2023 TREND CHECK
2023 TREND CHECKWhile we're obviously fans of performing monthly Trend Checks, we know that 
the start of the new year will always be the ultimate trend-call to action.
So, whether you're proudly pioneering or begrudgingly behind:
check, absorb, ideate and go!
Read each mega-trend introCheck your organization's 
on-trendnessReceive a related, juicy 
2023 opportunity2023
TREND CHECK
1 2 3TABLE OF CONTENTS
2023 TREND CHECK
The enterprization 
of consumersCREATOR INC.5
An evolved internetMETAPHYSICAL10
Consumption is 
turned on its headUNCONSUMED15
From authenticity to 
actionBRAND BEINGS4
Finding meaningful 
connections in a lonely worldJOYNING9
Consumers look to 
reclaim their localeSTATE OF PLACE14
The rise of value-led 
segmentationBEHAVI:OUR3
Are you ready for the 
transparency revolution?GLASS BOX BRANDS8
The emergence of 
conscious convenienceSOLACE AS A SERVICE13
Embedding assistive intelligence 
into consumers’ livesAIDED BY AI2
Fun as the ultimate 
fear antidoteFREEDONISM7
Adjusting to an 
uncertain worldPRECAREIOUS12
Consumers seek new routes 
to enlightenmentAGE OF HEALING1
Curation that empowers 
consumers’ uniquenessFOR YOU6
People are taking 
back controlPOWER TO THE 
PEOPLE11AGE OF HEALING
2023 TREND CHECK
The relentless pursuit of self-improvement is giving way to self-
transformation, with the pandemic having acted as a catalyst for personal 
growth. People's definition of wellness is constantly evolving, moving 
beyond the physical to encompass mental, emotional, spiritual and 
social health. In fact, 76% of global citizens now say that mental health 
and physical health are equally important. This reprioritization means 
that every brand needs to ideate how to integrate wellness into 2023's 
products, services, experiences, campaigns and more.  Consumers seek new 
routes to enlightenmentAGE OF 
HEALING1
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?
We have yet to start working on wellbeing for our 
own employees.
We have started to explore partnerships with leaders 
in the wellbeing field.
We're actively assessing how to minimize the 
negative effects our products and services have on 
customer wellbeing.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.Q:
A
B
CAGE OF HEALING
2023 TREND CHECK
INTERVENTION AID
Interrupting unhealthy consumer behavior
CARE COLLABS
Boosting mental health 
through creative partnerships
INTERNAL HEALING
Workforce resilience = business resilience
In June 2022, Tokyo-based logistics and media company Onken 
launched employee badges displaying roleplaying game-style 
hit point gauges. Each employee received three different colored 
badges to help them express their current condition while 
indirectly letting their co-workers know how much capacity they 
have for extra assignments, overtime and work.
When it comes to contributing to the AGE OF HEALING, look 
inward first. 41% of US employees say that their employer does 
not offer resources to support them with mental wellbeing. 
Appoint a CPO, as siggi’s did, or consider providing tools to help 
your staff monitor their work-life balance.
What would a Headspace collaboration 
with your brand look like?How will you help your employees and 
colleagues achieve mental resilience?Which detrimental habits will you 
help consumers counteract?Pinterest announced a first-of-its-kind global partnership with 
Headspace in October 2022, offering tools to manage stress, 
increase positivity, and improve sleep. The partnership gave 
hundreds of thousands of eligible creators access to a free six-
month subscription to Headspace across 20 countries globally, 
from Brazil to Japan.
Concerned that your brand doesn't have wellbeing expertise? 
Collaborating with organizations that do is essential. Check out 
Headspace's recent efforts — they have partnerships in nearly 
every industry. The right partnership could help you cater to 
over 75% of people worldwide who say that mental health and 
physical health are equally important.Early 2022, Dutch chocolate brand Tony's Chocolonely 
announced it would face its own demon: sugar. The company 
laid out a series of planned steps to battle overconsumption, 
which includes running campaigns to help customers make better 
choices (that is: eat less chocolate!), and pushing for a broad 
sugar tax in the Netherlands.
Let’s be real: consumers aren’t going to stop eating junk food 
or endlessly scrolling TikTok. But the brands that provide those 
products and services will increasingly be expected to counteract 
the poor habits they generate. This is not a trend to dive into 
headfirst. Start small by first ensuring you’re connected with your 
workforce and their habits, allowing wellbeing to flourish from the 
inside out.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGAIDED BY AI
2023 TREND CHECK
After decades of progress, artificial intelligence and robotics are moving 
out of the lab and becoming integrated into consumers' day-to-day lives. 
Strong consumer uptake, combined with a growing skills shortage and 
an urgent need for contactless solutions, has set the stage for a new wave 
of automation that promises to augment the human experience. This is 
important, as 43% of consumers say technology advancements have 
complicated their lives just as much as they have simplified things. Think 
2023-2030 on this one.Embedding assistive intelligence 
into consumers' livesAIDED  
BY AI2
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?
We talk about AI, but it hasn't been translated into 
something that benefits our customers.
We're currently running a few AI pilots.
AI is embedded into various strategic activities — time 
to dream up completely new services.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.Q:
A
B
CAIDED BY AI
2023 TREND CHECK
ARTIFICIAL I
Unlocking the next level of creativity
FAIRNESS OPTIMIZERS
The demand for ethical AIs and algorithms
INFLATION SUPPORT
Time is money, literally
To combat inflation and the rising cost of fuel, Australia's 
CommBank piloted a new in-app fuel finder feature that helps 
drivers find the cheapest prices in their local area. The AI-
powered tool learns the user’s fuel spending patterns to predict 
when they may next need to refuel and then reminds them ahead 
of time about the cheapest option nearby.
81% of UK and US consumers expect more self-service options 
than they’re currently being offered. Take into account various 
crises and the subsequent pricing boom, and you’ll discover 
that automated time-savers that help consumers deal with this 
financial reality — and mitigate its impact — are considered the 
GOAT.
How will you ensure your existing AI and 
algorithms are ethical and unbiased?How will you leverage AI to help consumers 
get more bang for their buck?How will you help democratize creativity 
by utilizing the influx of AI tools?California-based Fairplay, which describes itself as a 'fairness-
as-a-service' provider, uses AI to reduce algorithmic bias in 
lending. The technology assesses whether applicants declined 
by the primary algorithm resemble 'good' borrowers in ways that 
weren't previously considered — meaning more applicants from 
underserved groups can be approved for loans.
As the use of AI and machine learning has scaled up, so too have 
concerns that the technology perpetuates historical patterns of 
discrimination. And while this is particularly true in the financial 
services sector, it's something any industry — from mobility to 
recruitment — that's deploying algorithms should be aware of.Launched in October 2022, InteriorAI is an AI-powered image 
generator that can show users different ways to redesign a space. 
Users upload an image of their home, and browse through 17 
preselected styles, such as 'tropical', 'maximalist', 'biophilic', or 
even 'cyberpunk'.
Ever since the rise of creative AI tools like DALL·E, there’s been 
an influx of services that help both consumers and businesses 
achieve next-level creativity. A magazine cover designed by AI? 
Check. Turning thoughts and memories into vibrant colors? Been 
there, done that. Even urban planning has received an automated 
overhaul.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGBEHAVI:OUR
2023 TREND CHECK
Using demographic segmentation to predict consumer behavior is a thing 
of the past. Markers such as age, gender and social status are no longer 
an indicator of the way consumers behave, and they haven't been for a 
while. Instead, catering to values, passions, convictions and attitudes is the 
way to reach consumers' hearts. Targeting demographics just scratches the 
surface. In 2023, will you dig deep or stay shallow?The rise of value-led 
segmentationBEHAVI:OUR3
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?
We’re still dedicated to demographics as drivers of 
our product development.
We’re increasingly looking beyond demographic 
segmentation.
We’re fully post-demographic and keen to help break 
down stereotypes even further.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.Q:
A
B
CBEHAVI:OUR
2023 TREND CHECK
DEMOGRAPHIC DISRUPTORS
Repelling internalized demographic stereotypes
BEYOND THE BINARY
Enhancing usability by 
broadening demographic appeal
ACCESS FOR ALL
Accessibility is the new social justice frontier
For people who suffer from hand tremors, using a smart device 
can be highly challenging — involuntary shaking makes it tough 
to read and navigate on touchscreens. Using a tablet's built-in 
accelerometers, a browser called Staybl can compensate for 
tremors by creating virtual countermovements.
When thinking of ways to apply BEHAVI:OUR to your business, 
the first step should be to assess whether or not your offering is 
accessible to everyone. Can people who are illiterate use it? How 
about people living with disabilities? Basically, can it be used by 
everyone? If the answer is no, check how your offering holds up 
against Universal Design principles.
How can you embed post-demographic thinking 
into every part of your business operations?How will you turn barriers into 
expectation-setting innovations?How can you help consumers transcend 
their demographic stereotypes?Dating app Bumble allows women to make the first move. In July 
2022, the company expanded the options that users have when 
sharing their gender identity in dating profiles. Nonbinary folks 
could choose from a list of identities, but after users changed 
their gender from 'woman' to 'nonbinary,' they were blocked 
from initiating a conversation.
Bumble responded by updating its app, allowing nonbinary 
folks to start the conversation with their matches, regardless 
of gender. In 2022, 42% of brands are still making consumers 
feel unwelcome because of their gender, race, age, religion, or 
sexuality.Dove launched a Roblox game, which it claims is the first to 
specifically help girls combat negative self-esteem. Super U Story 
is situated at a school. Players dodge and destroy poisonous 
negativity by finding their unique superpowers of flight, fire, 
water, or speed. It’s part of a broader set of commitments Dove 
is making to challenge the representation of girls, women, and 
beauty in gaming.
Although society is moving towards a post-demographic world, 
some demographic groups struggle to shake the shackles 
of the past. Think queer people struggling with internalized 
homophobia, BIPOC dealing with generational trauma, and 
children weighed down by gender-related norms.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGBRAND BEINGS
2023 TREND CHECK
In today's hyper-competitive, increasingly values-driven consumer 
arena, authenticity is mandatory — it's not a guaranteed way to stand out. 
Consumers will appreciate brands that are open and vulnerable, but they'll 
advocate for, celebrate and show loyalty towards those that make real 
progress on social and environmental change and empower them to do 
the same. In 2023 and beyond, brands are expected to be at the forefront 
of purposed change.From authenticity 
to actionBRAND 
BEINGS4
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
COur brand is not connected to any significant social 
change.
We’re connected to a few social causes.
Our purpose is social change.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.BRAND BEINGS
2023 TREND CHECK
THE LAW OF THE BRAND
Progressive brands combat restrictive legislation
PROFIT PROPHETS
Fighting inequality through 
wealth decentralization
ROAD MAP TO ROAD TRIP
Consumers as a catalyst for do-good initiatives
Alibaba launched a carbon ledger program dubbed Carbon88 
across its ecosystem in August 2022. Users earn points for 
uploading proof of their low-carbon choices, such as riding 
public transport and bringing their cups to coffee shops. The 
accumulated points unlock digital badges and discounts on the 
platform.
Brands and institutions are, and will always be, responsible for 
turning the climate crisis around, but with 1 billion Asian citizens 
set to join the middle class by the end of this decade — alongside 
middle-class growth in other regions — it's crucial to nudge 
people in the right direction. Turn your sustainability road map 
into a joint (green!) road trip with rewards for tagging along.
How will you redistribute profits in pursuit 
of a better, more equitable future?How will you incentivize purposed behavior?How can your brand pressure governmental 
institutions to act in everyone’s best interest?In Q1 2022, Utah-based TAB Bank launched TAB Flow, a debit 
card that rewards customers with fractional shares of stocks every 
time they make a purchase. The bank calls it spendvesting. A free, 
basic account earns cardholders 0.5% stock rewards on eligible 
purchases from brands like Amazon, Disney and Starbucks.
It caters to those who don't have the time or knowledge to start 
investing on their own and addresses the growing number 
of consumers who are increasingly uncomfortable about the 
inequalities generated by global capitalism. Rethinking the stake 
your staff, customers and the earth (Patagonia!) have in your 
business is one way to supercharge your value.Apple’s legal team announced that it’s collaborating with 
policymakers and advocacy groups to develop strategies, file 
court briefs and recruit allies from other big companies to oppose 
bills in multiple US states that target gay and transgender people. 
Apple’s executives have urged other large brands to join the 
effort.
As right-wing politics continue to gain ground across the globe, 
so do the number of laws created to restrict bodily autonomy, 
stigmatize marginalized communities and limit freedom of 
speech. What legal challenges do your consumers face and how 
can your brand rally behind their cause?COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGCREATOR INC.
2023 TREND CHECK
A desire to combine work and purpose continues to merge with new, 
even lower-friction creator tools and media platforms - transforming old 
economic models and standards. Whether it's through creating content, 
selling goods and services or renting out excess assets, even more 
consumers in 2023 will become their own businesses. Almost one-third 
of global citizens say that they have started a business at some point — 
and they're looking to brands for assistance. How will you co-create and 
perhaps co-lead with this soon-to-be majority?The enterprization 
of consumersCREATOR 
INC.5
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We have yet to make the most of entrepreneurial 
staff, let alone our customers.
We've launched a pilot to support enterprising 
customers.
We've gone even further and are collaborating with 
multiple other brands, too.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.CREATOR INC.
2023 TREND CHECK
BOTTOM-UP BRANDS
The rise of decentralized co-creation
SIDE-HUSTLE HEROES
Building a creator economy 
that goes beyond the 1%
IN-HOUSE INVENTORS
Tapping into employee ingenuity
Since 1935, The Metropolitan Museum of Art has held a yearly 
exhibition of staff artwork. While all submissions are accepted, the 
show itself has always been off-limits to everyone but employees 
and their guests. But in June 2022, The Met let the public in. Art  
Work: Artists Working at the Met features pieces by 450 of the 
museum's workers.
Drawing on your employees and colleagues as a creative force 
is a secure way to dabble in the Creator Economy. It provides 
room to experiment and try new things before expanding your 
co-create efforts outside office walls. Will you feature staff in your 
next campaign or allow interns to design your next product line?
Identify how your brand can become 
part of the creator ecosystem.How will you utilize the creative skills of 
your workforce, from interns to CEO?What's the web3 version of your current 
product offering? And how can you leverage 
and incentivize online-first communities to 
make the next leap?TikTok now provides all users access to a beta platform for 
creating augmented reality filters, a service that was previously 
limited to just 450 creators. The platform’s Effect House offers 
tools and documentation to help people make their own AR 
filters. TikTok’s initiative demonstrates how brands can lower 
barriers to entry for the Creator Economy.
This isn’t a niche segment, as 70% of Gen Z and 67% of  
Millennials globally say they’re considering earning additional 
income through a side project in the coming year. How to 
facilitate SIDE-HUSTLE HEROES? Simplify payment processes, 
provide a platform for selling their services, or simply offer them a 
place to work.DeStore is a DAO-operated brick-and-mortar retail store, meaning 
that (in theory), anyone can become a co-owner of the brand. To 
get in, partners-to-be buy one of three NFT keys, each unlocking 
different perks ranging from access to a chat group for owners, to 
managing profits and voting on product and brand curation.
DAOs and conventional business models can co-exist, similar to 
how NYX Professional Makeup launched GORJS, a DAO focused 
on developing 3D artistry and digital make-up. The transferable 
insight? DAOs supercharge creativity through decentralization 
and open up new avenues of co-creation that weren’t accessible 
before.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGFOR YOU
2023 TREND CHECK
Inundated with an avalanche of new products, services and information, 
consumers are seeking out curation. And while the need for curation has 
been around for decades, new tools and tech offer consumers the chance 
to explore interests, values and even identities in a way that’s only limited 
by the boundaries of the user’s imagination. This means that mainstream 
culture is dead to many, so crafting that personal and seamless formula 
has become essential. Relevance-as-a-service is the name of the game. The 
rules? One size fits one.Curation that empowers 
consumers' uniquenessFOR YOU6
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We’re keen to partner with expert curators.
We’re actively ideating new, curated services.
We're ready to help customers take control of their 
own curation.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.FOR YOU
2023 TREND CHECK
CURATED IDENTITIES
Helping consumers curate themselves
VALUE VENTURES
Personalization that goes deeper
CHOICE RELIEF
Taking control of choice-saturation
Spotify Advertising and easyJet teamed up in August 2022 
to help those experiencing wanderlust — but feeling a little 
wander-lost — find their next travel destination. With easyJet’s 
new Listen & Book tool, listeners can find suggestions for their 
next European vacation based on the music they listen to. (And 
yes, this would have been even cooler if initiated by a railway 
company 😉)
The initiative speaks to those entering the purchasing process 
unaware of what they want. In fact, 60% of consumers say their 
priorities keep changing due to everything that’s happening in 
the world. But they do know they want brands to help them make 
the right decision.
How will you provide choice curation 
that moves beyond the superficial?How can you guide consumers toward 
customized recommendations? 
Preferably without a survey in sight!How can your brand help people 
explore and communicate every aspect 
of their identity in virtual worlds?In June 2022, Sterling Alternative Finance launched Altinvest, 
Nigeria's first ethical investment platform. Investment options 
are centered on various sectors such as agriculture and real 
estate, but all are focused on wealth creation for investors and 
supporting economic activities directed toward inclusion, growth 
and development.
When a product is anchored in purpose, it allows for deeper 
levels of personalization — and therefore brand connection — 
based on core values and principles. Why does that matter? 79% 
of people globally said that they make a special effort to buy from 
brands that are aligned with their personal values.April 2022 saw adidas Originals collaborate with Ready Player 
Me on personality-based, AI-generated avatar creation. Users 
answered questions relating to their style and personality to 
create a digital self that can be taken to other avatar platforms; 
Ready Player Me offers interoperability with 1,500+ metaverse 
apps and games.
The online world has long enabled people to build their own 
identities, but new tools provide near-limitless opportunities for 
creation and curation. It’s not surprising that 2 in 5 US members 
of Gen Z say self-expression in the digital world is more important 
than expressing themselves in the physical world.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGFREEDONISM
2023 TREND CHECK
Pre-pandemic, consumers faced daily challenges — climate change, rising 
income inequality, threats of terrorism and more. But COVID-19 was one 
threat too many, and a state of global anxiety ensued. One powerful 
remedy to combat the feeling of languishing? FUN! With 2022 being the 
year when permacrisis reached popular vernacular, it makes sense that 
72% of Gen Z worldwide now name fun as their number one value. How 
will you help spread this state of (purposed) play across demographics in 
2023? Consumers are counting on you.Fun as the ultimate 
fear antidoteFREEDONISM7
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA Our services and campaigns offer no fun whatsoever.
We’ve built a few fun elements into our services.
We’re actively bringing our customers bursts of joy.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.FREEDONISM
2023 TREND CHECK
PURPOSE JOLTS
Complex situations require daring solutions
CARELESS CARE
When entertainment and wellbeing converge
INFORMAL INFO
Finding a common language
Recognizing the power of a good song, the Indonesian Ministry 
of Communications and Informatics teamed up with two well-
known Indonesian musicians to create 'Berani Bersuara <3<3.' 
The song encourages speaking up and thinking before acting to 
counter online hazards like the spread of false information and 
hoaxes, as well as unethical behaviors such as intimidation, hate 
speech and fraud. 
Those dangers ring true globally, as 70% of people across 19 
surveyed countries see the online spread of misinformation as 
a top threat. And that doesn’t just apply to politics. Think of how 
you can bust persistent myths within your industry and explore 
how you can engage consumers while doing so.
How will you make practicing self-
care fun and effortless?How will you provide consumers 
with some truth serum?How will you translate complex matters 
into an easy-to-understand message? In time for Star Wars Day 2022 (aka May the 4th), the franchise 
collaborated with Headspace on breathing exercises voiced by 
Star Wars characters, as well as themed sleepcasts. For time-
stretched Jedis, the mindfulness app released 'Breathe with Star 
Wars' —short, animated exercises featuring Yoda and other well-
known characters.
The deeper layer? Ongoing polarization and inequality are 
prompting many to seek out new forms of escapism. Innovations 
that infuse mini-mental-mindbreaks with wellbeing benefits – 
see Age of Healing for more on that – are sure to attract praise, 
especially at a time when mental health is under immense 
pressure. From kids to adults, the need for easy and entertaining 
self-care is one for all.To encourage women to perform regular self-exams, breast 
cancer nonprofit Macma hosted an interactive exhibition at a 
Buenos Aires museum in Q2 2022. Full-scale copies were made 
of paintings by Rembrandt, Rubens and Raphael, featuring 
3D-molded breasts showing signs of what might have been 
cancer.
When it comes to complex and potentially unnerving information, 
showing usually beats telling. Check out vegetable-themed 
condoms for over-65s and paint made from actual human blood 
for some risqué inspo. Of global consumers, 75% approve of 
brands providing light-hearted content. But one consumer’s 
hilarious is another's deeply offensive, so tread carefully!COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGGLASS BOX BRANDS
2023 TREND CHECK
The connected world has ushered in an era of radical transparency, one 
where an organization's internal processes are an increasingly important 
part of its external-facing brand. Consumers are keen to engage with 
brands that reflect their social and environmental values, inside and out. 
This will not diminish in 2023, to say the least, as 70% of consumers 
globally report feeling wary about corporate sustainability claims and 
commitments. As trust in brands continues to dwindle, the time for honesty 
is now.Are you part of the ongoing 
transparency revolution?GLASS BOX 
BRANDS8
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA Our brand feels like a windowless room.
We’ve opened a few shutters, here and there.
We're as transparent as they come.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.GLASS BOX BRANDS
2023 TREND CHECK
TANGIBLE VALUES
Action as the ultimate truth teller
METRICS OVER MARKETING
Brands’ ethical business 
claims are under the spotlight
MISTAKE RE-TAKE
The moment of truth is now
Polarn O. Pyret, a Swedish children's apparel company, 
announced in October 2022 that it was ceasing production of 
rainwear and rain boots. The move aligns with the brand's goal 
to only use sustainable materials, a requirement that the brand's 
waterproof clothing cannot currently meet.
Actions like these are slowly becoming the norm, especially 
when targeting younger consumers, as Gen Z ranks authenticity 
as being more important than almost any other product and 
company attribute. Your response? Being transparent about 
your impact on both planet and consumer, and admitting when 
mistakes are made.
How will you put your social and 
ethical metrics front and center?What does a completely honest version 
of your brand look like? Be honest! ;)How will you bring your sustainability 
activations to life and highlight the 
tangible values they offer?Chocolate maker Koa  is turning to the blockchain to show 
consumers exactly how much it’s paying farmers in Ghana. Every 
time the Swiss brand makes a mobile payment to a farmer, the 
amount of Ghanaian cedi paid is automatically logged on a 
blockchain, along with the farmer’s name and the kilograms of 
cocoa beans or pulp they sold.
These extensive measures are necessary in a time where nearly  
6 in 10 consumers globally say their default tendency is to distrust 
something until they see evidence that it’s trustworthy. Time to 
elevate your ethical stories with irrefutable facts.On a wall above a bar in Rio de Janeiro, a Heineken billboard 
proclaims that it's cooling your beer. The billboard is made of 
solar panels connected to a Brewteco bar below. The out-of-
home campaign is part of a comprehensive strategy by the beer 
brand to help 50% of its points of sale switch to renewable energy 
by 2030.
When 'what does sustainability mean?' is still the most Googled 
sustainability-related phrase of the year, educators, governments, 
climate activists and businesses (!) aren’t getting through. To 
reach consumers, prioritize green initiatives that are easy to grasp 
and clearly impactful.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGJOYNING
2023 TREND CHECK
Even as endlessly evolving technologies and platforms for digital 
encounters continue to reshape the way we connect with each other, more 
and more people around the world feel lonely and isolated. Because 
even though pandemic lockdowns are (hopefully!) a thing of the past, 
33% of people worldwide experience feelings of loneliness. Therefore, in 
2023, consumers will value and show support to brands that help foster 
connections that are genuine, supportive, and meaningful.Finding meaningful 
connections in a lonely worldJOYNING9
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We haven't really started helping our customers make 
connections.
We’re looking to help customers connect with their 
inner circles.
We're ready to build next-level communities.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.JOYNING
2023 TREND CHECK
FANDOM FORGING
The emergence of brand communities 3.0
CROWD NURTURING
Cultivating connections 
with those who really matter
CONNECTIVITY CULTIVATORS
Facilitating conversations over shared interests
Built by a diverse team of engineers from Nigeria, Egypt, India 
and the US, Agbora caters primarily to African citizens and the 
African diaspora. The platform was developed as a place for 
professionals to express themselves, grow their circles of friends 
and contacts, facilitate meaningful relationships and promote 
opportunities by helping users share experiences and learn from 
each other.
Agbora is part of a larger wave of initiatives that help people 
bond with like-minded folks over common interests. Whether it’s 
travel, Pokémon Go or digital nomadism, people are looking for 
meaningful connections and expect brands to help kickstart the 
conversation.
What can you offer to help people strengthen 
bonds within their inner circles?How will you help consumers connect 
over the values you represent?How will you foster a brand community 
that’s mutually beneficial?Remento, an LA-based company focused on preserving family 
stories, recently launched a new app that provides conversation 
prompts to inspire family members to share stories about their 
lives. Consumers — whose expectations are primed by the digital 
services that transformed their connections to strangers — bring a 
new mindset to bear on close relationships with family members, 
friends and local communities.
Over the course of the pandemic, those communal bonds grew 
closer. Now, people are looking for tools that assist them in 
finding time, dealing with logistics and enhancing experiences 
when they connect to those that mean the most.Scotch & Soda collaborated with Salesforce and AE Studio to 
transform the Dutch fashion brand's traditional loyalty program 
into an NFT-driven web3 community called Club Soda 3.0. The 
September 2022 launch included minting one of 1,000 Founder’s 
Pass NFTs, which serve as a key to the web3 community and its 
exclusive experiences, events and brand offers.
Web3 is ushering in a new era of brand communities, as it 
allows companies to launch token-gated initiatives and enables 
consumers to own aspects of the communities they’re part of. 
With 47% of US Gen Z having joined a digital community, the 
time to launch one of your own is now.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGMETAPHYSICAL
2023 TREND CHECK
As physical and digital worlds continue to converge, we're witnessing the 
next online evolution. While yesterday’s web was dominated by websites 
and the infinite scroll of social media, the next iteration is defined by 
virtual worlds, metaverses and augmented realities. And even though the 
metaverse isn’t quite here yet, web3 and all of its implications are already 
impacting most frontiers of society, as 64% of consumers globally have 
already purchased a virtual good or taken part in a virtual experience or 
service. Crunch time is now.An evolved internetMETAPHYSICAL10
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We’re still kinda Web 2.0.
We’re dipping our toes in web3.
We ARE the metaverse.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.METAPHYSICAL
2023 TREND CHECK
DIRECT-TO-COMMUNITY
When brands are (virtual) communities first
META-DEMOCRACY
Virtual spaces enable equal opportunities
VIRTUAL EDUCATORS
Getting ready for digital take-off
In June 2022, Brazilian future studies school Aerolito announced 
a five-day program focusing on innovation. Aerolito’s learning 
process kicks off with a class hosted in the metaverse, giving 
participants a first-hand experience of one of the technologies 
covered in the program.
These types of educational programs are much-needed. Despite 
the hype and headlines, 13% of workers globally say they don't 
know what 'metaverse' means. So let’s start with the ABCs of  
NFTs, web3 and everything in between. Because even though 
predictions vary, the direction of travel is clear. How will you 
prepare for a new e-conomy that’s set to grow with a CAGR of 
39.4% from 2022 to 2030?
How will you develop virtual experiences 
that provide real-world value while 
also democratizing access?Before entering the metaverse, you need 
to understand its core principles.How can you utilize web3 tech to claim 
your spot in the community economy?HSBC's annual Red Hot Festival is one of Hong Kong's most 
notable brand activations. In August 2022, HSBC took it into the 
metaverse, creating a SUMMERverse experience within Minecraft. 
Any player could collect treasures to enter a draw for a cash 
reward, showcasing how virtual spaces can be leveraged to 
democratize access to otherwise exclusive events.
Similarly, Rock in Rio and Coca-Cola hosted Rock in Verse, a 
digital twin of the IRL event that allowed new audiences to 
experience one of the world’s largest festivals without paying 
for tickets – priced at nearly half the country's monthly minimum 
wage – or travel and accommodation.A blockchain-based, direct-to-community video platform, Shibuya 
offers creators a way to crowdfund videos and web series while 
giving their backers a say in creative direction. One of the first 
shows on the platform, an anime series called White Rabbit, 
allows users to decide between two options on what happens 
after the pilot. Viewers need to purchase and mint a Producer 
Pass NFT and stake it to cast a vote for either path.
Shibuya shows how leveraging web3 tech can completely 
revolutionize the consumer-brand binary, offering deeper levels 
of engagement than were ever possible with web2. See our 
NICHE NETS trend briefing for more.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGPOWER TO THE PEOPLE
2023 TREND CHECK
Roe v. Wade, the war in Ukraine, COP27, protests in Iran… Unprecedented 
social and environmental challenges have gone hand-in-hand with a 
loss of trust in central authorities, mainstream ideologies, institutions, 
and 'the elites'. Around the world, people are taking their frustrations 
to the streets, to chat rooms and their employers, exposing social and 
ecological injustices while building a new system. A large majority of 
youth worldwide is now involved in a social or political cause, fighting for 
a system without gatekeepers that's powered by — and crucially for — the 
people.Citizens taking 
back controlPOWER TO  
THE PEOPLE11
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA Our brand is seen as establishment.
Our brand sides with the people.
Our brand is of the people.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.POWER TO THE PEOPLE
2023 TREND CHECK
FOR & BUY
Creating equity from the ground up
CULTURE CATALYSTS
Brands stepping in as culture preservers
ACTS OF REFLECTION
Getting ready to stand by the people
Munroe Bergdorf — a model and ambassador for French 
cosmetics brand L’Oréal — has talked openly about how the brand 
used its past errors to build a more inclusive company culture. In 
2017, Bergdorf was fired as an ambassador for comments made 
on social media about systemic racism but was swiftly rehired 
in 2020 after calling L’Oréal out on its hypocrisy for publicly 
supporting Black Lives Matter.
In a time when brands are already working with collectives for 
greater accountability, how can you take it one step further? 
Now’s the time to conduct a – preferably external – JEDI audit. If 
you don’t, somebody else will!
Which local voices can you boost and spotlight?How will you objectively measure where 
you stand on the gatekeeping spectrum, 
both within and outside your office walls?How will you adapt your offering to be FOR 
& BUY the groups you’re trying to serve?Motorola unveiled its Cherokee interface as part of an effort 
to safeguard the endangered Indigenous language through 
younger generations, building on the brand’s earlier addition 
of support of South America’s endangered Kaingang and 
Nheengatu languages. Cherokee speakers can now entirely 
navigate their smartphones in Cherokee.
The initiative is one of many that indicate a shift from an era 
where brands existed to sell products, to one where brands are 
designed to create culture – the culture is now the product. As 
groups around the world are put under pressure, whether as a 
result of globalization or geopolitical tension, the role of culture 
guardian will only become more important.Stackwell is an investment platform aimed at encouraging Black 
families in the US to invest. It offers robo-investing, so users don't 
need extensive investment knowledge. More than just an easy-to-
use product, Stackwell was designed to reduce social and cultural 
barriers to investment.
As stock ownership is split dramatically along racial lines – white 
Americans own nearly 90% of all stocks in the US – efforts need 
to be made to redistribute wealth and create a more equitable 
and honest economic system. Helping marginalized communities 
acquire assets is one way; involving them in every step of your 
business operations is another.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGPRECAREIOUS
2023 TREND CHECK
Safety is the most basic of human needs. But in today's world, it's 
increasingly fragile. Nearly one in eight people globally are on the 
move, 92% of world citizens are concerned about the risk of a recession, 
while 70% of consumers across 19 surveyed countries see the spread 
of misinformation online as a top threat… Facing a future that's more 
uncertain than ever before, consumers are looking for brands to help them 
build resilience. In 2023, how will you equip them with the tools needed to 
survive and thrive?Adjusting to an uncertain worldPRECAREIOUS12
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We offer our customers no resilience whatsoever.
We’re partnering with other organizations to deliver 
on the need for resilience.
We’re going all-out in helping our customers future-
proof their lives.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.PRECAREIOUS
2023 TREND CHECK
RESILIENT FUTURES
Help consumers gain knowledge 
and skills for long-term change
FACT FINDERS
Brands help consumers sort fact from fiction
CRISIS COMPANIONS
Acting as first responders in times of crisis
Hard seltzer brand White Claw unveiled a temporary mural 
designed during a heatwave in London that saw temperatures 
hit record highs. The brand installed a six-meter cooling wall, 
covered in heat-proof paint and cooling mats. Overheated 
passersby could stand by the wall to lower their body 
temperature.
Increasingly, consumers care little about what brands say; it’s all 
about what they do to make the world better. Agility isn’t limited 
to startups, so leverage your resources to respond near-instantly 
in a crisis. For more opportunities, see how the White House 
and the Heritage Foundation help people manage the effects of 
climate change.
Use your internal expertise and reputation 
to let the truth shine through.In a crisis, ask what existing infrastructure 
or services you can immediately employ.Facilitate new habits and lifestyle changes that 
help consumers future-proof themselves.In September 2022, Brazil’s Supreme Electoral Court and 
WhatsApp released digital stickers to combat misinformation 
during general elections. The release included 12 stickers plus an 
animated one, all aimed at engaging young voters and offering 
additional information to prevent the spread of false news 
through WhatsApp.
Disinformation campaigns on social media continue to influence 
elections around the world. In 2020, the Oxford Internet 
Institute found evidence of organized social media manipulation 
campaigns in 81 countries, up from 70 in 2019. Real-time sharing 
can help citizens police, educate and protect each other. Can you 
help the crowds spot misinformation?The COVID-19 and Climate Resilience Program from NGO 
Women Initiative for Sustainable Environment (WISE) provides 
leadership, strategy and technical training for 60 women to 
scale their climate initiatives. Offering a global alliance of peers, 
mentors and funders, September 2022 saw WISE host an event in 
Kaduna State, Nigeria to reach local women.
Most consumers believe that governments alone can’t tackle 
challenges posed by the climate crisis, job automation and rising 
inequality. They're looking to businesses (see Natwest and Accor) 
to gain the knowledge, skills, connections and platforms they 
need to thrive in a disrupted future.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGSOLACE AS A SERVICE
2023 TREND CHECK
The impending purpose economy is on a collision course with demands 
for universal convenience, as instant anything often comes at an 
environmental and social cost. For many conflicted consumers, there's a 
growing tension between purchase and purpose. But as inflation bumps 
into the shift towards more conscious consumerism, more consumers will 
assess the value an item or service delivers both now and in the long term. 
Your call to action? Soothe their struggle and offer convenience without 
the culpability.The emergence of 
conscious convenienceSOLACE AS  
A SERVICE  13
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We’re all about instant-everything, no matter the 
human or environmental cost.
We’re carefully shifting to convenience with fewer 
harmful side-effects.
We've placed solace at the heart of our activities.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.SOLACE AS A SERVICE
2023 TREND CHECK
NORM-NUDGING
Making it easier for consumers to act or live better
AUTOMATED WELLNESS
Making it easier for consumers to feel better
MINDFUL POSSESSIONS
Making it easier for consumers to shop better
In September 2022, Canadian debit network Interac released 
a music track to promote mindful spending. According to the 
interbank network, two-thirds of Canadians are practicing 
‘intentional spending’ — making purposeful purchasing decisions 
that live up to their financial goals and personal values.
Spending ‘better’ doesn’t just mean being mindful. JD.com’s 
green-labeled products delve into eco-credentials within the 
supply chain; chocolate maker KOA  uses blockchain tech to 
promote transparency around paying cocoa farmers. The best 
MINDFUL POSSESSIONS are smartly-designed products that offer 
benefits without consumers even noticing.
How can you tackle wellness taboos and 
ensure healthcare access is available to all?Could your forward-thinking solutions 
help consumers spend better before 
they even spot a problem?As habits change, how might you 
nudge people towards better behavior? 
Bonus points for integrating into a 
consumer's immediate environment.LG Electronics presented its table-top air purifier, the PuriCare 
Objet Collection, in August 2022. Available in three colors 
and two shapes, the furniture combines aesthetic design and 
air purification while integrating wireless charging and mood 
lighting. LG also announced collaborations with artists such as 
Kim Sun-woo.
When it comes to their health, many have good intentions: 60% 
of people from 31 markets say they want to be healthier, but just 
28% have made major changes. This gap between aspirations 
and action opens an opportunity for accessible monitoring tools 
and products that make mental and physical health changes 
easier than ever before.Sweden-based Electrolux introduced GRO, an AI-powered 
kitchen concept that explores how kitchen products can 
contribute to eating more sustainably. The modular system 
nudges people to eat less but better meat by discovering local 
sources of protein and harnessing techniques previously used to 
prepare meat, such as smoking.
Electrolux is questioning whether home design can encourage 
people to adopt more sustainable and healthier habits. With 
the scale of global problems sometimes leading to inaction, 
brands can inspire consumers to adopt a more purposed lifestyle 
through small, incremental steps.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGSTATE OF PLACE
2023 TREND CHECK
The now near-universal celebration of place tends to focus on authenticity, 
relevance, local pride and storytelling. And while consumers appreciate 
brands that help them embrace place, moving forward they will have 
particular affection for the brands that also actively work to make those 
spaces better in 2023 (read: more sustainable and equitable). Consumers look to 
reclaim their localeSTATE OF 
PLACE14
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We're locally aware but could do much more.
We’re involved in local for-and-by campaigns.
We're deeply involved in purposeful and lasting 
support of local communities.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.STATE OF PLACE
2023 TREND CHECK
LASTING LOCALITY
Brand-assisted public spaces 
that make a lasting difference
REGENERATION NATION
Bringing people together to make cities greener
SHARED SPACES
Combating isolation through shared spaces
August 2022 saw Instituto Socioambiental open Floresta no 
Centro, a store in downtown São Paulo selling decorative and 
edible goods. Meaning 'forest in the center', products are made 
by indigenous, quilombola or riverine communities who defend 
Brazil’s wilderness. The store hosts regular events to share their 
stories.
From tech-fueled lifestyles to aging populations, consumers are 
battling a rising sense of social isolation. Physical retail spaces can 
tap into peoples’ pride of place, narrow the gap between urban 
and rural populations, and support nature’s guardians.
How can your brand nurture cities that prioritize 
wellbeing and create urban healing?How can you strengthen local ties through 
activations that also allow consumers 
to (re)connect with each other? How can you embed human connection 
and cultural expression into the 
(lasting) spaces you occupy? As part of the Bosk project (hosted during Arcadia art festival), 
volunteers walked 1,000 native trees through the city center of 
Leeuwarden, Netherlands, calling on inhabitants to reconsider 
the link between humanity and nature. At the end of the 100-day 
project, the trees were given a permanent home in the local area.
As work continues to become untethered from offices, brands, 
governments, and local authorities will need to do more to 
incentivize urban living. Brands can create spaces that enhance 
wellbeing and focus on urban healing, using green spaces 
to promote more equitable and sustainable societies — even 
avoiding premature deaths.The Coast Mountain College opened a building on the ancestral 
lands of the Tsimshian Kitsumkalum First Nation in Terrace, 
British Columbia, to provide culturally supportive housing for 
indigenous students. HCMA collaborated with local First Nations 
representatives on the design and materials.
Pop-ups are fun, but consumers expect brands to make lasting 
commitments to their local area, becoming effective agents of 
local civic transformation and, in some cases, even replacing 
public services. To safeguard heritage and the future, co-creation 
is a viable option — just ensure you’re demonstrating values 
shared by the community and your brand.COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERINGUNCONSUMED
2023 TREND CHECK
The consequences of unbridled consumption weigh heavily on the 
conscience of a growing number of people. This group will embrace more 
mindful modes of consumption (think: refrain, reduce, regenerate) that 
don’t just tackle the adverse effects of consumption and indulgence, but 
actually cut out entire parts of their usual buying habits. 87% of business 
leaders expect to increase their sustainability investments in 2023/24. Are 
you ready to take it to the next level and become UNCONSUMED?Consumption is turned 
on its headUNCONSUMED15
To what extent have you integrated this 
trend into your business operations?Q:
A
B
CA We’re still trotting down the path of unbridled 
consumption.
We occasionally encourage customers to refrain from 
buying something new.
We’re actively rethinking our business model to place 
UNCONSUMED at the heart of our strategy.Run with the COMMENCING innovation.
Run with the ADVANCING innovation.
Run with the PIONEERING innovation.UNCONSUMED
2023 TREND CHECK
COUNTERFAKE
Demonstrating that unnatural 
can trump au naturel
WASTE AWAY
Ensuring your products leave fewer traces
(R)E-WASTE
Reducing electrical waste 
through recycling and repair
Nigeria-based Quadloop turns electronic waste into products 
such as solar lanterns and aims to source 70% of its materials 
from e-waste, including recycling lithium batteries from old 
laptops. Quadloop's lamps help small businesses stay productive 
during power outages. The startup came third in the 2022 Gulf 
Information Technology Exhibition.
In 2021, globally discarded e-waste weighed more than the 
Great Wall of China and just 17.4% was properly recycled. If you 
can’t reduce social and environmental impacts of extraction and 
manufacturing, then reduce the amount of e-waste entering 
landfills (see Elkjøp), or keep devices in use longer with repair 
and resale systems instead.
How will you help consumers give a second 
life to the waste your products leave behind?What incentives can you offer to 
consumers to recycle their e-waste?Satisfy a new kind of status amongst consumers 
where guilt-free trumps exclusive.KFC Singapore is trialing food packaging that can be converted 
into commercial-grade fertilizer. The packaging is made from a 
mixture of paper and plant-based plastics; further collaborations 
to make the system scalable will follow.
'Grab-go-throw' is dead! Consumers believe it’s up to brands and 
governments to change: 85% of Britons are concerned about 
plastic packaging, but just 3% believe the responsibility lies with 
them. Beyond reducing your product’s impact, limit the amount of 
waste produced in the first place — see CoffeeB and Woolybubs. 
Do the work for your consumers and create alternatives that are 
more compelling and more convenient.US-based Aether makes lab-grown diamonds from carbon that’s 
been removed from the atmosphere, using carbon collected by 
Climeworks in Switzerland. Aether announced B Corp status in 
February 2022, which it says makes it the only diamond company 
with the certification.
It's harder than ever to distinguish real from fake. From fake 
news to deep fakes, we're well-versed in the damaging impact of 
hoaxes. But when compared to their conventional counterparts, 
many lab-grown, synthetic, cell-cultured alternatives have 
improved sustainability benefits and ethical credentials. Turn 
'fake' into a more desirable option, if not a better one!COMMENCING ADVANCING PIONEERING2023 TREND CHECK
Time to trendify
(Already an Amplify member? Just log in.)
Yes, performing a 2023 Trend Check is important. But ideally, 
you and your colleagues are trend-driven all year long. 
How? Cue Amplify, our trend platform, which puts trends, tools and 
training at your team's fingertips. All at a disruptively affordable price. 
What better way to turn 2023 into an ongoing opportunity? 
Explore Amplify2023 TREND CHECKShare the 2023 Trend Check 
with your team — for a touch 
of pressure and ideationUnpack and apply your fave 
trend with our Miro-based 
Consumer Trend CanvasStay in the know forever — sign 
up for our newsletter  (free) or our 
Trend Platform  (not free 😉)Also...
SHARE THE LOVE APPLY & IDEATE PREP FOR 20242023 TREND CHECKThis edition had 
many hands behind 
it, including:
Erick Smet
Caitlin Hughan
Vicki Loomes
Franziska Füsting
Camilla van Grembergen
Bruna BoucinhaWORDS DESIGN & 
PRODUCTION
Riz Razak
Nikki Ritmeijer
Sanya Gurung2023 TREND CHECKAny questions 
about anything?
Talk to Raymond Kollau, our Business Development Director.
Your message will go straight into his inbox and will be 
replied to asap.
Get in touch