Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK#GetTheFutureYouWant
Executive 
Summary Generative AI in marketing: 
A revolution unfolding
In a remarkably short time, generative AI has gained 
widespread popularity, emerging as a transformative force in 
marketing. Its rapid adoption rate is extraordinary. Currently: 
• almost 60% of organizations are integrating generative AI 
into their marketing efforts, from minimal to no adoption 
just a year ago,
 –of these, 37% are actively implementing it across 
various initiatives, while an additional 21% are in the 
experimental phase
• close to 80% of organizations have either already allocated 
budget or plan to do so in the next six months to integrate 
generative AI into their marketing initiatives• those investing in generative AI are dedicating 62% of their 
marketing tech investments to it, reflecting the growing 
maturity of both current and upcoming generative AI 
solutions. 
Marketers are using generative AI to craft compelling 
campaigns, elevate and personalize customer service and 
experiences, analyze data, optimize search, and undertake 
various other transformative initiatives. 
Unlocking value: Embracing the 
benefits of generative AI
The technology has rapidly proven itself. Nearly 60% of 
organizations surveyed believe the benefits of generative 
AI outweigh its costs and risks. These benefits span brand 
enhancement, cost efficiency, innovation, time optimization, 
and improved and personalized customer experience.2
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKExecutive 
Summary Redefining and augmenting, not 
replacing human creativity
Generative AI is not replacing human creativity; instead it’s 
redefining it and acting as a catalyst for innovation. More 
than half of the organizations surveyed say that balancing AI 
and human creativity is an ongoing challenge. But the strong 
consensus among marketers is that generative AI will not 
diminish but rather augment human creativity in the long run. 
It seems inevitable that marketing roles will be profoundly 
impacted by generative AI. From customer insights specialists 
to SEO experts, copywriters, digital marketers, and data 
analysts, all can expect to experience a new era of creative 
possibilities and related productivity gains.Addressing ethical and copyright challenges 
While the potential impact of generative AI on marketing 
is vast, there are ethical and copyright concerns that 
require clear regulation and new guidelines. As AI adoption 
in marketing increases, there is an urgent and growing 
need to ensure responsible practice. The current lack of 
comprehensive and clear guidelines means that 70% of 
organizations are potentially exposed to ethical challenges 
over their use and oversight of AI. 
Simultaneously, copyright challenges around AI-generated 
content indicate a need for decisive regulation and 
guidelines. At present, only 42% of organizations address 
these issues adequately by using robust cybersecurity 
protocols and monitoring for AI-derived versions of their 
work, for example.3
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKExecutive 
Summary Integrating generative AI into marketing
To seamlessly integrate generative AI, organizations should 
take a comprehensive approach. This means:
• Strategic direction:  Precisely define integration goals, 
adopt a pragmatic investment approach, and assess tech 
infrastructure. 
• Leadership and oversight:  Mobilize generative AI 
specialists, establish a task force, craft robust ethical 
guidelines, and remain vigilant while navigating the 
evolving regulations and compliance.
• Iterative execution:  Initiate selective, small-scale 
initiatives, drive iterative implementation with robust 
data security, and navigate responsibly considering the 
environmental impact of generative AI.
Finally, growing and expanding boundaries  requires 
marketing departments and organizations to cultivate 
partnerships and encourage upskilling, balancing generative 
AI with human ingenuity, and embracing a new era of tech-
driven collaboration. 76%
of organizations have either already 
allocated budget or plan to do so in the 
next six months to integrate generative AI 
into their marketing initiativesUnleashing the generative AI playbook
To fully embrace the transformative potential of generative 
AI in marketing, organizations must foster a culture of 
innovation and experimentation. In this way, they can 
strategically integrate AI technologies to unlock novel 
approaches, enhance customer experiences, and gain a 
competitive edge.4
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKThis report is written for leaders of marketing functions in 
all business sectors. In particular, it will be useful for chief 
marketing officers (CMOs) and other senior marketers 
in larger organizations. Its insights will also extend its 
relevance not only to CEOs and senior sales leaders but also 
to individuals with a strategic stake in marketing. It caters to 
tech team leaders fostering marketing functions, as well as 
advisors and consultants specializing in the dynamic realm of 
marketing strategies.
This report provides an in-depth exploration of the 
transformative potential of generative AI within the marketing 
landscape across all sectors. Through insightful use cases, the 
report elucidates practical applications of generative AI across 
diverse marketing domains. As well as discussing the benefits of 
generative AI, the report addresses the challenges its adoption 
can bring and proposes effective remedial strategies.This report is based on:
• the findings of a comprehensive survey of 1,800 CMOs 
and business leaders (director-level and above) from 14 
countries and
• 25 in-depth interviews with leading CMOs and 
industry experts.
For a comprehensive understanding of the broader 
landscape, we encourage you to explore our first two 
reports, which cover consumer and industry perspectives on 
generative AI:
• Why consumers love generative AI:  
https://www.capgemini.com/insights/research-library/
creative-and-generative-ai/
• Harnessing the value of generative AI:  
Top use cases across industries:  
https://www.capgemini.com/insights/research-library/
generative-ai-in-organizations/Who should read this report and why?
5
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKIntroduction In a span of about one year, the generative AI market is on 
the verge of significant growth. It is expected to reach $1.3 
trillion in the next decade, growing from $40 billion in 2022. 1  
No technology has reached 100 million users faster than 
ChatGPT, which crossed that threshold in just two months. 2  
Based on our recent cross-sector and cross-functional 
research, generative AI shows the greatest potential within 
IT, sales and customer service, and marketing functions. 3  
Furthermore, our consumer research on generative AI reveals 
that consumers who use generative AI tools are satisfied 
with them. In addition, 62% of consumers are comfortable 
with the implementation of generative AI in marketing 
and advertising, provided it doesn't negatively impact their 
overall experience. 4
Consequently, we have undertaken this in-depth exploration 
of its impact on marketing. 
Generative AI can be leveraged to create, innovate, and 
adapt autonomously. And it is reshaping traditional 
marketing strategies.This study, the second in the chief marketing officer (CMO) 
playbook series, 5 explores the following:
1. The rapid integration of generative AI in the 
marketing domain.
2. Implementation areas for generative AI within marketing 
and anticipated benefits.
3. Generative AI's role in augmenting – but not replacing – 
human creativity within marketing.
4. The urgent need for organizations to address ethical and 
copyright concerns arising from the use of generative AI 
in marketing.
We conclude the report by outlining key best practices for 
organizations to effectively harness generative AI technology 
in marketing.6
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKIntroduction In addition to delving into generative AI, the report 
showcases the evolution of the marketing function,  
taking on vital roles in business decision-making and 
customer experience shaping. It also emphasizes  
increased data adoption, empowering marketers  
with agile marketing strategies. 
For our research we surveyed 1,800 CMOs or executives 
responsible for marketing within their organizations. The 
respondents were drawn from organizations with over 
$1 billion annual revenue, across Australia, Brazil, Finland, 
France, Germany, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, 
Singapore, Spain, Sweden, the UK, and the US. We spoke 
to executives from multiple sectors, including automotive, 
consumer products, retail, financial services, telecom, 
utilities, high-tech, industrial manufacturing, life sciences, 
public sector, and media. In addition, we conducted 25 
in-depth interviews with CMOs and other marketing 
executives with firsthand knowledge or awareness of their 
organization's generative AI initiatives. For more details on 
the survey sample, please refer to the research methodology.
7
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGenerative AI is technology that has the capability to learn from 
and reapply the properties and patterns of data for a wide range 
of applications, from creating text, images, and videos in different 
styles to generating tailored content. It enables machines to perform 
creative tasks previously thought exclusive to humans. The following 
table summarizes the top generative AI applications and gives some 
examples.Definition of  
generative AI 
8
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKSelected generative AI applications 
Text
Images and 
video generation
Audio
Chatbots
SearchIndicative examples
Generating new text/reports, summarizing and translating into 
multiple languagesOpenAI’s GPT-4, Google Palm 2, Scribe, Claude
Generating new images/videos, analyzing existing images/video 
(e.g., video games, VR, animation)Adobe Fireﬂy, Stability AI, Midjourney, Nvidia, Dall-E2, 
Synthesia, Nvidia, Runway ML
Generating music and remixing, speech synthesis, sound 
eﬀects, voice conversion, audio enhancementSynthesia, Amazon Polly, Sonix.ai 
Generate human-like contextually relevant text responses in 
real-time to expand and improve customer service and adviceOpenAI’s ChatGPT, Amazon Lex, Google Bard
Enhanced search functions, adding language capabilities to 
search (e.g., “RAG,” retrieval augmented generation)Google Bard, Landing AI, Azure, Facebook Llama 2, Perplexity AI9
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING 
IS RAPIDLY GAINING PACE0110
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMarketers are moving 
fast to embrace the 
possibilities of 
generative AI  
The marketing function is swiftly adopting generative 
AI, witnessing substantial adoption of a technology that 
gained popularity within the past 12 months. In our report 
on generative AI  across sectors and functions published this 
year, approximately 40% of organizations were adopting 
a “wait and watch” approach. This approach now applies 
to only 12% of organizations in terms of the marketing 
function (see Figure 1).
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations; Generative AI Executive Survey, April 2023.FIGURE. 1
The marketing function is rapidly embracing generative AI
12%ORGANIZATIONS WHO ARE ADOPTING A "WAIT AND WATCH" APPROACH ON GENERATIVE AI 
Share of organizations across all functions, 
April 2023
Share of organizations in marketing function,
October 202339%11
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMost organizations 
already use generative  
AI in marketing
Currently, almost 60% of organizations have adopted 
generative AI into their marketing initiatives, including 
37% who have progressed from experimentation to active 
implementation (see Figure 2).
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 2
Marketing functions are deploying generative AI at pace
STATE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING
37% 21% 13% 10% 12% 5% 3%
Using across multiple/few initiatives
Testing/experimenting Don't know what it is and have no 
intention to bring it into 
marketing soon
Not using, but have a strategyNot using, and don't have a strategy
Taking a “wait and watch” approach
Used in the past, but don’t use it now58%
of organizations are integrating 
generative AI into marketing12
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKBusiness-to-business (B2B) sectors (e.g., manufacturing, 
life sciences) are only very slightly behind their business-to-
consumer (B2C) counterparts (e.g., consumer products, retail, 
automotive) in incorporating generative AI into marketing 
strategies (see Figure 3).
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 3
Both B2B and B2C sectors are actively deploying generative AI in marketing
STATE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING, BY SECTOR
Using across multiple/few initiatives
Testing/experimenting Don't know what it is and have no 
intention to bring it into 
marketing soon
Not using, but have a strategyNot using, and don't have a strategy
Taking a “wait and watch” approach
Used in the past, but don’t use it nowB2B sectorsB2C sectors
33% 25% 14% 12% 11% 4%2%38% 20% 13% 10% 12% 5% 3%
13
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGenerative AI is gaining traction not just in B2C but also in 
B2B sectors. Forrester predicts that, by 2024, B2B teams will 
use generative AI to swiftly extract valuable insights from 
diverse customer data to streamline idea generation and 
innovation, ultimately identifying unique capabilities in a fifth 
of launched products. 6 
Moreover, the US already stands out for their robust embrace 
of generative AI in marketing. On average, Europe lags 
behind the U.S. in implementing generative AI, potentially 
attributable to its more stringent regulations in the field of AI 
(see Figure 4).
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 4
The US is ahead in implementing generative AI in marketing
Average, GlobalAverage, Europe and UKSwedenFranceNetherlandsSpainItalyBrazilNorwayIndiaUKGermanyFinlandAustraliaSingaporeUSSTATE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING, BY COUNTRY
Using generative AI across 
multiple/few initiativesNot using or experimenting with 
generative AITesting/experimenting with 
generative AI50% 19% 31%
42% 15% 44%
40% 20% 40%
38% 23% 39%
37% 21% 43%
36% 24% 41%
35% 20% 45%
34% 27% 39%
34% 21% 44%
33% 24% 43%
33% 22% 44%
32% 19% 49%
32% 21% 47%
31% 18% 51%
34% 22% 44%
37% 21% 42%14
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKOrganizations investing in generative 
AI are allocating a significant portion of 
their marketing technology budget to it  
Marketing functions are actively establishing governance 
systems and practices to leverage generative AI. 
Half of the organizations we surveyed have a dedicated 
budget to implement generative AI within marketing, and 
a quarter plan to create one in the next six months. When 
this is considered alongside the nearly 40% of organizations 
that already have progressed from experimentation to 
implementation (as established above), it is evident that 
organizations are proactively investing in their forthcoming 
generative AI initiatives within marketing. 
Moreover, nearly half have formed dedicated teams within 
marketing to implement generative AI. A third more plan to 
establish them in the coming months (see Figure 5).
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI.FIGURE. 5
Marketing teams are swiftly allocating budgets and establishing dedicated teams for generative AI initiatives 
THE BUDGET AND TEAM STRUCTURE FOR IMPLEMENTING GENERATIVE AI WITHIN MARKETING
Already in place
Plan to in the next six months
No plans to do so in the next six monthsA team (speciﬁc to marketing) for generative AI Budget for implementation of generative AI within marketing26%
50%25%
33%
47%20%15
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKA breakdown of budget allocation specifically for generative 
AI in marketing across various sectors, highlights that 
although there are variations, the allocation remains 
substantial across all sectors (see Figure 6).
Figure 6 illustrates that three-quarters of the B2C 
organizations surveyed have allocated or plan to allocate 
budgets for generative AI within the next six months. Even 
for B2B sectors at the opposite end of the spectrum, such 
as life sciences and manufacturing, this figure remains 
high at 65%. This underscores the swift and substantial 
commitment of resources to generative AI in marketing 
across diverse sectors.
Moreover, the budget for generative AI now represents 
a substantial portion of the total marketing technology 
budget, as businesses increasingly recognize the potential 
of generative AI. As shown in Figure 7, those organizations 
that currently invest in generative AI have earmarked 62% of 
their marketing technology budget for such initiatives. These 
investment plans reflect the rapidly advancing maturity 
of both existing and forthcoming generative AI solutions 
and offerings.
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI.FIGURE. 6
Three in four organizations have either already allocated a budget for generative AI marketing initiatives or have plans to do so 
within the next six months
BUDGET ALLOCATION PLANS TOWARDS GENERATIVE AI WITHIN MARKETING, BY SECTOR
Already in place No plans to do so in the next 
six monthsPlan to in the next 
six monthsAverage
Life 
sciencesManufacturing
Public 
sectorTelecom
UtilitiesBanking
RetailInsurance
High-techAutomotive
Consumer
 goodsMedia63%15%21%
55%25%20% 24%
54%22%
52%22%26%
51%27%22%
51%25%25%
49%28%23%
46%27%27%
46%28%26%
44%30%26%
42%24%34%
31%34%35%
50%26%25%16
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKSource: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; 
N=1,142 executives with marketing responsibilities from unique organizations who 
invest in generative AI.FIGURE. 7
Among those investing in generative AI, over half of their marketing 
technology budget is specifically allocated to these initiatives
SHARE OF MARKETING TECHNOLOGY BUDGET ALLOCATED 
TO GENERATIVE AI AMONG ORGANIZATIONS INVESTING IN 
THIS TECHNOLOGY
62%
17
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of B2C organizations.  
Note: Research conducted in 2021 exclusively focused on B2C sectors.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,404 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique B2C organizations; A new playbook for chief marketing officers, September 2021.FIGURE. 8
CMOs at B2C organizations are increasingly pivotal in strategic decision-making processes
B2C ORGANIZATIONS ACKNOWLEDGE THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF MARKETING IN 
STRATEGIC DECISION-MAKING
72%
49%71%
57%
2021 Current, 2023Our C-suite executives (e.g., CEO, CFO, CTO, CIO) 
see marketing as a strategic partner in driving 
business growth and not as solely a cost centerOur CMO is involved when critical decisions to drive 
business goals and objectives are made 
(e.g., on growth strategy, new product development)HOW MARKETING HAS 
EVOLVED INTO A 
STRATEGIC BUSINESS 
DRIVER  
Marketing has been transformed in recent 
years, emerging as a strategic force driving 
organizational success. CMOs now play a central 
role in shaping the decisions that steer businesses 
towards their goals and objectives. Armed with a 
good understanding of market trends, consumer 
behavior, and digital technologies, CMOs can now 
contribute significantly to the development of 
growth strategies and new products (see Figures 
8 and 9).
Dustin Sedgwick, Chief Marketing Officer and 
Managing Director – Payments, JPMorgan Chase 
& Co, says: “Marketing is more and more going to 
be seen as revenue generator and a profit center as 
opposed to a cost center.”18
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of B2C organizations.
Note: Research conducted in 2021 exclusively focused on B2C sectors.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,404 executives with marketing responsibilities from 
unique B2C organizations; A new playbook for chief marketing officers, September 2021.FIGURE. 9
CMOs at B2C organizations are assuming greater accountability for revenue and profit-related decisions 
Contribution to 
revenue growth 2021 2023 2021 2023 2021 2023
Contribution 
to proﬁt DIRECT  
RESPONSIBILITY OF CMOSSHARED  
RESPONSIBILITY OF CMOS INFLUENCING ROLE /  
NO RESPONSIBILITY 
24% 49% 59% 33% 17% 18% 
25% 44% 53% 36% 23% 21% 
19
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of B2C organizations.
Note: Research conducted in 2021 exclusively focused on B2C sectors.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,404 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique B2C organizations; A new playbook for chief marketing officers, September 2021.FIGURE. 10
CMOs at B2C organizations are taking on more significant roles in managing the customer experience
Managing end-to-end 
customer experience 
across touchpoints (e.g., 
stores/dealers, social 
media, web/apps) 2021 2023 2021 2023 2021 2023DIRECT  
RESPONSIBILITY OF CMOSSHARED  
RESPONSIBILITY OF CMOS INFLUENCING ROLE /  
NO RESPONSIBILITY 
30% 47% 46% 31% 24% 23% WHY MARKETING IS 
PROGRESSIVELY 
TAKING 
RESPONSIBILITY  
FOR CUSTOMER 
EXPERIENCE
Marketers have evolved beyond promoting 
products; they now focus on creating 
personalized customer interactions. Our 
research shows that 66% of B2C organizations 
believe their CMOs have increased 
responsibility for customer experience, 
compared to 46% in 2021. By understanding 
the entire customer journey, marketers 
can tailor strategies to engage consumers 
effectively. Consequently, the direct 
involvement of CMOs in managing the end-to-
end customer experience has risen significantly 
since 2021 (see Figure 10).20
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKTo ensure a seamless end-to-end customer 
experience, marketers have a wide range of tools 
and platforms at their disposal. However, our 
findings suggest that, on an average, less than 
four in 10 organizations use such tools extensively 
to map and track customer interactions and 
touchpoints (see Figure 11).
Linda Ha, Global Customer Engagement & Loyalty 
Manager, Ikea Ingka, says:  “We’ve transitioned 
from transactional interactions to fostering genuine 
relationships with our customers. This shift allows 
us to create a meaningful value exchange, enabling 
us to collect valuable data about our customers – 
understanding and supporting their needs and life 
stages. This proactive approach not only strengthens 
our foundation in first-party data but also prepares 
us for a cookie-less future. Leveraging Salesforce 
Marketing Cloud and integrating data from Google 
Cloud Platform, we’ve developed customer-centric 
programs, incorporating customer journeys across 
emails, SMS, and now extending to data from the 
Ikea app.”
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Note: Research conducted in 2021 exclusively focused on B2C sectors.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with 
marketing responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 11
Most organizations do not use digital tools extensively to optimize customer experience
USAGE OF TOOLS AND PLATFORMS BY ORGANIZATIONS TO OPTIMIZE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE
Use it extensively Use it sparsely Plan to use it in the next 6 months No plan to use it in the next 6 monthsCustomer Journey Platforms
 (e.g., Adobe Journey Optimizer)Customer Data Platform
 (e.g., Salesforce 360, Adobe AEP)SaaS based Cloud Marketing Platforms
 (e.g., Salesforce/Adobe marketing cloud)33%30%24%13%
31%35%21%14%
40%30%18%11%21
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKHOW MARKETERS ARE USING 
GENERATIVE AI AND WHY0222
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMarketers employ 
generative AI for creating 
campaigns, enhancing 
customer experiences, 
and conducting data 
analysis
Our research shows widespread integration of AI in 
marketing, touching upon diverse marketing activities that 
encompass both internal operations and customer-centric 
areas. Not confined to any specific domain, the applications 
span across diverse functions, ranging from ideation and 
campaign creation to data analysis, personalized customer 
experiences, and search engine optimization.
For example, 32% of the marketers we interviewed use 
generative AI extensively for data analysis, including 
managing data, predictive modeling, A/B testing, and social 
media listening. The same percentage focus on delivering 
personalized customer experiences, indicating a targeted and 
customer-centric approach (see Figure 12).23
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK
DEEPALI NAAIR
Group Chief Marketing Officer,
CK Birla Group, an Indian 
multinational conglomerate“As a marketer, it's crucial for me to experiment with  
this new technology and explore its possibilities.”
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,112 executives with 
marketing responsibilities from unique organizations who are using generative AI.FIGURE. 12
Use of generative AI is widespread within marketing
IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERATIVE AI USE CASES IN MARKETING, CURRENT
Use extensively 
(for > 50% of initiatives)Use for < 50% of 
initiativesDon't use at present Don’t use, but plan 
to in 6–12 monthsAverageMeasure and track brand metricsCustomer serviceMetahumans for engagement,
 forecasting or simulationInnovation (new product/concept development)Personalized customer and brand avatarsText/content creation
 (emails, blogs, scriptwriting)Customer understanding and journey mappingImage and video generationSearch engine optimizationCampaign creationPersonalized customer experienceData analysis32%
32%
31%
31%
29%
29%
29%
29%
28%
28%
28%
27%
29%30%
28%
25%
25%
30%
28%
26%
28%
29%
28%
27%
29%
28%13%
11%
13%
12%
12%
14%
14%
12%
15%
12%
12%
16%
13%25%
29%
31%
32%
29%
29%
31%
31%
28%
32%
33%
28%
30%Deepali Naair, Group Chief Marketing Officer, CK Birla 
Group, an Indian multinational conglomerate, emphasizes 
on the need to embrace generative AI: “As a marketer, it's 
crucial for me to experiment with this new technology and 
explore its possibilities.”
Further, the executives we interviewed shared insights 
on how they are integrating generative AI within their 
marketing initiatives – 
Strategy and decision-making: Aaren Ekelund, Chief 
Marketing Officer & Chief Communication Officer, 
Microsoft Denmark: “As a CMO, utilizing generative AI 
and machine learning for tasks like forecasting, strategy 
alignment, and pipeline management is vital. We've 
developed an advanced financial modeling platform over the 
years. With the accessibility of technology, we now efficiently 
cluster customers, conduct AB testing, and leverage data-
driven insights for informed decision-making.”
Customer experience:  Veronique Bruhat, Head of 
Digital Health Specialty Care, Sanofi: “Generative AI has 
accelerated the speed of delivering the right personalized 
message to the patient when it matters.”24
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKContent creation:  Rupert Bedell, Chief Marketing 
Officer, Paysend, a global fintech company from the UK: 
“We're delving into generative AI for video production, a 
domain where we typically engaged external video production 
agencies. It crafts exceptionally high-quality custom videos, 
even achieving cinematic standards. This opens up exciting 
possibilities for our creative endeavors.”
Search engine optimization:  Torie Wilkinson, Chief 
Marketing Officer, Lovat Park, a privately-owned company 
in hospitality from the UK: “ChatGPT is instrumental for 
us, especially when dealing with extensive content from an 
organic SEO perspective. It aids in crafting the initial draft by 
amalgamating diverse possibilities, forming an itinerary for 
visitors, such as suggesting activities, local coffee shops, and 
more. These foundational details, which remain relatively 
consistent year after year, are efficiently organized with the 
help of ChatGPT.”
Moreover, the utilization of generative AI across all the 
aforementioned marketing use cases is anticipated to see 
a rise in the next 2–3 years (see Figure 13).
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,112 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are using generative AI.FIGURE. 13
The use of generative AI in marketing is set to increase over the next 2–3 years
IMPLEMENTATION OF GENERATIVE AI USE CASES IN MARKETING, NEXT 2–3 YEARS
Will use extensively (for > 50% of 
initiatives) in the next 2–3 yearsDon't plan to use in the 
next 2–3 yearsWill use for < 50% of initiativesAverageMetahumans for engagement, forecasting
 or simulationCampaign creation Innovation (new product/ concept development)Personalized customer experienceText/content creation (emails, blogs, scriptwriting)Data analysis Image and video generationMeasure and track brand metrics Customer understanding and journey mappingCustomer serviceSearch engine optimizationPersonalized customer and brand avatars 45%
45%
45%
44%
44%
42%
42%
42%
42%
41%
41%
40%
43%42%
44%
44%
44%
42%
45%
48%
46%
45%
46%
46%
47%
45%13%
11%
11%
12%
14%
12%
10%
12%
13%
13%
13%
13%
12%25
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKUse case Example
Personalized customer 
experienceHere are some examples of how organizations are using generative AI for marketing:
Search engine optimization
Image and video generation
Content creation
Campaign creation 
Customer service
Data analysis
InnovationContinental has partnered with Google Cloud to enable drivers to interact with their car in a natural dialogue. The vehicle can inform the driver about tire pressure, local 
points of interest at their destination, and so on, and can respond to driver questions.7 
Nike uses generative AI to create custom-designed sneakers through their “Nike By You” platform. Customers can personalize and design their shoes, leveraging generative 
AI to generate unique design combinations based on user preferences.8
Walmart is experimenting with generative AI to help shoppers in all stages of the shopping experience, from the search and discovery phase to making a purchase. Three 
features in development include a shopping assistant, generative AI-powered search, and an interior design feature.9
Google deployed the Search Generative Experience (SGE) to combine reliable data from multiple organic search results and turn it into a prose answer to a user’s search – 
all without having to click on any links in the results page.10 
IKEA is using generative AI to generate realistic images of its products in customer homes. This helps customers to visualize how IKEA products would look in their own 
homes before making a purchase.11 
Unilever uses generative AI to craft tailored product descriptions for e-commerce platforms like Amazon UK. This helps to improve the ranking of their product pages in 
Search Engine Results Pages (SERPs) and drives more traﬃc to their websites.12 
Adobe integrated generative AI into a digital marketing platform called “Adobe GenStudio.” The platform uses generative AI to automate and optimize the creation of 
digital advertisements.13
Allstate has developed a generative AI application based on ChatGPT 3.3, MyStory, which reduces the time for customers to report a claim. Customers can now recount the 
incident just once, which then gets delivered to all necessary parties.14 
Marqeta, a global issuing and payment processor, uses an external-facing question and answer tool powered by generative AI called Marqeta Docs AI, which helps users 
quickly navigate the site and reduces the overall time to value for customers.15 
Moody’s has formed strategic partnerships to use generative AI to conduct faster ﬁnancial analysis and insights for its customers and employees.16
Bayer Pharmaceuticals explores generative AI to speed up drug development, aiding data analysis and correlation, and automating tasks like drafting clinical trial communi-
cations. This may cut down time and costs in bringing new drugs to market.17 
Coca-Cola launched Coke Y3000, their eighth iteration in the Coke Creations platform and the world’s ﬁrst futuristic ﬂavor co-created with AI. The launch has demonstrated 
strong initial results.1826
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMarketers expect a wide 
range of benefits from 
generative AI  
Our research indicates that 57% of organizations believe 
the benefits of generative AI outweigh its costs and risks. 
This figure, although significant, has decreased from 74% 
in our previous report on generative AI across sectors and 
functions published earlier this year (see Figure 14). This 
decline might suggest an acknowledgment of the current 
challenges of generative AI, including data security risks, 
copyright issues, and ethical concerns.
David Hirsch, General Manager, Marketing at QBE, a 
multinational insurance group headquartered in Sydney 
says: “Generative AI is not just another buzzword; its tangible 
impact is becoming increasingly apparent and is poised to 
grow significantly. Marketers have only begun to explore its 
potential, and it presents a significant opportunity. However, 
it also comes with risks - understanding how to harness this 
technology effectively and without detriment to customers is 
key to staying ahead.”FIGURE. 14
Organizations believe that the benefits of generative AI use will outweigh its costs
ORGANIZATIONS AGREEING THAT THE BENEFITS OF UTILIZING GENERATIVE 
AI OUTWEIGHS ITS ASSOCIATED COSTS AND RISKS
Share of organizations across all 
functions, April 2023
74%Share of organizations in the marketing 
function, October 2023
57%
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI; Generative AI Executive Survey, April 2023.27
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKDAVID HIRSCH  
General Manager Marketing,
QBE, a multinational insurance group 
headquartered in Sydney“Generative AI is not just another buzzword; its tangible impact is 
becoming increasingly apparent and is poised to grow significantly. 
Marketers have only begun to explore its potential, and it presents 
a significant opportunity. However, it also comes with risks - 
understanding how to harness this technology effectively and 
without detriment to customers is key to staying ahead.”
28
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKBy harnessing the power of generative AI, businesses 
expect to fuel innovation, enhance satisfaction, conduct 
scenario analysis, and save time. For example, 67% of 
organizations believe generative AI will be helpful in long-
term brand building (see Figure 15).
Generative AI is poised to enhance 
efficiency and customer satisfaction 
Figure 16 illustrates the extent of the benefits 
organizations expect to gain by integrating generative 
AI into their marketing strategies over the next 2–3 
years. The anticipated advantages include accelerated 
content creation, prompt results leading to streamlined 
marketing processes, heightened customer satisfaction 
and engagement, lowered marketing costs, and an 
improvement in content quality, reaching up to 14%.
We are in the early stages, and generative AI technology 
is just over a year old. Given this, organizations exhibit 
cautious optimism in anticipating benefits from adopting 
generative AI in marketing. However, considering the 
swift advancement and integration of this technology 
within marketing, the actual benefits are likely to surpass 
current expectations among marketers. 
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,137 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are using generative AI.FIGURE. 15
Expected benefits from the use of generative AI in marketing encompass brand building, cost reduction, innovation, 
enhanced customer satisfaction, and more
SHARE OF ORGANIZATIONS STATING VARIOUS BENEFITS OF USING GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING
67%
65%
65%
65%
65%
65%
65%66%
66%
64%
64%
63%
63%
63%
Brand building Market understanding Eﬃciency Innovation Customer experienceProduct/service/content creation that is more
 accessible and inclusive, serving a wider range of customersGreater personalization and tailored experiences for customersImprovement in customer support Creation of brand avatars to uniquely represent the brand to customersImprovement in customer satisfaction and engagementCreation of products that are not possible with current design approachesInnovation in new channelsImprovement in quality of contentMore eﬃcient and streamlined design processTime saved by getting faster content/resultsReduction in marketing costsMarket simulations for scenario analysisAccurate and insightful analysis of performance, customer and market trendsHelp in long term brand building29
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKWe have already seen those implementing generative 
AI realizing greater benefits. For example, Heinz used 
an AI image generator to create a ketchup bottle image 
and invited people to propose new ketchup-based ideas. 
These suggestions were transformed into the company’s 
inaugural campaign featuring visuals entirely generated by 
AI. The campaign received 850 million earned impressions 
globally (a 2,500% + return on media investment) and a 
39% higher engagement rate than previous campaigns.19  
Generative AI is also instrumental in enhancing 
personalized experiences across channels, ensuring 
consistency and relevance. It can ensure that each 
interaction through each touchpoint (such as SMS, social 
media, etc.) contributes to a consistent and personalized 
customer experience. By integrating data from diverse 
channels, it provides a comprehensive customer view, 
facilitating tailored content and promotions that are not 
only personalized but also aligned with the customer's 
buying journey stage.
For example, Spotify’s GenAI DJ tool curates personalized 
playlists and audio ads based on users’ listening habits. 
This has helped increase user engagement and reduce 
churn.20  Similarly, Sephora’s chatbot, Sephora Virtual 
Artist, utilizes generative AI to provide personalized 
makeup recommendations based on customer 
preferences and facial features.21Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,137 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are using generative AI.FIGURE. 16
Marketers expect both operational and customer benefits by integrating generative AI 
EXTENT OF BENEFITS PERCEIVED BY MARKETERS BY USING GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING OVER 
THE NEXT 2–3 YEARS
14.1% 14.0% 13.9% 13.7%
Improvement in
 quality of contentReduction in overall 
marketing costs Improvement in 
customer satisfaction
 and engagementTime saved by 
getting faster content
 and results30
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMore examples of benefits from using generative AI are highlighted in the following table.
Industry Example
E-commerceAutomotive
Food 
Amazon is using generative AI to simplify how sellers create more thorough and captivating product descriptions, titles, and listing details. This simpliﬁes and 
expedites the process of listing new products and enhancing existing ones, ultimately aiding customers in making conﬁdent purchase decisions.26 To enhance the driver experience, Mercedes has integrated a GPT model into over 900,000 cars as part of a beta program. Drivers can access this model 
through the’company's voice assistant, enabling inquiries about destination locations and answering various questions.22 
Coca-Cola has rolled out its third generative AI initiative of the year. As part of a global holiday campaign, it allows people to experiment with holiday-themed 
content, from selecting images to personalizing holiday greetings through generative AI-driven text capabilities, shareable across social platforms and 
WhatsApp.23
Casper, the mattress company from the US, launched a generative AI enabled bot to engage with customers who cannot sleep. Insomnobot3000 is “extra 
chatty between 11 PM and 5 AM,” providing companionship for night owls.24
Flipkart, an Indian e-commerce company, has a three-pronged approach to generative AI. It plans to create chat-led experiences for customers and sellers, 
upgrade the search function based on large language models (LLMs), an build internal tools for productivity and eﬃciency.25 31
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of B2C organizations.
Note: Research conducted in 2021 exclusively focused on B2C sectors.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,404 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique B2C organizations; A new playbook for chief marketing officers, September 2021.FIGURE. 17
An increasing number of CMOs at B2C organizations are now at the forefront of driving digital transformation in marketing 
In our organization, the CTO/CIO and the CMO have a shared responsibility for driving 
digital transformation in marketing2021 2023
Our organization believes that marketing must be technology and data driven today52% 65% 
50% 61% HOW MARKETING HAS 
BECOME INCREASINGLY 
DATA-POWERED   
Marketing leaders are increasingly using data 
and technology to drive marketing strategies 
and business outcomes. As shown in Figure 17, 
marketing is more technology and data-powered 
today than it was in 2021, with a growing number 
of CMOs having joint responsibility for driving 
digital transformation within their organizations.
Monica Gonzalez Peñas from Allianz underscores 
the significance of data and analytics for 
marketers, emphasizing: “In today's landscape, 
understanding data and digital platforms is crucial 
for success. A mindset rooted in data analytics and 
digital is increasingly indispensable for marketers.”
Likewise, Rupert Bedell of Paysend delves into 
the growing partnership between marketing 
professionals and technology leaders: “There’s 
significant overlap between my role and the CTO, 
and we’re collaborating effectively to determine the 
necessity of implementing a new CRM system.”32
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of B2C organizations.   
Note: Research conducted in 2021 exclusively focused on B2C sectors.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,404 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique B2C organizations; A new playbook for chief marketing officers, September 2021 .FIGURE. 18
Use of data in different marketing scenarios at B2C organizations has increased over the past couple of years
OUR MARKETING TEAM USES DATA TO ...
64%42%
40%
63%
48%
35%
61%
43%
46%61%
58%
58%41%60%
2021 Current, 2023… build retargeting campaigns across channels (i.e., to
 remind website/app visitors, after they leave without buying)… optimize the media mix (e.g., decide
 which social media platform/oﬄine activities to target)… decide a go-to-market strategy for a new product/service… introduce new business models… decide content to include for brand messaging… modify campaign strategy
(e.g., add more customer touchpoints like emails, website)… be more agile in responding to customer and market needsIt is imperative for organizations to break down 
silos in order to harness extensive data more 
effectively. Simon Rost, Chief Marketing Officer 
for Enterprise Imaging, GE Healthcare, explains: 
“Healthcare generates enormous datasets, especially 
in imaging. Leveraging technology can unlock the 
potential of this often untapped and isolated data, 
extracting valuable insights and optimizing decision-
making processes.”
Figure 18 explores how marketing teams use 
data-powered strategies. It shows the increase in 
the share of organizations using data since 2021. 
For example, almost 65% employ data-driven 
methods to adapt to shifting market dynamics and 
customer demands or to adjust their campaign 
strategies. In 2021, only around 40% used such 
approaches. 
Florence Lemetais, VP Customer, Marketing 
and Business Development at Fnac Darty, a 
multinational retail company headquartered in 
France: “Now we measure everything, and we take 
the decision linked by measurement and performance. 
So, the data has become the center of everything.”33
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK“Now we measure everything, and we take the 
decision linked by measurement and performance. So, 
the data has become the center of everything.”Executives we interviewed elucidated the uses of 
data for their operations:
• Rupert Bedell from Paysend: “The two 
applications of big data that we spend a lot of time 
analyzing and based on which we make continual 
changes are the acquisition funnel and our search 
marketing.”
• Torie Wilkinson from Lovat Park: “We are using 
data for A/B testing across our website, SEO and 
journey mapping based on search traffic, pricing 
strategies, UX projects, analyzing paid traffic, etc.”
FLORENCE LEMETAIS 
VP Customer, Marketing and Business Development, 
Fnac Darty, a multinational retail company 
headquartered in France
34
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMarketers use diverse channels to engage their 
audience. Social media platforms like TikTok, 
Meta, and X (formerly known as Twitter) are used 
by nearly 80% of marketers, highlighting the 
enduring significance of social networks. Around 
75% use direct messaging platforms such as 
WhatsApp Business and Facebook Messenger for 
personalized communication, emphasizing the 
value of one-on-one interactions. Voice Search 
Optimization (VSO) platforms such as Amazon’s 
Alexa, Google Assistant, and Apple’s Siri are also 
important (see Figure 19).
According to the Harvard Business Review, the 
pandemic pushed businesses to adopt new 
marketing channels to engage with customers. 
Nearly two-thirds (61%) reported increasing the THE CHANNELS 
MARKETERS USE  
TO ENGAGE WITH 
CUSTOMERS 
EFFECTIVELY
Percentages represent share of organizations.
The figures may not sum to 100% due to rounding.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing responsibilities from 
unique organizations.FIGURE. 19
Social media is being used extensively by marketing teams to engage with customers
Social: e.g., TikTok, Instagram, Facebook, X 
(formerly known as Twitter)Use it 
frequentlyUse it 
occasionallyPlan to use in the 
next 6 monthsNo plans to use it in 
the next 6 months
44% 34% 16% 6% 
Direct messaging: e.g., WhatsApp Business, 
Facebook Messenger42% 33% 22% 3% 
Voice search optimization (VSO) e.g., Amazon's 
Alexa, Google Assistant, Apple's Siri40% 34% 21% 5% 
Chatbots and AI-driven customer support: 
e.g., Drift, Intercom, ManyChat36% 33% 20% 10% 
Augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR): 
e.g., Facebook's Oculus, Roblox29% 27% 29% 16% 
The metaverse 16% 37% 30% 17% 35
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKnumber of channels they use. This is more marked 
in the case of B2C services, where 77% reported 
an increase in the number of channels used.27
In the next few years, the metaverse, along with 
immersive technologies such as augmented and 
virtual reality, are poised to grow, offering new 
ways to reach customers through interactive 
experiences and innovations. Again it seems 
likely that B2C organizations will embrace these 
technologies the fastest (see Figure 20).
A report from the Harvard Business Review 
suggests that enterprises, alongside consumer 
adoption, will be pivotal in revealing the value of 
metaverse technology. The pace of metaverse 
adoption hinges on government support. Notably, 
Asia, MENA, and Europe exhibit higher adoption 
rates owing to improved access to necessary 
devices.28  Our 2022 report on immersive 
technologies reveals that 93% of consumers 
express curiosity about the metaverse, while 51% 
express a willingness to use it once it becomes 
accessible to them.29
Percentages represent share of organizations.  
The figures may not sum to 100% due to rounding.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 20
Usage of immersive technologies such as the metaverse and augmented/virtual reality will pick up in the next few years
Social: e.g., TikTok, Instagram, Facebook, X 
(formerly known as Twitter)Will use it frequently 
in the next 2–3 yearsWill use it occasionally 
in the next 2–3 yearsWon’t use it in the 
next 2–3 yearsCan’t say/don’t 
know
46% 31% 3% 20% 
Direct messaging: e.g., WhatsApp Business, 
Facebook Messenger45% 32% 4% 20% 
Voice search optimization (VSO) e.g., Amazon's 
Alexa, Google Assistant, Apple's Siri45% 33% 5% 16% 
Chatbots and AI-driven customer support: 
e.g., Drift, Intercom, ManyChat43% 33% 6% 19% 
The metaverse 39% 33% 5% 23% 
Augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR): 
e.g., Facebook's Oculus, Roblox37% 31% 10% 21% 36
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKVERONIQUE BRUHAT
Head of Digital Health Specialty Care, 
Sanofi"Generative AI has accelerated the speed of 
delivering the right personalized message to  
the patient when it matters.”
37
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGENERATIVE AI WILL AUGMENT 
HUMAN CREATIVITY IN 
MARKETING0338
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKFinding a balance 
between generative AI 
and human creativity is an 
ongoing challenge
Navigating the relationship between generative AI 
and human creativity poses an ongoing challenge for 
organizations. While generative AI streamlines tasks and 
content creation, excessive reliance on this technology may 
undermine the spontaneity and emotional depth of human 
creativity. Additionally, the AI-generated content may contain 
factual errors and flawed logic, as discussed later. Thus, 
humans will need to dedicate time to checking and editing. 
Consequently, striking the right balance between generative 
AI and human engagement in creative work is a critical 
challenge, as acknowledged by 55% of organizations 
surveyed. Analyzed by sector, consumer products and 
automotive sectors express the strongest concerns about 
this issue compared to high-tech, public sector, and life 
sciences (see Figure 21).
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI.FIGURE. 21
Organizations within the consumer products and automotive sectors are particularly challenged about finding a 
balance between generative AI and human creativity
SHARE OF ORGANIZATIONS STATING THAT FINDING THE BALANCE BETWEEN GENERATIVE AI AND 
HUMAN CREATIVITY IS AN ONGOING CHALLENGE
61%59%57% 56% 55% 54% 53%51%49%47%44%55%62%
Average
High-techPublic sector
Life sciencesUtilities
InsuranceMedia
TelecomManufacturing
BankingRetail
AutomotiveConsumer 
goods39
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK55%
of organizations say striking the 
right balance between generative AI 
and human engagement in creative 
work is a critical challenge
CHRISTOPHER WILLIAMS 
Chief Communications Officer,  
COMPASS Pathways, a biotechnology 
company from the UK“Machines excel at recognizing patterns and enhancing 
efficiency by mimicking human communication. However, 
they lack the ability to convey genuine human emotions 
authentically, connecting with others on a deep emotional 
level. I don't know how AI is ever going to do that.”Florence Lemetais from Fnac Darty says: “We are striving to 
strike a balance between algorithms, automated generation, 
and human input. While humans alone may not suffice, relying 
solely on automation doesn't capture the complexities of the real 
world.”
Analyzing this challenge by country, it is evident that 
organizations in the US, UK, India, Brazil, and Australia are 
the most concerned about maintaining a balance between 
generative AI and human creativity. Organizations in Sweden 
and Norway have fewer concerns.
40
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,735 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI.FIGURE. 22
In the long-run (next 5–10 years), generative AI will serve as a catalyst for human creativity 
IN THE NEXT 5–10 YEARS, GENERATIVE AI WILL ...
19% 33% 29% 20%
… completely replace 
human creativity and 
ingenuity in marketing … augment human creativity 
and ingenuity in marketing, 
but humans will remain the 
central decision-makers… will play a limited role 
in augmenting human 
creativity and ingenuity 
in marketing… not have any impact on 
the human creativity and 
ingenuity in marketing
In time, generative AI will 
augment human 
creativity, not replace it
In the longer term (next 5–10 years), marketers believe 
that generative AI will augment rather than replace human 
creativity. Talking about how generative AI cannot replace 
creativity, Christopher Williams, Chief Communications 
Officer, COMPASS Pathways, a biotechnology company 
from the UK, adds: “Machines excel at recognizing patterns 
and enhancing efficiency by mimicking human communication. 
However, they lack the ability to convey genuine human emotions 
authentically, connecting with others on a deep emotional level. I 
don't know how AI is ever going to do that.”
While AI is poised to replace human labor on mundane, 
repetitive tasks, marketers acknowledge the unique human 
elements of creativity, such as intuition, emotion, and context 
understanding. AI is viewed as a potent tool to augment 
these intrinsic qualities (see Figure 22).
Organizations adopting a cautious “wait and watch” stance, 
and those without a strategy for incorporating generative AI 
in marketing tend to believe less in its significant impact on 
creativity. Conversely, those actively experimenting with or 
implementing generative AI more robustly acknowledge its 
role in augmenting human creativity.41
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPratik Thakar, global head of generative AI at Coca-Cola 
underscores that the collaboration of AI and human 
intervention is essential for achieving their notable output: 
“I think it will be a long time before human creativity can be 
completely simulated. Our generative AI advert Masterpiece 
couldn’t have been made without human input. And I don’t think 
it would be able to come up with something that could become 
as iconic as the Coca-Cola logo. That doesn’t mean businesses 
won’t try to use it to save money, particularly on repetitive work 
such as mass personalization. But in the near term, being able 
to augment your skills with AI is likely to open doors to new and 
interesting opportunities.” 30
Further emphasizing the crucial role of human creativity in 
the era of AI adoption Elizabeth Cunnigham, Head of Loyalty 
Marketing and Brand at IAG Loyalty, part of International 
Airlines Group (IAG), adds: “At this moment, what we truly value 
is the innate human qualities of insight, empathy, and creativity. 
Can a machine match the depth of human creativity? While AI 
certainly has its place, I remain unconvinced as yet about its 
ability to replace the human touch in marketing.”
ELIZABETH CUNNIGHAM
Head of Loyalty, Marketing and Brand, 
IAG Loyalty, part of International Airlines 
Group (IAG)"At this moment, what we truly value is the innate human 
qualities of insight, empathy, and creativity. Can a machine 
match the depth of human creativity? While AI certainly has its 
place, I remain unconvinced as yet about its ability to replace 
the human touch in marketing.”
42
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMarketers view 
generative AI as a 
catalyst for innovation  
Marketers envision a future where generative AI acts as 
a catalyst, unlocking new creative possibilities. As shown 
in Figure 23, 57% of respondents anticipate creative 
teams leveraging generative AI outputs as a starting 
point in their creative process as part of a collaborative 
relationship between human creativity and AI-driven 
innovation. Moreover, 55% foresee generative AI as a 
catalyst for innovation, motivating teams to think beyond 
conventional boundaries.
For instance, 
• Nestle used generative AI to refine and add significant 
details and new characters to an original painting created 
more than 360 years ago to promote their La Laitière 
yogurt.31 
• Wendy’s, an American international fast food restaurant 
chain, employs a generative AI tool to automate routine 
tasks such as drive-thru customer orders. This innovation 
enables human employees to concentrate on essential 
duties like food preparation.32  Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with 
marketing responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI.FIGURE. 23
Generative AI will play a crucial role in enhancing the creative process 
Generative AI will reﬁne and
 enhance ideas generated by creative teamsGenerative AI will motivate teams
 to think beyond conventional boundariesBy automating routine tasks, generative
 AI will give more time for teams to innovateCreative teams will use generative AI
 outputs as a foundation in their creative processSHARE OF ORGANIZATIONS STATING THE IMPORTANCE OF GENERATIVE AI IN THE 
CREATIVE PROCESS
55%57%
55%
54%43
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKPercentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,736 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations; Generative AI Executive Survey, April 2023 .FIGURE. 24
Organizations believe that generative AI is disruptive for marketing 
ORGANIZATIONS AGREEING WITH GENERATIVE AI BEING DISRUPTIVE
Share of organizations across all 
functions, April 2023
21%Share of organizations in the marketing 
function, October 2023
46%A director of digital marketing at a multinational cosmetic 
company emphasizes that while generative AI is valuable 
for refining ideas, the task of revealing and effectively 
communicating the underlying meaning behind the idea remains 
fundamentally human-led: “Generative AI can help you find 
variations. It can help you find the right lexicon, hitting the right tone. 
But the authentic idea and the campaign message or the deeper 
meaning behind a campaign, I think that is going to be human led.”
Further underscoring the significance of human involvement in 
strategy and vision creation, Dustin Sedgwick from JPMorgan 
Chase & Co adds: “In creative industries, human involvement remains 
essential for shaping the vision, strategy, and direction. Generative AI 
acts as a tool, opening new creative avenues.”
Generative AI is seen as an increasingly 
disruptive force, reshaping nearly 
every role in the field of marketing 
While generative AI is not set to replace human creativity, its 
impact will be felt across marketing teams, enhancing the 
efficiency and effectiveness of various marketing roles.
Nearly half of the marketers surveyed believe that generative AI 
will significantly disrupt the marketing function. This perception 
has intensified in the last six months – only 21% of executives 
across sectors and functions shared this belief earlier in 2023, as 
highlighted in our recent report on generative AI across sectors 
and functions (see Figure 24).44
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKDUSTIN SEDGWICK
Chief Marketing Officer and 
Managing Director – Payments, 
JPMorgan Chase & Co.“In creative industries, human involvement 
remains essential for shaping the vision, strategy, 
and direction. Generative AI acts as a tool, 
opening new creative avenues.”
45
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMarketers in high-tech, consumer products, retail, life 
sciences, media, public sector, insurance, and automotive 
sectors express a stronger belief in the disruptive potential 
of generative AI. Notably, these sectors also align with 
those that have actively allocated budgets for generative AI 
in marketing.
Generative AI’s impact on marketing is evident in the ease 
with which it can generate personalized campaigns and 
predict consumer responses, as well as its speed in crafting 
visually appealing content, all of which can help foster 
customer engagement and brand loyalty.
Consequently, as shown in Figure 25, while 29% of 
organizations, on average, believe generative AI will not 
affect job roles, the majority anticipate significant or 
moderate impact on key positions. For example:
• SEO specialists – significant impact in refining online 
visibility and content optimization strategies. 
• Digital marketing specialists and creative directors – 
significant impact in enhancing digital strategies and 
creative campaigns.
Percentages represent share of organizations.High impact=must gain extensive knowledge about generative AI for very frequent use, 
Moderate impact= need some knowledge about generative AI for occasional use, Little impact= need very limited/no knowledge about 
generative AI for rare use.   
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,783 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 25
Almost all marketing roles will be impacted by generative AI 
Brand managerPR/CommunicationsContent marketing specialistData analystsSocial media specialistProduct marketerDigital marketing specialistCopywriterCreative directorSearch engine optimization specialistCustomer insights specialistsIMPACT OF GENERATIVE AI ON MARKETING JOB ROLES
73%
73%
72%
72%
71%
71%
71%
71%
70%
69%
67%27%
27%
28%
28%
29%
29%
29%
29%
30%
31%
33%
Role will be highly/moderately impacted Role will not be impacted much46
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK• Customer insights specialists, data analysts and social 
media specialists – significant impact in processing 
extensive data and optimizing social media interactions.
• PR/communications specialists and brand managers, 
copywriters, and content marketing specialists – impact in 
communication and storytelling aspects.
Dustin Sedgwick from JPMorgan Chase & Co. says: “I think we 
will go through a short-term displacement and role composition 
change, similar to previous technological step-changes 
throughout history. It'll be hard at first, but we'll eventually 
adapt and evolve. People really underestimate humans' ability to 
identify new areas not previously explored that need their unique 
skills and perspectives. While certain tasks or functions will get 
replaced by automation and AI, humans will inevitably find new 
areas to add value that AI isn’t trained for and can’t replicate.”
Conrad Bird, Director, Campaigns & Marketing at the Cabinet 
Office, UK, says: “Despite fears about AI, I believe that AI will not 
replace humans, but it will challenge marketers who don’t use AI.”
CONRAD BIRD
Director, Campaigns & Marketing, 
Cabinet Office, UK“Despite fears about AI, I believe that AI will not 
replace humans, but it will challenge marketers 
who don’t use AI.”
47
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKORGANIZATIONS ARE 
USING BOTH EXTERNAL 
COLLABORATIONS AND 
INTERNAL INITIATIVES 
TO BRIDGE THE AI  
SKILLS GAP  
A majority (63%) of organizations say demand for 
generative AI skills in marketing significantly 
outstrips supply. This reflects the growing 
recognition of the potential of generative AI in 
enhancing marketing strategies and initiatives. 
Analyzing hiring behavior, freelance work 
marketplace Upwork noted that posts for 
generative AI jobs increased more than 1000% in 
Q2 2023 compared to the end of 2022. 33 
Some examples of skills that are gaining 
prominence in marketing are:
• Prompt engineering skills to get the 
desired information.• Verification skills to evaluate responses to identify 
biases, inconsistencies, misleading information and 
ethical considerations.34
To address this skills gap and harness the full 
potential of generative AI in marketing, organizations 
are implementing internal and external strategies. On an average, 53% of companies have definite plans 
to provide generative AI training for their marketing 
teams in the next six months, particularly companies 
from the Netherlands, India, Australia, and the US. 
Sectors such as media, insurance, automotive, and life 
sciences also show higher-than-average commitment 
48
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKto generative AI training for their marketing teams. 
Linda Ha from Ikea Ingka says: “People are worried that 
their jobs will be replaced by generative AI, but I think 
this is our opportunity to empower our teams – to upskill 
and reskill the teams we have in order to meet the new 
capabilities.”
Marketing leaders must look not only for technology 
and AI skills but also need an understanding of how 
to balance AI with human creativity. Christopher 
Williams from COMPASS Pathways adds: “The skillset 
that people like me are going to need is knowing how 
to balance what something like generative AI can do 
against the unique thing that a human being can bring to 
it. This is the key skill that I'm looking for when it comes 
to bringing talent onto my team.”
Nearly a quarter of organizations rely solely on 
external applications and platforms for generative 
AI in marketing. However, half of them are in the 
process of either developing or using in-house 
applications alongside external ones. A smaller group 
leverages external generative AI applications but 
relies on internally developed prompt, constraint, or 
knowledge models, and another group exclusively 
uses in-house applications and platforms  
(see Figure 26).Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,051 executives 
with marketing responsibilities from unique organizations who have implemented at least one generative 
AI initiative.FIGURE. 26
Half of the organizations are either developing or using in-house applications alongside external 
ones for generative AI solutions in marketing
We completely rely on external
 generative AI applications available in the marketWe currently use external applications,
 but looking at developing exclusive in-house onesWe have developed in-house applications, which are
 used along with external applications based on requirementWe leverage external generative AI applications,
 but always leveraging internally developed prompt,
 constraint or knowledge models which are retained in-houseWe only use in-house applications
 to implement generative AI solutionsAPPROACH TOWARDS LEVERAGING GENERATIVE AI SOLUTIONS FOR MARKETING
14%13%
22%
28%
23%49
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKURGENT ACTION IS NEEDED TO 
ADDRESS ETHICAL AND COPYRIGHT 
ISSUES ASSOCIATED WITH 
GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING 0450
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKThe ethical concerns 
around generative AI use 
in marketing are 
signficiant
As AI algorithms become increasingly sophisticated, 
marketers face enduring ethical considerations around 
issues such as the responsible use of customer data, the 
transparency of AI-driven decision-making processes, and 
ensuring algorithms do not reinforce social inequalities.
Our research indicates that 70% of organizations are 
potentially exposed to ethical challenges due to the absence 
of comprehensive and clear guidelines for the use and 
oversight of AI systems (see Figure 27).
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 27
Seven in ten organizations have not established ethical guidelines for use of AI in marketing
We are unaware of the potential ethical
 implications of AI in marketingEthical considerations are not a priority
 in our AI marketing initiativesWe are exploring ethical frameworks for AI but have
 not implemented them comprehensively yetEthical considerations are a part of our AI strategy, and
 we involve diverse stakeholders in decision-makingWe have established ethical guidelines for AI usage
 and continually monitor AI-generated contentSTATE OF ADOPTION OF ETHICAL GUIDELINES AND FRAMEWORKS IN MARKETING
28%30%
21%
12%
10%51
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKVarious ethical issues could give rise to problematic 
output, including :
• inappropriate or inaccurate content, commonly 
termed as AI “hallucinations”
• bias, skew, or discrimination arising from the training 
data-set
• generation of content based on copyrighted or 
unauthorized data.
Recent instances illustrate how prominent organizations 
have incurred financial losses due to inaccuracies 
propagated by their generative AI tools, stemming from 
inadequate and questionable ethical practices.
Our research shows that organizations often overlook 
attributes such as trust and responsibility when 
selecting AI systems, and less than half consider issues 
like transparency, human involvement, legal compliance, 
social benefit, and environmental consciousness (see 
Figure 28).FIGURE. 28
Less than 50% of organizations consider attributes of trust and responsibility when selecting AI systems for marketing 
Considers data privacy and security from the 
design phase, for data usage that is secure 
and legally compliant with privacy regulationsDesigned for human beneﬁt, with a clearly deﬁned purpose 
setting out what the solution will deliver, to whomAI with carefully delimited impact
AI respectful of privacy and data protection
Enables humans to make more 
informed choices and have the ﬁnal sayControllable AI with clear accountability
Delivers outcomes that can be understood, 
traced, and audited as appropriateTransparent and explainable AI
Produced by diverse teams using sound data 
for unbiased outcomes and the inclusion of 
all individuals and population groupsFair AIDeveloped with the needs of all 
stakeholders in mind, to avoid damage to 
the environment, and to address pressing 
challenges such as climate changeSustainable AIIncludes a fallback plan when neededRobust and safe AIORGANIZATIONS CONSIDERING ATTRIBUTES OF TRUST AND RESPONSIBILITY WHILE SELECTING 
THE AI SYSTEMS FOR MARKETING
53%
49%
46%
46% 44%43%40%
AI systems in 
marketing
Percentages represent share of organizations.
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing responsibilities 
from unique organizations.52
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKThe use of generative AI in 
marketing raises copyright issues
Generative AI in marketing might raise significant 
copyright concerns, as AI-generated content can create 
challenges in determining ownership and intellectual 
property rights and, consequently, legal disputes could 
arise. 
Stock photo provider Getty Images sued Stability AI, 
creators of AI art tool Stable Diffusion, over alleged 
copyright violation, accusing them of misusing more than 
12 million Getty photos to train their Stable Diffusion AI 
image-generation system.35
Despite this, organizations are not currently 
implementing sufficient measures to address copyright 
issues. Our research indicates that, on an average, only 
42% of organizations are implementing measures, such as 
strong cybersecurity protocols, monitoring or searching 
for AI-derived versions of their work, including logos and 
artwork. We note that 36% of organizations expressed an 
intention to implement such measures within six months 
(see Figure 29).FIGURE. 29
A little over 40% of organizations, on average, have taken concrete steps to address copyright issues  
Demand compensation from generative
 AI platforms for intellectual property
 infringement due to absence of licensed input dataMonitor digital and social channels to check
 for derived versions of our workProactively search for our work in datasets/databases,
 including logos, artwork, textual elementsImplement strong cybersecurity measures to
 ensure the security of external AI tools we useRestrict employee usage of generative AI platforms to
 prevent input of conﬁdential business information and
 ensure work-related queries don't expose sensitive dataDemand terms of service from generative AI platforms
 to conﬁrm proper licensure of their training dataSTEPS TAKEN TO ADDRESS COPYRIGHT ISSUES ARISING OUT OF USE OF GENERATIVE AI IN MARKETING
45%
43%
43%
42%
40%
39%34%
35%
36%
36%
38%
38%21%
22%
21%
22%
23%
23%
Already implementing No plans to implement in the next 6 months Plan to in the next 6 months
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware about generative AI.53
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKTHE NEED TO 
ADDRESS 
GREENWASHING IN 
MARKETING CLAIMS
Organizations frequently overlook the issue of 
greenwashing (the practice of overselling or 
overstating an environmental claim for a product or 
service) in their marketing. Our research indicates 
that only 39% of marketing leaders consider 
greenwashing a significant concern, although we find 
that consumers globally are becoming more wary of 
it. Our recent sustainability research revealed that 
49% of consumers never, rarely, or only sometimes 
trust an environmental claim about a purchase 
they are considering, rising to 65% among Gen Z 
consumers (see Figure 30).36 
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with 
marketing responsibilities from unique organizations; A world in balance 2023: Heightened sustainability awareness yet 
lagging actions, November 2023.FIGURE. 30
There is a perception gap between marketing executives and consumers on the significance of greenwashing
Greenwashing is one of our top concerns
 since it erodes customer trust and
 damages brand reputation, marketers
 from all organizationsAll consumers: We never, rarely,
 or only sometimes trust an
 environmental claim about a
 purchase we are consideringGen Z: We never, rarely, or only 
sometimes trust an environmental claim
 about a purchase we are consideringSHARE OF ORGANIZATIONS AND CONSUMERS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF GREENWASHING
49%65%
39%Marketing 
executives Consumers54
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKThe research also showed that a third of consumers 
believe that organizations/brands greenwash their 
initiatives. This rises to 45% for Millennials and 50% 
for Gen Z consumers.37 
Despite this, most organizations do not take 
measures to tackle the problem – only 39% 
of marketers use independent sustainability 
certifications to uphold their brand reputation and 
only 42% substantiate their sustainability marketing 
claims with concrete evidence (see Figure 31).
As consumers become increasingly discerning and 
environmentally conscious, marketers must prioritize 
transparency and authenticity, ensuring their claims 
align with concrete eco-friendly practices to build 
credibility and maintain consumer trust. A Harvard 
Business Review study estimates that organizations 
perceived to be greenwashing suffer, on an average, 
a 1.34% drop in their American Customer Satisfaction 
Index (ACSI) score and are open to accusations of 
corporate hypocrisy.38
The EU and the UK both implemented new or 
updated regulations to combat greenwashing and 
protect consumers in 2023.39 Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 
executives with marketing responsibilities from unique organizations.FIGURE. 31
Most organizations do not consistently adhere to sustainability monitoring and reporting practices
We use various sustainability certiﬁcations and
 independent third-party assessment to
 preserve customer trust and brand reputationWe back up our sustainability marketing
 claims with credible evidenceSHARE OF ORGANIZATIONS FOLLOWING SUSTAINABILITY MONITORING AND REPORTING 
PRACTICES TO ADDRESS GREENWASHING
44%
42%55
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKA GUIDE TO MOVING FORWARD 
WITH GENERATIVE AI IN 
MARKETING0556
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKFigure 32 shows areas for organizations to focus on to 
accelerate the use of generative AI in marketing.
STRATEGIC DIRECTION 
Precisely outline integration objectives for generative AI 
• Set clear, strategy-aligned goals  for generative AI 
implementation in marketing. Whatever the focus of 
implementation. These goals pinpoint areas for value 
addition and relevant use cases, which helps in selecting 
tailored tools.
Simon Rost from GE Healthcare says: “Define your use case 
clearly upfront. It is very important to understand what you 
want to achieve before you think about the tool. The tool should 
basically help you get to that goal faster or better.”
• Align generative AI objectives with broader 
business goals for impact and relevance. Close 
collaboration between marketing teams and key 
stakeholders is essential. Ensure generative AI objectives 
complement business goals like revenue growth or 
customer satisfaction.
The director of marketing at a global e-commerce company 
says: “It is super important to get to understand goals in advance, 
understand what each organization is capable of, and define 
priorities. There might be occasions where we want to automate, 
but there might be other occasions where the customer needs 
human interaction for a specific reason.”Source: Capgemini Research Institute analysis.FIGURE. 32
Key considerations for organizations to drive generative AI initiatives in marketing 
Establish a dedicated task force to 
integrate generative AI  
Craft robust ethical guidelines 
Stay informed about evolving AI 
regulations requirementsOutline integration goals for 
generative AI
Adopt a pragmatic approach for 
investments in generative AI 
Evaluate tech infrastructure for AI 
system compatibility and consolidate 
into a uniﬁed framework
Start small and drive iterative implementation
Implement robust security and privacy protocols
Navigate responsibly, addressing the environmental impact of generative AI
Cultivate dynamic partnerships, and enhance internal skills
Maintain equilibrium between generative AI and human ingenuity
Transcend conventional roles and embrace tech-driven collaborationLeadership 
and 
oversight
Iterative 
executionStrategic 
direction
Expand boundaries57
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKAdopt a pragmatic approach for 
investments in generative AI
Over the last 12 months, generative AI has garnered 
substantial attention, prompting significant investments. 
Recognizing the substantial initial investment  
required for venturing into this domain, it is imperative 
for companies to adopt a pragmatic approach to their 
investment decisions . It is crucial for them to craft a Evaluate tech infrastructure for AI 
system compatibility and consolidate 
into a unified framework
Ensure compatibility and integration capabilities.  
Begin by evaluating your marketing infrastructure to 
pinpoint potential bottlenecks, ensuring a seamless 
integration between generative AI tools and existing 
platforms. Recognizing the strengths and limitations of 
current technologies empowers strategic adjustments 
and investments, facilitating the smooth incorporation of 
generative AI.
Integrate diverse solutions into a unified framework.  
Marketers face a multitude of generative AI tools and 
solutions, necessitating a strategic architecture to avoid  
being overwhelmed. Consolidating these tools into a 
single platform is vital, transitioning from isolated point 
solutions to a unified framework. This also facilitates 
ethical and responsible architecture management, and 
streamlining the incorporation of brand standards across 
all solutions. SIMON ROST
Chief Marketing Officer  
for Enterprise Imaging, 
GE Healthcare“Define your use case clearly upfront. It is very 
important to understand what you want to achieve 
before you think about the tool. The tool should 
basically help you get to that goal faster or better.”
strategic roadmap that meticulously prioritizes short and 
medium-term objectives.
Furthermore, foresight is paramount, as companies should 
anticipate the necessity for continuous investments 
over time  to guarantee the sustained maintenance 
and augmentation of their capabilities. This approach 
ensures alignment with the dynamic nature of technology 
development and deployment.58
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKLEADERSHIP AND OVERSIGHT 
Assemble specialized marketing task 
forces to integrate generative AI  
For expediting adoption, organizations should establish a 
well-defined ownership and governance framework – 
• Create a specialized marketing team to explore 
generative AI. This team’s role involves pinpointing 
specific areas and use cases where generative AI can 
yield significant outcomes.
• Allow for interdisciplinary collaboration (include 
sales and IT teams as a minimum) to develop customized 
solutions that align with marketing goals and 
customer needs.
A director of digital marketing at a multinational cosmetic 
company says: “Establishing a clear governance structure 
is crucial. It delineates responsibilities, defines remits, and 
ensures the availability of necessary resources and tools 
for agile and consistent implementation. Equally important 
is appointing a dedicated leader for generative AI and 
determining its organizational placement.”Craft robust ethical guidelines for 
the conscientious use of AI 
Establishing robust ethical guidelines for AI usage in 
marketing is essential to ensure responsible and inclusive 
practices within the industry. 
Conrad Bird from the UK Cabinet Office says: “When 
employing AI in our communication efforts, we will prioritize 
transparency and ethical responsibility. We aim to set 
industry standards in the ethical use of AI. Given our public 
accountability, we are committed to making decisions that 
prioritize human values.”
• Develop ethical guidelines and a comprehensive 
framework  emphasizing transparency, fairness, and 
user privacy in AI-driven decision-making processes. 
Simon Rost from GE Healthcare says: “It helps to bring the 
experts from business, IT, compliance and legal departments 
together early on in the evaluation of these generative AI tools 
to understand what to look out for.”• Conduct regular audits and assessments 
of AI systems to check for biases and 
discriminatory outcomes.
• Actively engage with diverse communities 
and customers  to understand their concerns and 
perspectives regarding AI applications in marketing so 
guidelines reflect the values and expectations of the 
wider society.
• Participate in workshops  alongside the research, law, 
and education community to identify comprehensive 
ways to build trustworthy AI.
• Train and continuously educate employees across 
marketing  on the ethical implications of their work, 
emphasizing the importance of unbiased data sourcing, 
fairness in algorithms, and the responsible use of 
AI-generated content. Establish mechanisms for 
reporting ethical concerns and violations, along with 
clear consequences for non-compliance.59
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK• European Union and Italy:  The EU AI Act is 
approved and expected to be finalized by the 
end of 2023, and will classify AI usage based 
on risk levels, prohibiting certain uses and 
imposing stringent monitoring and disclosure 
requirements for high-risk applications. In 
March 2023, Italy briefly banned ChatGPT, 
citing concerns about how – and how much – 
user data was being collected by the chatbot. 
Since then, approximately $33 million has been 
allocated to help unemployed people and 
workers in positions at risk of automation to 
boost their digital skills.40  
• US: Initial steps are being taken to produce 
legislation to regulate AI. Certain interim 
measures are in place, including the White 
House recently announcing a voluntary 
agreement with seven prominent generative 
AI companies to provide minimum guardrails STEPS TAKEN BY COUNTRIES TO 
REGULATE AI
for safety, security, and public trust, as 
safeguards.41
• UK: Currently, the UK plans to split 
responsibility for governing AI between existing 
regulators for safety, transparency, fairness, 
and accountability rather than creating a new 
body dedicated to the technology.42 
• Brazil:  A draft AI law outlines the rights of AI 
usage and provides guidelines for categorizing 
different types of AI based on the risk they pose  
to society.43 
• Japan:  Japan has adopted a “soft law” 
approach to AI regulation: the country has no 
prescriptive regulations governing specific ways 
AI can and can’t be used. Instead, it has opted to 
wait and see how AI develops, citing a desire to 
avoid stifling innovation.44 Aaren Ekelund from Microsoft Denmark says: “There is a 
concerted effort at Microsoft to educate all employees on ethics. 
Comprehensive training sessions have been conducted in marketing 
and sales organizations, as well as the development sector to ensure 
employees are well informed and encouraged to voice concerns if 
they notice any deviations from ethical guidelines.”
Remain vigilant, navigating the ever-evolving 
realm of AI regulations and compliance 
• Consider assigning a dedicated compliance officer or 
team  to track and interpret the rapidly evolving laws and 
guidelines related to generative AI. 
• Proactive engagement with policymakers, privacy 
regulators, and global subject matter experts  on an 
ongoing basis should also be considered.
• Further steps , as highlighted in our recent research,  
could include: 
 –requesting disclosures about the capabilities and limitations
 –drafting/revisiting policies
 –establishing accountability
 –providing more control to users.60
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKHighlighting the importance of governing AI, Aaren 
Ekelund from Microsoft Denmark says: “It's essential to 
govern generative AI effectively, providing adequate education 
to ensure people understand its implications, rather than 
outright preventing them from exploring its potential.”
Similarly, Veronique Bruhat from Sanofi underscores the 
significance of regulations: “Regulatory processes and data 
privacy are critical in pharmacovigilance, integrating AI into 
these processes has the potential to accelerate our ability to 
meet patients' needs and make more informed decisions about 
adverse events, in a way that maintains responsibility and 
ethics in the core of the way we work.”  
ITERATIVE EXECUTION 
Drive implementation through experimentation and 
continuous iterations  
• Start with small-scale projects as testing grounds to 
help you evaluate the effectiveness of generative AI in 
specific marketing tasks – look for simple, high-impact,  
low-risk use cases.
Claudia Willvonseder, Executive Board Member at Dr. 
Oetker, says: “We need to exercise caution and not rush into 
using generative AI simply because it’s trending. Strategic and 
thoughtful implementation is key.”AAREN EKELUND
Chief Marketing Officer & Chief  
Communication Officer,  
Microsoft Denmark“It's essential to govern generative AI effectively, 
providing adequate education to ensure people 
understand its implications, rather than outright 
preventing them from exploring its potential.”
Establish a rigorous testing and verification strategy  
with synthetic scenarios and adversarial testing to monitor 
AI outputs for incorrect results or invalid representations. 
Human involvement is crucial to address contextual and 
nuanced limitations in AI results.
• Learn from small projects and monitor continuously . 
Implement robust monitoring systems to track and 
analyze data to measure ROI, customer engagement, and 
overall progress.
Elizabeth Cunnigham at IAG Loyalty says: “Test generative AI 
on small use cases: learn, tweak, and optimize. In as agile a way as possible and using the same process, try to understand how we 
can use this technology to get the greatest benefit from it.”
• Use a process of iterative refinement , and adjust 
strategies based on real-time feedback. This ensures that 
the marketing team stays agile and responsive.
Linda Ha from Ikea Ingka says: “The assignment-based approach 
has proven highly effective in uniting cross-functional teams to 
define specific use cases and adopt an iterative test-and-learn 
method for applying new technologies. This approach enables  
a phased transformation that meets both business and customer 
needs.”61
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKMONICA GONZALEZ PEÑAS 
Chief Customer and Marketing Officer, 
Allianz“In banking and insurance there is huge amount of 
critical data for customers. The key challenge for us 
is ensuring that artificial intelligence stays within 
regulations on data and security.”Safeguard success by implementing 
robust security and privacy protocols 
Our research highlights concerns around data collection, 
data security, and copyright. For example, nearly seven in ten 
organizations surveyed agree that the use of sensitive data 
in generative AI processes could pose a risk of cyberattacks 
and data breaches. A similar proportion acknowledge issues 
associated with generative AI content, citing concerns about 
copyright and intellectual property rights infringement as 
well as the risk of generating misinformation or inappropriate 
content, which could lead to reputational damage and 
legal repercussions. To protect against these issues, we 
recommend marketers follow the steps below.
• Curate data meticulously,  verifying its authenticity 
and relevance to avoid misleading outcomes and skewed 
results. 
The chief marketing and digital officer of an Indian 
multinational automotive manufacturing corporation says: 
“One of the requirements to make generative AI more effective 
is to have a very clear data strategy in place, because it takes out 
output from the data which you supply. So, it's important to filter 
and curate the data which goes in.”
• Focus on collection of diverse, high-quality datasets  
through rigorous validation and cleansing processes, 
ensuring representative and unbiased data. 
62
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK• Collaborate with domain experts  to gain valuable 
insights, enhancing dataset accuracy. 
• Invest in continuous monitoring and updates  to 
reflect changing consumer trends.
A product management and marketing executive for 
a French digital automation and energy management 
company says: “Concern arises when data contains biases 
due to errors in collection or unusual comments, potentially 
leading to flawed or biased outputs. This issue raises the risk 
of incorrect implications, a critical concern for us.”
• Safeguard sensitive data through robust privacy 
protocols to maintain customer trust, ensure legal 
compliance and prevent breaches. Adhere to data 
privacy laws such as the EU’s GDPR, Japan’s Protection 
of Personal Information Act, Singapore’s Personal Data 
Protection Act (PDPA), the California Consumer Privacy 
Act (CCPA) enforceable from March 2024, India's Digital 
Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act enforceable soon, 
and other similar legislations.45 
• Build a data governance framework to ensure data 
is managed, processed, and utilized in a standardized, 
secure, and compliant manner. Clear guidelines on data 
access, usage, retention, and organization can mitigate 
risks associated with data misuse.
• Review transaction terms  and insist on terms of 
service from generative AI platforms, ensuring proper licensure of training data, and seek broad compensation 
for failure to license data appropriately.
• Limit employee access to generative AI platforms , with 
guidelines encouraging use only when necessary. Protocols 
should prevent inadvertent input of sensitive business data 
and address concerns highlighted by incidents such as the 
Samsung data leakage.46 
Monica Gonzalez Peñas, Chief Customer and Marketing 
Officer at Allianz, says: “In banking and insurance there is huge 
amount of critical data for customers. The key challenge for us 
is ensuring that artificial intelligence stays within regulations on 
data and security.”
Navigate responsibly, addressing the 
environmental impact of generative AI  
Measuring generative AI's carbon emissions is challenging. 
Despite its marketing benefits, 50% of organizations fear 
generative AI’s environmental impact might exceed that 
of traditional methods due to the high energy demand of 
complex AI models. For instance, GPT-3 training emitted over 
550 Mt of CO2 and OPT surpassed 75 Mt of emissions.47  
Our survey shows that 53% of organizations now aim for 
sustainable integration within marketing initiatives, compared 
to 77% in our previous report across sectors and functions 
(see Figure 33).Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 
research, Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,752 executives with marketing 
responsibilities from unique organizations who are aware 
about generative AI; Harnessing the value of generative AI: Top 
use cases across industries, July 2023.FIGURE. 33
Organizations are less conscious about implementing and 
scaling generative AI in marketing in a sustainable way
SHARE OF ORGANIZATIONS WHO ARE CAUTIOUS 
ABOUT IMPLEMENTING AND SCALING 
GENERATIVE AI IN A SUSTAINABLE WAY
53%77%
Marketing function,
 October 2023Across all functions, 
April 202363
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKThe growing awareness of generative AI's energy-intensity 
highlights the need for sustainable marketing strategies. 
Organizations should: 
• Establish clear sustainability guidelines,  especially 
considering the carbon footprint of generative AI. A 
single query can emit 4–5 times more carbon than a 
search-engine query48 (and ChatGPT had 173 million 
users/1.8 billion monthly visits in April 202349). 
• Conduct regular training sessions and internal 
communications  to educate marketing staff about the 
energy-intensive nature of AI use.
• Our recent report on AI use outlined key ways to 
promote a sustainable user model, including optimal 
model architecture, compression techniques, 
parallel computing, early stopping, larger batch 
size, and energy-efficient hardware and data 
centers.50
Ronaldo Art, Chief Marketing Officer for Kimberly Clark 
Brazil says: “The marketing of the future is about what is 
going on in your surroundings, and that includes sustainability, 
environmental, social, and governmental aspects in your city/
province/country that affect your consumers. Therefore, 
marketing is required to be done in a more responsible way.”EXPAND BOUNDARIES
Cultivate dynamic partnerships and enhance in-house 
expertise for an expansive utilization 
Collaborating with external generative AI experts and 
simultaneously investing in internal employee training is 
a powerful strategy. Our research finds that close to half 
(46%) of organizations intend to partner with external 
agencies or consultancies for generative AI guidance in 
the near future. 
As we saw earlier, there is a talent gap with respect 
to generative AI expertise in marketing. Further, 63% 
of surveyed organizations also feel that new, as yet 
unknown, job roles in marketing will emerge in the next 
few years. 
To fill in the skills gap and be future-ready, organizations 
should:
• Partner with external experts and firms, including 
hyperscalers and technology providers (such as AWS, 
Microsoft, Adobe, Salesforce, Google) to gather fresh 
perspectives, knowledge, and innovative solutions that 
might not be available within the organization. These 
experts can provide insights into the latest trends, 
best practices, and real-world applications, enabling 
marketers to stay ahead. FELICIA LEKSELL
Chief Marketing Officer, 
Ericsson ONE“Employees need to learn effective 
prompting of AI models. Inadequate 
prompts compromise the quality 
of output and the possibility of 
harnessing the full potential of AI and 
LLMs (large language models).”
64
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKCLAUDIA WILLVONSEDER
Executive Board Member, 
Dr. Oetker“Strategic thinking, creativity, and the generation 
of unique ideas remain in the domain of experts 
– humans. The key is to empower these experts 
with AI tools.”
• Invest in internal training programs  to equip employees 
with generative AI skills, reducing reliance on external 
experts. Offer workshops on generative AI to give the 
team a sense of potential applications and the confidence 
to begin experimenting. To ensure meaningful outcomes, 
train employees on how to prompt generative AI tools 
correctly. Felicia Leksell, Chief Marketing Officer, Ericsson 
ONE, says: “Employees need to learn effective prompting of 
AI models. Inadequate prompts compromise the quality of 
output and the possibility of harnessing the full potential of AI 
and LLMs (large language models).”
Organizations handling highly sensitive personal data, 
especially in the public sector, may adopt a hybrid strategy 
for developing generative AI skills. This approach involves 
strategic partnerships for specific components while 
retaining crucial institutional knowledge in-house. Conrad 
Bird from the UK Cabinet Office says: “Our primary choice is 
internal development of the generative AI platform. However, 
as a contingency, a hybrid approach is considered, outsourcing 
specific components while preserving vital skills and institutional 
knowledge in-house. This balances external expertise with 
internal security protocols."65
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKStrike a harmonious equilibrium 
between generative AI 
and human ingenuity
Organizations must recognize the distinctive 
strengths of both AI and humans, ensuring that 
technology augments rather than replaces human 
capabilities. Marketing leaders should acknowledge 
AI's proficiency in data-driven tasks and content 
generation,  while valuing human creativity in 
storytelling and understanding nuanced emotions.  
A marketing technology executive at an American 
clothing organization says: “It’s possible for a brand 
to create and showcase a campaign using generative AI. 
However, this could demotivate employees who were not 
involved in this initiative. Leaders need to recognize that 
happy employees lead to satisfied customers. Balancing 
technological advancements with human creativity and 
recognition is essential.”AI should be left to handle repetitive tasks, freeing 
marketers to focus on creatively interpreting data, 
infusing campaigns with genuine human experiences, and 
building meaningful audience connections. Linda Ha from 
Ikea Ingka says: “I believe that generative AI will fuel our 
creativity by automating operational processes, allowing us to 
free our time and focus on delivering enhanced value to our 
customers and exploring innovative engagement strategies. It 
opens up new horizons for creativity.” 
By recognizing the unique strengths each brings to the 
table, organizations can harness the full potential of both 
generative AI and human input, ensuring a future where 
human creativity and technology seamlessly coexist. 
Claudia Willvonseder from Dr. Oetker says: “Strategic 
thinking, creativity, and the generation of unique ideas 
remain in the domain of experts – humans. The key is to 
empower these experts with AI tools.”“The marketing of the future is about 
what is going on in your surroundings, 
and that includes sustainability, 
environmental, social, and governmental 
aspects in your city/province/country 
that affect your consumers. Therefore, 
marketing is required to be done in a more 
responsible way.”
RONALDO ART
Chief Marketing Officer,         
Kimberly Clark Brazil 66
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKLINDA HA 
Global Customer Engagement & 
Loyalty Manager, 
Ikea IngkaI believe that generative AI will 
fuel our creativity by automating 
operational processes, allowing 
us to free our time and focus on 
delivering enhanced value to our 
customers and exploring innovative 
engagement strategies. It opens up 
new horizons for creativity.”
Transcend conventional roles to embrace 
a new era of tech-infused collaboration
It is crucial for marketing leaders to transcend 
traditional roles, moving beyond brand custodianship 
and communication management. Modern marketers 
need to understand and utilize cutting-edge tools and 
digital platforms, including generative AI. Rupert Bedell 
from Paysend highlights the crucial role of technology 
adoption for CMOs: “ The demands on a CMO are much 
greater … as well as being a creative influencer, you need 
to understand the technology more than ever before. To 
transition into a CMO role in the future, understanding AI 
absolutely needs to be on everybody's development plan.”
By embracing technology, marketers can drive real-
time engagement, analyze market trends, personalize 
customer experiences, and, ultimately, ensure the 
sustained success of their organizations in the digital age. 
Highlighting the limitations of inadequate technological 
capabilities, a marketing technology executive at an 
American clothing brand asserts: “If marketing leaders 
lack a deep understanding of technology’s capabilities, they 
are forced to rely on others. This can create an imbalance, 
especially with external partners keen on promoting their 
own products. They might not fully disclose the drawbacks, 
leaving marketing leaders in a vulnerable position. ”67
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGenerative AI has emerged as a transformative force in marketing, 
with almost half of the surveyed organizations dedicating specific 
resources for its implementation. Currently, nearly 60% of marketers 
are actively incorporating generative AI into their strategies, 
leveraging its potential to create content, enhance campaigns, and 
optimize data analysis. Generative AI is also instrumental in delivering 
a high level of personalization across various channels.
However, there are challenges, including ethical dilemmas and 
copyright concerns, surrounding AI-generated content. There is a 
need for clear regulation and ethical frameworks. 
To successfully adopt generative AI in marketing, firms must 
strategically redefine their direction, outlining integration goals, 
adopting a pragmatic investment approach, assessing tech 
infrastructure, and mobilizing marketing specialists. Simultaneously, Conclusion
they should strengthen oversight with robust ethical guidelines that 
emphasize iterative execution through experimentation, robust data 
security, and environmental awareness. These efforts should be 
integrated and pursued in parallel, for a comprehensive, positive and 
sustainable approach.
Maintaining a balance between generative AI and human creativity 
is vital if we are to preserve authenticity and innovation in marketing 
approaches. The profound impact of generative AI not only 
promises enhanced creativity and efficiency but also holds unlimited 
potential for the future. Organizations that hesitate to embrace this 
technological shift risk falling behind in a rapidly evolving landscape 
where innovation and adaptability are crucial for success.68
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKResearch methodology
We conducted a focused survey in October 2023, 
engaging 1,800 executives overseeing marketing 
strategies across diverse organizations worldwide. To 
complement this research we interviewed 25 chief 
marketing officers (CMOs) and marketing leaders 
with firsthand knowledge or awareness of their 
organization's generative AI initiatives.
Charts comparing 2021 and 2023 data exclude 
respondents from B2B sectors, as they were not 
part of the 2021 survey. The covered sectors include 
automotive, banking, consumer goods, insurance, 
retail, telecom, and utilities.
Our findings reflect the views of the respondents to 
our online questionnaire and are aimed at providing 
directional guidance. Please contact one of the 
Capgemini experts listed at the end of the report to 
discuss specific implications.% OF ORGANIZATIONS 
BY HEADQUARTERS LOCATION
12%12%
7%
7%
7%
7%6%
6%
6%
6%
6%
6%6%6%US
UK
Australia
France
Germany
India BrazilFinlandItalyNetherlandsNorwaySingaporeSpainSweden% OF ORGANIZATIONS BY SECTOR
12%12%
12%
12%4%
4%
6%
9%
9%
12%4%4%Automotive
Banking
Consumer 
goods
Insurance
RetailTelecomUtilitiesHigh-techManufacturingLife sciencesPublic sectorMedia
69
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKRESPONDENTS BY TITLE
34%
7%19%
8%
9% 9%14%
Director/
Senior 
Director
Assistant Vice 
President
Vice President Senior Vice President
/Executive Vice PresidentPresidentChief 
Marketing 
Oﬃcer or 
the 
equivalentOther C-level executive
(e.g., CEO, CTO, CDO)ORGANIZATIONS BY ANNUAL REVENUE
19%
22% 19%
21%19%$1 billion –
$4.99 billion
$5 billion –
$9.99 billion
$10 billion – 
$14.99 billion$15 billion – 
$19.99 billionMore than $20 billionORGANIZATION BY TYPE OF 
MARKETING FUNCTION
40%
28%31%
Centralized marketing function, that handles all 
marketing initiatives for the entire organization
Decentralized marketing function, where individual 
departments/ business units/geographies are 
responsible for their own marketing initiatives
Mix of both centralized and decentralized models
Source: Capgemini Research Institute, CMO Playbook #2 research, 
Sep–Oct 2023; N=1,800 executives with marketing responsibilities 
from unique organizations.70
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKReferences
9. Techcrunch, “Walmart experiments with generative 
AI tools that can help you plan a party or decorate,” 
October 2023.
10. Insight Partners, “Generative AI, SEO, and what leaders 
should know: Google search in the future,” September, 
2023.
11. Designboom, “IKEA AI app replaces your furniture with its 
products to help you shop,” June, 2022.
12. Medium, “Companies and Marketing agencies steadily 
adopting GenAI in Marketing!”, August 2022.
13. Adobe, “Adobe Unveils Adobe GenStudio for Enterprises,” 
September 2023.
14. ARN, “Allstate’s cloud-first approach to digital 
transformation pays off,” October, 2023.
15. Marqeta, “Marqeta announces new Generative AI 
investments,” August 2023.
16. PR Newswire, “Moody’s and Google Cloud partner on 
generative AI applications tailored for financial services 
professionals,” October, 2023.17. LinkedIn, “Meaningful Use of Google's Generative AI,” 
August 2023.
18. CGT, “Coca -Cola Creations Travels to Year 3000 With 
Generative AI-Powered Experience,” September 2023.
19.  COTW, “Heinz A.I. Ketchup,” August 2022.
20. Analytics Vidhya, “Spotify embraces AI: From 
personalized playlists to audio ads,” July 2023.
21. Sephora website, accessed on October 2023.
22. Economic Times, “Generative AI and all about its 
automotive application,” September 2023.
23. Adweek, “Coca-Cola's Holiday Campaign Gets a 
Generative AI-Powered Makeover,” November 2023.
24. Persado, “Generative AI for the customer experience: 
Understanding 4 big opportunities,” August 2023.
25. The Hindu business line, “Flipkart leverages GenAI to 
improve customer experiences,” September 2023.
26. Amazon, “Amazon launches generative AI to help sellers 
write product descriptions,” September 2023.1. Bloomberg, “Generative AI to Become a $1.3 Trillion 
Market by 2032, Research Finds,” June 2023.
2. Mint, “No technology has ever reached 100 million users 
faster than ChatGPT, which crossed that threshold in just 
two months,” March 2023.
3. Capgemini Research Institute, Harnessing the value of 
generative AI: Top use cases across industries, July 2023 .
4. Capgemini Research Institute, Why consumers love 
generative AI, June 2023 .
5. Capgemini Research Institute, A New Playbook for Chief 
Marketing Officers, September 2021 . 
6. Forrester, “Predictions 2024: GenAI And Partners Help 
B2B Marketing, Sales, And Product Endure A Wild Ride 
Ahead,” October 2023.
7. TechwireAsia, “Google Cloud and Continental to equip 
generative AI in cars,” September 2023.
8. Aum, “Generative AI : How Generative AI Is 
Revolutionizing the Digital Marketing?”, August 2023.71
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK27. LinkedIn, “The Adoption of Digital Marketing Pre and 
Post-Pandemic,” August 2023.  
28. Harvard Business Review, “Yes, the Metaverse Is Still 
Happening,” May 2023.
29. Capgemini Research Institute, Total Immersion: How 
immersive experiences and the Metaverse benefit customer 
experience and operations, December 2022.
30. Forbes, “The Amazing Ways Coca-Cola Uses Generative AI 
In Art And Advertising,” September 2023.
31. Adweek,” Nestlé Brand Is Latest to Venture Into Brave 
New World of AI Art Direction,” September 2022.
32. WordStream, “How to Harness the Power of Generative 
AI in Digital Marketing Responsibly & Effectively,” July 
2023.  
33. CIO, “10 most in-demand generative AI skills,” September 
2023. 
34. LinkedIn, “Skills Workers Will Need in the Age of 
Generative AI – Part 1: Digital and Technical Skills,” 
April 2023.35. The Verge, “Getty Images is suing the creators of AI 
art tool Stable Diffusion for scraping its content.” 
January 2023.
36. Capgemini Research Institute, “A world in balance 2023: 
Heightened sustainability awareness yet lagging actions,” 
November 2023.
37. Ibid.
38. Harvard Business Review, “How greenwashing affects the 
bottom line,” July 2022.
39. Capgemini Research Institute, “A world in balance 2023: 
Heightened sustainability awareness yet lagging actions,”  
November 2023.
40. Washington Post, “From China to Brazil, here’s how AI is 
regulated around the world,” September 2023.
41. Pillsburylaw, “Unleashing the AI Imagination: A Global 
Overview of Generative AI Regulations,” August 2023.
42. Ibid43. Washington Post, “From China to Brazil, here’s how AI is 
regulated around the world,” September 2023.
44. Ibid.
45. PIWIK, “17 new privacy laws around the world and 
how they’ll affect your analytics,” accessed on 
November 2023.
46.  LinkedIn, “Risks and security considerations for 
organizations starting on Generative AI,” August 2023.
47. MIT Technology Review, “We’re getting a better idea of 
AI’s true carbon footprint,” November 14, 2022.
48. Euronews, “ChatGPT: What is the carbon footprint of 
generative AI models?” May 2023.
49. Nerdy Nav, “97+ ChatGPT statistics & user Numbers in 
May 2023,” May 2023.
50. Capgemini Research Institute, Harnessing the value of 
generative AI: Top use cases across industries, July 2023.72
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKKey contributors
Gagandeep Gadri
Managing Director, frog  
and Head of frog, UK
gagandeep.gadri@frog.co
Bhavesh Unadkat
Vice President,  
Head of Marketing Services, frog
bhavesh.unadkat@frog.co
Ron Tolido
CTO,  
Insights and Data Global Business Line 
Capgemini
ron.tolido@capgemini.com
Valerie PERHIRIN
Managing Director, Sustainability powered 
by Data & AI, Capgemini
valerie.perhirin@capgemini.com
Mark Oost
Global Offer Leader AI, Analytics and Data 
Science, Insights and Data, Capgemini
mark.oost@capgemini.com
Steve Jones
Executive Vice President, Data Driven 
Business, Capgemini
steve.g.jones@capgemini.com
Alex Smith-Bingham
Executive Vice President,  
Customer Experience Group Offer Lead, 
Capgemini
alex.smith-bingham@capgemini.com
Yvo Booisma
Vice President, Global Offer Leader 
Marketing, Capgemini
yvo.booisma@capgemini.com
Darshan Shankavaram
Executive Vice President,  
Digital Customer Experience Global 
Practice Leader, Capgemini
darshan.shankavaram@capgemini.com
73
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKSusan Maginn
UK Live Marketing Lead, frog
susan.maginn@frog.co
Hiral Shah
Manager, Capgemini Research Institute
hiral.shah@capgemini.com
Amrita 
Senior Manager,  
Capgemini Research Institute
amrita.a.amrita@capgemini.com
Jerome Buvat
Head of Capgemini Research Institute
jerome.buvat@capgemini.com
Subrahmanyam KVJ
Senior Director, 
Capgemini Research Institute
subrahmanyam.kvj@capgemini.com
Christina Schehl
Executive Vice President
Head of Customer First Germany, Capgemini
christina.schehl@capgemini.com
The contributors would like to especially thank Marisa Slatter and 
Anushree Kanodia for their contribution to the research. 
The contributors would also like to thank Anu Jain, Naresh Khanduri, 
Lee E Dempsey, Shawn Goodin, Courtney Holm, Cortney Knoll, 
Marc Peeters, Alon Tirosh, Ed Bolton, David Robert, Chris Harrison, 
Markus Cramer, Oscar Olsson, Andreas Markdalen, Philippe Thobie, 
Christopher Baird, Laurence Parkes, Ross Landles, Rob Bartlett, 
Aarti Kulkarni, Jane Asscher, Komi Sarna, Marion Lecorbeiller, Kazari 
Anupam Patra, Kristin Morris, Rupali Chakraborty, Ashwani Kumar 
and Punam Chavan for their contributions to the research. 74
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGenerative AI, with its unparalleled ability to generate 
entirely new content, can change how marketers work 
and how customers interact with their favorite brands. 
Beyond efficiency gains and enhanced creativity, 
generative AI can accelerate market research, leading to 
a more nuanced understanding of customer needs and 
behaviors. With a better perception of what motivates 
customers, we can make personalized and contextually 
relevant interactions an every-moment occurrence for 
them along any journey.
At Capgemini, we’re leading the charge in this era 
of experience empowerment to give organizations 
responsible and ethical AI solutions that align with 
compliance frameworks and their business objectives. 
Our five offerings represent steppingstones toward 
making generative AI a valuable tool for CMOs to be 
more efficient and effective in how they meet today’s 
customer expectations.1. Understand and tailor each customer journey
Since no two customers or journeys are alike, there’s no 
reason why the content should all be the same. Everyone 
knows that personalized content will naturally engage 
more customers. But relevant content is just as important. 
That’s why organizations must first grasp the intricacies 
behind all the possible paths customers take and make 
them more compelling for each unique persona. 
Depending on the channel, touchpoint, and customer 
objective, we can build customized generative AI chat 
interfaces that act like personal assistants, ready to give 
customers exactly what they want. When queried, these 
interfaces respond with images, videos, and messaging 
geared towards moving the journey forward – and every 
new interaction contributes to AI’s goal of refining the 
next experience.
Contact us  to learn how this offering can help you define 
and shape your customer journeys.ELEVATE YOUR MARKETING 
POSSIBILITIES WITH THRILLING 
GENERATIVE AI OPPORTUNITIES
2. Design the experience
Generative AI can assist in the rapid prototyping of ideas, 
providing visual or conceptual models for evaluation, thus 
reducing the time and resources traditionally required 
in the design process. During ideation, generative AI 
becomes a brainstorming partner, suggesting creative 
concepts and product and service designs based on a blend 
of historical data, current market trends, and emerging 
consumer preferences. This ensures the generated ideas 
are unique and relevant. Although we don’t believe 
generative AI will fully replace human creativity and 
expertise, it can save marketers valuable time, which they 
can channel into crafting and launching more exceptional 
campaigns at record speed. After all, it’s much easier to 
slightly tweak an almost complete marketing asset than it 
is to build one from the ground up.    75
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKImagine being able to create multiple campaigns 
targeting diverse audiences across many different 
channels – with just a single brief. That’s the promise 
of our campaign accelerator. In a pioneering proof 
of concept, we put this tool in the hands of an 
automotive marketing department: first they select 
a car as the focal point for their campaign, then the 
features to highlight (safety, performance, space, 
etc.), the target audience (working professionals, 
parents/families, sports enthusiasts, etc.), and lastly 
the platform (Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, etc.) on 
which the campaign will run. With this input, the tool 
generates a theme, combines images and messages, 
and filters everything through the company’s 
brand guidelines for consistency and cohesive 
representation. It provides several initial options from 
which the marketer can then add the final touchups 
and deploy the campaign in a matter of weeks – 
significantly reducing the time to market. The tool 
has been developed to accommodate any industry’s 
requirements. 
Contact us  for a customized demo.Your Gen AI  
Campaign Builder3. Power the experience
After identifying the journeys and creating the bespoke 
designs, it’s time to activate them with real-time 
customer information. Capgemini’s Connected Marketing 
Engine platform leverages AI, machine learning, and 
advanced analytics to pool all customer data in one place. 
With its ability to bridge technology tools and break down 
marketing silos, the platform can be integrated into any 
existing ecosystem to:
• Create 360° customer profiles that bring both online 
and offline touchpoint data together.
• Give marketers and in-store staff access to relevant 
customer information through dashboards.
• Deliver real-time personalized content using 
generative AI.
With vital customer data in hand – and generative AI 
assistance on demand – employees can enhance their 
marketing, sales, and service capabilities to forge lasting 
customer connections.
Contact us  for a demo and read our PoV to learn more 
about this offering.4. Scale up marketing assets with greater efficiency
With the engine powering exceptional customer 
experiences, it’s time to speed up content production. 
Despite being at an all-time high, demand for even more 
personalized content will keep growing, which means 
CMOs must find ways to be more efficient and relevant in 
how they communicate with various audiences. 
With this offering, CMOs can integrate generative AI into 
their creative workflows and quickly put together multiple 
variations of content that considers a recipient’s age, 
gender, health, political views, important life moments, 
and more for on-point delivery. This integration will 
empower marketing teams to increase efficiency, lowering 
costs per asset, and transform their operating models to 
rely less on agency involvement.76
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKCapgemini is making content precision and speed 
an imperative for many organizations. We’re 
currently working closely with a leading global 
consumer products brand to strategically place 
advertisement videos within social media. 
The brand knows that to get maximum 
engagement, the videos must be adapted to suit 
different audiences, which means one broad stroke 
likely won’t make huge engagement ripples. This 
is where generative AI’s ability to glean real-time 
customer behaviors comes in handy – in addition to 
helping create and distribute multiple versions of 
the same intended message.Adaptive content 
creation powered by 
generative AI5. Deliver concrete business outcomes
How can CMOs ensure their generative AI initiatives 
meet compliance standards and make a real difference 
across the organization? Capgemini’s Generative AI Lab 
helps clients adhere to a reliable and secure framework 
so that all solutions are developed with the best quality 
and ethical standards in mind. Our lab includes a 
dedicated team of AI experts, whose priority is to follow 
the evolution of the technology as well as to research 
and apply the most relevant generative AI use cases for 
our clients.
For more information, visit https://www.capgemini.com/
aifuturesUnlock the future of superior 
customer experience now
When the power and beauty of human intelligence 
combine with technological innovation, the imagined 
possibilities become tangible. Our aim is to help CMOs 
discover the multitude of possibilities generative AI will 
unveil as the technology amplifies human potential. 
With a global collective of 30,000+ data and AI consultants 
and engineers, frog, a leading global creative consultancy, 
part of Capgemini Invent, our exceptional industry 
experts, and a strong ecosystem of partners all along the 
generative AI value chain, we bring to life our clients’ most 
relevant use cases for substantial business impact every 
time. 
Contact us  and learn how you can apply generative AI 
across the full content life cycle, leveraging our five 
offerings:
Generative AI-Driven Customer Journeys
Generative AI Synthetic Design
The Connected Marketing Engine
Generative AI-Driven Content Velocity
Generative AI Lab77
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKCapgemini is well aware of the risks that leveraging 
generative AI can pose to businesses. That’s why 
we’re building a fully packaged generative AI 
innovation toolkit to equip organizations with 
the materials and guidelines they need to dial up 
their innovation efforts, safely and effectively. We 
already have a few assets available:
• Project initiation form: designed to simplify 
generative AI project briefings with creative 
agencies, ensuring clarity and efficiency from 
the outset while bolstering project scalability 
and safety.
• Legal risks and recommendations guide:  
guidance covering generative AI legal challenges, 
from IP ownership to AI ethics, paired with 
actionable strategies and a handy checklist for 
safe and responsible adoption.• Best practice pilot framework: an essential 
guide to navigating generative AI projects 
with confidence, including legal, data, ethics, 
and security measures, to help organizations 
innovate responsibly while maximizing the 
technology’s potential.
• Generative AI tool selector: a dynamic 
framework designed to help organizations select 
the most suitable generative AI tool for each use 
case, with a traffic light grading system to clearly 
indicate tool effectiveness and safety.
• Tip sheets: guidelines, including the dos and 
don’ts of selecting and using generative AI tools. Tackling some generative AI 
adoption risksfrog- Unlocking the Power of AI
Defining your GenAI enabled Marketing Strategy
frog is a leading global creative consultancy, part of Capgemini 
Invent. We enable CMOs and marketing executives to push the 
frontier of brand and consumer relationships, develop robust 
capabilities, and launch new ventures that enhance the customer 
journey. At frog, we help clients imagine new opportunities 
by leveraging emerging technologies like Gen AI as a tool for 
accelerating innovation and growth. This includes:
• Crafting brand narratives that engage new audiences and deepen 
customer loyalty
• Redefining customer experiences through AI-powered 
hyper-personalization
• Empowering human creativity through AI
• Defining a blueprint for ethical AI through clear and 
robust governance
Get in touch to learn how to unlock Gen AI's unprecedented creative 
potential: https://www.frog.co/contact78
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKAbout the 
Capgemini Research Institute 
The Capgemini Research Institute is Capgemini’s in-house think 
tank on all things digital. The Institute publishes research on the 
impact of digital technologies on large traditional businesses. 
The team draws on the worldwide network of Capgemini 
experts and works closely with academic and technology 
partners. The Institute has dedicated research centers in India, 
Singapore, the UK, and the US. It was recently ranked number 
one in the world by independent analysts for the quality of its 
research. 
Visit us at www.capgemini.com/researchinstitute
79
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKItaly
Andreas Markdalen  
Global Chief Creative Officer, frog
andreas.markdalen@frog.co
Spain
Raul Bartolome Ruiz  
Head of Generative AI and Insights and 
Data, Capgemini
raul.bartolome-ruiz@capgemini.comThe Netherlands
Eric de Wit  
Generative AI for CX Lead, Capgemini
eric.de.wit@capgemini.comIndia  
Ramakrishna Srinivasa  
Generative AI for CX Lead, Capgemini 
ramakrishna.srinivasa@capgemini.com
Syed Husain Imam  
Head of frog India
syed-husain.imam@frog.coThe Nordics  
Wei Wei Feng  
Gen AI Expert, Insights & Data, Capgemini
weiwei.feng@capgemini.com
Peter Alsterberg  
Head of frog Sweden, Denmark & Finland
peter.alsterberg@frog.co
The United Kingdom  
Rebecca Rusby  
Generative AI for CX Lead, Capgemini
rebecca.rusby@capgemini.com
Bhavesh Unadkat   
Vice President, Head of Marketing Services, frog
bhavesh.unadkat@frog.co The United States  
Shawn Goodin  
Generative AI for CX Lead, Capgemini 
shawn.goodin@capgemini.com
Jessica Leitch   
Vice President frog, North America
jessica.leitch@frog.co Local contacts
Brazil
Caue Moresi  
Insights & Data Practice Leader, Capgemini
caue.moresi@capgemini.comFrance
Ramzi Haddad  
Generative AI for CX Lead, Capgemini
ramzi.haddad@capgemini.com
Philippe Thobie  
Executive Vice President frog, France
philippe.thobie@frog.coGermany   
Sargon Korkis  
Generative AI for CX Lead, Capgemini 
sargon.korkis@capgemini.com
Christina Schehl  
Head of frog, Germany
christina.schehl@frog.coGlobal contacts
Alex Smith-Bingham  
Customer Experience Group Offer Lead, 
Capgemini
alex.smith-bingham@capgemini.com
Gagandeep Gadri  
Managing Director, frog
gagandeep.gadri@frog.co
Naresh Khanduri  
Global Generative AI for CX Lead, 
Capgemini 
naresh.khanduri@capgemini.com
Mark Oost  
Global Offer Leader AI, Analytics and Data 
Science, Insights and Data, Capgemini
mark.oost@capgemini.comFor more information, please contact:80
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKHarnessing the value of generative AI: 
Top use cases across industries
The power of open minds: 
How open innovation offers benefits for 
all
Intelligent products and services: Unlock 
the opportunity of a connected business
Why Consumers love generative AI  
 A world in balance: Heightened 
sustainability awareness yet lagging 
actions
The art of software: The new route to 
value creation across industries 
Digital twins: Adding intelligence to  
the real world
Networks on cloud: A clear advantageMore Capgemini 
Research Institute Publications81
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKFirst Name
Last Name
EmailFields marked with an    are required  Capgemini Research Institute
By submitting this form, I understand that my data will be processed by Capgemini as indicated above and 
described in the Terms of use. 
SubmitReceive copies of our reports by scanning 
the QR code or visiting
https://www.capgemini.com/insights/research-institute/subscribe/Subscribe to latest research 
from The Capgemini Research Institute82
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKNOTES83
Capgemini Research Institute 2023Generative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOKGenerative AI and the evolving role of marketing: A CMO's PLAYBOOK
Copyright © 2023 Capgemini. All rights reserved.About Capgemini
Capgemini is a global leader in partnering with companies to 
transform and manage their business by harnessing the power 
of technology. The Group is guided every day by its purpose of 
unleashing human energy through technology for an inclusive and 
sustainable future. It is a responsible and diverse organization of 
nearly 350,000 team members in more than 50 countries. With its 
strong 55-year heritage and deep industry expertise, Capgemini is 
trusted by its clients to address the entire breadth of their business 
needs, from strategy and design to operations, fueled by the 
fast evolving and innovative world of cloud, data, AI, connectivity, 
software, digital engineering, and platforms. The Group reported in 
2022 global revenues of €22 billion.
Get the Future You Want |  www.capgemini.com