ice breakers 
and ideas for
ideas’ sake
 
mapping and
identifi  cation
 
the road to
the problem
 
twist and turn
 
sorting and
prioritizing
 
focus and
solution
The six phasesCreative teams Common understanding implementationone solution from manyfind lots of problems
The creative working model start
finisH15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeCOUNT TO 15 
a simple team exercise
Ask the group to stand in a circle facing inwards. If 
there are more than 15 participants, form two circles.
Explain the following rules:
1. The group will count to 15 (adjust according to the 
number of people).
2. Only one person can say each number. If two say a 
number at the same time, the group must start again from the beginning.
Variation:
If there are more than 15 participants, the group may 
systematically eliminate those who say a number at the same time. Another option, which makes 
the exercise slightly more challenging, is to ask the 
participants to keep their eyes closed during the 
exercise.
Review the task with the group:
• What was the challenge?
• Who took the initiative?
• What strategy did you choose?• How did you solve the exercise?15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeTHE WORLD’S
OLDEST CREATIVEEXERCISES
a simple way to develop your creativity
Take a clothes hanger or any other simple everyday 
object at hand. Ask the groups to spend five minutes 
thinking of as many different uses for the object as 
possible.
Who thought of the most?Quantity is more important than quality in this 
exercise!
Review the exercise together.15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeLOOKING FOR
THAT ONE ANSWER
det t here are no absolute truths!
1. Ask the group – with a maximum of two seconds 
thinking time – to come up with a word they feel best 
describes the group. Write down the word.
2. The group should then spend one minute writing 
down all the words they can think of that describe 
them, both positive and negative.3. Finally, draw a circle around the word they now 
agree best describes the group.
They are most likely to choose a word from the second 
step of the exercise.
The reason is obvious. Allowing all ideas to flow is 
better than looking for one absolute answer!15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeTHE SPOON TASK 
something from nothing!
Split into groups of 3-4. Hand each group a spoon and 
a lump of modelling clay.
Ask each group to design and make a new product in 
five minutes.
Then ask the groups to present their products.
Variation:
This exercise can also be done individually.15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeASSOCIATION 
1. The group sits in a circle.
2. One person starts the exercise by saying a word, for 
example, “burger”.
3. The participant nearest to the right then says the 
first word he or she thinks of that has a connection to 
the word burger (e.g. ketchup, fries, cheese).
4. The next person in the circle carries on the 
association and the exercise continues, without word repetition, until everyone has answered.
5. Surprising questions may well come up at the end, 
such as “what word did we start with?” or “what was 
the third word?”iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeCAMPING TRIP 
Hit the road, but use your head!
1. Ask the group to sit in a circle. Invite them on a 
camping trip. You are the “tent chief” and you decide 
what everyone is allowed take with them on the trip.
2. Without telling the others, decide that everything 
they take must be edible.
Example:
“I want to bring a sleeping bag,” says Michael.“No, you can’t,” replies the tent chief.
“I want to bring a pizza,” says Sarah.
“Yes, you can,” replies the tent chief.
In the next round you can change the rules and/or the 
“tent chief”.
Continue until everyone has worked out the rule of 
the game.
30 mins15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeIDEAS FOR
IDEAS’ SAKE 
a simple team exercise
1. Split into groups of 4-6.
2. Ask the groups to imagine that they have a 60 cm 
long tube. The tube is buried in the ground and there 
is a table tennis ball inside it.
3. Ask the groups to come up with as many 
suggestions as they can for ways to get the ball out of 
the tube. Allow them two minutes to write down their 
ideas. Stop the game.
4. Let the group read out their suggestions. No idea is 
wrong; all ideas are possible solutions. The group that comes up with most suggestions is the winner!
Reflection:
• Who came up with the first suggestion?
• Was everyone in the group given a chance to contribute?
• What are the differences between the first and last 
suggestions?
• What have you learned from this exercise?15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeUSE THE
ROOM 
breaking traditional mindsets!
1. Ask the participants to walk around the room. Tell 
them to look about, point at what they see and then, 
in turn, say what they see. Example: They see a chair, 
point to the chair and say “Chair”.
2. New rule: participants continue their tour around 
the room, looking around and pointing, but this time they give the objects a different name. Example: They 
see a chair, point to the chair and say “table”.
3. Try several times.
Finish with a group discussion about the experience.
 15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeTHE NAME GAME 
break the ice and learn each other’s names!
1. Everyone stands in a circle and says their name in 
turn.  One person then moves to the middle of the 
circle and is given a rolled-up newspaper to hold.
2. Someone in the outer ring says the name of another 
member of the group. The person with the newspaper 
must now quickly tap that named person on the head 
with the paper before the named person has time to 
call out another name.3. Anyone who does not manage to say a new name 
before he/she has been tapped on the head, must 
move to the centre and hold the newspaper.15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeGATEKEEPER  
a fun way to build
confidence in a group! 
1. Split the group into two rows, standing or sitting, 
one row facing the other. One person is chosen as 
“gatekeeper” and stands in the middle of the two rows.
2. Those sitting in the rows will now – using eye 
contact only – arrange to switch places with each 
other.
3. The gatekeeper must try to jump in and take the 
place of one of those swapping. If he/she succeeds, the game has a new gatekeeper!15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeEXPERT  
an exercise that stimulates
free and random thinking
 
Split into groups of four. Each group forms two pairs, 
facing one other. Assign the following roles within 
each group:
• A reporter
• A world expert
• Two observers
Ask each of the observers to think of a random 
word. On a count of three from the instructor, ask 
both observers to say their words out loud. If the 
words are “monkey” and “house” then the topic of 
the game becomes “monkeyhouse”. The reporter 
then interviews the assigned world expert about the phenomenon of the “monkeyhouse”. This world 
expert uses their “knowledge” and must respond as 
best as he/she can to the reporter’s questions. Allow 
two minutes for each interview and switch roles until 
everyone has played each part.
Reflection:
• What was it like to be the world expert and
the reporter?15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeBINGO  
break the ice with a simple competition
1. On a sheet of paper, draw a grid of 4 x 4 or 5 x 5 
boxes.  In each box, write a phrase such as “has been to 
Africa” or “knows the names of all the Beatles”.
2. Give a copy of the sheet to everyone in the group. 
They should now go around the room, asking people 
the questions in the boxes. If a person answers “yes”, 
write their name in the square. If they answer “no”, try 
again with another question.3. Each name may only be written down once on each 
sheet. This forces the participants to interact with as 
many people in the group as possible.
4. The first person to complete a horizontal and/or 
vertical row of boxes calls out “bingo” and wins the game. If time permits, you can review the answers as a 
group, to see if they match up. The sentences written 
in the boxes may be job-related events and situations. 
This will better familiarize the participants with each 
other.   
 15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeUSE THE
ROOM MORE!
three simple exercises   
a. Ask the participants to spread out around the 
room. On your signal, ask them to form groups of a 
specified number. Example: If you say “three”, then the 
participants gather in groups of three, with no talking.
b. Ask the participants to walk around the room. Then 
tell each participant to think about two other people 
in the room – without speaking. 
Once they have decided who they are thinking about, 
they should try to make an equilateral triangle with 
those other two people – still without saying anything 
to anyone. Switch the groups after three minutes.
C. Ask the participants to spread out around the room. 
On your command, tell them to form shapes in groups. 
Example: If you say “car” then the groups must try to 
form the shape of a car.
 15 mins
iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeMAKE AN 
ELEPHANT! 
encouraging laughter
1. Give each person a sheet of paper and ask them to 
close their eyes. They now have two minutes to tear 
out the outline of an elephant (or another animal).
2. They must now each hold the elephant above their 
head i.e. they should not be able to see their own elephant.
3. Ask everyone to briefly describe why the elephant is 
the way it is and how it felt to work in this way!iCe breakers and ideas for ideas’ sakeAIRLINE 
an exercise that encourages group
bonding and creative skills
1. Split into groups of 3-6.
2. Hand out sheets of A4 paper, glue, paper clips and 
crayons. On your signal, the groups have 20 minutes to 
make a paper plane that flies well, looks good and that 
stays airborne for as long as possible.
3. The groups can compete in two categories: longest 
time in the air and longest distance travelled in metres.
4. After 20 minutes, all the groups should present their 
planes and briefly describe their work process.
30 minsmapping and identifi Cation
30 minsMINDMAPS 
a tool that uses a specific target group in 
order to generate good ideas
Split into groups of 3-4. Ask each group to choose a 
target customer/group, or assign one for them. One 
person in each group should take notes throughout 
the exercise. 
Based on the chosen target customer/group, the 
participants should work through the following steps:
arena: Spend three minutes writing down all the 
different places their target group might be on any 
given day. Select one of these places.
activities: Based on the choice above, spend three 
minutes noting down all the activities that the target group might engage in at the chosen arena. Select one of these activities.
problems: Given the choice above, spend three 
minutes noting down any problems that the target group may face when doing the chosen activity in the 
chosen arena. Select one of these problems.
solutions: Each group should then spend five
minutes coming up with possible solutionsto the selected problem.mapping and identifi Cation
30 minsEVERYDAY 
ISSUES 
playing with words generates good ideas!
1. Split into groups of 3-4. One person in each group 
should take notes.
2. The groups begin by making a list of approx. 20 
random nouns. The words need not be related.
3. Ask the groups to look at the list of words. Each 
group member then chooses one word from the list.4. Allow three minutes per word and ask the following 
question: can you think of any everyday problems 
related to this word? Take for example the word “cat”:
• uses the kids’ sandbox as a litter tray
• makes noise at night
NOTE: Write down everything that is said without 
criticism.It can be a good idea to let each group member 
choose a separate issue.
5. Spend three minutes considering each problem and 
suggesting possible solutions.mapping and identifi Cation
30 minsUSE THE NEWS
1. Split into groups of 5-7.
2. Hand out newspapers and magazines to each group.
3. The groups should look for articles about 
unfortunate events. For example: thunderstorms, 
traffic accidents, hurricanes, floods, power cuts or 
traffic jams.
4. The groups should now pick out a couple of the 
topics they find most interesting and inspiring.5. Spend 3 minutes on each and discuss:
What actually happened?
What went wrong? Why?
Who was involved and what did they do?
What did the place look like?6. How could this have been avoided?
The groups note down the problems in each situation 
and think up ideas for solving it.
7. A variation of the exercise is simply to read through 
newspapers and magazines and look for pictures and 
articles that inspire great ideas!
45 minsmapping and identifi Cation
30 minsSKETCHING
FOR IDEAS!
1. Split into groups of 4-6.
2. Make a list of 20-30 “inspiration words” consisting of 
common nouns, or let the groups do it themselves.
3. Everyone should have a pencil and a sheet of paper.
4. Give each person their own “inspiration word” and 
ask them to draw their individual words using just three lines and drawing with the hand they normally 
do not write with. Allow one minute for this.
5. Ask the group members to exchange drawings and 
then give each person a new word. They should then 
add to the drawing in front of them. What they draw 
should be based on their new inspiration word.
6. Carry on until everyone has added to each drawing in their group.
7. Ask the group to discuss the pictures and try to 
come up with ideas from what they see.mapping and identifi Cation
30 minsA TYPICAL DAY 
finding problems by looking at the world 
through other people’s eyes
1. Split into groups of 3-5. Give each group the name of 
a famous person or target group, or let the group think 
of one itself.
2. Describe a typical day in the life of the person or 
target group. Write a short story describing the day. 
Split it up into sections, such as: wake up, go to work, 
have lunch, and so on. You can make it more realistic by giving the person’s name and imaginary details.
3. It is often a good idea to focus on details about 
specific areas of interest.
4. Note down the ongoing problems the person faces 
during the course of the day. mapping and identifi Cation
30 minsTWO WAYS TO
USE RANDOM WORDS
Create new ideas!
a.
1. Split into groups of 4-6 and ask each group to write 
down a list of 30 random words. Number the words from 1-30.
2. Ask the groups to identify an area where they want to 
find new ideas, such as “teaching”.
3. The group should then select a random number from 
the list. For example, they choose number 19 and next to 
number 19 is the word “spectacles”.
4. The challenge now is to think of ideas for how 
“spectacles” can make “teaching” more interesting and 
better, or how the simple combination of the words can contribute to new ideas.
5. Spend two minutes per word.
6. The exercise can also be done individually. The random 
word list can be made in advance.
b.
Participants should each think of a personal item and then 
split into pairs. They will then discuss these items and
try to develop new ideas or products from the
combination of the two words. 
What new ideas might come from, for example,
“shoe” and “key”?
 
15 minsmapping and identifi Cation
30 minsINTERVIEW 
talk to someone, and you’ll get answers!
1. Split the group into pairs.
2. Give the pairs three minutes to interview each other 
about their favourite hobby.
3. Ask them: what are the good/fun things about your 
hobby?
4. Next: what can be difficult and problematic about 
your hobby?
5. Note down the problems.
 
15 minsmapping and identifi Cation
30 minsCUT
AND PASTE 
find ideas and issues
in old newspapers
1. Split into groups of 3-5 and set out some old 
newspapers and magazines on each group table (one 
table per group).
2. The groups should now cut out words or phrases 
that they find funny, weird or interesting.
3. When the group has 20-30 items, everyone should move to the next table, taking one clipping each with 
them. Leave the rest of the clippings on the table. 
4. At the new table, each person should make new 
combinations of words. All participants will then take 
a combination to the next group table, as everyone 
moves round again. The teams continue to rotate and 
create new word combinations.5. Once back at their own table, each group should 
finally select one combination that forms a problem 
or an idea.tHe road to t He problem
30 minsDRAW AND SOLVE! 
drawing gives a non-verbal
stimulus. t he colours and the
collaborative nature of the exercise will 
generate creative solutions!
1. Staple or tape a number of large sheets of paper 
around the room. Three to seven are usually enough. 
Have enough pens so that everyone can write. A 
variety of marker pens in different colours are useful.
2. Present a problem or challenge.
3. Ask the participants to go to a sheet one at a time 
and create a simple drawing based on associations 
with the problem. Do not use words. Do not use the whole page!
4. Each person should then move to another sheet, 
and a new picture, building on what is already on the 
paper.
5. In a short period of time the sheets will fill up.
6. Ask the participants what they see in the pictures, 
what the pictures remind them of and how this can help to create ideas to solve the problem.
7. Write down the new ideas!
presenting problems15 mins
tHe road to t He problem
30 mins5 WHYS? 
a simple and effective tool 
to get to core of a problem
Ask the group to select a problem. Ask a question 
about the problem, starting with the word “why?” 
Based on the response, the team will then ask a new 
question, also beginning with “why?” Note down the 
answers.
When the group has asked and answered five 
questions, they move on to a new problem (if time is 
available).
The point is not to come up with good ideas, but to 
analyze and identify the causes of a problem.
15 minstHe road to t He problem
30 minsGROUP ART 
a task that can be done in groups
of 3-4 that gives an intriguinginsight into a problem area
1. The group chooses a problem area that they would like 
to understand better.
2. Each participant draws a picture that illustrates their own experience of the problem. They cannot use words, 
characters or numbers. Each person hangs their drawing 
on the wall.
3. The group then goes around the room together 
discussing how each individual interprets each drawing.
4. The group should focus on finding out what each person 
intended to express in their drawing.
When the group feels it is finished with a drawing (approx. 
two minutes) it moves on to the next picture. All the pictures should be discussed.
Variation:
The entire group creates a shared drawing. Every time 
someone adds something to the drawing, the group 
discusses what it means and why it was added. This gives 
each participant the opportunity to understand the 
others’ approaches to the problem and therefore 
gain a deeper knowledge of the issue.15 mins
tHe road to t He problem
30 minsINSIDE
OR OUTSIDETHE FRAME
an exercise that reveals the most 
important aspects of a problem
1. Give each group a large sheet of paper and a pad of 
Post-It notes. The sheet of paper acts as a frame.
2. The group then picks a problem area they want to 
explore.
3. They individually brainstorm the different 
challenges involved in solving the chosen problem 
and write these down on the Post-It notes. This step 
should take approx. three minutes.
4. Each group member now sticks their Post-Its on the 
sheet of paper – placing the most important issues in the centre of the page and the more peripheral issues 
around the outer edge of the paper.
5. Everyone in the group should then look at how each 
other prioritized their issues. Combine Post-Its that say 
the same thing and discuss whether thenotes are placed correctly. Spend five
minutes on this step.
15 mins15 mins
tHe road to t He problem
30 minsPSI 
ideas from anything!
p in psi stands for problem. Start by defining a 
problem for the group to solve.
s in the psi stands for stimulus. Absolutely anything 
can provide a stimulus. Ask the group to look around 
for different stimuli. Anything goes. The point is to 
trigger new ideas ( i).
p + s = i
By combining a problem and stimuli, you’ll get ideas! Using this technique, the problem becomes part of 
the solution.
15 minstwist and turn 
30 minsCHARTING
FOR CONTEXT
to clarify and see
a broader picture
1. Split into groups of 3-6. Ask the groups to write 
down a specific problem in the middle of a large 
sheet of paper. The groups should now try to identify 
central, relevant factors relating to the problem. Write 
these down on Post-It notes and place them around 
the problem description.
2. Stop after 4 minutes. Ask the group to look at the 
Post Its. Can they prioritize and combine some of the 
notes?
3. Ask the group to cut down the number of Post-Its 
to 6.
4. Let the picture be dynamic and move the 
notes around so that the group gains a common 
understanding of the problem.15 mins
twist and turn 
30 minsGO BACKWARDS!
new ideas often appear if 
you turn everything upside down!
1. Turn a problem or challenge on its head by asking: 
“How can you make the problem worse?” or “How can 
you achieve the opposite effect?”
2. Let the group brainstorm the inverse problem 
to generate opposite solutions. Do not discard any suggested solutions!
3. When the group has a satisfactory number of ideas, 
turn everything on its head again and generate ideas 
for solving the original problem.
4. Did they find anything that can be taken further?
15 minstwist and turn 
30 minsIDEA HUNTERS
a method of self-directed problem solving
1. Assign the participants one common problem and 
then split them into groups of 5-7.
2. Designate one or two people per group as “idea 
hunters”. The others should remain seated. They are 
the “experts”.
3. The idea hunters then move around the tables 
interviewing each group of experts in turn. Allow 5 
minutes for this.4. Back at their own tables, the groups should then 
collate the information that their idea hunters have 
gathered.
5. It is a good idea for one of the participants to 
assume a leadership role and make an overall summary of all the ideas found by the different groups.
6. Review the ideas.
7. Did the groups find anything that can be taken 
further?twist and turn 
30 minsONCE UPON A TIME
a group exercise that’s also individual
1. Split into groups of 5-7.
2. Choose a problem.3. Ask the participants in the different groups to sit at their 
tables. Everyone should have a sheet of paper and a pen 
and should write down a suggested solution at the top of 
the sheet of paper. When they are finished, they turn the 
page and lay it face down in the middle of the table. Allow 
2 minutes for this step.
4. Each participant should now take someone else’s 
sheet from the table, turn it over and read the suggested 
solution. This will generate new potential solutions. Now, 
build on these ideas. Allow 2 minutes for this.
5. Now repeat the process from step 3 several times, until 
the sheets of paper are full. If ideas still keep coming, you 
can add more sheets of paper to the table to ensure no 
suggestions are missed.
6. Once all the ideas are written down, read them
out loud in each group. Then select the ideas
that the group wishes to take further.15 mins
30 mins
snu og vende WHAT DOES
THIS MEAN?
this exercise is suitable when you want to
find a problem, solve a problem,
or are simply a bit stuck!
Ask the question: “What is this for and what is its actual 
purpose?”
Think of as many different angles of a specific problem or 
situation as possible: technical, moral, practical...
Example:
I’m helping an athlete train for the Olympics.
By asking what this means, the following points arise:
• To qualify for the Olympics
• To win a gold medal• To run faster
• To improve technique
• To impress the selection committee
• To earn more money
When trying to find solutions, we often forget about 
understanding the core of the problem or
situation. Note the responses to your
question and use them in further work.15 mins
twist and turn 
30 minsPO
po means “provocative operation” and is 
a lateral thinking concept introduced by edward de b ono
He believed that the best solutions to a problem or a 
challenge come as the result of a provocation.
Present a problem or a challenge to the participants. 
Encourage the members of the group to make 
comments that deliberately turn things upside down 
or are provocative. The statements must begin with 
the word “PO”. This ensures that the others realize that the upcoming statement will be “a PO”.
Problem: “I have not trained enough!” 
“PO: no eating until after training!”
Emphasize that a PO should be used as a stimulus for 
new ideas and new POs!
15 mins15 mins
twist and turn 
30 minsIMAGINE!
with a picture as a starting point
1. Split into groups of 4-6.
2. Select a picture that is colourful, surprising and 
interesting. The more original the better!
3. Ask the groups to look at the picture for 30 seconds.4. Then tell them to close their eyes and think about 
the picture.
5. Everyone should open their eyes again after 1 
minute. Let them talk about what they see, what 
surprises them and what they are inspired by.
6. The goal now is to make connections between the 
picture and a chosen problem.
15 mins15 mins
twist and turn 
30 minsWHAT IF?
Question after question!
1. Suggest provocative solutions to a problem, starting 
with “What if” questions. Write down the ideas. By all 
means include ideas that seem unrealistic.
2. Ask new “What if” questions.3. No idea should be criticized.
Let your imaginations run wild!
4. Build on the ideas.
15 minstwist and turn 
30 minsCHALLENGE!
Challenging our prejudices often
generates good ideas!
Question the group about a problem or parts of a problem, 
preferably something that is particularly difficult to be 
creative about. The point now is to challenge the problem:• Assumptions and opinions that have not previously been 
questioned
• Limits that have not yet been breached
• “Impossible” – things we assume cannot happen
• “Cannot be done” – things we assume cannot be done
• “Sacred cows” – “established” truths, traditions or 
phenomena that “should” not be challenged
• Breach of patterns or functions
Example:
How can you help people in a shop that goes on fire?
• Break a window and go out together
• Shut them in a safe with money
• Use them to put out the fire
One way that humans deal with the complexity of the 
world is to make assumptions about how we think things 
are and how they relate to each other. This is often of 
practical use, but rarely leads to new ideas.twist and turn 
30 minsProblem: 
Name:PIECE BY PIECE
works well in large groups and provides
lots of ideas for specific problems
Each person writes a problem on a sheet of paper.
The problem can be the same for everyone, or it can be 
individual. If individual, the person’s name must also be included on the sheet. The problem is then passed to the 
next person in the group. 
Choose from the following rules:
• One idea per person
• One person can write ideas on an entire row
• Optional number of ideas
The first ideas should be creative, since they will inspire 
those who come after!
When the first person is finished, pass the sheet tothe next person. This way, you avoid people
arguing for their own ideas. Moreover,
each contributor can build
on other people’s ideas.
45 minstwist and turn 
30 minsMY HERO
How would a famous person view the issue?
1. Ask each person to write down the name of his/her 
own personal hero on a sheet of paper.
2. Then choose a problem to be considered.
3. Pick one person and ask them to leave the room.
4. Ask the person to come back in again and behave 
as if he/she actually is their chosen hero; in attitude, behaviour, walk, language etc.
5. The others may ask questions to better familiarize 
themselves with the hero.
6. Then ask the hero and the others to consider the 
selected problem.
7. Now try to sketch out ideas and solutions for the 
problem based on the needs and wishes of the hero.8. Switch to another hero after 4 minutes.15 mins
twist and turn 
30 minsREMEMBER
AND REMEMBER
used for finding solutions
to recognised problems
1. Ask the group to think about a problem.
Then ask the group to forget about it, as if the problem 
has been resolved.
2. Then focus on the stage between when the problem 
existed and when it was resolved. As we have not been presented with the solution, this is now an unknown.
3. The point is to now imagine different scenarios of 
what might have happened and what the solution 
could be. What the group comes up with can easily 
become a new idea for a solution!
15 mins15 mins
twist and turn 
30 minsWHICH IDEAS
WOULD YOU STEAL?
by putting yourself in your competitors’ 
shoes, lots of interesting things can happen!
“Which ideas would you steal?” lets us see through our 
competitors’ eyes. It provides interesting perspectives 
and useful “outside in” focus.
1. Ask the group to select an idea or solution.
2. Then ask them to imagine that they are 2-3 of their 
toughest competitors. The group will now pretend they are the competitors and assess the ideas that 
have come up. The question is then: “Which of the 
ideas would the competition want, and why would 
they be interested in these in particular?”
3. If the ideas would not have been of interest, is there 
any point in continuing to work on them?
4. Is it possible to develop and improve on the most exciting ideas or enhance the less attractive ones?
15 minstwist and turn 
30 minsCHALLENGING
OUR ASSUMPTIONS
sometimes things are not as they seem…
Ask the group to consider a given situation. They 
should now try to focus on the preconceptions they 
have about the situation that they do not question or 
challenge.
For example:
• It is too expensive• It takes too long
• We will never get permission!
Remind the group that an assumption = something we 
think is true without really having questioned it!
situation: We don’t get people to come along to 
social functions.
assumption: People cannot be bothered.
solution: We need to get them to “bother”.
assumption: They are too tired after work.
solution: Can we do it before work?
The group should take notes throughout
the exercise.
Ideas will come as they work.15 mins
sort and prioritize
30 mins Very important Not very important
Unique
FamiliarEVALUATION
FORM 
evaluating ideas
Draw this grid on a flip chart.
1. Split into groups of 4-7. The group then decides on 
a number of ideas and the order in which they should 
be considered.
2. Each participant should write an idea on a Post-It 
note.3. They should then place the Post-It on the grid, in 
what they consider is the appropriate box.
4. Then ask the group members in turn to
reflect on/argue why they have chosen
this box for their idea.
15 mins15 mins
sort and prioritize
30 minsX/3 
an exercise
in prioritizing
1. Let the group spend three minutes discussing and 
reaching a common understanding of what they have 
prepared. Similar items should be weeded out. Num -
ber the proposals that remain.
2. An elected group leader counts the number of ideas 
(x) and divides it by three (x/3). The result shows how 
many points each participant is allocated. These points 
are to be used for voting.
3. Now each participant should choose their favourite 
ideas. They are to choose as many ideas as they have 
points. Each of their favourite ideas gets a point. The group leader then adds up which ideas get the most 
points and reports his/her findings.
15 mins15 mins
sort and prioritize
30 minsTESTING
five questions to test whether or
not an idea is worth pursuing
Choose one of the ideas.
1. Is this something the target group wants, and is it 
technically possible?
2. Does it resolve rational, emotional and social needs?3. Is it a business idea or just a product idea?4. Have economic, organizational and competitive 
considerations been included in your assessment?
5. Are all the details clear?Note down the answers to the questions. If possible, 
they should be used to further develop the ideas.
15 mins15 mins
sort and prioritize
30 minsDEFINITELY
NOT THAT ONE!
Choosing from among many options is
difficult, but it is easier to find something bad than something good!
1. It is not easy make a choice from many options.
The method outlined here removes the bad choices.
2. Ask the group to look at all the ideas. Split the ideas 
into two categories: “No” and “Maybe”. If the group 
is in doubt, the idea should be placed in the “Maybe” category.
3. Remind the group that the “Maybes” should include 
some fresh and exciting ideas, not just logical and 
objective ones.
15 minssort and prioritize
30 minsTHROUGH
COLOURED GLASSES
put on your glasses, and be
amazed at what you see!
1. Split into groups of 5-7.
2. Choose a number of ideas and spend 5 minutes on 
each idea.
3. Brainstorm on the basis of the following parameters:
blue: What facts do we know?
green: What is positive about the idea?
black: What is negative?
red: What sort of feelings do we have when we realize 
the idea?
4. Let each group member in turn put on the glasses.5. Write down the answers and use them to conclude.15 mins
foCus and solution
30 minsQUICK PRESENTATION
if you haven’t communicated something 
within the first minute, you may as well 
forget about it!
1. Ask the groups to choose an idea and a group 
member.
2. This person should then light a match and present 
the idea in the time it takes the match to burn out.
3. They must stop when the match is dead.
4. The others in the group may now comment on the 
presentation and ask questions.
15 mins15 mins
foCus and solution
30 minsPOT
a simple assessment tool
Choose one of the ideas. Note down:
• 3 positives about the idea; advantages• 3 opportunities; what might result from the idea?• 3 threats: what are the risks?
Can the positives and opportunities be devel -
oped?Can the threats be eliminated?
15 minsfoCus and solution
30 minsTHE GOLDEN TRIANGLE
being challenged can sharpen
your concentration
Organize a role play exercise where one person is 
selected to play each role: one will present an idea; 
one is a sponsor; the rest of the group are reporters 
who will create a story around the idea.
1. Start the role play. The presenter must try to 
convince the sponsor that this is an idea is worth 
investing in. The reporters observe and take notes. Allow two minutes for this step.
2. There will now be a press conference where the 
reporters will question the presenter and the sponsor.
3. Give the reporters three minutes to write a rough 
draft of their article. Ask someone to read out what 
they have noted.
4. Any new insight will help to further develop the idea 
for presentation and implementation.
 foCus and solution
30 mins What? Who? When? Measured in?ACTION PLAN
setting up a plan to support your idea
What needs to be done now? 
Write down the next steps for what must be done to 
implement the ideas. This ensures commitment and a greater likelihood that the idea will be realized.
Do not write the name of someone who is absent in 
the “Who” box.foCus and solution
30 minsWHAT NOW?
a good idea, but what now?
Three simple tasks concerning the path from idea to 
action.
a. work on your ability to take action:
Write down the first five activities that must be done to 
realize the idea.
b. breaking down an idea into parts you can take 
action on:
Write down the first steps you can take in the course of 
10 minutes, and that take less than a minute to do.
C. f ocus on what can slow the progression:
Write down the three biggest challenges to realizing 
the idea. 