500 Social Media Marketing Tips:
Essential Advice, Hints and Strategy
for Business: Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram, Pinterest, LinkedIn,
YouTube, Snapchat, and More!March 2024 Edition
Copyright © 2012 - 2024 by Andrew Macarthy
Cover and internal design © Andrew Macarthy
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form or by any electronic or mechanical means including
information storage and retrieval systems – except in the case of
brief quotations in articles or reviews – without the permission in
writing from its publisher, Andrew Macarthy.
All brand names and product names used in this book are
trademarks, registered trademarks, or trade names of their
respective holders. I am not associated with any product or vendor
in this book.
Website: 
http://www.andrewmacarthy.com
Facebook: 
http://www.facebook.com/500socialmediatips
Twitter: 
http://www.twitter.com/andrewmacarthy
Instagram: 
http://www.instagram.com/500socialmedia
Pinterest: 
http://www.pinterest.com/andrewmacarthy
LinkedIn: 
http://www.linkedin.com/in/andrewmacarthy
*** My 
Premium Content Bundle 
is a selection of incredibly useful social
media marketing resources - instantly downloadable - to help you reach and
surpass your social media marketing goals. Learn more at
www.andrewmacarthy.com/premium
 ***
*** Get the audiobook version of 
500 Social Media Marketing
Tips – FREE for new Audible users with a 30-day trial:
***
Audible UK: 
http://bit.ly/500smmtUK
Audible US: 
http://bit.ly/500smmtUS
Audible FR: 
http://bit.ly/500smmtFR
Audible DE: 
http://bit.ly/500smmtDETable of Contents
500 Social Media Marketing Tips: Essential Advice, Hints and
Strategy for Business: Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest,
LinkedIn, YouTube, Snapchat, and More
!
Table of Contents
Why Your Business Needs Social Media Marketing!
Before You Begin: Key Considerations For All Social Media
Marketing
Explained: The Best Types of Content to Post on Social Media
Video Content Strategies
Experiment with live broadcasting tools
The Rise of Stories And How to Take Advantage
Facebook Tips:  Marketing Strategy You'll Like and Share
Facebook Business Page Setup Strategy
Facebook Marketing Strategy
Utilizing Facebook Groups to Build Your Business
Paid Advertising Strategy on Facebook
Using Your Personal Facebook Profile for Business
Twitter Tips: Tweet Your Way to the Top
Twitter Profile Setup Strategy
Twitter Marketing and Content Strategy
Using Twitter for Customer Service
Paid Advertising on Twitter Strategy
Pinterest Tips:  Pin Your Way to Marketing Perfection
Pinterest Profile Optimization
Pinterest Marketing and Content StrategyExperiment with Stories on Pinterest
Pinterest Board Ideas for Business
Advertising on Pinterest
LinkedIn Tips:  Network Like Clockwork
LinkedIn Profile Optimization
LinkedIn Marketing and Content Strategy
LinkedIn Advertising Strategy
YouTube Tips:  Video Made the Marketing Star
The Core Foundations of a YouTube Video Marketing Strategy
YouTube Channel Optimization
YouTube Marketing and Content Strateg
y
YouTube Video Ideas for Business
Further Considerations for Optimizing YouTube Videos
SEO Optimization Strategies for YouTube
Increasing Views on Your YouTube Videos
YouTube Shorts: Short-form Video Strategy and Best Practices
Paid Advertising on YouTube
Instagram Tips:  Snap-happy Marketing Strategy
Instagram Profile and Content Optimization
The Importance of Hashtags on Instagram
Taking Great Instagram Photos: The Basics
Instagram Content Optimization Strategy
Video Content Strategy for Instagram
Instagram Stories: An Instagram Revolution
Instagram Reels: An audio-visual mashup
Long-form Video Marketing on Instagram
Shopping on Instagram: Seamless Selling to CustomersInstagram Direct: Private and Group Messaging
Advertising on Instagram
Snapchat Tips: Self-Destructing Social Media Marketing
Snapchat Content Ideas
Advertising on Snapchat
TikTok Tips: The Social Media Disruptor
TikTok: The Basics
TikTok Marketing Strategies for Business
Going Live on TikTok: Best Practices
Set up a TikTok Shop to Sell Your Products
Paid Advertising on TikTok
Social Media Marketing FAQs and Miscellaneous Advice
FREE E-book Updates FOREVER
Download My Essential Social Media Marketing Premium Content
Bundle
I Need You: Help Make This Book Even Better!
Hire Me: Social Media Design,  Analysis and Management
About the Author
One Last Thing...
Why Your Business 
Needs Social
Media Marketing!
Over the past two decades, social media marketing has become an
indispensable tool in the arsenal of brands and businesses of all kinds, with
opportunities to build relationships, engage with customers, and increase
sales like never before – and the stats back it up. Research by Report Linker
predicts that global social commerce market will reach $2.9 trillion by 2026,
and in annual polls conducted by Social Media Examiner, the vast majority ofrespondents say that social media marketing is important to their business. 
You are about to learn hundreds of expert hints and tips to build a social
media marketing strategy effectively grow your business on all of the most
popular social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
Instagram, and Pinterest. Each chapter is grouped broadly into several
sections including profile optimization, content strategy, and advice on paid
advertising.
Since the first edition of this book was published in 2012, social media
marketing has evolved massively. One of the most significant changes is the
shift from brands simply broadcasting marketing messages on social
platforms to an environment where engaging with fans and fostering
communities around a product or an idea has become imperative to success.
And instead of a simple drive to rack up the highest number of followers on a
social media profile as a marker of authority or success, businesses are opting
to take a customer-first approach in their content, as well as building niche
communities - encouraged by changes on major social media platforms such
as Facebook, where meaningful interactions are given priority over overtly
promotional content.
Whatever your goals, long-term success in social media marketing results
from building strong, personal relationships with customers, and publishing
the type of content and expertise that they will want to share with their
friends, family, and colleagues – effectively, making them willing
ambassadors for your brand. While this approach is a world away from
traditional marketing, this open, two-way relationship is now what billions of
consumers around the world expect from the businesses and brands in which
they invest time and money. Direct selling 
does 
have a place within the social
media marketing ecosystem, but as you’ll learn, it is no longer the direction
that most brands will want to focus on. 
I hope you find all of the following advice helpful, whether you're a complete
social media novice or an already-savvy marketer looking for some extra
expert tips to drive your business onto bigger and better things. And if this
book 
does 
help you out in some way, I’d really appreciate a quick rating or
review on Amazon. Honest reviews help readers find the right book for them
– that’s more people like you. Thanks in advance!Andrew.Before You Begin: Key
Considerations For All Social Media
Marketing
Peer pressure, success stories in the media and general hype tell today’s
business owners that having a presence on social media is essential. That’s
not to say a business couldn’t do well without utilizing social networking, but
it’d certainly be missing out on a myriad of opportunities to build and grow.
However, one of the biggest mistakes that a business owner can make is to
leap into social media marketing with no real clue of what they are going to
do with it - only the vague hope that if they just simply start posting on a few
social sites, it will somehow, some way, get customers pouring in. While
there is a possibility that you will get lucky, this way, in most cases this kind
of “try it and see” approach will lead to unrealistic goal-setting, poor results,
a huge waste of time, and ultimately a defeatist attitude that discourages you
from the idea of social media marketing completely. To ensure that this
doesn’t 
happen to you - and to give you the best chance of success - I urge
you to digest the key considerations for social media marketing detailed
below. By the end of this chapter, you will have a firm understanding of what
kind of approach 
works 
for business on social media and how to pursue your
efforts in a well-planned, logical manner.
Decide which social networks will work best for you
Depending on the type of business you run, not every social media site is
going to suit your marketing, your audience, or what you are trying to
achieve. To help you decide where to begin, identify the social networks
where your target audience already hangs out, or use customer personas and
research of social network demographics to judge where you will best be
received. Joining Facebook is really a no-brainer for almost all businesses
due to its sheer size and influence, but more "niche" communities with their
own unique attributes - still with hundreds of millions of users, mind you -
like Pinterest (big female audience), Instagram (younger demographic), or
LinkedIn (strictly for professionals), might be where you find you can make a
bigger impact. Bear in mind that unless you're a big company with the resources to plow full
speed ahead into every potentially viable social platform, chances are you're
better to focus on one or two “core” social networks first. It's better to excel
on a couple of social networks than be mediocre on five or six. You'll learn
all about what each particular social network brings to the table as they are
introduced in the chapters to come, but to start off, experiment with a couple
of social networks where you can invest some significant time, track your
progress, and then either build on your achievements with them, or steadily
begin to experiment with other platforms on which you might have additional
success.
Define and assess your goals
Before you start posting content to social media, it is useful to define the
guiding themes and overall goals of your strategy, as these will help you
shape the way you approach what may well become the linchpin in your
marketing machine. I'm a fan of the SMART technique for creating
actionable social media goals. Here's a 
breakdown:
S
pecific: 
Be specific in what you want to achieve. Do you want to raise
awareness of your brand? Increase sales? Drive web traffic? Improve
customer service? Strengthen loyalty? Put a modest number or percentage on
it.
M
easurable: 
How will you know that your goal has been achieved? What
analytics tools will you use to track your progress?
A
chievable: 
Is your goal realistic? When you are just starting off, don’t aim
too high, at the risk of being deflated if you don’t hit your projected goal.
R
elevant: 
Is your goal aligned with your company's mission, vision, and
values? 
T
ime: 
How soon do you want to have achieved the goal? To add a focus to
your marketing, stick to one overarching goal at a time, e.g., 
"I want to
increase traffic to our website by 15% in the next three months"
.
For example, a shoe store who normally sells 20 pairs of shoes a day might
first aim to use social media to help reach 25 sales per day. After a few
months, they can evaluate their progress by using analytics tools and social
insights (engagement, followers, comments, sales, etc.), using it to shape
their subsequent marketing activity.
Perform an audit to help shape your content strategyCarrying out an audit is one of the best ways to get an idea of a strategy for
developing social media content that will resonate with your audience. Take
time to identify your audience's needs, desires, and interests on social media -
ask yourself what problems you can help them overcome, what questions you
can answer, what types of discussions they like to engage in, the type of
content they prefer (e.g., text, photo, graphics, video), and when they are
most likely to be around to see it. Tools like SEM Rush and TrueSocial
Metrics are two popular paid options if you want to dig right down into the
details, but you needn't spend a penny to get a good, general idea... especially
if you utilize publicly available information about your competition to help
you out! 
First, identify your competitors. You'll probably know them already, but a
simple web search will tell you if you don’t. Then visit their websites and
social media profiles for a nose around. Make notes on how often your rivals
publish updates on social media (is it daily, every other day, weekly?), and
which content seems to perform best for them based on the number of likes,
comments, and shares. You can gain further insight by identifying how much
of this content appears to be original versus shared from other sources, and
what the topics, branding, and tone of voice used are like. Use the
information you gather to mirror successful types of content in your own
social media strategy, but 
also 
to identify gaps and opportunities where you
can improve on it.
Note: 
See the 
Premium Content Bundle 
chapter of this book to download a
ready-made 24-question template to help your business plan and execute your
social media strategy, and how to perform a simple competitor analysis
.
Plan ahead with a social media content calendar
One of the stiffest tests facing brands on social media is to consistently
publish high-quality content for their fans. A company's social media
presence that appears abandoned is the digital equivalent of turning the lights
off. Because you're not updating online, people will assume that you're going
out of business, even if the opposite is true. Consistency can help to boost
levels of engagement by enabling fans to anticipate your next post, and it will
also foster a stronger relationship with your audience (who will keep coming
back for more). One of the best ways to help get this right is by compiling a
social media content calendar. An editorial calendar will allow you to planyour activity for weeks - or even months - in advance. This foresight will
allow you to plan everyday posts and promotional campaigns, as well as
building seasonal themes into your updates - and prevent you from posting
sub-par content just because you feel the urge to publish 
something
. In
addition to planning for the big holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas,
you will also be able to map out a strategy for “mini holidays” like July 4
th
or Valentine’s Day, occasions where fans are actively searching on social
media for deals, discounts, advice, etc. The ability to scan a social content
calendar regularly will also provide you with a way to step back from day-to-
day posting and re-affirm your wider strategy. Of course, spontaneous
posting to social media still has a place, but for the foundations of your
marketing, a content calendar is highly recommended. One simple way to
organize a content strategy (that can be used to populate your calendar and
prevent yourself from becoming overwhelmed) is to create a daily theme
across your social networks. For example: sharing a new blog post on
Monday, asking a question on Tuesday, an infographic on Wednesday, a
quote on Thursday, etc.
Note: 
Download my ready-to-use social media content calendar templates in
the 
Premium Content Bundle 
chapter of this book.
Re-purpose content across social media
It is worth emphasizing that something that might be distributed as one piece
of content in the real world (a press release, say), can be marketed as four or
five content pieces for social media: blog about it, tweet, make a video, a
story, share on Facebook, turn it into an infographic for Pinterest, etc. This is
a fantastic strategy for making the most of your content creation, particularly
if you are strapped for time or low on resources.
Drop old-style communication methods and get social – find and
define your social voice
Successful social media strategy requires just that - a 
social 
strategy.
Traditional marketing techniques like TV and newspaper advertising worked
because the direction of communication could only go in one way (from
brand to consumer) with little chance for reply, but social media means that
this is no longer the case. Now that a two-way dialogue is firmly established
and your brand is under the spotlight 24/7, you must resist the urge to talk 
at
people, and adapt your tone of voice and communication methods to connectwith them on a human level - speaking to them in a personable manner and
listening with intent, rather than just 
hearing and doing nothing about it. This
lesson applies the same whether you are a small business employing a
handful of people, a multi-national company with thousands of staff, the
owner of a "fun" business like a karaoke bar, or something more "serious"
like a finance company. With that said, a good place to start is to define and
use a tone of voice that matches your brand's core beliefs. By maintaining
your fundamental beliefs across all web content, advertising, and social
media posts, you create parallel experiences, and these recognizable actions
create expectations for customers and help drive them through your
marketing funnel. Brands that define their social voice (and strive to maintain
it in all of their social interactions) can cut through the noise and deliver a
clear message that, ultimately, will produce improved results.
Humanize your brand and be emotive; tell stories
People use social media to connect with other 
people
, so lower your barriers
and show fans the real you and the people behind your business' logo; be
transparent, open, and authentic in all of your communication – authenticity
often means being a little bit more open about what your business might
traditionally share with customers. But there’s a fine line – if you’re
consistently sharing posts about internal conflicts or your love life, that line
has probably been crossed! Establish your 
unique 
voice, show a sense of
humor, use everyday language, etc. And if being genuine endears customers
to you, then they will be more likely to want to engage with your content,
share it with others, 
and 
support you financially when the time comes to buy,
by choosing you over another brand with whom they have no connection.
A genuinely human approach, especially with a focus on storytelling - the
human brain’s most primitive and powerful form of communication – has
consistently proven to be a successful tactic on social media. Through a
combination of clever, emotive, surprising text and imagery, it can snap
people out of their autopilot-browsing - something we’re all guilty of doing.
As a brand, that’s the moment you need to connect with customers, keep their
attention, and ultimately win their trust, loyalty, and business. Here are a few
“versus” examples to show how a little bit of thought into your language can
make a big difference in the impact of your communication. Hint: the
preferred 
language comes second in each example:Emphasizing the customer:
 
“We’ve just launched our new sunglasses range
for summer, check it out!” vs. “Earn your stripes by breaking boundaries in
new Double Bridge shades // #ItTakesCourage to push yourself.”
Providing clear value:
 
“Read Our Best 26 Running Tips” vs. “26 Running
Tips
That Will Help You Run Faster And Longer This Summer.”
Building curiosity:
 
“Study shows volunteering is key to improving your
wellbeing.” vs. "71% see volunteering as key to improving wellbeing. Learn
how your company can give back."
Keeping language simple:
 “
Our research and calculations indicate that
purchasing our air conditioning unit reduces the temperature of the home by
an average of 10 
degrees – how fantastic is that?” vs. “We’ve done the math!
Our sums show that our air conditioners make your home 10 degrees cooler,
even on the hottest days!”
There’s tons of advice for general content ideas in later chapters, to which the
above language best practices apply, but for starters ask yourself: who are
your customers? What are their stories? How does your product or service
make their lives better? And how can you speak to them in a way that
resonates?
Note: 
On a related note – and a powerful pairing to text alone – are
emoticons or Emoji - fully-drawn, expressive emoticons and ideograms that
have fast become a universal language all of their own, can add a whole new
layer of fun and expression to your status updates, and encourage people to
engage. 
So now you know that to succeed on social media, you need to maintain a
cliché-free zone, with genuine communication, imagery, and stories that
capture people's attention. As alluded to earlier, real people (especially on
social media and 
especially
 the younger generation) don’t respond to
marketing speak and will be quick to ignore you if they suspect it. Rather
than trying to manipulate fans into buying products or services, showcasing
you and your brand's true values and personality will go a long way to set you
apart from your competitors.
Don't over-promote: build relationships and provide valueThe vast majority of social media users do not visit Facebook, Twitter,
Pinterest, et al. to be given the hard sell by companies; they use them to
interact with family and friends and to be entertained. If they do "like" or
"follow" brands on social media, they often do so on a whim (think about the
number of brands you "like" or "follow"). And all but the most passionate
fans won't care to see every single post you publish, so it is your job to
convince people to enjoy having your business as something that is a big part
of their everyday lives, and continue to earn your place in their feeds - don't
see it as a right, see it as a privilege. You do this by building trusting and
loyal relationships, by being friendly, sharing great content, helping people
with customer service issues, etc., - with the odd promotional post in
between, of course... which if the rest of your strategy is on target, your
audience really shouldn't mind.
Ultimately, with social media content in mind, change your mindset from
"what can we sell you?" to "what can we do to help you?", because in terms
of choosing to follow a brand on social media, your fans will certainly be
asking the question "what's in it for me?" With competition up and organic
(non-paid) reach at an all-time low, it is crucial that the content you post
touches people on a personal and emotional level. Some of the most powerful
emotional triggers are humor, awe, anger, and even narcissism (stuff that, by
sharing, makes the individual look good in front of their peers on social
media).
Once you hit your stride, one useful exercise to help you keep on track is as
follows: from time to time, stop and take a look at your last ten social media
posts and ask yourself this question: 
“What value am I providing and what
purpose am I serving?” 
If you cannot clearly define the answer to this
question, you should think 
carefully about amending your strategy to better
reach audiences who are now smarter and savvier than ever before - people
who easily see past weak content or an over-sale-sy message. Just as in the
real world, social media followers will resonate with a brand that they can
love and trust, much more than one whose sole purpose seems to be to
encourage them to open their wallets at every opportunity. To reiterate the
point I made above, you should strive to become a 
seamless part 
of their
expected social media experience, not a jarring element that they want to skip
past. All of this good work will build a positive image around your brand and
slowly convert into sales.Post consistently, with high-quality content and stuff that resonates
As I touched on earlier, one of the toughest tests that brands face is to deliver
consistent, high-quality content for social media. Regardless of what or how
often you post, never launch a presence on a social media channel, post for a
few weeks, and then let its activity dry up! For most social networks, one,
two or three updates per day is a good target. At a minimum, you should post
at least a couple of times a week so that your content continues to appear in
the news feeds of your most engaged fans. If you're really not in the position
right now to pay much attention to social media, it is more important to be
present than completely absent, even if that means putting aside just one day
a month to update your social profiles with a link to your new blog post,
uploading a video to YouTube, or giving insight into your work on your
LinkedIn Page. At least then, when the time comes that you're ready to
expand your efforts, you have a foundation to build upon.
Once you’re at that stage, consistency (do you notice I’m hammering this
consistency 
point home?) is key. One of the main reasons that brands fail on
social media is because they do not post enough. To single out Facebook as
an example of a social network that a large majority of brands use, here's
some wider perspective to explain why consistency is so important: When
someone visits their Facebook News Feed, there are an average of 1,500
possible posts generated by the site’s complicated algorithm, and ordered by
how likely the user is to interact with each piece of content - from friends,
Pages, groups, events, etc. In addition, around half of users don't check
Facebook every day. And of those that do, they only browse for around 30-60
minutes in total. For all of these reasons, the chance of all of your posts being
seen 
and 
engaged with among all of that competition is diminished
considerably. In fact, without paid promotion (which we will look at later),
Facebook makes it almost impossible for 
all 
of your fans to see 
all 
of your
posts (the average is lower than 10%), and brands must now work hard to eke
as much free, organic reach out of their Facebook activity as possible. In
addition to the above, in order to make sure that as many people as possible
encounter the content you post (either on the social network where it was
originally posted or if shared elsewhere), the content used to promote your
business (either directly or indirectly) must be worthy of fans’ attention, i.e.,
the kind of entertaining, helpful, inspirational, 
valuable 
stuff that people will
like, comment, click (if a link is included) and share. Most people have ahandful of "go-to" sources, either in their favorites or subconscious –
websites and social profiles that they routinely share from. This selection
promises them consistently valuable content they can share with their friends
and fans, and your aim should be to become one of these trusted sources
.
That doesn't mean that every update that you publish has to be a world-
beater. It’s perfectly fine to make small talk or to build connections in a more
relaxed way. You might even find that’s often what works the best -
sometimes a simple question like “What are your goals for today?” can get a
big response, with small interactions from fans that might lead them to check
out some of your weightier posts in the future. Overall, don’t constantly fret
about making it too light or too deep; strike a balance and make it 
you 
(see
the 80/20 rule in the next chapter for more information). 
The bottom line is that the more consistently engaged a customer is with your
posts on social media content - liking, commenting, sharing - the more likely
they are to continue to do so in the future, and the more exposure you will
get. Increasingly (with sites including Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram),
positive interaction like this will ensure that your posts will continue to
appear in their News Feed for future engagement opportunities. Social
networks’ news feed algorithms filter content into individuals' feeds
according to what they think is most relevant to them, so if a fan never sees
posts from you (because you are inactive), ignores your posts for a prolonged
period of time because they are not engaging enough, your posts may
disappear from that person's News Feed and you may find it difficult to get
them to re-appear without paying for the privilege.
Note: 
With organic reach on Facebook and other social networks at an all-
time low, it might seem that the best solution to gain exposure for your
content is to post 
incredibly frequently
. However, in some ways, this
approach is counter-intuitive. Not even your most passionate fans will enjoy
being constantly flooded by posts from you, and by decreasing the pressure
of needing to produce a rapid stream of top quality content day in, day out,
you leave more time to make sure that what you 
do 
publish is as good as it
can be - stuff that will garner the most engagement from fans. Also, if you
substitute the time spent on "excess" content for supporting "core" content
with a smattering of advertising dollars, you increase the number of unique
fans who see these posts. And, if they engage with a like, comment, or share,they're more likely to see the next one, organically, in the News Feed.
Which types of posts get the most engagement?
One of the great debates among social media marketers is whether text,
image, video, links, or other post types are the most effective in reaching fans
and encouraging them to interact. The truth is that nobody can tell you for
certain. - Social networks are forever tweaking their algorithms, forcing
brands to play catch-up - and at the end of the day, it very much depends on
what your individual data reveals to you is working best. For example, way
back in 2012 
Facebook 
was telling businesses that posts that include a photo
album, picture or video generated about 180%, 120%, and 100% more
engagement, respectively, than text posts alone. But what use is that potential
for engagement if you notice that 
your text posts 
at any given point in time
happen to reach 5x more people than when you use images? My advice is to
resist the temptation to blindly follow trends, fads, or tricks that promise to
deliver high levels of engagement and outsmart the algorithm. Instead, use
them as a guide but always focus on providing awesome, valuable content
first 
and foremost. Continue to test and tweak with a close eye on your 
own
stats, and keep adapting to push on with what is working best 
for you 
(not
everybody else) at any given time.
Don't get hung up on reach; focus on creating loyal, passionate
fans and meaningful relationships
As you now understand, fierce competition between individuals, brands 
and
the way social networks' algorithms work means that not all of your fans will
see your posts in their news feeds when you publish them. Therefore, you
need to think less about chasing "likes," follower numbers, and post reach -
as these metrics (although having some influence and merit, especially if they
are reaching a targeted, high-quality audience) can often be arbitrary. Instead,
concentrate more on producing great content that will grow a loyal following
of people who love what you do (showing it via post likes, comments,
sharing your content, and eventually through sales), therein encouraging
more 
people to invest in your cause. I'd say if you're getting anywhere near
5% reach to all of your fans without paid promotion, you're doing 
extremely
well.
On the subject of building and maintaining a strong relationship with your
fans, try as best you can to keep engagement with your audience timely anduse @mentions as a means to be more personable. If someone comments on a
status update you make or posts a public message on your profile, be sure to
reply to it as soon as possible. Any chance to further the conversation, answer
a query, or give thanks for a customer's support is all but lost if there is no
reply – and it's something a lot of businesses on social media fail to do, to
their detriment. If your profiles are really busy and you simply don't have the
time to respond to every fan comment (or if it doesn’t necessarily warrant a
response), giving a "like" (rather than ignoring them) will at least show that
you are listening to what they have to say.
Provide great customer service; handle complaints well
Unlike other forms of media, social media gives your company instant and
effective exposure to your customers 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Customers also have similar access to 
you
, and this is no more apparent than
in what can only be described as a revolution in customer service. In addition
to making your customers feel good, answering complaints provides a useful
insight into your target audience’s personality, what your business is doing
well, and what it could improve on. With the instantaneousness of a
Facebook post or a tweet, people's expectation of receiving a swift and
effective response to their queries or problems is higher than ever. Many
social media experts will advise you to 
always 
reply within an arbitrary time
limit of something like 30 minutes. If you employ a dedicated social media
community manager, this may be possible, but for the vast majority of
businesses, it just isn't a realistic target. I'd still recommend that you deal with
customer service issues as soon as possible after they arise, but suggest that a
response time within 24 hours (on weekends, too, if you can manage it) is
acceptable to most people. Furthermore, instead of constantly monitoring for
problems, simply assign a few dedicated batches of time in a day to respond
to customers and handle issues.
 
Note: 
If speed of response is going to be an issue for you, one solution is to
gather all the questions and comments you get on social media into a single
location. For example, Buffer Reply (paid service) lets you pull in comments
on your Facebook and Instagram posts (including ads), private Facebook
messages and Twitter DMs, and public tweets mentioning your brand’s
handle, into a single Gmail-like inbox. Meanwhile, Facebook’s Inbox for
Pages is a good free alternative. It lets you manage interactions on Facebook,
Messenger, and Instagram in one place.Of course, the best way to avoid customer service issues being played out
publicly on social media is to prevent them from happening. To facilitate this,
give people several options to solve problems themselves and for making
contact - online FAQs, email, telephone, private message - and place them
where people will see them easily, like in your main bio or About section.
The simpler it is to contact you, the more likely a customer is to try that first
to help resolve a problem, rather than spouting off angrily at you online.
Also, demonstrate your willingness to accept that problems do sometimes
occur by using your social media profiles as a way to announce less-than-
positive news about product or service issues. There will always be 
some 
fans
who are upset when they read this, but they’ll be a lot more aggrieved if they
have to discover the issue on their own. If someone does post their angry
grievances in public about you on social media, three of the most important
pointers to remember when approaching such a situation are as follows:
Don't ignore it: 
The longer you leave a customer complaint to sit and fester,
the angrier said customer will be, and by refusing to reply to negative
feedback, it looks to 
everyone 
like you are unwilling to deal with problems
and are simply hoping that ignoring them will make them go away. Look to
respond as quickly as possible, as most customers expect a swift response.
Don't delete it: 
Just as bad (if not worse) than ignoring negative feedback is
to delete a negative, critical or complaining post or review submitted on your
profile. When the customer who complained notices that their comment has
been deleted, they will only be 
even more 
upset, and other fans who see what
you have done (especially if the original criticism was screen-grabbed for
evidence) will think negatively of you, too.
Convey empathy in your replies
: In person, we naturally display empathy and
active listening through our body language: gestures, facial expressions, etc.
On social media, you have to rely on your words instead. Fortunately, the
same phrases that show empathy face-to-face can also be used to show
support when typing on social media. Try incorporating phrases like "I
understand how you feel" and "That must be so..." into customer reply.
Amplify and solidify your approach with strategies like using customers' first
names; re-reading your messages out loud before you send them to make sure
they come across well, and saying "thank you" often.
Key social media customer service metricsTo provide exceptional customer support, it's important to understand what’s
working and where you can improve. Here are three ways to measure
customer 
service performance on social media:
Queries by channel:
 Find out how many customer requests, issues and
problems you respond to on each channel in a given period. This can tell you
things like how big the demand is and how many people you might need to
ensure customers' expectations are met. One other benefit is that, over time,
you will be able to see which channels customers contact you through most
and at what days and times you are most in demand.
Speed of first reply and time to resolution: 
How fast, on average, are you
responding to customers on social media? Over a given period, take note of
when customers sent a query and the date and time when you first replied.
Another way to calculate the speed and efficiency of your performance is
through time to resolution. How long does it take to resolve an issue for a
customer — starting from the moment they first get in touch through to the
final, conclusive answer.
Resolution rate:
 From all the support requests you receive over a given
period, how many do you or your team resolve? Knowing this number will
help you see how effective your support is, not just how fast.
In summary, always respond to complaints on social media professionally
and courteously, and in a time frame that matches the resources of your
business. Be ready to acknowledge the customer's feedback (even if you don't
think you were in the wrong, as going off on the defensive is a very bad
tactic, too) and be willing to admit your mistakes. We're all human –
customers realize this and will respect you a whole lot more for being open
and honest about any errors instead of simply trying to sweep issues under
the carpet. To sweeten instances like this, explain how you will work to fix or
improve things if necessary, ask for input from your fans if the situation calls
for it, and send a follow-up note a couple of days after the issue has been
resolved as a way to make sure everything is still okay 
and 
to reaffirm a
social connection between the customer and your company. Occasionally,
consider going above and beyond the call of duty to remedy a customer's
problem - in public – in order to harness a wave of respect and good karma.
When a Citibike customer in New York City fell off one of its bicycles and
ripped his jeans, instead of just apologizing, Citibike delivered the gentlemana voucher to buy a new pair of pants. Surprised and overjoyed, the customer
shared the news (and a photo to prove it) on Twitter, to all of his followers.
Automation isn’t a dirty word
With so much work involved in growing and maintaining a strong social
media marketing strategy over a variety of channels, automation will allow
you to save time, stay flexible, and plan your social media strategy down to
the minute. Tools like Buffer (
http://www.bufferapp.com
) or Post Planner
(
http://www.postplanner.com
) allow you to manage multiple social media
accounts from a single dashboard (letting you upload in bulk for the week’s
upcoming post, publishing content when you are asleep but your audience is
not, or when you are on vacation, etc.). In fact, automation tools can help to
successfully build a long-term social media strategy by scheduling new and
"
evergreen" blog posts for repeat exposure, i.e., sharing the same great
content multiple times across several social networks, over a set period. This
will allow more of your existing audience the chance to catch your great
content 
and 
allow new followers to find it if they missed it the first time
around. Pay close attention to the frequency that you automate such posts. It
may be fine to post a blog post link to Twitter a couple of times in one day
(where the flow of information is incredibly quick and dense), but for sites
like Facebook and LinkedIn, a bigger delay between each share would be
more appropriate. On that note, when you 
do 
prepare to share the same link
multiple times, you’re best off re-styling it to make each share as unique and
engaging as you can. Check out the Blogging Tips section for more
information about using this technique.
In spite of all of the help that automation tools provide, remember that
building strong personal relationships with genuine one-to-one interaction
should remain at the core of your work. You certainly should not try to
automate that (i.e., automating replies to comments on your profiles is a bad
idea!), as the results will not likely be good.
Note: 
On the topic of scheduling and automation, here's a nifty strategy for
scheduling posts that you might not have thought of: schedule posts to
publish 
just before or after the hour 
(rather than right on the dot) as a way to
catch people who are checking social media at the start of their day, lunch
break, after work, between meetings, etc.
Invest time to see resultsSocial media is now an essential marketing and PR tool and should be taken
seriously. If you ask an existing employee to take over responsibility for your
social media output, do not expect them to be able to do it 
as well 
as their
current job. If you're going all-in, expect it to take up 
at least 
12-15 hours a
week to plan, create, and schedule content, measure results, and engage with
customers. Consider employing somebody as your Social Media Manager
full time. Alternatively, outsource your activity to a local specialist marketing
firm, experts who can help you hit the ground running. If you do, ensure that
they understand your brand, marketing goals, and speak your customer's
language.
Draw up a social media policy; make employees ambassadors
A clear, company-wide social media policy will clarify the objectives for
staff mentions of your brand on social media and empower them to positively
support your brand, helping to make you a more socially active business. To
prepare the information you need, consult with the key influencers in your
business, adhere to state and federal laws, gather feedback from your
employees, and outline guidelines about the use of social media (whether
mentioning your brand or not), both inside and outside business hours. Try to
summarize the most important points in a document no longer than one or
two pages (otherwise it might not be read and leave you open to issues in the
future), and highlight the benefits that responsible use of social media can
bring to the company as a whole. Employees need to feel confident about
social sharing guidelines to be good brand ambassadors, so make 
writing
company- related statuses easy. For example, invent a hashtag related to life
at your business, and encourage them to take pictures and share updates using
it. The person in charge of social media content, of course, should know the
policy inside out.
Social media marketing isn't free; experiment with paid ads
Many years ago, social media marketing was seen as the new digital gold
rush, a way for pioneering brands to reach and promote to their customers for
free. In certain aspects, this was true. Now, however, with competition
greater than ever, algorithms that prioritize paid content over organic posts,
and 
a more astute audience, paid promotion is all-but-essential - your ads
need to help customers filter through the noise and find products they want
and the information they require. That's not to say you 
can't 
still achieve
excellent results without spending any money, but it will be much moredifficult, and even a nominal figure spent well (such as $5 per day on highly
targeted Facebook ads) can noticeably compound a brand's success. In fact,
social media advertising is one of the most cost-effective ways to reach your
audience.
The best social media ads are authentic in tone and targeted and relevant to
specific groups. They understand what their audience wants and speaks
directly to their needs. Successful social media advertising involves a
promotion that blends into a user's experience of the platform on which it
appears, mirroring the tone and publishing style of the audience - think
seamless instead of disruptive. There’s lots more about paid advertising for
each specific social media platform to come, including best practices and
strategy. 
Note: 
Just as with traditional marketing, customer segmentation is important
when targeting your customers on social media - with organic content, but
especially when you run paid ads. There are four different types of customers
that you need to keep in mind:
New customers who don't know your brand yet
New customers who have recently discovered your brand
New customers who are just about to make a purchase
Existing customers
With your business goals in mind, aim to create content that targets
individuals at different points of your marketing funnel.
Reconsider return on investment (ROI) metrics
Social media return on investment is not like traditional marketing. For a
variety of reasons, you may not always want to focus solely on monetary
return within a fixed period. Consider metrics such as brand awareness,
word-of-mouth promotion, traffic driven to your website via social media,
and strengthening loyalty and engagement with existing customers. These
can all be just as valuable in the long run - leading to plenty of sales over a
longer period, rather than a short-term gain 
that dies off quickly.
Measuring performance with Google Analytics and other tools
Understanding the performance of your social media marketing is key to
being able to succeed in the long run. One of the most cost-effective ways(read: free) to monitor social media conversions is through Google Analytics.
Two of the most valuable reports for social media marketers feature under the
“Social” section of the site: Network Referrals - shows the data on social
media traffic referrals to your website from social networks; and Landing
Pages - will show you which of your website pages are shared most often on
social media. You can also use Google Analytics to set up and monitor goals,
like completed sales, inquiries, and engagement. One of the simplest goals to
setup is URL Destination - Google Analytics will mark a goal as met when a
visitor lands on a particular page on your website, e.g., a "Thank you for your
purchase" page.
Other useful tools for measuring the performance of your social strategy
include social networks’ native tools (Facebook Insights, Twitter and
Pinterest Analytics, etc.) 
Bit.ly 
(to measure click-through rates on specified
links), and 
Social Mention 
(to track mentions of your business name,
competitor names, etc.). In essence, use analytics tools to set goals, see where
your social media strategy is working best, and work out how your customers
are finding you so that you can fine tune and optimize your efforts going
forward. It is unlikely that you will nail your social media strategy on the first
attempt, so evaluate your progress often and don't be afraid to test the water
with new ideas, tweak old ones and repeat what works for you.
Note: 
For an elegantly simple way to monitor the growth of your social
media profiles, download my Social Media Progress Tracker spreadsheet. For
more details, check out the 
Premium Content Bundle 
chapter of this book.
Slow and steady wins the race; be patient and ignore scams
Social media success does not happen overnight. Just like in real life,
friendships and bonds between you and your audience can take a long time to
build, and some people just take longer to warm to you and convert into
paying customers than others. Sometimes the metrics that don't pay off
instantly (increasing brand awareness and customer retention, or improving
customer service) are the ones that will have the greatest impact on
conversions later on. I have seen 
so 
many instances of businesses diving into
social media marketing with gusto, only to give up shortly afterwards
because they did not have 1.3 billion Facebook fans and a ton of sales after
their first week of posting ten times a day (okay, that’s an exaggeration, but
you understand what I mean!). If you're not serious about working at socialmedia for not just weeks or months, but years, you are already setting
yourself up for failure.
On a related noted, ignore 'get followers fast' scams. It might be tempting to
use services offered all over the web to rack up fans and followers quickly,
but you'll only end up with hundreds of random strangers - or bot accounts –
won’t care 
about you or your business. 50 interested, engaged, and loyal
followers are insurmountably better than 5,000 who are not. The only real
“secret” to growing an audience on social media is to be consistent and
patient
in your efforts.
Above all, enjoy the ride; build strong, meaningful relationships
The stronger someone acquaints with your brand on social media, the more
likely they’ll remember you and pass the positive word on to their friends and
family. As I’ve hammered home throughout this chapter: be consistent,
present, real and genuine in all of your content and communication if you
want to foster genuine interaction with customers on a slow and steady path
to creating loyalty, sales and brand advocates for life.Explained: The Best Types of
Content to Post on Social Media
With the foundations of social media marketing covered, let's get down to the
nitty-gritty of social media content. In this chapter, we'll look at a variety of
proven posting strategies to help your social media strategy thrive. The
following content strategies are generalized in a way that applies to the
majority of social networks covered in this book, but you'll find more 
specific
advice about how to maximize their impact for each platform within each
social network's individual chapter.
Note: 
What follows are some of the most popular content strategies for social
media. If you'd like 
tons 
more ideas demonstrated alongside real-life
examples, check out my list of 
101 Social Media Content Ideas for Business
at 
http://bit.ly/101smmideas
Ask questions and start discussions
Get to know your fans and give them a chance to get to know you by posing
questions and starting discussions. These questions can be about a product or
event related to your business, a quick trivia quiz, or just about the wider
world. Often the types of questions that garner the most engagement are those
that can be answered quickly, e.g. those about preference 
("Do you prefer
product A or product B?")
; Yes or No 
(Are you a fan of X?")
; those that ask
for opinions 
("What's your favorite flavor of ice-cream we offer?"); 
or ones
that politely challenge 
("Opening our second Canadian store this month -
guess where?"). 
Even just ending a status update with “do you agree?” or
“what do you think?” is enough to encourage people to get involved. There is
also a place for questions that trigger deeper discussion – especially in
community groups – but you’ll soon figure out what your customers respond
to best. Even the simplest question can be useful in achieving impressive
levels of engagement (and consumer insight!), provided that the subject
captures the attention of your audience. Interestingly, 
where 
you ask the
question in a status update also affects engagement rates. Posing a question at
the end of a post - compared to somewhere in the middle where it can easily
get ignored - can increase engagement by up to 15%, according to a study by
Buddy Media.Note: 
Similar to the above – and also commonly used – are 'fill in the blank'
posts as a way to encourage engagement. They're successful because fans
will only have to type one or two words at the most to respond, e.g., 
"If you
could live anywhere in the world, it would be
 
."
Tell your story and feature the stories of your customers
Every brand and individual has a story to tell, whether through text or (often
better) through visuals; humans are hard-wired to react and respond to a
compelling tale. Use social media as a destination where fans can get to know
you and your brand much better than they can through simply viewing the
products or services that you sell; make it a place where your voice,
personality, and authenticity can shine through. Interesting and engaging
topics of conversation to 
cover include why you launched your company,
your achievements and failures and what you learned from them, what
motivates you, highlighting issues that you are passionate about, and the
people and events that inspire you. In essence, show customers that you share
their thoughts and ideals, and become a brand that they want to invest in
emotionally, which will eventually lead to loyalty and, ultimately, sales.
In addition to your own stories, your customers or clients will always have
fun and interesting stories about how your product or service fits into their
lives (and often it's going to be more interesting than content you could come
up with yourself), so encourage them to share their tales with you (through
text, photos, and videos), so that you can feature them as part of your content
strategy – this is referred to in the industry as “user-generated content”, often
shortened to UGC. Doing so will excite and please the customers in question,
encourage them to spread the love about your brand, help to build a stronger
community around your product or service, and also act as strong social proof
to others about how your brand positively impacts people's lives. Handily,
UGC allows you to gather and share content quickly, and create in-the-
moment marketing campaigns based on the current needs and trends of your
customers.
Dig into problems you solve, share your expertise, and be valuable
One of the most effective ways to influence social media users into
connecting with you on a social and emotional level is to position your brand
as an authority - a source that they can trust and respect, and whom they can
rely on for the information or experience they desire. One of the best ways todo this is to dig into the problems your brand can solve and demonstrate your
expertise. By this, I don't mean you should start boasting about how good
your product is at solving "Problem X" at every opportunity; instead, be a
valuable beacon of information within your field or industry. For instance, if
your company sells antique furniture polish, you might publish posts to
explain why it is so important to keep aged items in good condition, share
recent examples and statistics about antiques that have sold for high prices
due to their pristine preservation, and provide hints and tips about how best to
treat different kinds of wood. Great content – whether single posts or links to
a blog article – will also be shared, further increasing brand awareness.
Use breaking news, holidays, and special events to inspire content ideas 
 
If you are able to weave hot, newsworthy topics into your social media posts
(not just for the sake of getting likes and views, but adding something to the
discussion), it can add a relevance and credibility to your output that will
endear you to fans by showing you as a brand that is at the forefront of trends
within your industry (
and 
in the case of Facebook, its algorithm works to
show timely, trending stories near to the top of the News Feed, possibly
leading to higher engagement). Use tools like Google Alerts
(
http://www.google.com/alerts
) and Feedly (
http://feedly.com/
) to be notified
of breaking stories when they happen, or sites like BuzzSumo
(
http://www.buzzsumo.com
) to hunt down trending tweets and topics related
to almost any subject.
 
In addition, some of the most viral posts on social media are linked to one-off
dates or celebrations throughout the year. Holidays like Christmas,
Thanksgiving, Easter, Mother's Day, Father's Day, Halloween, or special
days like St. Patrick's Day, the night of the Oscars, etc. are feel-good
occasions and easy to create content for, e.g., wishing your fans a happy time,
sharing a fun fact, asking a holiday-related question, or suggesting how your
product or service can best be utilized at a particular time of year. Beyond
that, there are even more "niche" occasions that might resonate with your
fans: things like the release day of a big movie, International Talk Like A
Pirate Day, Movember, or International Coffee Day. Mark all of the most
relevant dates in your calendar, and prepare content ahead of time in order to
"celebrate" them with your audience.
Note: 
When you 
do 
use the above strategies, it is important to do so in theright manner, and with appropriate tact. Avoid hijacking popular cultural
events for the sake of it (especially if you cannot make the associated content
relevant to your business), and try to do it in a way that doesn't come across
as blatantly opportunistic. Spagettio's once learned this lesson the hard way
(via a tirade of negative feedback) after it commemorated the anniversary of
Pearl Harbor with an image of a spaghetti hoop holding the flag of the United
States.
Promote products and services (adopt the 80 / 20 rule)
Way too many brands are either all business or none when it comes to social
media, but you have to find a balance that works for your audience. Although
the majority of your social media marketing content should not be overtly
promotional, selling your product or service is ultimately what you're there
for, and customers do realize that. Assuming that your brand-to-customer
relationship is good and the rest of the social media content you post is
valuable, they will tolerate the odd post to tell them about a new product or
service, or a sale or offer that you are running - heck, they might even
appreciate you letting them know! An easy way to balance out your social
media output in a way that will keep you on the good side of your customers,
and one a lot of brands already use, is the 80/20 rule. It states that you should
post non-promotional content 80% of the time (your own valuable, helpful or
personable stuff, or related content linking to another source, with the sole
aim of driving engagement) and reserve the other 20% for being more
promotional. Even within this 20%, there is a broad spectrum of approaches,
from subtle to more overt selling, depending on how you believe your
audience will react.
Note: 
Where sales and offers are concerned, one approach to keep customers
engaged is to make certain promotions exclusive to the people loyal enough
to follow you on social media; e.g., an extra 5% off for quoting a code posted
on your Facebook Page, or a surprise flash sale for people who spot a tweet
from you. Another involves giving fans early access to new products or
services, preceded by a campaign of posts that build awareness and make
people feel a sense that they are getting something special and exclusive.
These messages can either be hosted exclusively on a social media channel 
or
can be used to push people to your website 
where you have more freedom to
present your brand and its offerings, collect e-mail addresses and visitor data,
give away coupons, etc., in any way that you like.Make effective use of visuals – both images and videos - to drive
engagement
Images are amongst the
 
most popular type of content shared by social media
users, so it stands to reason that you should give them a lot of attention in
your own content strategy. Additionally, where brands are concerned, there
are real benefits to creating unique visual posts. Research shows that social
media images are much more likely to be associated with positive emotions
than text posts, and brand promotion via images is much more accepted than
if by text (done right, they don't really look like ads, slotting seamlessly into
people's news feeds – remember, 
non-jarring
 is what you should be aiming
for). 
Online tools (mentions of which are dotted throughout this book) now make
the creation of beautiful visual content easier than ever. With this in mind, try
not to fall into the trap of creating snazzy visuals for the sake of it, or to the
detriment of your central marketing message. Study the performance of your
images to spot which ones trigger a response in your fans and which ones do
not. When you find what works, replicate and scale it. Remember, too, that
good written content that spells out your value proposition, compels fans to
act, and builds a dialogue between you and your customers, (when
accompanying an image, on its own, or in reply to comments) remains
crucially important. Make sure your marketing and sales strategy defines how
and when visuals will be used, and that they complement your brand while
upholding the quality of your product or service.
Where to find images to post on social media
Physically shooting photos or building your own original graphics is always
the best option for visual content on social media, but time and budget
constraints make this impossible for most brands to execute one hundred
percent of the time. Luckily, there are a ton of online tools to find and edit
photos and graphics, either completely free or for a small fee. Where free
photos are concerned, some of my favorite sources for images include Comp
Fight (
http://www.compfight.com
) and Unsplash (
https://unsplash.com
). For
reasonably priced stock images, Yay Micro (
http://www.yaymicro.com
) is
my go-to destination. Be careful when choosing stock images – avoid
cheesiness and cliché at all costs; go for natural, visceral shots. As for
graphics and vectors, Freepik (
http://www.freepik.com
) is my first port of
call to look for free stuff. If I can't find what I like there, Vectorstock(
http://www.vectorstock.com
) is my preferred site. With all of the above -
whether an image is free or paid for - always read and understand the terms
of using an image, e.g., whether accreditation is required, if it can be used for
commercial purposes, etc.
Note: 
Each social network has its own specific best practices for image sizes,
but the general rule of thumb for any visual content is that bigger is always
better. The social networks will automatically resize your images as needed:
there is no quality loss when the image is scaled down, but there will most
certainly be if an image 
needs to be blown up. For simplicity’s sake, sticking
to the following measurements should cover you for nearly all of your visual
needs: 1280 x 720 pixels for landscape images, 735 x 1102 pixels for portrait
images, and 900 × 900 pixels for square images. In addition, it’s useful to
name your image files thoughtfully for SEO (search engine optimization):
include keywords separated by hyphens or underscores, and alt tags to sit in
place of your image when an error prevents it from loading, or it is being
interpreted by someone who is visually impaired.
Brand your images (but sometimes choose not to)
One of the fundamental building blocks of branding is consistency. In order
to help your fans learn to instinctively recognize your visual content when it
appears in their news feeds or is "stolen" from the social network you
originally posted to, it is critical to brand your content effectively. This can
be achieved in one or more ways combined, such as adding a logo (create
guidelines addressing size and placement for neatness), website URL or
Twitter handle, and using a consistent color palette, photo filter, and fonts to
reflect your brand personality. The colors, filters, and fonts used in your
images will strongly affect how people perceive your brand on social media,
so choose them with care, considering what kinds of feelings you want each
piece of content to evoke, e.g., bright and cheery, serious, nostalgic, etc. For
efficiency's sake (and to compound a sense of familiarity over time) you may
even want to create a uniform template for certain types of visual content,
e.g., promotions, industry insights, milestones. Research has shown that it
takes people between 5-7 impressions for people to begin to recognize your
brand, so the repetition of key brand ingredients like logo, colors and
typeface is extremely important. So, if your social media post graphics look
and feel cohesive, then users can form a clearer understanding of your brand
in their minds.Note: 
In most cases, a subtle approach to branding works best; your image -
not your brand - should take center stage, and sometimes no text overlay or
filter is needed. This is particularly pertinent for content created to mark
occasions with emotional or historical significance, e.g. Mother's Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Memorial Day, etc., where foregoing all branding might
actually work in your favor for two reasons: slapping your logo on such
content just doesn't seem right, and people may be encouraged to share high
quality, original, "brandless" images because they feel more ownership over
them - the visual content is suddenly much more selfless, or more about the
fan and their connections than it is your brand. Although there is a higher
chance that the images in question might be stolen and used without
attribution, if those images 
do 
get more shares on the social profile you
originally published them to as a result of having no branding, some sort of
built-in attribution should remain each time they are passed along, e.g., a
Facebook link to your business' Page or a "retweeted by" link on Twitter.
Make images powerful and self-explanatory
The best images to use on social media are ones that catch the eye, inspire
curiosity, entertain, spur emotion, or broadcast a gripping message. It doesn't
really matter if the image shows an experience related to your brand or not;
the important thing is to help reinforce the kinds of emotions you want
customers to 
associate with your company. Research by Buffer found that
self- explanatory, stand-alone images perform better than those that need
explanation and clarification in the accompanying description. In essence, if
your image needs a caption to make any sense at all (rather than to elaborate
and provide more value), it might not be as effective as you want it to be.
Share a special offer, discount code, or upcoming event
People love special offers, and images are a great way to highlight them in a
bold and imaginative way - whether it's the launch of a season-long
promotion, a one-off event, or a week where each day brings a new deal (a
great way to encourage people to visit your social profiles multiple times).
Compound an image's impact with accompanying text that includes a link for
fans to access the offer/get more information, a time limit that will add a
sense of urgency, and a call to action that will drive click-throughs. 
Note: 
As an extra way to drive engagement, you could design an image that
tells fans that they'll gain access to a secret sale, discount code, etc. if saidimage receives a certain number of shares. Set a realistic target based on your
existing audience and predicted reach, because you do really want to hit it
and reward those who were interested.
Show customers enjoying your products and services
There is no greater form of social proof than customers showing others how
much they are enjoying your product or service. Doing so with an image is an
extremely powerful way of converting people into customers because it helps
people associate positive emotions with your brand, whether the photo is
snapped by you or - even better - user-generated. Smartphones make it
extremely easy for people to capture and share experiences with your brand
as they happen, so encourage your customers and fans to do just that when
they are at your premises (with signs or purpose-made "group photo/selfie
spots" with an interesting background, for example.), out and about, or at
home (e.g., "Post a photo in the comments to show us the view you see while
listening to our podcast"). Actively encourage customers to tag or mention
your profile in updates containing photos, so that when you are notified you
can easily save and share the user-generated image on your brand's profile
page (giving credit, of course, but also making the person feel special and
eager to show their moment in the spotlight to their friends). Unify these
types of posts with a hashtag that you can track across all platforms to hunt
down more user-generated content, and even add a subtle link to the product
or service in question, if you think your audience won't mind. For an
additional layer of persuasion, you could experiment with adding a short
customer testimonial in the form of a text overlay on top of an image of a
happy customer, both to spread cheer about your brand and help convert
others into willing buyers.
Note: 
As a quick and powerful aside to your social media efforts, include
customer images on the product pages of your website for top-notch social
proof. Include instructions with your product (on the packaging, confirmation
email, etc.) to let customers know how to tag you on Facebook, Instagram,
etc., then use a website plugin to have the images automatically appear on
your site
.
Show off product features in images or infographics
People viewing and buying products online don't have the ability to examine
them as they would in real life, so high-quality product images from differentangles and with added details (or a link to where they can be found) are
extremely important to social media marketing. Add annotations to an image
of a product or service to show off features that might not be immediately
obvious, e.g., the special type of fabric used in a garment, how efficient your
delivery times are, or the wondrous technology hidden inside a gadget. If size
is an important part of your product, think about juxtaposing it next to a
common household item (or your competitor's product!) so that customers
can easily judge the scale.
Infographics also work well to display lots of information - especially
numbers and other data related to your brand - in an eye-catching, engaging
and shareable way. If graphic design isn't your bag, sites like Piktochart
(
http://www.piktochart.com
) and Easel.ly (
http://www.easel.ly
) will help you
to create great-looking infographics in a simple, drag-and-drop manner.
While infographics render well in Twitter and Pinterest feeds, do 
not 
upload
and post a full infographic image to sites not designed for such images, like
Facebook or Instagram, because it will be shrunk, squashed and be almost
impossible to read. Instead, select a square portion of the infographic (either
the top section where the title is or from its most interesting point), cut it out,
and post 
this 
along with a link and a call to action to encourage people to
click through to your website, Pinterest profile, etc. to view the infographic in
full.
Share inspirational, aspirational, motivational and nostalgic images, and
blog post quotes
Three types of image posts that often perform well on all social media are
inspirational, aspirational, and motivational quotes. In addition to their
tendency to stir a deep emotional response, they are also highly shareable, so
target your quotes to relate to the mindset of your customer. Nostalgic photos
with a text overlay work similarly in the way that they strike a chord of a
shared experience within us, often from our childhood. Subjects for these
might include historical images of your target audience's city or
neighborhood, or dusty old snapshots that relay the heritage of your brand.
And of course, everyone on social media loves a funny image - uplifting and
shareable. The following are some very broad guidelines for creating strong
examples of each type of image. With repetition and consistency, your fans
will learn to tie the emotions they feel when viewing these images to your
brand, product or service:Motivational images: 
items or landscapes that inspire optimism and
positivity; strong sans serif fonts that capture attention and reinforce authority
(capitalize words to create emphasis); bright and vivid filters to compound
impact of your words. Often, the best kind of inspirational content crops up in
the form of case studies, customer testimonials and stories of your own
failures and challenges.
Aspirational images: 
Aspirational content doesn't necessarily refer simply to
that which appeals to customers who aspire to attain great wealth, social
status or to 
own expensive possessions. An aspiration is defined as a hope or
ambition of achieving 
something
, so can describe any genuine desire - like
improving one’s golf swing, taking care of pot plants better, or becoming
more confident as a person. Underlying these aspirations are deeper
motivations: to connect with people, to impress our friends, to find a
romantic partner, etc. Aspirations are linked to people's identities. Therefore,
aspirational content speaks to feelings rather than needs, opening up the
potential customer pool from those who are currently in the market for your
product, to anybody who is capable of experiencing those feelings. As well as
producing images that 
show
, consider how they help to build a story to help
your audience 
feel
 a certain way about your brand and products; one that will
help them to reach their own personal goals.
Nostalgic images: 
Choose a retro, relatable, interesting photo of your
company, your community, etc., ideally several years old; hand-written,
narrow fonts are wistful and memory-laden; match your filter to the occasion
or season, e.g., bright and over-exposed for summer. Tie nostalgic images to
a popular hashtag like #tbt (Throwback Thursday) to add some extra clout
and shareability.
Funny images: 
Images that are created to entertain don’t have to be directly
related to your products or services, but should appeal to your target audience
in order to be successful. Match the font type to the tone of the humor, e.g.,
serif for playful, sans serif for dry; use warm tones and filters. Highly
shareable, they can work by transforming your company into a relatable,
more personable entity.
Note: 
A similar strategy to the above involves lifting a choice statistic or
quote from a blog post and converting it into a powerful image that will
motivate your readers to click over to read the article in full. Graphics andtext overlays can be quickly and easily created in programs like Photoshop,
PowerPoint or Keynote, 
or 
through online tools like Canva
(
http://www.canva.com
), or Adobe Spark 
(
http://spark.adobe.com
).
Share hints, tips, and tutorials
Offering hints and tips to your customers is a great way to be consistently
valuable, increase the potential virality of your posts, and to grow brand
loyalty. One of the easiest ways to do this is to show simple, step-by-step
instructions by composing a photo album or a single photo split into several
frames (the Instagram-built Layout app, websites like Fotor
(
http://www.fotor.com
) and Canva both offer free collage-making tools,
while mobile apps like PicFrame and Diptic will help you to achieve a similar
effect on iOS and Android devices). To take one example, PetSmart uses a
single Instagram image split into multiple images to give simple pet training
advice, like teaching a dog to sit and lay. The photo's visual instructions are
complemented by further explanation in the text caption. 
 
Note: 
Try the following: Pick out a blog post's most quotable, shareable
snippet and turn that into an image either as a quote on its own or coupled
with an 
appealing photo.
Show behind the scenes
To increase intimacy with your brand, show your human side, and to make
customers feel that they are getting a special sneak peek at the inner workings
of your company, use photos to snap photos of behind-the-scenes goings-on –
either vague, but exciting teasers 
or 
documenting each stage of a project as
you go along, showing fans your work in progress. For example, Tiffany &
Co. once snapped a photo of an artist they had employed, right in the middle
of him painting a new backdrop for its new Fifth Avenue store. Other
examples might be as simple as showing off the treats bought for the office to
celebrate the end of the working week, taking a snapshot of a special visitor,
or posting a photo to welcome the newest member of your staff.
Highlight your charitable side and consider purpose-driven marketing
No matter your size, embracing charitable or purpose-driven marketing is a
great way to stand out and build strong, lasting relationships with consumers.
For example, the clothing brand, Levis, regularly promotes the good it does,
such as posting a photo of a t-shirt printed for the free day it gives allemployees so that they can help projects in their local communities. Closely
related to this is purpose-driven marketing - essentially, using social media to
take a stand on a social or political issue, or to act on a cause. In a defiant
move, REI, an outdoor clothing and equipment brand, closes its doors on
Black Friday (traditionally one of a retailer's busiest days) and gives its
workers the day off to enjoy the outdoors. 
Taking a stand shouldn’t ever be as simple as jumping in on a trending topic
on Twitter. Ideally, you should choose an area that aligns with your brand
purpose, one that relates to a longstanding brand ethos and also, ideally, one
that aligns with your product or service. Never try to jump on a bandwagon
or shoehorn your brand into a conversation where it doesn't belong, as such a
move, if perceived as cynical, could cause a backlash against you. Once you
have communicated a charitable or purpose-driven side to your business, it is
important to show, over time, that your thoughts are not fleeting, and that
your actions reflect that too. In other words, keep it up and show consistency
to the cause. 
Before you act, ask yourself if the thoughts or actions you are about to
communicate will reflect positively on your brand in the future, or shape your
future growth, five or even ten years from now. It is also important to
mention that you don’t need to create a campaign that chooses sides on
political or social topics. For example, many brands have remained neutral by
helping out with disaster relief efforts following natural disasters at home and
around the world.
Share popular memes; adapt them to your audience
Memes (most often humorously-captioned images or GIFs) are hugely
shareable and extremely popular on social media. If you're unfamiliar with
memes (I'm sure you'll have seen one even if you didn't recognize the image
as one), the best thing is to visit a site like Know Your Meme
(
https://knowyourmeme.com
) to discover 
trending examples for use on your
Page, or to create your own - you'll pick up the idea in no time. There are
several defining characteristics that make memes so engaging: they are
relatable, witty, and entertaining. Memebase and Memedroid are two more
popular sites that collate trending memes, and you're also likely to find the
latest memes on sites like Reddit and Imgur. However you incorporate
memes into your content, the most important thing is to tie the meme back toyour product or brand culture. Don't simply use a generic meme for the sake
of it (however tempting that might be); make it your own and find a way to
create a meme that will resonate with your audience in a way only you know
how.
Note: 
The beauty of using GIFs to interact on social media is that they allow
you to harness the expressiveness of a famous face or someone’s genuine
physical reaction to a situation; an ideal way to fill in the gaps left by the lack
of body language and tone in text-only communication.
Humorous images also do well on social media - anything that will evoke an
emotional reaction, particularly if it is a positive one. The "Funny". "Aww"
and "Pics" subreddits of Reddit (
http://www.reddit.com/r/funny
,
http://www.reddit.com/r/aww 
and 
http://www.reddit.com/r/pics
 
respectively)
are an almost infinite source of such content, but if you have your own
original images, all the better. Despite the widespread popularity of memes
and other viral images, do not rely on them heavily as a way to bulk out your
social marketing strategy. Regardless of the high engagement rates they
might get, this type of content can be regarded as not "high quality"
(especially in the eyes of Facebook, as often the engagement it 
does 
get is not
the most highbrow). So too much of it could hinder your reputation and reach
more than it helps. But used once in a while, memes shouldn't do any harm.
Jump on fads in popular culture
Just as the popularity of a meme comes and goes, so do real-life photo trends.
So-called “photobombing” and selfies are trends that look like they are here
to stay, but others like “whaling” and “owling” (remember those? Me
neither!) burned out as quickly as they arrived. Nevertheless, all of these
trends can be taken advantage of in order to boost engagement in your own
content strategy, whether you take the photos yourself or encourage your fans
to so that you can share their efforts on your social profiles. For example,
Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary in Australia encourages visitors to take selfies
with some of the animals within the park, which it then features on its
Facebook and Instagram profiles.
Build Presentations for Slideshare
Slideshare (owned by LinkedIn) (
http://www.slideshare.net
) is the web's
biggest hub for hosting and sharing presentations on almost any topic. Some
of the most popular slideshows are business-related, which makes the sitedoubly important for B2B companies. The site's visual nature makes it one of
the most efficient platforms from which to create or re-purpose work in order
to generate high-quality leads (paid membership even allows you to place
contact forms within the presentation itself). The most successful Slideshare
presentations are laser-focused 
in their subject, turning individual aspects of
written content (blogs, e-books, speeches, and even infographics) into highly
visual content, using strong and emotive photos or graphics, a consistent
color scheme and fonts, and keeping text to an absolute minimum - often just
a single sentence (or even half of one!) per slide. Check out the Explore and
Popular pages on Slideshare for examples of featured content, and mirror this
style in your own uploads. Slideshare decks can be created, saved, and
uploaded via software like PowerPoint and Keynote, and online tools like
Canva. Once published, Slideshare presentations can be shared onto
Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, LinkedIn, and more, 
and 
embedded into
websites.
Other image types: word clouds, screenshots, and snack size data
Word clouds are a fun and inventive way to represent a piece of content when
sharing it to social media, whether using the words from a blog post, the
transcript of a video, or the opinions of people commenting on a particular
status update. Sites like Wordle (
http://www.wordle.net/
) ask you to paste in
a body of text, which it will then use to generate a word cloud – customizable
by font, layout, and color scheme. The more times a word appears, the more
prominence it is given in the cloud. If you want to direct people to a specific
part of your website or show them a quick step-by-step process, then
screenshot images are one effective way to go about it - show people, don't
tell. Creating them is as simple as using a snipping tool like Skitch
(
https://evernote.com/skitch/
) (or even the Print Screen key) to grab a
snapshot, then adding text and arrow annotations before sharing. Or if you
want to add a bit of visual flair, check out a service like PlaceIt
(
http://www.placeit.net
), which allows you to insert a screenshot onto
professional stock photos of devices captured in real-life settings.
Screenshots are also useful if you simply cannot find a suitable image:
grabbing blockquotes, ordered lists, or short paragraphs (stuff that can be
easily digested) is the best option here. Infographic-style images needn't be
big, full pieces of work. Sharing a snippet of fascinating or impressive data in
the form of a graphic with a text overlay or a chart can be just as powerful.Examples might include the number of hours it takes to manufacture a single
pair of bespoke shoes, how the amount you've given to charity has increased
over the years, or how many cups of coffee your team goes through during a
busy week!
Experiment with animated GIFs
While the popularity of animated GIFs has prevailed for many years, their
usage has boomed thanks to more accessible creation tools and faster Internet
connections. Animated GIFs are currently supported on many social
networks and they are an easy way for brands to add a fun, engaging element
to content. A few methods for their use include: demonstrating a tricky step
in a how-to guide; replaying a hilarious moment from a recent event, ad
campaign, or behind the scenes at your business; flashing up the benefits of a
product or service; making an announcement, thanking a customer, relaying a
reaction or emotion like happiness, surprise, or fear; or simply creating a cool
effect like a seamless loop, in a much more dynamic way than text or static
emoticons. Check out Giphy (
http://www.giphy.com
) to search for and
discover a massive archive of animated 
GIFs, create your own using software
like Photoshop or simple web tools like Make A GIF
(
http://www.makeagif.com
), and use Loop Findr
(
http://loopfindr.tumblr.com/
) to build animated GIFs that contain seamless
loops.
Video Content Strategies
Video content (pre-recorded or live streaming) is a 
huge 
part of the social
media mix, and many of the strategies above can very easily be adapted to
work in video form for multiple social channels. Later chapters will include
specific 
advice on maximizing the impact of video for the social networks in
question. In the past, the focus on social video was mostly about achieving
viral success. However, virality doesn’t always do much for your brand in the
long term. Short, authentic, raw, entertaining, and valuable videos go much
further than forcing an idea in the hope that it will become a one-hit wonder.
With attention spans being so small on social media, short-form videos give
you more freedom to produce emotive, relatable videos that get to the point
quickly, without the overhead of creating more in-depth content.
Develop compelling video content for social mediaMake sure that your videos reward people's attention and tell a story, even if
only the first few seconds are watched, and utilize a style that mirrors the
organic content your fans like to see. Even though people's attention spans
are now sporadic and short, consumers are more focused on their phones than
ever. As a result, your job is to build new ways to tell meaningful, emotional
stories in short form that are built for mobile. Make your video more visually
engaging by using a format unique to mobile, such as vertical video. It’s
easiest to just build for mobile right from the start, as you’ll avoid the time
and cost of editing for mobile. Otherwise, check out Animoto
(
www.animoto.com
) or Adobe Spark (
spark.adobe.com
) for an easy way to
create three versions of the same video: landscape, square, and portrait, all at
once. My recommendation is when you broadcast solo, is to use portrait
mode. And when you go live with a guest or show a view, use landscape.
Square videos work well for almost any content - so stick with that if you
want to keep things simple!
Comprehending the significance of vertical video
Vertical video has had a bad rap for many years; most experts agreeing that
landscape video was the best format for any situation. After all, our eyes are
positioned in "landscape", aren't they? Well, the rise of mobile and social
video means that it's time to rethink that advice, because vertical video on
mobile devices is a compelling storytelling format that can help you connect
with your audience, and in many situations for marketers, is the new default –
see Instagram Stories and Facebook Stories, for example. Vertical video's
secret weapon is that it feels authentic, even if it’s coming from a brand. And
access to it is fast and natural - users don't have to fumble around rotating
their screens as it appears in the orientation that 99.9% of people normally
hold their mobile phones
.
Because vertical video is native to mobile devices and the majority of
vertical-first content is filmed on smartphones, the expectation of your
audience is dramatically different than something that they might view on TV
or sites suited to longer form content, like YouTube. In the world of vertical
video, what you publish or broadcast doesn't need to be as polished — in fact,
polished productions might even perform worse. Consider the following five
tips to maximize the impact of vertical video:
Content:
 Be aware of who your audience is and what you’re going to showthem. Vertical video works great for filming, well, vertical things – like
people.
Context:
 Consider where your viewer might be when they’re watching your
content. Will they be relaxing in the privacy of their own home (where
landscape video might work best) or on a packed commuter train (more
suited to mobile, vertical video)? 
Length:
 Related to the last point, viewing vertical videos is almost
synonymous with being on-the-go. Consider that your audience probably
won't have time to sit and watch a long, interrupted vertical video - keep it
short. Get to the point, early and give the viewer the hook almost upfront —
bite-sized, instant content means they're more likely to engage.
Break the mold:
 Vertical video offers you the opportunity to direct the
viewer's eyes and attention wherever you want to take it. Horizontal video
usually moves the viewer’s gaze from left to right, but in the vertical format
there’s no clear horizon; it’s all under your control.
Re-purpose for desktop:
 You don’t have to forgo desktop viewers by creating
vertical-first video: repurpose those videos into square or landscape videos
where possible.
Experiment with live broadcasting tools
Tools like Facebook Live, Instagram Live, and LinkedIn Live have brought
the ability to easily live stream video to the web well into mainstream
consciousness, and for brands and businesses, instant web video -
complimenting some of the content strategies listed above, e.g., product
demonstrations, a look behind the scenes, Q&As, etc., can be used as a highly
engaging way to connect with, and expand your audience. I'll get into the
particulars of different live broadcast tools later on in the book, but if it's an
avenue you are interested in, the following basics will ensure that your live
streams leave audiences wanting more. Just because live video is raw and
unedited, doesn’t mean the need to prepare falls completely by the wayside:
Decent connectivity: 
Nothing will annoy your audience more than a stream
that constantly pauses, drops, or stutters. So wherever possible, ensure that
you maintain a good Wi-fi or 4G connection. If you think there might beissues, make your audience aware so that their expectations are managed
effectively
.
Appropriate setting: 
If you are broadcasting from your home or office, record
a test clip to ensure that what your audience sees will be an adequately lit and
well-composed setting without a distracting or unprofessional background
(i.e. dirty dishes, messy storage cupboard) - think about the image that you
want to portray! Obviously, your power to control this out on location might
be different, but always try to do so.
Steady camera: 
Okay, this isn't going to be possible at all times, especially if
you're outside filming a dynamic scene, but if you're filming yourself or
something static, then a tripod or selfie is a must.
Good sound: 
Poor quality audio or distracting background noises can be the
bane of audiences tuning into live broadcasts. So, if streaming in a quiet spot
isn't an option and you don't want to rely on your phone's built-in mic, look
into buying a cheap, clip-on mic. If it has a fluffy cover to block wind noises,
all the better. 
What to talk about on live streams
Theme your content for your live streams so they fit into your existing
marketing plan. This will reinforce your message and can lead your audience
to consume your other content about that theme. For example, make sure that
your blog content, video content, and mailing list content all overlap in their
topics so you're sharing a cohesive message and able to offer more resources
and content to your audience around specific topics. An easy way to proceed
with this approach is to use a variation of the hub and spoke content model -
where the hub is one large content topic, and the spokes are sub-topics
underneath it. Let’s say your hub topic is “Electric Bikes”. Some spokes of
"Electric Bikes" content could be:
How to choose the best e-bike
How to feel confident when riding an e-bike for the first time
The must-have accessories for e-bike riders
E-bike maintenance tips
Once you have the hub and the spokes, you can identify which topics would
work best for a live stream, and which would suit other formats.   How to structure your live video
You don’t have to write a script for a live stream, but you should have a
general structure in mind so you don’t go off-topic too much. An easy four-
pillared structure is as follows:
An opening hook:
 Grab viewers' attention from the beginning with a question
for them to respond to, something simple like asking people where people are
from or how they are doing. This approach is especially useful on Facebook
because when more people engage with a comment or a like, it will show
your ongoing broadcast to more people in the News Feed.
Note:
 Many people who actually see the 
very
 beginning of your stream are
most 
likely watching a recorded replay (the logic here is that the chances of
everyone 
that wanting to watch tuning in right at time the broadcast goes live,
is slim). Keep these viewers in mind and plan to start talking immediately -
the first 60 seconds can make or break your stream. Don’t twiddle your
thumbs and wait for people to tune in for too long.
A promise or desired outcome:
 What will the viewer learn during your live
stream? What is the desired outcome you’re promising to share with them?
Communicating a desired result will encourage viewers to stick around.
A call to action:
 What do you want your audience to do after they’ve watched
your live? Join your email list? Follow your page? Purchase a product?
Whatever it is, you have to encourage them to do it with a call to action.
Following your CTA, and as your broadcast is coming to an end, recap the
most important points and share a little about what viewers can expect in
your next broadcast. Tell them when it's going to happen and ask fans to
follow your profile so that they can be notified and tune in live.
Review Your Insights
You should always analyze the performance of your live streams to gauge
their performance and gain insights into what went well, what didn’t, and
how you can improve in future broadcasts. For instance, you can look to see
if there was a big surge or drop off in engagement at certain points, and
consider what was said or done at to cause it.
Live stream best practices and promotion
Be consistentIf your aim is to live stream regularly, then try to be consistent with it.
There's never any guarantee that your fans will watch every broadcast, but by
going live at the same time every week, for example, you make it easier for
them to remember to tune in. Utilize your analytics to find out when your
audience is most active on your platform of choice and arrange your live
stream around those days and times.
Simulcast your livestreams
As mentioned above, live video features are available on many social
platforms, so why not go live on several at once to reach a larger audience? A
paid tool like StreamYard (https://streamyard.com/) will allow you to
broadcast live streams on multiple social networks.
Repurpose your livestreams
Live video can make for fantastic content to "upcycle" for future content, so
put it to work! This includes uploading the live stream to YouTube,
transcribing them (check out Rev (www.rev.com) as one source for
affordable transcription services) and creating a blog post, posting them as a
long-form video on Instagram, or cutting out valuable snippets and sharing
them as short video posts on social media
.
Host contests on social media
Contests (promotions, sweepstakes and prize draws) are a staple strategy for
many brands on social media, and they're a great way to increase awareness
of your company, generate buzz for a new product, encourage engagement,
and build a community around your profiles. The goal of a social media
contest should be to attract highly engaged fans who will stick with you after
the promotion ends, slowly converting them into loyal regular customers. To
this end, offer a prize that targets your audience's wants and needs (e.g. free
coffee for a week if you own a coffee shop, a free pampering session if you
own a spa, a store-specific voucher, etc.). Contests with generic prizes
(Amazon gift cards, iPads, etc.) will attract low-value fans who aren't
necessarily interested in your brand offering, and unlikely to convert to loyal
fans and customers in the future. To further prevent unwanted entrants, make
your contest last for a long time to discourage those people only looking for
the chance of a quick win (perhaps weeks or even months depending on the
prize), and also make the barrier to entry something that only true fans would
take the time to do. Other simple ideas for contest success include making iteasy for people to share news of the contest with their friends, hosting a joint
contest with a related business to share audiences, and considering paid
promotion to encourage entries in the campaign's infancy.
Work with social media influencers
One of the biggest trends to emerge in social media over the past several
years is influencer marketing. Essentially, it involves building strategic
partnerships with individuals that already have a large social media
following, and who would be interested in promoting what you have to offer.
Crucially, that individual should also already love what you do (or be open to
trying it out), and be willing to share it with their audience – ideally, a crowd
who match your target demographic. Having an influencer mention your
brand or your products can provide your brand with oodles of exposure and
credibility, and it is a relationship that can nurture and grow over time.
It is common for popular influencers to receive tons of requests from brands
to mention their products, and for those with a huge following (hundreds of
thousands, millions even), a not-insubstantial fee is usually involved.
However, for smaller influencers, building a budding relationship needn’t
cost a fortune. You could start simply by commenting on their photos,
sending a tweet, tagging them in your posts, or sending a DM. They’ll
receive a notification, and after a few mentions, they might be open to
connect. Alternatively, an inexpensive way to tempt influencers to work with
you is to offer free samples of your product or services. If your offering
matches the influencer’s style of content, they’ll often be more than happy to
write a blog post, share a photo, give you a shout out, etc., in return for a
freebie.
Here are 5 simple steps to help you succeed when working with influencers:
Define:
 Align on business objectives and desired outcomes upfront so you
and the influencer are clear on the goals
.
Discover:
 Identify creators who share your brand values and can deliver the
desired impact. Tools like Meta’s Creator Marketplace Tool, which allows
you to search for influencers to work with on Instagram.
Co-create:
 Brief creators with organic and paid in mind. Strike a balance
between the creator’s point-of-view and your brand goals and be open to
platform-native approaches like humor, stickers and text overlays.Scale:
 Add paid media to reach more people.
Measure: 
Measure, evaluate and use learnings for your next campaigns. Post-
campaign follow-through makes a strong partnership.
Note: 
To improve your chances of success, be selective about who you send
offers to. Do your research and select influencers who have a history of
getting their followers to take action. If you’re just starting out, aim for so-
called micro influencers, those with smaller follower counts whose fees are
much smaller, and might be more receptive to your offer, e.g., someone with
a couple of thousand followers who lives locally vs. a worldwide social
media megastar with millions of fans. Check out Facebook’s Brand Collabs
manager - a really useful tool to search for and connect with influencers to
work with across Facebook and Instagram.
Tie everything together with: a strong hashtag strategy
Hashtags on social media help to group conversations, give context to your
posts, and because using the"#" symbol in front of a word turns it into a
clickable link – a sound hashtag strategy can help you and your content get
discovered by your target audience. In most cases, clicking on a hashtag
included in a post will take a person to a list of posts containing the same
hashtag. Many brands use hashtags because "that's the thing to do” but
adding them without purpose can weaken the impact of a post, or even have
the power to turn people off your brand completely. Hashtags for business
use normally fit into one of three types: branded, community, or campaign.
Branded and community hashtags work best as part of a long-term strategy,
while campaign hashtags are best for short-term goals:
A branded hashtag is one that’s unique to your business; it can
be as simple as your company name, slogan, or the name of a
product, e.g. #traderjoes. Getting fans to use your branded
hashtag is key to getting discovered on certain social networks,
particularly Instagram. When fans use it, it means they enjoy
your product or service and want to share the experience with
others. Even better, when fans post images or videos using a
branded hashtag, it can be a great source for curating influential
user-generated content for use in your own future content.
Community hashtags also enable brands to connect like-minded people around a specific topic, but unlike branded
hashtags, community hashtags don’t have be directly related to
a business — they often focus on a theme, feeling, or idea. For
example, Levis uses the hashtag #LevisPride to show its
support for the LGBT community. You can also use
community hashtags as a way to express an emotion or
sentiment relating 
to your brand, e.g., #ShopSmarterChicago or
#SparkYourHappy.
Campaign hashtags usually last for a few days, weeks, or
months, because campaign hashtags are most often associated
with specific campaigns, like a new product launch or a
contest. For this reason, brands promote a campaign hashtag
heavily when a campaign is live to generate as much activity as
possible, then stop promoting it once the campaign has ended.
For example, Whole Earth Foods used the hashtag
#ManvHorse2018 to promote the fact that it was sponsoring the
Man Versus Horse event in 2018 and to encourage fans to take
part.
General hashtags best strategies
I’ll be covering hashtag strategy for specific social networks in later chapters,
but these tips will be useful for wherever your hashtags appear:
Identify your hashtag goals
 to give you the direction you need
to implement them as part of your social media strategy
successfully. Goals can range from creating buzz around a
product, to driving contest entries, to encouraging user-
generated content.
Research your hashtag:
 Search and listen to see what hashtags
people are already using when talking about your brand, and
capitalize by using those. Also check to ensure your desired
hashtag isn't already being used by another company. For
inspiration, tools such as Hashtagify (
Hashtagify.me
) can help
you to discover relevant or trending hashtags. 
Make hashtags easy to remember
 – and to spell. Don’t leave
room for possible typos, which will make hashtags hard for
people to use. Short hashtags work best.
#ilovechocolatecakeandeatiteveryday - a hashtag like this is
difficult to read. In addition, use legible formatting. Symbols
don't work too well, and capitalizing words helps make
hashtags a bit more readable, e.g., #BigSale rather than
#bigsale.
Educate your audience
. Make sure you clearly communicate
the hashtag to them in your own posts and more importantly,
explain why you want them to include it in their own posts.
Be patient.
 If you've rolled out a hashtag, chances are that your
audience won't take to using it "organically" straight away,
especially if you're using a brand slogan or other one-sided
hashtag. The best hashtags are inclusive, shareable, and
discoverable. If it doesn’t organically fit within a post, it will
come across as forced and lose its impact.
Give people a reason to use your hashtag.
 The best hashtags
draw people in and invoke curiosity to explore and become part
of a conversation. Whether it’s as part of a contest entry or the
fact you recognize hashtag users with a like or a comment,
your audience will be more likely to use your hashtag when the
relationship benefits you both.
Measure your results and adapt your strategy.
 Measuring your
results and adapting your campaigns as needed is the best way
to make sure you stay on track and deliver on the goals you set
out to reach or improve through the use of hashtags. More than
ever, social media users are tagging their updates with
"emotion" hashtags, too, e.g., "Had an awesome meal at 
Betty's
Grill today! #stuffed #bestburgersever." Whether the
sentiments are good or bad, they can often give you a deeper
insight into your brand image than you imagined. Hashtag
search tools like Tagboard (
https://www.tagboard.com
) provide
a way to find recent top tweets related to any given hashtag,
conduct competitive hashtag analysis, and track hashtag use
across different platforms.
Tie everything together with: a social media brand style guide
As well as much of what has been covered in this book so far, one thing thatall successful social media accounts have in common is that they are
consistent with their branding. When a piece of their content appears in fans'
feeds, it is instantly recognizable. To ensure that each and every post drives
home this sense of continuity and to drive familiarity amongst fans, they will
most likely be using a social media style guide. And you should build one,
too. A social media style guide is a clear and detailed outline for how your
brand will appear on social media, and should relate to and be part of your
overall marketing brand guidelines. There isn’t one fixed format for a style
guide, but some of the most crucial elements that every brand should consider
including are:
Voice and tone:
 What is the overall defining sound for your brand personality
(its voice) what specific implementations of voice does it use in different
situations (its tone)? You have the same voice all the time, but your tone
changes. Is your brand’s voice and tone witty, laid-back, direct,
approachable, etc.? 
Spelling, grammar, and punctuation:
 Obviously, getting basic spelling right
in your social media posts is a must. But grammar and punctuation are
changeable depending on your approach. Will your sentences be long or
short? Is slang allowed? Are any words banned? How liberal will you be with
emoji use? etc.
Formatting:
 With so many different social media platforms, formatting is
especially important. Will all your posts follow the same consistent
formatting template? Or will it differ for different post types and across
networks?
Multimedia usage:
 From photos to videos and GIFs, it’s key to decide what
look is right for your brand and to keep it easily accessible in one place.
Include visual asset information about colors and fonts, templates, what
formats to utilize on each network, e.g. Instagram Stories, and what kind of
user-generated content is worthy of consideration.
Hashtag usage:
 As explained previously, hashtags are important for
everything from generating buzz to joining in conversations, but how and
when they are used, and the number of them featured, will differ by business
and social network.Breaking news:
 In today’s connected world, it is crucial that your brand be
mindful of how you’re perceived on social media, particularly in relation to
breaking news stories. Having guidance in place can keep you from looking
insensitive or tone-deaf. Keep on top of the news that's important to you and
your fans when you’re publishing social media content. Consider pausing
your scheduled content or 
posting something else in light of major breaking
news events. 
Your own style guide can as many or as few components as you like, and it
should be a living document that can evolve with your business.
The Rise of Stories And How to Take Advantage
While the traditional social media news feed has been experiencing growing
pains, “stories” have risen as a new and compelling format across social
media platforms, empowering businesses to tell better and deeper stories
about their brands. Since debuting on Snapchat in 2013, stories have quickly
grown into something that looks like it could even become the default format
for content consumption and creation. As well as Snapchat, you'll now find
the option to share stories on Instagram, Facebook, Pinterest, Linkedin,
Twitter, and YouTube.
Stories – in the social media sense - are full-screen, mobile-oriented
(portrait/vertical) videos and images that are typically temporary in nature,
appearing and disappearing over a rolling 24-hour cycle. They are often
posted off-the-cuff, but can also be planned as part of a marketing campaign.
They can feature GIFs, stickers, links, music, and more, and their casual
nature makes hugely popular with ordinary social media users – but also
brands looking to capture their attention. Stories are now an essential part of
a business' social media strategy and offer the perfect way to share unfiltered,
authentic content with your audience. Stories are housed in a separate section
to main news feed content - in several cases, in a prominent position above it.
This means that stories not impacted by the whims of social networks'
algorithms, meaning more of your fans are likely to see the content in them.
And when they do watch your story - auto-played and in full screen, they
have to actively decide to tap away, rather than nonchalantly swiping past it.
Specific advice and tactics for making the most of stories on differentplatforms can be found in their relevant chapters (in particular, the Instagram
Tips chapter has a wealth of information, specifically on effective advertising
with stories), and below you’ll find some general ideas and best practices:
Design stories with storytelling in mind
When thinking about what you want to post to stories, you should also
consider their make-up versus main feed content. Stories are designed to be
viewed in a sequence, while main feed posts are mostly made up of just one
video or image. As you're telling a story, you should think about building it
with a beginning, a middle, and an end. A good target to aim for is a
sequence with around 3-7 posts. That's not to say that single-post stories can't
be valuable in their own right, but designing them with longer sequences in
mind generates content with a natural flow - and more opportunity to
communicate your message, engage viewers, and to encourage them to act
.
Supplement your main feed content with bonus info via Stories
As well as the main photo to share to your feed, snap a couple of extra ones
that go behind-the-scenes and chat about them in stories.
Turn stories into real-time events
Get your audience involved in following along at meetups, retreats, with a
challenge you set, etc.; ask them to participate by leaving a comment on one
of your main feed posts or sharing a photo with a particular hashtag.
Use photos with captions to tell your stories
Tell the story of a recent in-store event or product launch, or turn a blog post
into a story of photos with the main points summarized.
Give your followers a quick and easy way to consume your content
If you publish lots of news or updates regularly, summarize your articles with
a headline and a tagline or sentence. If you produce video content, consider
creating an extra or edited version for stories. If the news is shareworthy, add
your brand logo to help spread the awareness of your brand if others go on to
share the story.
Promote your content
If you use main feed posts to drive traffic to your web content, create
promotional images for stories and mention that the link is on your Page or in
your bio. When you create a header image to promote a blog post on yourmain feed, make an additional image specifically for use with stories.
Give sneak previews of your upcoming products or launch them through
stories
While preparing the marketing materials for your upcoming launch or
announcement, create a few more vertical designs for your stories. Consider
more than one image or design since the ephemeral nature of stories allow
you to share more photos and videos without cluttering up your main feed.
Here are some variations you could think about:
Different angles of the product
Specific features of the product
Different people using your product
Various ways of using your product
Share user generated content and showcase your customers
Stories provides a great option to feature your customers (and your product)
without changing the theme of your main feed branding or adding too many
photos to your main profile. Invite your customers to share photos of
themselves using your product and let them know that you will be featuring
them on your stories. Alternatively, look out for photos of your product taken
by your customers; reach out to the people you find ask if you can feature
their photos and them on your Instagram Stories
.
Use stories to do research and interact with your community
What types of content do they want from you on social media, and how can
you provide those content to them?Facebook Tips: 
Marketing Strategy You'll Like and
Share
Facebook is the most visited social network in the world, with well over one
billion users across desktop and mobile. As the king of social networks, your
target audience is almost guaranteed to be there.
Years ago, Facebook was a veritable goldmine for brands looking for a large
captive audience and lots of web traffic, but this unfettered potential has
slowly declined over the years as competition has increased, paid promotion
introduced, and as Facebook tries to re-balance the site’s stream of personal
vs branded content. In its latest major News Feed updates in 2018, Facebook
made clear more than ever that the News Feed will favor showing updates
posted or shared by users’ friends and family over that of business Pages and
that content that encourages communities to gather and interact in meaningful
ways, is what the site’s algorithm will prioritize. It makes sense, given that
Facebook users primarily visit the site to interact with their friends and family
and they want to see their posts, but they 
also 
visit Facebook to be informed,
inspired, to converse amongst likeminded people, and be entertained - which
is where you come in. So, while Facebook marketing isn’t as straightforward
as it used to be, the site is still a must-use resource for nearly every brand
interested in social media marketing. If you’re smart about your approach,
there is still 
ample 
opportunity to reach your target audience and succeed in
your business goals. Use the tips in this chapter to build, brand and market
your business on Facebook, as well as amass a following of highly engaged
customers.Facebook Business Page Setup Strategy
Pages are no longer just a home for your brand’s Facebook posts. As a lot of
content from Pages gets overshadowed in the News Feed (or doesn't appear
in it at all), Facebook has moved to create additional value for businesses by
making Pages a 
destination
; a place where people can find all the information
they need about your business: opening hours, to read or write reviews, to
make a purchase, book a reservation, submit customer service queries, and
more, 
as well
 as a place to engage with content that resonates with them. 
Small and local businesses in particular should think of Facebook as they
would other platforms such as TripAdvisor, Yelp, and Google. Even just
doing the simple things such as keeping business hours up to date, and
completing profile information fully are critical for discoverability on
Facebook. So, before you dive in and start posting on Facebook, it pays to
take some time to lay solid foundations to help get your brand presence set up
properly and in a position to impress fans when they visit your Page.
Create a Facebook Page, not a personal profile
When you sign up to Facebook, you are assigned a Personal Timeline by
default. 
Personal Timelines, often referred to as profiles, are designed for
individual, non-commercial use. For your business to take advantage of
everything Facebook marketing has to offer, you must create a separate
Facebook Page. Facebook Pages look similar to personal Timelines, but
provide unique tools for brands like analytics, custom tabs to host business-
related information, and advertising tools. Pages do not require separate
Facebook accounts and do not have separate login information from
Timelines. You can create a Facebook Page in one of three ways: by
searching 'Create A Page' in the search bar at the top of the site, by clicking
the 'Create A Page' button at the top of any existing Facebook Page, or by
visiting 
https://www.facebook.com/pages/create
.
Note: 
If you are currently using a personal profile for business purposes,
there is a possibility that Facebook will find and shut your account down
without notice. If you are in this situation, this is what to do: compose a status
on the profile you created that explains that you have created a new Facebook
Page for your business and ask people to go and like the Page to continuereceiving updates and information from you. Share your Page and the same
message to your personal timeline and ask friends if they'll like and share it to
help grow your audience back. Once you've built momentum, deactivate your
initial profile, group or event. While building a Facebook Page is essential for
businesses on Facebook, there are also several ways to utilize a personal
profile - in a non-commercial way. For now, we're going to concentrate on
Pages, but look out for Timeline-based tips in the 
Using Your Personal
Facebook Profile to Boost Business 
section at the end of this chapter.
Keep your Facebook Page name short; get it right the first time!
If at all possible, try to keep your Facebook Page name short, as this will help
if you go on to create Facebook ads, where the headline space in the advert
(often the name of your Page) is limited to just 25 characters. If you are 
not
happy with your Page name at any time, go to the "About" section of your
Page, click “Edit Page Info” and type the amendment into the Name section.
Changing your Page's name does not affect its username or Page web address
(explained below).
Get a custom Facebook username and URL for your Facebook Page
Set up a vanity @username and URL for your Facebook Page. Your Page's
username will appear below your Page's name and in your Page's URL to
help people find and remember your Page. An example of a username could
be @SpringfieldCoffee if the Page name is Springfield Coffee. Facebook
sometimes restricts new pages from setting up a vanity URL, but a couple of
dozen followers normally helps the option appear. To reach this threshold
quickly, invite your e-mail contacts and current Facebook friends – a
community of people who already care about you and your brand - to visit
and "Like" your Page. 
Fill in business info accurately and in detail
Fill in as much of your business' details as possible in the About section of
your Facebook Page, including address, brand story, contact details, product
information, website (add multiple URLs by separating them with commas in
the website box), and links to other social profiles. Putting effort into
populating these 
sections makes your Page helpful to customers who can see
all of your essential information in one place, and the keyword-rich blurb is
also good for search engine optimization (SEO), as the text in your About
section is indexed by Google. Note: 
In November 2016, Facebook rolled out an easy to optimize your Page
based on type, by offering pre-made templates. They include quick setups for
Shopping, Venues, Professional Services, Restaurants, and more. Each option
gives different defaults for the tabs along the side of your Facebook Page and
for the buttons under your cover photo. So, if you want to update your Page's
look and feel instantly to match your business type, do so via the Templates
section under Settings > Templates and Tabs. Are you a restaurant owner and
selected Restaurant/Cafe as your Page's category? Make sure you include the
types of foods you serve, and also upload your menu as a PDF for customers
to browse, or if you're in the U.S. or Canada, you can also add a menu
through SinglePlatform.
Create an awesome cover photo and add a call-to-action button 
 
Use your Facebook Page’s cover photo to effectively communicate your
brand or message in one simple, high quality image. Facebook’s guidelines
say that the ideal size for a cover photo image is 820 × 312 pixels - any
smaller and Facebook will automatically stretch the image, making it appear
blurry. However, Facebook displays Page cover photos at 640 x 360 pixels
on smartphones. This means, rather confusingly, that cover photos can appear
differently on desktop and mobile. To ensure your cover photo also displays
on mobile (i.e. is not obscured or cropped), create an invisible buffer of 75
pixels at the top and bottom of the recommended height of the desktop cover
photo and place your image within that - the remaining 670 pixels. Ideas for
cover photos include one powerful image that communicates who you are
and what you do, a collage of your products, highlighting an ongoing offer,
or featuring a photo or testimonial submitted by one of your own fans - the
latter will really "wow" your customer and hopefully they'll spread the word
to their friends. Keep users engaged by periodically updating your cover
photo and profile pic – once per month is a good target to aim for, but a
seasonal change is popular among brands, too.
When you upload a cover photo, click on it and you will be able to edit it to
add a text description. Here, type a short, relevant blurb, then add in a call to
action and related links to your website, a product, an offer, a Page tab, or
feature a discount code as a reward for clicking. Many Facebook Page
visitors click on cover photos for a closer look, so use the description as a
way to anchor the photo and encourage them to take action. To encourage
more clicks on your cover photo, you can try experimenting with a "button"as part of your cover design with its own call to action, e.g., 
"Get 10% off
your next purchase with us - Click Here!" 
Alternatively, (and to tempt the
people who won't click on your Page’s cover photo - call to action or not),
you might want to use it to let non-fans know what value there is to them in
"liking" your Page, e.g., Free DIY tips, daily dessert recipes, regular
parenting advice, etc. Every time a Facebook user "likes" your Page, a large
part of your cover image (along with your profile photo) will show in the
News Feed of that person's friends, inviting them to "like" the Page too, so do
your best to make the 
design as compelling and visually representative of
your brand as possible, even at a smaller size.
Facebook most recently amended its rules about cover photos in July 2016.
They read: 
“Covers can't be deceptive, misleading or infringe on anyone
else's copyright. You may not encourage people to upload your cover to their
personal timelines.” 
Facebook has been known to remove the cover photos
of Pages that don't follow along, so stick to its rules in order to avoid any
nasty surprises. Once upon a time, Facebook also told Page owners that their
cover photo could not feature text that covered more than 20% of its entire
area. This restriction no longer applies, which means that you can include
contact details and pricing and purchasing information about a product in
your cover image to whatever extent you like. While this is mostly good
news for marketers, I would still advise caution. Too much text can make a
cover photo look spammy and unprofessional, so I would recommend at least
some restraint, as the importance of the instant visual impact of a great cover
photo cannot be overstated.
Add a call to action, offers and links in the cover design and description
In December 2014, Facebook announced the rollout of solid, clickable call-
to-action buttons that can be added to cover photos, including "Book Now",
"Contact Us," and "Use App.” Designed as a way to bring your business’
most important objective to the forefront of your Facebook presence, call-to-
action buttons can be linked to any destination on or off Facebook. In late
2016, Facebook’s CTA buttons were enhanced - with the "Get Quote",
"Request Time" call-to-action buttons, and more since. When a person takes
action on your Page, such as asking when they can schedule an appointment,
a Messenger (Facebook’s instant chat service) conversation is automatically
created between your business and that person, allowing you to chat and
confirm the appointment.Upload a Facebook profile photo recognizable at a small size
While the cover photo dominates the upper portion of your Facebook Page,
arguably it's the profile photo you choose that can have the most influence
overall, as it is seen all over the site: in the News Feed of followers, in posts
on your Page's timeline, in stories, in all comment replies, and of course, next
to your Page’s cover photo. The recommended upload size for a profile photo
is 180 x 180 pixels, but it is displayed at 170 x 170 on your main profile on
desktop, 128 x 128 on smartphones, and as small as 43 x 43 pixels next to
comments. Ideally, the image you choose should be recognizable (or at least
distinct) at this smallest size. While your profile photo will display as a
square on your Page, it will be cropped to a circular shape next to posts, in
Messenger, stories, and on ads. Think about how your profile photo will look
when cropped into a circle, and upload a design that will look great whether a
square or circle. With design in mind, upload a profile photo that
complements your cover image designs, and vice versa. Don't be afraid to
tweak the colors of your profile photo to help the hues match, but do ensure
that your brand logo is still recognizable.
Note: 
As with the cover photo, edit the description of your profile photo to
add 
some relevant blurb and a link to your website or an offer, as a way to
reward those curious enough to click it.
Setup and optimize a Shop to sell products across Facebook and
Instagram
Launched in the summer of 2020, Facebook Shops is a free and easy way to
create your own online store on Facebook and Instagram. Customers can
browse and purchase your products, all from your Instagram business profile,
Instagram Stories, your Facebook business Page, and Facebook Marketplace.
By selling directly on Facebook and Instagram, you can target your
customers where they already spend time and transform their time on social
media into sales opportunities. Before you can launch your Shop, you’ll need
to do two main things:
1. Gather some business and financial documents and other information,
including your ID, tax information, physical business address (if you have
one), delivery options, and banking info. 
2. Link all relevant accounts in your Business Manager on Facebook. If
you're not on Business Manager already, create an account atbusiness.facebook.com
 and add your profiles to help you manage your
linked accounts and Page roles.
Setting up your shop
To actually start building your shop proper so that people can start buying
from you, you’ll need to use Facebook’s Commerce Manager. Commerce
Manager lets you take care of all aspects of selling on Facebook and
Instagram in one place: handling inventory, tracking and fulfilling orders,
customer support and returns, gaining insights into your performance and
customers’ purchasing habits, and more. 
Depending on your needs and preferences, you can choose to use Commerce
Manager by itself, or combine it with a third-party commerce solution like
Shopify or BigCommerce. To access Commerce Manager, visit
facebook.com/business/shops
 and click on the “Get Started” button.
In the Commerce Manager setup, you'll choose whether you want to sell on
Facebook or Instagram, link your business accounts, set your delivery
options, and return policy and designate a bank account for your payouts.
Managing inventory
Once you’ve sorted out the basics, it’s time to upload your products and
manage your inventory in a catalogue, all handled via Catalogue Manager.
You can list as many products as you like.
For each product you’ll need to provide a product title and images, an
accurate product title, a price, the product type, product variants, a clear and
brief product description, stock availability, and returns information. Plus,
you’ll need to provide a product URL to help Facebook verify the item and
product category codes - essential so that Facebook can calculate tax.
You can upload items to the Catalogue Manager in one of four ways:
Manually: Best for small businesses or if you have fewer than
50 different items to sell.
With a data feed (CSV, TSV, XML, RSS/ATOM): A data feed
is a spreadsheet where you enter information about your
inventory. A data feed allows you to add several items to your
catalogue at once, and make changes to your catalogue in bulk,
automatically. Data feeds might be for you if you have a
product inventory that is large or changes often.Third-party partner: If you already use a platform partner such
as Shopify to manage your inventory and sales, you can
integrate it with Commerce Manager. 
API integration
If you're a developer or work with one, you can directly
integrate with Facebook’s API to handle your shop.
Note: 
People are more likely to buy products with compelling images and
accurate descriptions. Review your catalogue to make sure that your products
give customers enough information to feel confident about buying.
Use at least three images per product, showcase it with minimal clutter (a
white background is preferred), and be consistent with visual treatment in all
of your images. Importantly, keep testing to see what performs best.
After adding products, make sure to test how they look through a Facebook
and Instagram account 
not
 linked to your business, to see how customers will
see them. 
Customizing your shop
To give your shop an on-brand look and feel, Facebook allows you to
customize it by changing the size, color and appearance of the text and
buttons, featuring products, and creating curated collections. Any
customizations you make will look the same across Instagram and Facebook.
Collection optimization tips
 Organize products into multiple collections themed around
seasonal events, promotions, upcoming launches and trends.
Each collection will have a name, a description, a cover image, and
include between 6 and 30 products. Use a concise (under 20
characters) name for your collection; one that draws people in - like
teasing a sale or special offer.
Describe the purpose of your collection and its value to your
customer, e.g. “Winter Sale, 25% off”.
The collection cover image is the largest image that appears in
your collection, and should tell the story of the collection and
be consistent with your brand. Find creative ways to represent
your collection, avoiding generic stock imagery wheneverpossible.
Using Insights to improve results
The Insights section within Commerce Manager shows you how customers
are interacting with your shop. Use the Overview dashboard to spot trends
and understand your total shop performance, and the Products tab for insight
into each individual product.
Add Business-specific Service, Events, Appointments, etc. tabs to your
Page
Facebook allows businesses to add and arrange a variety of tabs to Pages,
depending on your business and what you provide. These tabs can be a great
way to promote your products, services, events, offers, etc. more prominently
– the most popular of which I detail below. To add any of the following tabs,
visit Settings > Templates and Tabs, and scroll down to the Tabs section.
Services tab
As a way to showcase what services your business provides, and to give
customers an easy way to inquire about them, use the Services tab. When you
set up a service, you'll be asked to add in information like its name, a photo,
price, and duration. When customers enquire through your Services tab,
you'll receive a notification through Messenger and be able to arrange and
confirm the appointment through a private conversation.
Appointments
Appointments are easy to use tools that allow businesses to show the services
they offer, display their availability, collect and manage requests for
appointments and communicate with customers. Appointments on Facebook
save you and customers time, and offer a convenient way to manage your
bookings versus calls and texts. To set up appointments on your Page:
1
. 
Click the blue call-to-action button below your Page's cover
photo.
2
. 
Click Book with you > Book Now > Next.
3
. 
Click Appointments on Facebook to manage your
appointments through Facebook.
Consider Facebook Page custom apps to promote your brand offeringCustom tabs – one-page sub-menus of your Facebook Page - display in a
column on the left-hand side of your Facebook Page. They’re great little hubs
for things like hosting contests, or encouraging people to sign up to your e-
mail list. Just search for a particular kind of app in Facebook's search bar,
e.g., "contest app" and chances are it will be automatically suggested to you
and can be installed in just a 
few clicks. Apps can also be used to cross-
promote your other social profiles like Pinterest, Instagram, YouTube,
Twitter, etc. One of the best ways to populate custom tabs to appear exactly
as you desire (with branded design, links, etc.) is with the free Static HTML
iframe app. To get started, simply find and install the Static HTML iframe
app via the Facebook search bar. If the relatively basic coding required by the
Static HTML iframe app is beyond your knowledge (and you don't have a
developer to help you), check out "freemium" services like Pagemodo
(
http://www.pagemodo.com
) and Woobox 
(
http://www.woobox.com
) that,
through a simple step-by-step process, will allow you to build customized
custom tabs.
Add a Facebook Page Plugin and share buttons to your website 
 
To promote your Facebook Page on your website, grab the code for a
Facebook Page Plugin (formerly the “Like Box” at
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/plugins/page-plugin 
and embed it into
a suitable spot on your website. When you set up the plugin, make sure to
check the options to “Show Friends’ Faces” and “Show Page Posts, as this
will ensure that the plugin shows viewers the profile photos of any of their
friends who already like your Page, as well as a scrollable, clickable preview
of your most recent status updates. Although most Facebook Page Plugins are
placed in website sidebars, some people have had success by inserting the
widget 
underneath 
blog posts. In this position, the plugin works as part of a
call to action, e.g. 
"Did you enjoy reading my blog post? Yes? Then, click
"Like" to stay updated on Facebook..."
In addition to the Facebook Page Plugin, embed the Facebook "Like" and
"Share” buttons on top of, beside, or underneath the blog posts and products
on your website. Doing this encourages people to broadcast their love for
your work to their friends and also lets them choose how they want to do it:
"Like" posts links to Facebook with one click, while "Share" allows them to
add a personalized message before posting. Grab the code for these buttons
by searching the web for 'Facebook Like button' (Google 'Facebook Likebutton') or by visiting the Facebook Developers' page at
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/plugins/like-button/, 
or automatically
via a service like AddThis (
http://www.addthis.com
).
Note: 
For access to all kinds of official Facebook brand assets for you to use
online and offline (including Facebook logos and "Find Us on Facebook"
badges) simply visit 
https://www.facebookbrand.com/
Get set up for customer service via Facebook Page and Messenger
As explained in a previous chapter, the role of social networks as a customer
service portal is growing all the time, and if you’re active on your Page, then
Facebook fans will expect you to respond to their queries, either directly on
the Page, via private message or via Messenger. 
Many people prefer instant messaging as it can be used to resolve issues
easier and faster. There are a number of different ways that you can leverage
Messenger to help you accomplish your specific goals, including responding
to customers one-on-one in a prompt manner; using chatbots to track orders,
help customers 
discover new products and purchase; and using Messenger
ads to encourage people to contact you through Messenger.
Business Rules for Facebook Messenger
There are several key ground rules laid out by Facebook about how to use
Messenger for business. The most important ones you need to know about
are:
Standard Messaging: Pages have up to 24 hours to respond to a
user, and messages sent within the 24-hour window may
contain promotional content.
Message Tags: Businesses can send 1:1 updates to users who
have opted into them. This can happen outside of the 24-hour
standard messaging rules, and it can only be for important and
“personally relevant updates," like updates on their order
status.
Subscription messaging: Only Pages that are registered with
the Facebook News Page Index (NPI) can send non-
promotional subscription messages.
Sponsored messages: Businesses are able to send promotional
content outside the 24-hour standard messaging window, but
they need to pay to do so via Facebook Ads' Sponsoredmessages.
Chatbots need to respond within 30 seconds: If you’re using a
chatbot on Messenger, you’ll need to ensure it is quick and
accurate.
In short, really, the takeaway is that you need customers to reach out to you
before you can contact them (Sponsored messages aside), and when they do
contact you, you need to reply quickly.
To begin the setup and optimization of Messenger for business, you’ll need to
enable people to message you directly in the Messaging section of your
Facebook Page Settings. Visitors to your Page will then see a “Message”
button, which they can use to start a conversation with you on Messenger.
Facebook’s unified inbox, accessed via the Inbox link on your Facebook
Page, will help you seamlessly manage all of your conversations across
Facebook and Instagram.
How customers can connect via the Messenger app
To make it easier for people to identify and contact you, as
mentioned previously, your Page has 
a unique username (e.g.
@500socialmediatips). Your username will appear directly on
your Page, underneath your Page title with an @ symbol before
it, and in the search of the Messenger app. Pages that already
have a vanity URL already have a username, because a Page’s
username and vanity URL are the same.
Messenger Links and Messenger Codes prompt direct
communication
 with your business. Messenger Links use a
Page’s username to create a short and memorable link
(m.me/500socialmediatips) that, when clicked, opens a
conversation with the business in Messenger. Messenger Codes
work in the same way. They’re unique codes that people can
scan in Messenger using the camera in their phones to open a
thread with your business. You can use Messenger Links and
Messenger Codes in ads, on your website or in any other
marketing channel to prompt people to reach out to you
directly. Messenger Code images are available to download
from your Page’s inbox.Manage customer service introductions and expectations with Instant
Greetings and Instant Replies; set up Saved Replies for quick response
times.
You want to drive people to Messenger so that you can have direct
conversations with them, addressing whatever needs or questions they have
in a personal, private conversation - Instant Greetings are a great way to do
that. It allows you to have a Messenger box for your brand open up as soon
as a user navigates to your Page. Instant Greetings can display a message
encouraging users to ask a questions (or be left blank), but it does give
people a quick reminder that they can get in touch. To enable this feature,
look for the “Starting a Messenger Conversation” option in Settings ->
Messaging on your Facebook Page. In addition:
Instant Replies send a one-time, automatic response to the first
message a customer sends to your Page, e.g. Thanking them for
their message, reassuring them that you will respond soon,
pointing them to an online FAQ to help answer their query, etc.
Instant Replies will not be sent if your status for responding
messages is set to “Away” – which can be toggled on (for a
maximum of 12 hours) or off via the Messages (inbox) of your
Page.
If your Page receives the same query often, set up Saved
Replies in
 order to be able to fire back a quick response. To
create or select a new Saved Reply, click the speech bubble
icon in the message reply box and choose "Create New Reply".
Enter a title (for selecting it later), add the message body and
images, then add personalization that will be pre-populated
when the message is sent, such as the person's first and last
name. Saved Replies won’t only save you time, 
but will
impress customers (especially those eager and impatiently
waiting for your reply!) 
and 
help to maintain your Page’s
response rate.
Any time you’re away from your computer or phone, turn on
Away Messages to let customers know that you’ll get back to
them as soon as possible. This helps you keep your
responsiveness rating and set expectations with your
customers.Note: 
Another way to manage and serve your customers more efficiently is
by providing an easy way to see basic information about them, and tag them
with custom labels “frequent customer,” “high priority,” etc. Check it out
within Messenger in Facebook Business Suite. Tap the person's name to see
their publicly available profile, as well as their previous interactions with
your business.
One other key tidbit to aid in optimizing customer service on Facebook is
this: Facebook recommends that brands keep their messaging succinct and to
the point - and ideally, readable within the message preview that appears
when customers receive a notification of your replies. This approach is more
likely to facilitate positive response.
Explore using chatbots in Facebook Messenger
In addition to manual Messenger chat, chatbots are fast becoming a
gamechanger. Chatbots allow you to scale the number of people you can
communicate with and give you the ability to reach more people, helping
them purchase more products through an automated process. Best of all, tools
like ManyChat 
(https://manychat.com/
) and ChatFuel 
(
https://chatfuel.com/
)
mean that anybody can quickly and easily create powerful chatbots for
business. Here are several ways chatbots can be used to boost your
Messenger game:
Deliver your content: 
Rather than sharing your content via
email, use a
 chatbot to share it directly with users in
Messenger. They can ignore an email much more easily than
they can a chat notification.
Help fans find the most relevant content: 
you can also use
Facebook
 Messenger chatbots to help your followers “pull”
content to themselves, rather than pushing it to you. This turns
things around for content marketing. You now have a non-
intrusive way to deliver personalized content to your target
audience.
Engage event attendees: 
Provide attendees information before
(a reminder
 of the event schedule), during (key information,
video replays), and after (follow-up asking for feedback) an
event to keep them in the know.Re-engage your potential customers with Messenger ads
Facebook ads are an effective
 way to get people chatting with you.
There are two types of Facebook Messenger ads: click-to-Messenger
ads allows you to direct people from the Facebook News Feed to a
Messenger conversation with you. Meanwhile, Sponsored Messages
allows you to initiate a Messenger conversation with anyone who has
messaged your Facebook Page within the past 30 days. Here are a
selection of ways to put Messenger ads to good use:
Re-engage customers: 
A great way to use Facebook Messenger ads is
to re-engage potential customers, like people who have visited your
website but didn’t purchase, or people who have asked you questions
via Facebook Messenger before. For example, you can use click-to-
Messenger ads to offer to encourage them to ask questions or
Sponsored Messages to send relevant content and offers to them.
Generate sales leads: 
Run click-to-Messenger ads to target
your audience on
 Facebook. When a person clicks on the ad to
learn more, they will be taken to a Messenger conversation
with a chatbot that would ask a series of questions.
Manage your Facebook Page with Business Suite
Although you can manage your Facebook presence by visiting your Page
directly, Facebook Business Suite exists as a single place across mobile and
desktop to access the tools you need to help you thrive across Facebook (and
Instagram). Business Suite includes tools like posting updates and stories,
messaging, insights and advertising capabilities; a time saving tool that frees
you up to focus on other areas of your business.
To get the most out of Business Suite, first link your Facebook and Instagram
business accounts via Settings if they aren’t already. To access Business
Suite, log into the Facebook account associated with your business. Then,
you’ll automatically be redirected to Business Suite when you visit
business.facebook.com
 on desktop.Facebook Marketing Strategy
Now that your Facebook Page is looking great and you’re encouraging
people to visit it, let's explore some ways that you can make the most
effective use of the platform, in conjunction with the content strategy ideas
described in the previous chapter. But first, some very important
considerations:
Pin important posts
Facebook allows you to pin a single post to the top of your Page's timeline for
up to a week. Use this to feature important content and make it more visible
to fans who visit your Page. All new status updates will appear below the
pinned post until it is unpinned (or a week elapses), whereupon it will fall
into its original chronological position. After creating a post, hover over it
until the pencil icon appears, click it and choose 'Pin to Top'. In particular,
posts to consider pinning 
include special announcements, contents,
promotions, etc.
Boost interaction with Facebook-embedded posts
In August 2013, Facebook rolled out the ability to embed personal profile or
Page posts into an external website. Use embedded posts to lift conversations
from your Facebook Page to help encourage and boost interaction with your
statuses in places away from the site, such as part of a blog post, or even in an
e-mail newsletter as a way to drive readers to your Page. As long as the status
update you post is public, 
anybody 
can embed it from your Facebook Page or
embed it from wherever else it appears, which - if your status is really
shareable - could give your Page and content a lot of exposure. Embedded
posts even include buttons for viewers to "Like", comment, and Share the
post, 
and 
a button to "Like" your page.
How to embed a Facebook post
1
. 
Hover over the post you want to embed, left-click on the arrow
that appears, and choose "Embed Post".
2
. 
Copy the code that appears and paste it as HTML on your
website or blog.Re-post top-notch content, but don't be spammy about it
Since not everyone checks their Facebook News Feed all day every day, and
only a small proportion of your fans will see your content first time around, if
you have a killer article or link to share, post it several times as a way for as
many of your fans to see it as possible. However, make a concerted effort to
share the information under different guises, e.g., different wording in the
text, an image with a link, a link share post, etc. Facebook will penalize your
reach if you publish the exact same status over and over, as it has found
people react negatively to "copy and paste" posts.
Encourage engagement but avoid engagement baiting
To encourage higher click-through rates from Facebook and other social
media to your website, being specific about what you want your customers to
do using a clear call to action is often a good bet, e.g., 
"Click here for more
information [your link]"
. Sometimes that little push can make all the
difference between a successful status and one that sinks without a trace.
However, it is worth pointing out that Facebook periodically updates its
News Feed algorithm to crack down on so-called engagement baiting – in
tagging, comments, and links. 
An example of tag-baiting might look like: “Want to see what’s
behind the curtain? Tag a friend, and if we get 100 friends
tagged, we’ll reveal!”
An example of comment-baiting might look like: “Comment
NO if you’re against wearing socks with sandals!”
An example of link-baiting might look like: "You'll never
believe who puked on the red carpet last night... CLICK to see
our exclusive pic!"
Facebook wants you to publish valuable content and foster authentic
engagement, so if it spots that your fans are being tricked into reading
deceptive articles or baited into engaging, any similar posts in the future will
be singled out to receive less visibility in the News Feed. Facebook will even
notice if you’re engagement-baiting in the audio of videos, so if you’re
thinking of posting anything even near stuff like the examples above… it’s
best not to.
Guarantee views with "Follow" and “Favorites” strategy 
 One tactic that can be used to all-but guarantee that fans see all of your Page's
content is to train them to select the "Follow “option, found in the ellipsis
(…) drop-down underneath your Page's cover photo. With this selected,
every time you post a new status update, the fans in question will be much
more likely to see your new content appear at the top of that users’ News
Feed. These requests are best communicated through a status update with a
screen grab of the menu to demonstrate the exact action that you wish them
to take. Whether or not you are comfortable with asking at the risk of
appearing pushy is up to you; you should make this judgment based on the
strength of the relationship you have with your audience. If you do decide to
do it, I wouldn't force it upon fans very often, particularly as they are unlikely
to be right on your Page when they see your instructions appear, and even
more unlikely to click through and carry out the instructions.
Maximize the impact of pre-recorded video on Facebook
The emergence of video content on Facebook has changed the landscape of
the social network. In many cases it pays to upload engaging video content
directly to the site, rather than, for example, sharing a YouTube link. This is
because native Facebook video is given more favorable treatment in terms of
reach (but keep an eye on your analytics to see how things go). If the video is
"evergreen" in nature (i.e., it's still as relevant in the future as it is now), why
not post the video twice - once by uploading directly to Facebook and at a
later date via a shared YouTube link?
Strategies to maximize the impact of videos uploaded to Facebook
Videos uploaded to Facebook play automatically and 
with
audio on (unless a user’s phone is on silent) - when a user
pauses on it while scrolling through their News Feed. With that
in mind, consider how you will hook your fans into watching
your clip (and turn the sound on if it is off) from the very first
frame – catching someone’s eye with movement in the first 2-3
seconds is one way to do this, or if a person is seen talking in
front of the camera, fans who are interested will click to hear
what’s being said. Alternatively, publishing videos (
with
captions if necessary) that do not require sound to be
understood, is another popular strategy – especially for mobile
viewers for who playing audio (in a public setting, forexample) is not an option. As well as creating captions within
the video file yourself, another option is to upload an SRT file,
which adds captions to your videos. There’s an added benefit to
SRT files: Facebook favors videos that include them because it
can analyze the content, which helps the site show it to the
right people, which can in turn benefit you.
Organize videos into playlists and series. Doing so enables
Facebook to better suggest related content to viewers,
increasing the likelihood that they will discover and watch
more of your videos. On Facebook, a playlist is a collection of
videos that shares a particular theme or a topic, while videos in
a series bring together a sequential set of videos together in
chronological order. Page managers can create, manage, edit,
and reorder playlists within Facebook’s Creator Studio.
Playlists also have a unique URL, so you can share them on or
of Facebook to help maximize interest.
Select a Featured Video will appear in a prime position below
the "About" section of your Page - a great opportunity for an
introductory video to your business, or to highlight a current
promotion.
Add descriptive tags to make your video more discoverable,
tag people
 featured in your videos, and select the best
thumbnail available from the menus that appears after the file
has been uploaded (or upload your own custom image – 1920 x
1200 pixels will fit fine). Don't forget to grab the video embed
code to include in a blog post on your website to encourage
more exposure and interaction – choose between embedding
the whole status update, or just the video player itself for a
cleaner look.
Once a video has finished uploading, select whether you'd like
to auto-generate captions, write them yourself or upload a
SubRip (.srt) file. Video captions will automatically show if a
user is watching your video with sound off, making it instantly
more accessible.
Organic post testing - which is available in the 'Content
Library' section in Creator Studio - lets you to test up to four
different variations of a video post against one another, in orderto find a "winner" to publish to your Page. The tool enables
you to try out different variations of your video posts, which
are shared with a 
small sample of your audience. Afterwards,
you'll receive insights into which post saw the most response,
and you can publish that post to your full audience.
Note: 
If you're looking for free music and sound effects for videos you share
to Facebook or Instagram, check out the Facebook Sound Collection
(
https://www.facebook.com/sound/collection/
). Browse sounds by genre,
mood, length, and vocals to find just the right tracks.
The video content you choose to post should reflect the same types of stuff
referred to in the 
“Explained: The Best Type of Content to Post on Social
Media” 
chapter of this book.
Experiment with Stories and Reels on Facebook
Facebook Stories
In August 2018, Facebook gave Page owners the ability to share Page Stories
with their fans. Page Stories are almost identical to Instagram Stories,
allowing you to share photos and videos - short, relatable, and fleeting
moments that represent your brand or business - directly from your mobile
device. Often peppered with colorful text and stickers (that can prompt
viewers to Shop Now, Book Now, Call Now, or Get Directions directly from
within the Stories feed, with each button mirrors the existing call-to-action
options available in the main header of business pages, Page Stories are a
way to engage your audience in a more frequent, authentic and casual way in
order to develop deeper connections, and can be a key strategy to increase the
humanized and community-driven appeal of the site that Facebook
encourages. Their “rough around the edges” and quick creation makes Stories
a compelling accompaniment to your more polished, ordinary Page posts.
What's more, people can view your Page story by tapping on your mobile
page's profile picture, and they also appear to followers of your Page at the
very top of the News Feed in a highly visible area - separate from the intense
competition and crowded nature the main News Feed.
To create and share Stories to Facebook:
1. Visit your Page on the Facebook app and tap "..." in the top-right corner.
2. Tap "Open Camera" and create your Story.3. When you're finished, tap the "+Page Story" icon to share it with your
audience.
Note: 
For tons of tips about maximizing the use of Stories, see the Instagram
Tips chapter.
Facebook Reels
After a successful rollout on Instagram, Reels arrived on Facebook in the fall
of 2021. Reels gives you a way to record 90-second clips set to music, which
can be shared on Facebook Stories, sent as DMs, or added to the Reels tab on
your profile or in groups
.
The ‘Single Theme’ group setting makes it easy to prompt members to share
their Reels. For example, you could prompt group members to, say, post
videos all performing a given task or reaction, which could spark a new
engagement trend in your group, and prompt further interaction within the
community.
What's really interesting about Reels is that they can reach everyone, not just
your existing followers. People can discover reels based on their interests and
what’s popular both at the top of News Feed alongside Stories and in a
dedicated News Feed section. When viewing a reel on Facebook, people can
easily follow the creator directly from the video, like and comment on it, or
share it with friends.
Note: 
For more tips about maximizing the use of Reels, see the Instagram
Tips chapter.
Utilizing Live Video on Facebook
In February 2016, Facebook rolled out its "Live" feature worldwide.
Facebook Live is a function that allows people to record and (after the fact)
publish live video streams to Facebook via its mobile app or via your desktop
webcam. To record live video, you can simply tap on Update Status and
choose the Live Video icon. You can write a quick description and choose
the audience that you want to share with (your Page, Event, or group) before
going live.
Note:
 Facebook's Live Producer allows you to go Live on Facebook using
higher-end production equipment and streaming software or a desktop /
laptop camera. Live Producer can be accessed from any entry point to Livefrom a Page and at facebook.com/live/producer.
During your broadcast, you’ll see the number of live viewers, the names of
friends who are tuning in and a real-time stream of comments and reactions.
When your live video session ends, you’ll get immediate insights into how
many people watched your broadcast (including the number of concurrent
watchers, repeat viewers, and how many stayed until the end). Your live
video can then be published onto your Timeline, where it can be watched
again by anyone who missed it (use a description to tell people why they
should click play), or you can consider paid promotion for added exposure.
Strategies to improve your Facebook Live strategy
With the spontaneity of some live video, many viewers will
miss your streams
 without proper notice. Where possible, pre-
schedule your live stream video within Video Manager to build
anticipation and allow viewers the option to mark their
calendars so that they can be reminded to tune in. Scheduling
not only creates a post on your Facebook page that alerts your
fans, but if you click the time stamp on the post, you’ll also get
a unique URL you can share anywhere to help spread the word.
If your Facebook Page has a Shop, think about combining the
two to broadcast your own infomercial-style broadcast. When
you mention your products in a live broadcast, you can tag
them in your video, allowing viewers to watch your live stream
and access a link directly from the stream, where they can
purchase your product right within Facebook. After your video
has uploaded, click the Tag Products icon, enter the names of
the products featured in your video, and click Publish when
you're done.
Add a descriptive title. Facebook recommends crafting a
descriptive
 title that will make the video easily searchable.
With Facebook seeing billions of searches every day, it's worth
the little extra effort.
Include a call-to-action. While Facebook has removed the call-
to-action
 functionality for videos, there are still several free
ways to add a CTA to your Facebook video. In your post copy,you could include a link to a blog post or website and invite
viewers to find out more information by clicking on the link.
You could also simply ask your audience to share their
thoughts as comments. During the video, you could mention a
CTA if you are talking in the video or use a text overlay. At the
end of the video, you could have a text overlay or a static
image with a CTA and let the video play for a few seconds
after the actual content ends.
Encourage interaction by asking your viewers questions to
reply to in the comments, or by posting a poll. You may not
have time to respond to every comment and question 
from
viewers during a broadcast (and some people may join as
you’re about to finish) so make sure to respond to comments
just after the show has gone off the air. Also check in regularly
to address comments made on the replay, especially if you
asked your audience to share the link with their friends while
you were live.
Featured Links let you prominently display a link to a website
during a live broadcast. This link can be used to direct viewers
to a store, to share important information, prompt donations,
etc. Featured Links must be set up in Live Producer before
your broadcast begins and links cannot be edited once the
stream starts. Once you're live, you'll be able to control when to
show the featured link to your viewers. Featured links appear
for 15 seconds, and do not populate on the screen after the Live
ends, when it becomes a "was Live" video.
After recording, publish your recorded video and use the
caption to provide a preview of its content.
 Taking the time to
watch a video can be a stretch for some, so it helps to provide a
little information about your video so that people can quickly
decide if it’s worth their time. Facebook recommends “pulling
out a key quote or moment from the video as the text
component of your post” in order to set up the expectations of
what the viewer will see.
Another method by which you can spread the reach of yourFacebook
 video is by tagging other Pages that either
contributed to it, or that you would like to make aware of the
video.
If you regularly live-stream from a business Page, organize
your replays into
 video playlists to make it easy for people to
find 
episodes on specific themes after the event. Navigate to
the Videos tab and you to create a playlist from there.
The Video Clipping feature allows you create specific excerpts
from your Live and save them as new individual files. The new
clips are automatically added to your Content Library in your
video Creator Studio so you can then easily repurpose your
Facebook Live videos by creating new posts with the clips -
and also feature them in ads.
For more ideas and insights into the benefits of using live video on Facebook
and other platforms, check out the 
“Explained: The Best Types of Content to
Post on Social Media” 
chapter of this book.
Use hashtags to encourage engagement and conversation
In June 2013, Facebook joined sites like Twitter and Pinterest by rolling out
the use of hashtags, which appear as clickable links in Page and personal
profile updates and in posts on the News Feed. People can use hashtags in
Facebook search to discover posts related to specific topics or interests.
Billions of pieces of content are shared on Facebook every day - peaking in
the 8-11pm primetime slot - so hashtags provide a huge opportunity for
brands and marketers to participate in conversations in a meaningful, relevant
and timely way. While the use of hashtags hasn't blown up in the way
Facebook imagined it might, used sparingly they still can be of benefit.
Several ways to use hashtags effectively on Facebook
Since most brands will be trying to keep the length of
Facebook copy to a minimum (most research shows that
shorter post captions deliver better engagement than long
ones), using just one or two hashtags per post is a good idea.
Research by Track Maven found that using a single hashtag in
a Facebook post generated more engagement than usingseveral.
As well as your own branded hashtags, so-called news-jacking
hashtags can be a powerful way to piggyback on widespread
events that are popular amongst your fans - and a way for
people who haven't discovered your brand yet, to perhaps
stumble across it.
Discover new Pages and partners by scouring for specific
hashtags in
 Facebook search and track your own hashtags to
monitor what people are saying about you and your brand, then
join the conversation.
Ask for Likes and Shares – and invite Likers to Like your Page
Ask users to 'Like' and Share your content when you post, so that it will be
shared on their walls and in their News Feeds, therefore increasing exposure
for your Page. Don't appear desperate by doing it too often (Facebook will
limit the reach on these types of posts if you do, especially if the content
associated with the post is poor) and word your request in a way that endears
you to your fans. Buddy Media found that action keywords like “post,”
“comment,” “take,” “submit,” “like” or “tell us” are the most effective. Be
direct in your request and fans will 
listen and take action. Enhance the
experience by creating a community that encourages your fans to discuss
topics and interact with each other within the comments. Did you know, too,
that you can invite people who liked a post but 
haven’t 
liked your Page, to do
so? When a post has had more than a handful of likes, the message below it
will read “[name], [name], [name], and [number] of others liked this.” Click
on the “others liked this” bit for a list of everyone who liked that post and a
notice of whether they have liked your Page or not (the chances are that many
people will only see your post as a result of someone else engaging with it
and their being notified). If they haven’t liked your Page, you can click
“Invite” next to their name to send them a notification asking them if they’d
like to. If they’ve enjoyed your content once, there’s a greater chance they’ll
be open to seeing it again.
Note: 
On a somewhat related point - and here's an opportunity to create
common bonds and emotional ties between your brand and fans - did you
know you can humanize your Facebook Page updates by sharing what your
business is feeling, watching, reading, listening to, drinking, eating, playing,traveling to, looking for or exercising? Just click on the smiley face in the
status update box and select one of the options.
Encourage your fans to react to posts to boost reach
Facebook offers five reactions to every published post - Love, Haha, Wow,
Sad, and Angry. In the spring of 2017, a Facebook spokesperson revealed
that the site's News Feed algorithm judges reactions to be 
more 
valuable than
just likes. A reaction, they say, is an even stronger signal that a person wants
to see more of that type of post. For businesses, that means getting people to
use them is more important than ever. So, how do you make people express
an emotion stronger than a like? Make them feel it – in your captions and
visuals! Use this strategy when sharing links, too. A lot of people share,
comment on, and react to Facebook links without actually clicking on them
first. In addition, asking fans to respond to an informal poll is an effective
way to solicit reactions. Ask them to match their reaction to a particular
answer choice.
Note: 
Facebook has laid out two important of rules regarding the use of
reactions. First, the reaction – if you ask for one directly should match the
emotional intent of the post, e.g. "Choose "love" if you think this puppy is
cute!". Second, don't use reactions to conduct polls via a video, where the
whole recording consists of static or looping graphics or images. Fail to
follow them and you could see your post reach negatively impacted.
Encourage reviews and Recommendations
Local business Pages have always been able to feature ratings and reviews on
their Page, but in the summer of 2018, Facebook updated Reviews and
Ratings to Recommendations. Recommendations allow customers to share
richer feedback about your business to help you become more visible in your
local area:
Facebook users can indicate whether they recommend your
business with a simple "Yes" or "No” option, and can explain
their opinion with tags, text and photos.
Recommendations can be created directly on a Page, as a
comment on a friend's post asking for Recommendations, or
via a prompt after tagging a Page in a photo or post.
Recommendations given publicly across appear on the Reviews
tab.As mentioned, Recommendations appear on your Page and are discoverable
across Facebook when people are searching for or talking about your
business. The opinions of the people they know and trust - their friends and
family - will be surfaced most prominently. When a review is left for a
business, a status update is created that goes out to the News Feed of that
customers' friends, along with the business' cover and profile photo and its
star rating. So, as a way to spread awareness of your business, after their
purchase from you, encourage customers to post a Recommendation or
review of your business.
Real-life location? Encourage check-ins from customers 
 
When a user views your Page and business information on the Facebook
mobile app, they’ll also be shown information like which of their friends
have visited and checked in and whether they or the wider Facebook
community has recommended you with photos, star ratings and reviews.
Knowing this, it pays to encourage people to “check-in” if you have a real-
life location. Display notices in prominent areas of your establishment, such
as the entrance, on receipts and at the point of sale, to prompt customers to
get out their smartphones, check-in and inform their friends of where they
are, encouraging them to visit too. 
Add Timeline milestones; use as marketing opportunities
Facebook allows you to add Milestones in the history of your business (past
and present) on your Page by scrolling through and marking dates on your
timeline (e.g. when the business was established, your 1000th sale, etc.).
These help flesh out your company history and can give customers a
fascinating insight into your growth over the months and years (particularly if
you were in business way before Facebook came on the scene). You can even
use upcoming milestones as a way to connect with customers and provide
them with an incentive to remain engaged, e.g., 
"Here's to each and every
one of you for helping us reach 20,000 fans! Check back tomorrow at 6pm
for a special promotion to say thanks!"
Create Facebook Offers
If at least 50 people have liked your Page, you can create an Offer on your
Facebook Page. When a fan claims an offer, they'll receive an email and
notifications reminding them that they can show at your business' physical
location or a code to enter online so that they can get the discount. Offers areuseful in promoting special deals, rewarding loyal fans, and encouraging
them to spread the word about your business to their friends. To create an
offer from your Page, click 
Offer, Event + and click Offer from the top of the
status update box. Fill out the details to make your offer shine, including
Headline, Image, redemption link, start date, and expiration date. Preview
your offer in the top left and make any changes, then click Post Offer.
When you create an Offer, you'll also have the opportunity to boost its reach
with paid ads. You can see how many people were genuinely interested - how
many people viewed your offer, how many people clicked on it, and how
many people used it if you're using a Conversions or Store Traffic advertising
objective with your offer ad.
Some pointers to help run a successful offer include:
Make offer discounts substantial (at least 20% off a product or
service,
 or the opportunity to get something else free when
purchasing is recommended for the best results) and ensure that
they are exclusive to Facebook fans.
Keep your offer and its terms and conditions simple and give
people a
 reasonable amount of time in which to claim it (this
also allows them time to spread the word about your great deal
to their friends) – 7 days is ideal.
Use simple and direct language in your headline to reduce any
confusion, and showcase the value of the deal your fans will
get, rather than just using a slogan.
Use a clear and engaging image to represent your offer. Photos
of people using your product or enjoying your service often
perform best.
Pin the offer to the top of your Page for added visibility and
train your
 staff so that they are prepared when a customer
wants to redeem their offer.
Facebook contest strategy for success
As of August 2013, Facebook re-allowed contests to be administered 
on Page
Timelines
, not just through third-party apps like Woobox, Shortstack, and
Heyo. Businesses can:Collect entries by having users post on the Page or comment/like a Page post
(e.g., "
Like this post for a chance to win one of our new sandwich toasters -
releasing March 21!" or "Comment with a funny caption for this photo - the
one that makes us laugh the most / gets the most likes wins X prize."
 or 
"Post
a photo in the comments of you using our product - our favorite will win X
prize."
 or 
"Suggest a new menu item in the comments below - our favorite
will go into production and the inventor will win X prize!"
 Another spin on
this entry method is to ask viewers to comment and tag a friend to enter.
Your fans will tag friends who would be interested in winning the prize and
this will drive interest in your Page and product or service. This route works
best if you can reward the winning commenter and their tagged friend with a
prize, e.g., dinner for two at your 
restaurant, or two free gifts of your product.
Collect entries by having users message the Page (e.g., 
"For your chance to
win this fantastic sweatband, message us using the button above and tell us
why you deserve to win!"
) or utilize 'Likes' as a voting mechanism, e.g.,
"Help us choose our next smoothie flavor. Click 'like' to vote on your favorite
pic and we'll choose one lucky person to win a $20 gift card with us!"
Note: 
Free tools like Agorapulse’s Timeline Contest page
(
http://contest.agorapulse.com/
) provide an easy way to host and select
winners from Timeline sweepstakes, quizzes, or photo contests.
While creating a promotion on a Page Timeline is faster, easier and cheaper
(great for a spontaneous giveaway for example, but more likely to attract
poor quality entrants), third-party apps - while requiring a small fee - still do
have many advantages. I would certainly recommend them over Timeline-
only contests for bigger and more serious campaigns. Advantages of apps
include:
A more professional and customizable campaign, more in line
with your branding strategy.
The ability to collect data (such as e-mail addresses) in a secure
and structured manner.
Easy to add "share" buttons to increase the virality of contest
once someone has submitted their entry.
Whichever type of contest you run on Facebook, there are still important
legal guidelines to follow, including offering terms of eligibility and releasingFacebook of any association. I urge you to read the 
Promotions on Pages,
Groups, and Events
 section of Facebook's Page Guidelines for a full
rundown
: 
https://www.facebook.com/page_guidelines.php
Publish and Promote Events on Facebook
Publicizing an event on Facebook is a popular method for generating buzz
and discussion about a brand, and a way to funnel potential customers to your
Page or Group to engage with you further - whether the occasion will occur
offline (like a store's grand opening) or online (like a live webinar or the start
of a sale). Facebook Events can be shared on Pages, in the News Feed, in
Messenger, and also appear in the site’s main Events section. Let’s look at
some essential tips and best practices for getting your Event seen by as many
people as possible and attracting new customers as a result!
Creating an event
You can create a Facebook Event using your personal profile, a Page, or a
Group. The exact instructions below relate to Pages, but the general strategies
will work for all Events in general. To create an event, click on the Create
Event option in the status update box, where you’ll be presented with a pop-
up window in which to fill out all the Event details
.
Event cover image
The recommended size for an Event cover image is 1200 x 628 pixels, or you
can upload a video between 30 seconds to 5 minutes long. Your Event cover
image acts as a marketing banner for your event, so design it to catch people's
attention with a bold image and color palette - whether they see it on desktop
or mobile.
Event name
Keep the Event name clear and short, as long names can get cut off on certain
displays.
Event location and time
Add a location for the event and Facebook will generate a map to show
people where to go. A location will also mean that your event appears in
Facebook's Events Near Me section for users - free advertising, essentially. If
your event's start and end date is longer than two weeks apart, create two
separate events with their own time and location.Event Details
Utilize the space in the Details section to help secure the attendance of people
curious enough to view your Event page. After the first 10 or so lines, users
will have to tap or click to see the event's full details, so keep critical
information - like a reminder of the event name and location; a link to where
tickets can be bought; and one snappy sentence that sums the event up and
why people can’t afford to miss it - "above the fold." Use the rest of the
Details section to include a bulleted list of things people can expect to do and
see at the event, a call-to-action to encourage their attendance (with another
link to tickets), and to share the event with friends. Use @mentions to tag the
names of the venue, sponsors, people or Pages appearing at the event, so
people can learn more about them. You can also use the Details section to let
people know that they can comment in the discussion section with any further
questions they might have, and that you'll get back to them with an answer
ASAP.
Keywords, co-hosts, and ticket URL
Before publishing your Event, you’ll see options to add
keywords, co-hosts, and a ticket link URL.
Adding relevant keywords allows Facebook to share your event
to the people who will most likely be interested in attending.
When you add Pages as a Co-host to your event, they will be
able to invite all of their friends and followers and the event
will be added to their Facebook calendars, so it's a great way to
build awareness.
If you're selling tickets to your event from an external source,
add your ticketing website link to
 the Ticket URL field. This
makes it easy for people to buy tickets and unlocks the ability
to create ads that can help drive ticket sales.
Note: 
If you have an Eventbrite ticket account, connect it to your
Facebook Page (Settings > Event Ticketing) to easily manage your events
and sell tickets right on Facebook.
Facebook's paid online events option enables businesses to
charge a one-time fee direct on Facebook for access to a virtualevent. Enabling an admission fee is done through the event set-
up process and is subject to eligibility.
Promoting the Event
When your Event is published, Facebook will create a post on your Page to
let your fans know it’s coming up and also add an Events section to your
Page where its listing will remain even when the initial post is long gone.
Both options give people the chance to indicate their interest or intention to
attend. To give your event even more exposure, you could:
Update your Page's cover photo to promote it, as well as update
the
 cover photo call-to-action button to feature your ticket site
link.
Pin your event post to the top of your Page to make sure it's the
first thing visitors to your Page see.
Re-order your Page sections (via Settings -> Edit Page) to
bring the Events section to the top in the run-up to it.
Invite another Page to co-host a paid online event to expose
your event to a new audience. Co-hosting lets other Pages add
the event to their own calendar so that their fans can see it and
RSVP.
Send up to 50 free invites to Page followers for a paid online
event, via the event details page. Seeing that others have
RSVP'd will encourage others to purchase access.
Events can also be promoted via paid ads, through the form of Boosting your
Event post - which converts it into an ad - or by creating custom ads via
Facebook's Ad Manager. While the former method is the quickest and easiest,
Facebook's main ads tool will offer you more targeting options, which often
means a more effective ad, and more bang for your buck. These include being
able to target people who have attended your events in the past, or those that
have simply shown interest. Both allow you to help you increase awareness,
RSVPs and ticket sales for your event on Facebook.
In addition to using ads to promote events created via a Facebook Page, you
can use Facebook event frames to build awareness - and encourage fans to do
the same. Event frames are profile and page photo overlays that your
attendees can use to promote the event to their friends, followers, and fans.To begin creating an event frame, use Facebook Frame Studio in the Camera
Effects Platform (
https://developers.facebook.com/products/frame-studio/
)
Gather leads and build brand awareness through Facebook Events:
If your event is ticketed (free or paid) through
 Eventbrite to
register attendees for your online or offline event, anyone who
registers for a 
ticket becomes a part of an exportable list of
contacts that you can use as a lead. An additional way to
capture leads using your Facebook events is to create lead ads
and ads for the lead generation pages on your website. Target
your ads to an audience of people who responded to your
Facebook event.
Stream live from your Facebook event to encourage viewers to
attend
 or to show them what they’re missing out on. In the
Facebook mobile app, go to your Facebook event. Tap the
status update box and look for the Go Live option.
Keep the magic of your event alive until the next one arrives.
After it’s
 over, thank attendees on the event page and remind
them when the next event will take place. Encourage attendees
to share their favorite stories, photos, and videos on the
Facebook Event page and their own profiles. Of course, you
can do the same on your own Page.
Use the event’s page to promote your Facebook group (if you
have one), so that event
 attendees can join to network with
other event attendees, organizers, speakers, and sponsors in a
more permanent location.
Facebook event attendees (or those who engaged with your
event
 page) can be used as part of a target audience in future
Facebook ad campaigns, meaning that you can promote your
business’ products, services, or future events to those who
engaged with your Event page.
Note: 
Page admins can easily repeat a Facebook event with the Create Repeat
Event option in the drop-down box on your Event page. In addition, to
prevent the need to invite fans to events within their area, you can invite them
to subscribe. When a fan subscribes, they will automatically be notified whenyour event is in their locality – ask them to subscribe by clicking on “Events”
below your Page’s cover photo and hitting Subscribe.
Reward and encourage people to become Top Fans
Top Fan badges are little icons that appear next to people's names when they
comment on your Page (and also be publicly visible on a top fans list on your
Page's Community tab) Top Fan badges are, in all honesty, something that
allows people to feel a bit special and to show off a bit. They are made
available to those who are the most active people on your Page, which can
include liking or reacting to content, and commenting on or sharing posts. 
As well as giving fans a little bit of prestige, Top Fan badges can be used as a
business opportunity. You could reward Top Fans with a little gift each
month, e.g. a 10% off voucher on their next purchase (announced publicly to
encourage others to work towards becoming Top Fans). And you also have
the ability to share posts only with Top Fans. This can be used as a way to
reveal exclusive information about upcoming products or events, give early
access to sale events, etc., and can be touted as another incentive to
encourage followers to engage more with your 
Page in order to become
eligible for Top Fan status and the perks that come with such dedication.
Cross-promote with (and on) other Facebook Pages
One of the most powerful ways to increase the amount of customers to visit
your Facebook Page and engage with your brand is to work with other Page
managers within your niche or businesses in your same locale. Get in touch
to discuss ways in which you can occasionally cross-promote each other’s
Pages, share posts, conjure up offers and increase exposure for your
businesses. For example, a children’s clothes store owner might connect with
a local ice-cream parlor - places that share the same clientele - to work a
cross-promotion arrangement on Facebook. Additionally, you might want to
communicate with other businesses to encourage them to add your Page to
the Featured "Likes" section of their Page and agree to do the same in return.
This works great with complementary products and services and helps spread
the word of your business, as Featured Pages sit prominently on your Page
and display on rotation depending on how many are set up. 
To add a featured Like on your Facebook Page:
1
. 
Visit and "Like" a complementary business while usingFacebook as your Page (or by clicking the three dots
underneath its cover photo, choosing "Like as Your Page..."
and selecting your company's Page if you're browsing under a
personal account).
2
. 
Return to your Page and click "Settings" and then "Featured"
on the next page. Under the "Likes" section, click "Add
Featured Likes" and choose the Pages that you would like to
showcase on your Page.
A more covert way of making your brand known (especially to the audience
of rivals in your business niche) is to engage and post relevant, friendly, and
useful (not spammy or self-promotional!) comments on statuses of their
Facebook Pages, posting under your Page's username (make sure you are
posting as your Page by clicking on the profile photo icon beneath the post
you want to comment on, and choosing your page from the drop-down
menu). Your profile photo and link to your Page will be visible with every
comment you make, hopefully encouraging people to visit and check you out.
Again, make your comments interesting, helpful, insightful, funny, witty,
charming, etc., to increase the chances of a click-through! The last thing you
want to do is come across as shady or desperate, especially like those 
"It's
Andrew from Andrew's Aardvark Farm - just dropping in to give you a Like!
Check us out!" 
kind of posts that commonly occur. If I ever see any type of
blatant self-promotion on my Page, it gets instantly deleted!
Track your progress
Use Facebook Insights (click "Insights" at the top of your Page) to track how
your Facebook Page is performing day by day and over a longer period of
time. The Likes tab displays your overall Page growth and where your
audience is finding you, while the Reach, Visits, and Post tabs will show you
which types of updates - 
text, links, video, etc. - are preferred by your
audience (click on individual posts for more detailed stats about engagement)
and at what times they are most likely to be on Facebook to digest your
activity. On the People tab, you'll be able to learn about the demographics of
your audience, including gender, age, language, and location. All of this data
is extremely useful in helping you to tweak and tailor your ongoing content
strategy and to deliver the kind of stuff that you know your fans will love.
Note: 
In February 2016, Facebook introduced Reactions - an extension of theLike button, that allows people to choose one of five additional emoticons to
communicate their feelings about a post (ordinary or a sponsored ad) – Love,
Haha, Wow, Sad, or Angry. You’ll find a breakdown of reactions to each
post in Insights; this extra sentiment-focused data will allow you to better tell,
in a quantitate manner, whether your audience is responding to your content
in the way you hope, especially those who in the past – without Reactions –
would not choose comment or found “Like” inappropriate.
Another notable section of Facebook Insights is Pages to Watch, a feature
that allows you to track a variety of metrics relating to your rivals' Facebook
activity, including the number of posts, engagement rates, and new Page
likes. Adding the competition to this list will enable you to keep an eye on
their performance to see what is (and what isn't) working for them, and you
can use this knowledge to influence and improve your own strategy. In
addition to direct competitors, it is often useful to pay attention to other
companies in a similar, but not identical, field, e.g., another retail or B2B
venture in your vicinity, as well brands that are unrelated to yours but which
your audience like and engage with. When researching others’ Page content
to build upon within your watch list, look for stuff that gets high engagement
(likes, comments, and shares), low engagement but the potential to improve
(that 
you 
can improve on for your Page), and specific trends within your
industry to capitalize upon.Utilizing Facebook Groups to Build Your Business
As brands battle for precious organic reach in the News Feed from Pages,
Facebook Groups provide a fresh avenue to cultivate a loyal community who
can interact with you and each other and could help to fill the gap lost in
organic reach over the years. Facebook Groups are a convenient way to
network with peers, strengthen relationships with current customers, or attract
new ones - whether you create your own or join one of the millions that
already exist – and can act as a powerful partner to an existing Facebook
Page.
Your own custom-made group can exist as a place to provide customer
support, promote upcoming events, get feedback on upcoming products, and
for customers to connect, collaborate, and share knowledge (all valuable
consumer insight for you!). To get the most benefit from groups, your aim
should be to position yourself as an authority figure: be active, give help, and
be genuine, i.e., not a huge focus on selling. Over time, your knowledge and
influence will be recognized and 
this will help to pique people's interest,
perhaps enough to make them want to consider your product or service. 
To create a group linked to your Facebook Page, click the three little dots
(…) at the top of your Page’s status bar and choose Create Group from the
drop-down menu.
Optimize your Group in 8 simple steps:
1
. 
Give your group a name and select a group type – Project,
Support, Team, etc. - to help people understand what the group
is about – from Group Settings. 
Note: 
If you aim to teach in your group, you may want to choose the
Social Learning group type, which is just like an ordinary group but
with extra features including group units, which allow you to organize
posts by topic or assign educational course content to members. Once
you’ve set the group type to Social Learning, you’ll see a Units tab in
the sidebar. Open the Units tab and click Create Unit. When members
have reviewed a post, they can mark it as complete by clicking “I’m
done.” You’ll be able to see completion stats in Group Insights.2
. 
Add a cover photo (the ideal photo size is 820 x 462 pixels);
check how it looks on desktop and mobile.
3
. 
Decide whether you want to interact in your group as your
Page or your individual personal profile name, by selecting
your choice from top-left of the group. 
4
. 
Write a description to tell people what the group is all about
and what it can be used for. It is not uncommon for group
admins to use this space to share information that they want the
entire group, especially new members, to know such as rules
and community guidelines.
5
. 
Add five tags to help people find your group; a mix of generic
and specific tags will work best. On the topic of tags, when you
later compose a group post, tag them with topics to help group
members easily find the information they're interested in. When
you compose a post, you'll be able to tag it with up to five
topics.
6
. 
If you are a local group, add your location so that people who
are looking for Facebook Groups in your area can find it more
easily.
7
. 
Customize your group URL. An easy-to-remember group URL
makes it simple for you to share a link to your Facebook group
in online communication and real-life marketing material.
8
. 
If you happen to have created a group 
not 
via your Facebook
Page, link your Group to your Facebook Page to make it
existence more visible and encourage fans to take a look, and
hopefully join. To link your Facebook Group to your Facebook
Page, choose the option within Group Settings.
9
. 
Promote your new group and encourage people to join. Hit the
Share button below your cover photo to share your Facebook
Group to different parts of Facebook: timeline, Messenger, and
Page.  In addition, hit the Invite button at the top of your group
to encourage active and Top Fans from your Facebook Page to
hop over and join in.
Building an effective group: essential strategy
Fostering an engaged Group community will strengthen your customers’
relationship with your brand, and this equity can then influence their futurepurchasing decisions. Here are three strategies to help build a strong and
loyal group audience:
Setup Membership Requests 
to ask up to three questions of group members
upon joining. You'll find the option on your group under More > Edit Group
Settings > Setup Membership Requests. For example, you could ask
questions including how they found the group, what their biggest struggles
are in relation to your brand's mission, etc. This is a fantastic way to see what
your future group members desire instantly, and an opportunity for you to
create and publish posts that serve their needs.
Engage with your group members regularly: 
When your group is new, there
might only be a few members and not a lot of posts from them. To help
kickstart discussion, take it upon yourself to introduce conversations on a
consistent basis, a couple of times per week. For example, you could
welcome new members every Monday, initiate a topical discussion every
Wednesday, and invite members to share their weekend plans on a Friday. At
least in the initial few months, I would recommend that you comment on
every post and answer every question in your Facebook group to ensure your
members feel heard and that they feel like they are getting value from being
an active member of the community.
Note: 
Add a topic to posts by using a hashtag before a keyword or phrase,
which can be pinned to the top of the group. You can also use Groups’ real-
time chats, conversation starter prompts, and Q and A tools to host interviews
and boost engagement.
Feature popular and/or active group members outside of the group
, on your
Facebook Page and in other locations. You can find out who these people are
from the More Member Details section of your Group Analytics. Compliment
the individual, explaining what they bring to the group as a way to encourage
new members to join.
At least once per week, thank your most engaged members 
as a way to keep
them motivated to post regularly. Like Facebook Pages, Groups include
analytics for you to monitor your group’s performance (those with 250
members, at least) and you can use these to develop your group-building
strategy. You can find monitor insights like your Facebook Group is growing,
when your members are most engaged, and 
who your most engaged membersare. With this data, you can learn to post on days and at times when
engagement is high, track active membership growth, and thank your most
active group members.
Note: 
If you trust someone enough and want to bestow more prestige upon
them (thus increasing their brand loyalty), promote them to become an admin
or moderator of the group. The latter will, as well, give you some extra eyes
on helping to police any spam or other unwanted posts that might appear and
free your time up to focus on building your business in other ways.
A lot of group content can reflect what you might post on your Page, 
but with
a little tweak or a twist to make it exclusive and worthwhile the group
members' time. Tried and tested content like running a poll, starting a debate,
quizzing members or asking them to join a discussion in a live video, or
sharing an actionable, “quick win” tip will always go down well.
Host regular events: 
Hosting events is a great way to get community
members involved (and maybe even attract inactive members back to the
community). Examples of events that you can hold include Q&As with an
expert from your company, panel discussions about a particular topic, and
where possible, real-life get-togethers to re-enforce relationships made
online.
The Q&A post option allows you to lead real-time question-and-answer
sessions, while the Get Together post option makes it easy to set up a
gathering with your group members. Compose a brief description, select a
time, and determine a location. Group members will be notified of the get
together with an invitation. Asking people to show their interest will help
generate buzz and they'll receive a notification closer to the time as well.
Note:
 Group admins can designate members, admins and moderators as
group experts to help people find content by members who are
knowledgeable about topics the group cares about. If they accept the role,
they’ll be featured in the Group Experts section of the member list, and
they’ll receive a badge that displays on their posts, comments and group
profile. To designate someone an expert, from the Members area of your
Group, select the member you want to make a group expert, click the three
dots, and select Add as group expert.Host a group video call discussion with Messenger Rooms
The Messenger Rooms feature in Groups allows you to create dedicated
group Rooms in which you can host video chats of up to 50 people at a time.
Once created, group members will be able to share a link to the Room to
invite people, including those who aren't members of the group. Inviting non-
members could be a good way to give potential new members a taste of the
group and what its discussions are all about. To create a room in a group,
click Create Room at the top of the group. Then enter a room activity, choose
an emoji, write something about the room and click post it
.
Crowdsource from your group: 
Use your group as a place to gather information that you can use as content
and marketing elsewhere, like testimonials, product reviews, or a personal
story connected to your brand that you can use as the basis for a blog post or
video. Utilizing the Prompts post option is a good way to generate interaction
– an eye-catching and simple way to get group members to share and browse
stories related to whatever the topic is.
Host a Watch Party with group members:
Watch Party is a feature that lets a group owner share video streaming
sessions, with everyone in the group being able to see and comment on the
same videos at the same time - a fun and interactive way to foster
engagement in your community around videos that you or others have
uploaded. Starting a Watch Party is just like posting anything else to a
group’s wall - just choose the Watch Party button under the status update
box. Write a catchy description to encourage group members to participate,
search for Facebook-hosted videos to add to a playlist you want to view, then
send out invites. Once a few people have joined the party, the stream will
begin. Once the Watch Party is over, a post will be available in your group
for members to comment upon and discuss what was watched. Use this post
as a way to initiate post-viewing conversations and remind people when the
next Watch Party will happen.
Utilize similar groups for exposure: 
If a search on Facebook (or LinkedIn)
shows that there are other groups in your business niche, full of people who
you think would like what you do, here's a way to bring you to their attention:
reach out to the group administrator and ask them nicely if you can feature
them and their group in an interview for your blog, podcast, etc. Once the(very flattering!) interview is live, provide the link to the group admin and
ask if they'd share it with their group, and to share your group/brand
name/Page along with it. In the likely event that they do, you've just earned
your brand some priceless promotion in front of an untapped audience.
Get fans to turn on notifications
: Like Pages, not all group posts will
necessarily show in a member's News Feed, but they can be notified when
they appear. If they want to do so, ask them to turn on notifications (in a
video or image post showing them where to go) - specifically the All Posts
option - from the Notifications drop-down at the top of the group (blue
checkmark > Edit Notification Settings on mobile).
Remain open, honest and authentic with your group members. 
Refrain from
talking down to group members, talk to them on their level and it will go a
long way to making you stand out as a leader.
Note: 
You can run paid ads both in the Groups feed on Facebook and within
your group itself - working with partner brands to create Paid Partnership
posts. The latter gives you a clear process for partnering with brands, and
essentially selling them on your group's reach - to boost brand awareness and
direct sales. For a whole host of tips to help you build and run successful
Facebook ads, check out 
the next section.
Paid Advertising Strategy on Facebook
Facebook marketing success is as much about distribution as it is content -
getting your content in front of not just any old people, but as many of the
right people as possible. A budget for Facebook advertising is an extremely
important consideration as part of your marketing strategy, particularly
because the competition for eyeballs on the site is ever-increasing and the
continued throttling of organic reach. In fact, Facebook now deliberately
limits the appearance in the News Feed of Page Post content that features
only promotional messages - asking people to buy something, encouraging
them to enter a sweepstakes, etc., which makes paid promotion even more
crucial. You wouldn’t launch a real-world business and expect people to just
turn up and continue to maintain their interest without promotion, and a brand
presence on Facebook is really no different. Luckily, you don’t need to spend
a fortune: Facebook ads can be a cheap and effective way to gain new fans,
keep existing fans engaged, direct people to your website, or get them to dowhatever you please on the way to reaching your marketing goals. Consider
this: if you allocate just $1 of marketing spend per day on Facebook ads, your
content will be exposed to several thousand people per month that would not
otherwise have seen it. If you are doing this and your competitors aren’t,
you'll be way ahead in the awareness game for your business niche.
Before you start with any type of advertising on Facebook, having a clear
measurement of success in mind before you start will help you to understand
the performance of your ads and make any adjustments to ensure you’re
delivering maximum value for your business.
The most basic Facebook advertising: boosting posts
To increase the ordinary reach of your most important posts - like special
offers, big events, or a company milestone, Facebook encourages you to use
its "Boost Post" tool, located via a button underneath each and every status
update. Boosted posts last for a couple of days and will increase the reach of
your content beyond the people who see it organically. In basic terms,
boosted posts create a set of instant Facebook ads without any of the detailed
customization options available through the main Facebook ads tool,
discussed shortly. Boosted posts do the following:
1
. 
Promote your post within mobile and desktop News Feeds of
Fans, and on Instagram.
2
. 
Promote your post within mobile and desktop News Feeds of
Fans, their friends, and via a limited set of variants like age,
gender, interests, and location.
3
. 
Generate a Sponsored Story ad within mobile and desktop
News Feeds.
The eventual cost of a boosted post depends on the number of people you
want Facebook to try to expose to that specific piece of content. Costs range
from a maximum budget of just a dollar or two for a few hundred people, to
hundreds of dollars if your aim is to reach many thousands of users. Once
Facebook approves your boosted post, which doesn't normally take very long,
the promotion will begin. The amount you are charged rises as your boosted
post reaches more people, but if you don't feel like you are getting value for
money, you can stop the promotion at any time. On a similar note, you can
add to your initial maximum budget if the promotion is going better thanexpected. If your boosted post does not reach the number of people Facebook
estimated it would reach, based on your budget, you will only be charged
according to the number that it did reach.
To get the most out of boosted posts, remember the following:
Wait at least 5-6 hours before boosting a post - let its organic
reach take hold and settle first.
Once a post is boosted, it may take some time until it reaches
the full breadth of your target audience. Will it still be relevant
as much as a few days away from when it was first promoted?
Take this into consideration.
Don't boost every post. Spend money on increasing exposure to
content that will drive meaningful engagement or make an
impact on your bottom line, e.g., eyes on a new product or
service, or clicks through to a valuable blog post.
Pin your boosted post to create additional visibility for the
promotion.
Measure the success of your boosted post through Facebook
Insights and other analytics tools.
If you're a small business owner that wants a quick and easy way to increase
the visibility of standout posts a couple of times a week, then boosting posts
should be a very strong consideration. If you want a bit more control and
customization 
or 
aim to build complex advertising campaigns on Facebook,
utilizing the main ads tool makes more sense - see below for more
information on this.
Note: 
The Boost Post button is also available in Facebook Groups, which you
may also want to consider if you would prefer to target fans and customers if
you’re the owner of burgeoning or already-thriving group. With it, group
admins can use three targeting options for promoting link posts inside the
group: generate more clicks; attract more engagement with likes, shares, and
comments; or prioritize potential customers. Group admins also have the
option to integrate a WhatsApp number, edit the call-to-action button, gather
insights on post reach, and more
.
Beyond the Boost: Facebook Ads StrategyIf you decide that boosting posts is too simplistic for your needs, the
Facebook Ads tool at 
https://www.facebook.com/advertising 
is a significant
advancement over boosting posts, with many more customization options
and, crucially, it's pretty user-friendly. Some of the options available in the
Facebook Ads tool include:
Choosing what the ad promotes depending on your goal (your
Facebook Page, a particular post, a Facebook event, a custom
tab with a newsletter sign-up form, an external website, etc.).
Choosing where on Facebook the ad appears (e.g., desktop and
mobile News Feeds, Ad Network, on Instagram, right-hand
column).
Adding a call to action button to ads to increase click-through
rates,
 (e.g., Shop Now, Read More, for web-based targets, or
Call Now, Get Directions for local, mobile customers).
Choosing who the ad targets (based on location, age, gender,
interests,
 and connections). Before targeting non-fans, I would
suggest homing in on existing fans (many of whom won't have
already seen your content or promotion organically, as well as
your email list - both of which Facebook enables you to do).
Facebook’s Audience Insights tool will break down all sorts of
information about your current audience on Facebook to help
you target your ads to people with similar attributes including
age, gender, relationship status, job, education, and more. All
this can be used as a way to help tailor your ad design and
reach an even more targeted audience. To see the Audience
Insights for your Page, go to
 
www.facebook.com/ads/audience-
insights/ 
and choose the “People connected to your Page”
option. Use the options on the left-hand side to filter the results.
Tracking conversions like registrations, checkouts, and views
of key pages on your website.
When creating Facebook ads from scratch, you can choose from two options:
Guided Creation (this option walks you through the whole process step-by-
step and is best if you're new to Facebook ads) and Quick Creation (allows
you to set up the ad campaign and then create ad sets and ads later; best if
you're already familiar with Facebook ads or confident enough to experimentwith less hand-holding). Switch between either option at any time by clicking
the Switch button at the top of the window while creating ads. 
You might also want to experiment with AI-powered ad tools provided by
Meta (for Facebook, Instagram and Messenger) - providing multiple
backgrounds to complement product images, auto-resizing images for
different ad placements, multiple versions of ad copy for your consideration,
and more.
Tips for Facebook ad creation
Successful Facebook Ads all have three things in common: they are specific,
targeted and compelling. The ad has one job: to get the customer to click on
it, and you’ll need to marry every element of the ad just right to generate
optimum results. The following pointers will help maximize the success of
your promotional campaigns.
When writing ad copy, speak to your ideal prospect in a tone
that will resonate with them
. Tell your customers what makes
you unique and why investing time in (and clicking) your ad is
worth the effort. Your message should be to the point; no long
or confusing sentence. Explain succinctly what makes your
products unique from others, and what benefits your customers
will get. Always end your ads with a call to action, either in
text or with a built-in button – or both. Don’t assume that the
audience knows what to do. Tell them outright what action they
should take. It’s obvious, but make sure the CTA matches the
ad and the intent of the customer.
Craft a headline that addresses the "you" to make the person
reading feel like you're speaking directly to them.
The image is just as important, if not more so than your copy as
it’s
 what gets people to stop scrolling and engage with your ad.
In general, you should avoid generic-looking stock photos. Put
your products front and center so your audience knows what
you’re advertising and why. Show people what life looks like
as a result of using your product (like happy or relieved faces)
or demonstrate its benefits.
Create at least four versions of each ad per campaign so you
can
 experiment with different images (both promotional andmore natural/lifestyle in focus), calls to action and copy so that
you can clearly understand which ones are performing the best.
Test a variety of ad types (lead ads, slideshows, a product ads
carousel,
 canvas, video, etc.) in a variety of placements (News
Feed, mobile, and sidebar) to see how the results vary. News
Feed and mobile ads should (as much as possible) blend
naturally into the ordinary stream of Facebook content, while
for the smaller sidebar ads in particular, subtle calls to action
and images with human faces or simple color combinations,
seem to work best.
Test a variety of target groups, based on criteria such as age,
gender,
 Pages liked, interests, location, etc. If your advertising
budget is small, hyper-target your audience - around 100,000
people is a decent sample. To target specific individuals and
those most likely to be interested in your offering, get savvy
with advanced targeting options such as lookalike audiences,
custom audiences, partner audiences, re-targeting, website
custom audiences, and conversion pixels, in order to get the
most bang for your buck (look out for these terms during the ad
setup process and use the "?" button next to each for a fuller
explanation). In fact, if there is one Facebook ads-related task
all businesses should do, it is to install the Facebook tracking
pixel on their website. A small piece of code placed in the
header of your website, the Facebook tracking pixel has two
major functions: tracking users who took action outside of
Facebook because of your Facebook Ad (signing up for your
newsletter, purchasing a product 
from your website, etc.), and
tracking activity on your website for retargeting purposes.
Utilize Facebook's Custom Audiences tool to reach new and
existing
 customers through Facebook and make the most of
those relationships. For example, Retargeting is a powerful
way of winning new customers and tempting people who’ve
shown an interest in your product back to your website, by
reminding them of products they have shown an interest in.
Meanwhile, Lookalike Audiences targets people similar to
those who already know and like your brand, and this can be
especially useful when you’re aiming to use your ads to boostgrowth.
Use a structured naming convention for your ad campaigns, ad
names,
 and ad sets to make identifying and tracking them easy.
With campaigns, for example, I like the format 
"
[Business/Client Name] - [Page Name] - [Item Promoted] -
[Objective]." 
The Business/Client Name qualifier may or may
not be necessary, depending on your circumstances.
When budgeting and bidding, don't sweat too much over terms
like
 cost CPC, CTR, CPM, etc. Instead, focus on your business'
cost per desired action, e.g., clicking a link and signing up to
your email newsletter. This method will allow you to calculate
your return on investment, i.e., how many conversions you
drove per dollar spent, much more easily.
Interested in video ads? 
Facebook's own research found that
when mobile video ads play
 loudly when people aren’t
expecting it, 80% of people react negatively, both toward the
platform and the advertiser. You might take this as a notice to
create video ads that do not require any sound at all to be
understood. However, in cases where this isn't possible, you
can add captions manually, or let Facebook create them
automatically. Automated captions are currently only available
through Power Editor. When creating video ads in Power
Editor, your video captions will be generated after uploading
your video (it may take several minutes for them to appear).
After your video ad has finished uploading, click Select. Below
Video Captions, use the dropdown that says "Generate
Automatically". The Ads tool also allows you to easily edit
existing videos with automatic cropping, video trimming and
image and text overlays. 
Facebook ads also allow you to promote your stories, and
customizable stories templates within the Ads Manager allow
you to automatically convert existing assets into stories ads
with minimal effort. For best practices and advice on Facebook
stories ads, see the Instagram Tips chapter of this book.
The Facebook Creative Hub
(
https://business.facebook.com/ads/creativehub/
) is a portal in
Facebook Business Manager for everything related to adcreative. It includes a "best of" pick of ads for all ad types -
great for inspiration - 
as well as the ability to create mock-ups
and work on ad campaigns collaboratively.
Note: Use Facebook Info And Ads Tab to Spy on Your Competitors
As a way to increase transparency for users, Facebook includes an Info and
Ads tab on every page, allowing anyone to view the ads that the Page is
running. While it’s supposed to be for the benefit of ordinary users, that
doesn't stop you - as a business - taking advantage. Why not check out what
sort of ads that the brands that you admire, or your competition, is running?
In no time at all, you’ll have recon that you can use to adapt for your own ad
campaign. Of course, the big limitation here is that only live ads are
displayed. For a historical perspective and tons more inspiration, I
recommend the massive wealth of real Facebook ads collated in the
AdEspresso Ad Gallery: 
https://adespresso.com/ads-examples/
Monitoring Facebook ad performance strategy
One of the biggest mistakes people new to Facebook Ads make is to set ad
campaigns to go live and then come back to check performance once the
campaign is completed. But by doing this, you’re missing out on huge
opportunities to enhance the performance of each of your ads. Frequently
monitoring your Facebook Ads campaigns enables you to know whether or
not your ads are resonating well with your audience and allows you to make
adjustments as you go along. For example, if your engagement isn't great you
can create a new ad set with a fresh design. Or if your clicks are low, perhaps
you need to tweak your call to action. Or if you aren't reaching as many
people as you thought, maybe your audience parameters or ad placements
need tweaking. Keep in mind that it can take a few days until you have
enough data to start really measuring ad performance, so I'd recommend
waiting until your ad has reached at least a few thousand people before
making changes. The strategy outlined here is best used if a set of ads in a
campaign are at least performing moderately well. If all ads in a campaign are
performing poorly, Facebook's algorithm might decide none of your ads
(tweaked or not) are worth giving a second chance, so it might be best to
scrap them and start again.
Note: 
If you want to gauge early on if your ad is hitting the nail on the head,
look for its Relevance Score in your ad reporting - a rating of 1-10 based onhow your audience is responding to your ad through likes, clicks, comments,
etc. It appears after the ad has received at least 500 impressions. One simple
strategy is to keep your budget low, tweaking your ad until you achieve a
relevance score of 8/10 or higher. At this point, you can think about
promoting the ad more heavily, but always keep an eye on the ad in case the
score (which updates in real time) starts dipping.
Unless you're very lucky, you won’t create the perfect ad first time around.
Expect to experiment and learn a lot in order to produce Facebook ads that
will deliver the results you are looking for. As a simple example, you might
start with 3 ad variants, one of which is clearly outperforming the others. You
can then stop running the underperforming ads, giving more of your budget
over to the one that is driving 
results. You might even want to create a new
ad variant, based on this ad, to see if that helps deliver even better results.
Ideally, you want to create several ad sets and ads before you start your
campaign and then eliminate under-performing ads as your campaign
progresses.
Note: 
When you are testing with Facebook ads, it’s important to change only
one element each time, keeping everything else the same. If you don’t, you
won’t be able to tell what actually changed the result! I recommend that for
each element you test, you start with wildly different changes to get a better
overall sense of what’s resonating with your audience. Check your ad report
at least once per 24 hours so that you can get a good overview of how it’s
performing. 
Too busy for Facebook Ads? Try Automated Ads
If you don't have the time or resources to learn the ins and outs of Facebook
Ads, Automated Ads might be a good starter option – you’ll find the option
to use this tool at the start of the Facebook Ads setup process. With
Automated Ads, Facebook asks you a few simple questions about your
business and your goals, and uses your answers to develop a customized
marketing plan. This includes up to six different versions of your ad where
only the best-performing will be shown; tailored suggestions to show your ad
to the most receptive audience; a recommended budget, and timely
notifications to give you an insight into the performance of your ads and what
might need tweaking.
I could write a whole other book on Facebook ads - much more than I havethe space to include here, unfortunately. Until I do, a quick web search will
return plenty of detailed step-by-step guides for making the most of Facebook
ads, and I definitely recommend you do this before jumping in, getting
bogged down and lost in the options available, and simply wasting your
money! Be smart, start small, and remember that there is no one guaranteed
formula for Facebook ad success; experimentation is the key, as too is
playing the long game. For example, after one successful campaign, you
could use the Facebook Pixel to create a new ad to re-target those who
engaged positively with that promotion, or to have another shot at persuading
people who might have visited your website but left without making a
purchase.
Advertising aside, your main focus should always be on producing top-
quality content that gains maximum traction organically. Typically, I only
spend "big" on an ad campaign (whether it be a Boosted post or properly-
planned ads) if I have a product or contest to launch, a coupon code or offer
to give away, or if an organic (non-paid) post does surprisingly well and I
think it has strong potential to go viral. The rest of the time, I rely on a small,
but regular ad budget solely used to help new fans find my Page.Using Your Personal Facebook Profile for Business
As explained at the beginning of this chapter, using your personal Facebook
Timeline specifically for commercial purposes is against the site's rules.
However, there are a number of useful little strategies that you can implement
via your individual profile that can help support your overall business
marketing.
Add a Follow button to your personal profile
If you are the figurehead of your company and happy to share your personal
profile's updates with customers as a way to help them feel more closely
connected to you, but don't want them all to be added as friends, consider
letting them follow your updates. When you become friends with someone on
Facebook, they automatically start following you, but you can also allow
people who aren't your friends to follow you by selecting “Public” next to
your post settings.  Use this ability to filter updates about your family to
Friends and updates pertinent to your business or things that you’re
comfortable sharing with a wider audience to the public.
Change your personal profile 'Work' to your business page
If people search for your business on Facebook and come across your
personal profile, you'll want to make it as easy as possible for them to find
your business Page too. Click on the 'Update Info' button at the top of your
profile and search for your Facebook Page in the 'Where have you worked?'
box and choose it when it appears in the drop-down menu. If you 
don't 
see
your Page appear when you type its name into the box, try typing its
username instead, i.e., the bit that comes after the '
www.facebook.com/' 
of
the Page's address. If you're still having no luck, insert your exact Page name,
click the drop-down that appears and enter the additional details (Position,
City/Town, etc.). When you click 'Add job', it 
should 
populate correctly.
Note: 
Here are two more soft-sell Facebook Page promotion opportunities:
add the URL to your Facebook Page under the 'Website' area of the Contact
Info section of your personal Facebook profile. In addition, add your personal
profile as a Featured Page owner on your Facebook Page. When you add a
featured page owner, your personal information will be displayed in the
About section of the Page and the Page will be shown on your personalprofile.
Learn about (and capitalize on) the ad strategies of your competition
If you’re your company’s ideal customer, then you’re going to be your
competitor’s ideal customer, too. As such, chances are that you are going to
be exposed to ads from your competitors in your personal News Feed. Keep
an eye out for them. You may discover, for example, that your main rival
seems to advertise mostly on Wednesday evenings, that they prefer video ads,
and that certain types of their posts get more attention than others. It's far
from scientific, of course, but by grabbing screenshots and making notes,
you'll have some broad information that you can use quite effectively when it
comes to running your own paid ads.Twitter Tips: Tweet Your Way to
the Top
Twitter is used by millions of businesses as a way to monitor conversations
about their brand, interact with customers, manage customer service issues,
promote offers, and share rich and engaging content like images and videos -
all within 280 characters per tweet (originally and famously 140 characters,
but doubled in 2017). A 2013 study by analytics company KISSmetric even
found that Twitter users were more likely to buy from brands they follow on
the site by a margin of 64 percent, and that’s just one statistic about a site that
has the power, arguably greater than any other social network, to connect
with customers and to create loyal brand advocates. 
In the early days of Twitter, many people and brands treated the site as an
RSS feed (remember those?), simply sharing links and headlines all the time.
While link sharing is still an important part of Twitter, nowadays some of the
network’s most successful accounts realize that you have to publish posts that
speak to people in your own voice; to share content, stories, and ideas that
resonate with them and encourage them to interact.
In fact, one of the keys to creating a thriving Twitter following is to strive to
post content that encourages conversation among your followers. When
you’ve successfully fostered this type of environment, your followers will
feel more engaged with your brand, 
which will hopefully boost their
willingness to buy from you.
In contrast to the above, for many businesses on Twitter the goal is less about
reaching the masses directly and more about getting their content in front of
key influencers who can then help to amplify their message to a broader
audience.
Whichever method you choose (a combination of both is ideal), in this
chapter, we'll explore some of the ways to make Twitter success a reality for
you.
Twitter Profile Setup StrategyNo stellar Twitter strategy is complete without a profile built to knock the
socks off your customers, so let's get started with some indispensable setup
and optimization tips.
Top Twitter username and a tip for the "Name" box
Your Twitter username is extremely important, as it will make up part of your
Twitter profile URL - the address you'll put on all of your marketing material
to direct people to follow you on the social network. Try to keep your
username short, simple and memorable. Most companies use their brand
name as their username, so that their address reads
www.twitter.com/yourbusinessname
.
 Unlike most other sites, Twitter will
allow you to change your username as many times as you like via its Settings
menu, but it's worth remembering that if you've publicized one username for
a while, unexpectedly switching to a new one would not make good business
sense
.
Write an engaging Twitter Bio, use real names
Your Twitter profile is likely to appear high up in web search results for your
individual or business name, so it's crucial that you use its 160-character bio
well (the bio text is used as the search link's description and, of course,
appears on your Twitter profile itself). Use the space to accurately and
succinctly tell people who you are, what you do, and why they should follow
you; use an upbeat tone to reflect Twitter's fun and conversational nature, and
if you're an individual, single "descriptor" words separated by commas, lines,
or hyphens (e.g. globetrotter | entrepreneur | wine lover..." are commonly
used space-savers. If you're a company, it's a good idea to include the real
name of the person handling your Twitter account so that customers feel
more like they're talking to a person rather than a faceless brand. If you have
room, you might also want to throw in emoji, a URL, or @mentions to link to
other accounts you are associated with, and even brand or industry-related
hashtag, too - but be careful that the latter doesn't mess up the readability and
balance of the bio as a whole.
Upload an effective Twitter profile image
Ditch the default Twitter avatar and use a headshot photo of yourself or your
brand logo – text works too, if the name is short enough. Twitter's one-to-one
interactions mean that people will identify much more closely with a profile
that displays a person's smiling face rather than the dreaded default 'egg'image or something similarly anonymous. Twitter recommends that your
profile image is uploaded at 400 x 400 pixels. 
Create a custom Twitter header image
In April 2014, Twitter rolled out a new version of its desktop profiles,
complete with a big 1500 x 500-pixel Facebook-esque header image – a large
banner that spans the whole width of the profile, ripe for customizing with
your own design. How you choose to fill the header image is up to you, but
tactics similar to Facebook - simple branding, highlighting promotions,
featuring customers, spelling out your mission statement, etc., are a few of
the most common strategies. 
Note: 
Download a Twitter header template optimized for desktop and mobile
screens (and lots of other great stuff) via the 
Premium Content Bundle
chapter of this book.
Switch to a Business / Professional Twitter profile
Professional Twitter accounts are for anyone who uses Twitter for
commercial purposes, and allow businesses, brands, creators, and publishers
the ability to grow and strengthen their presence on Twitter. Available as an
option in your Twitter Settings, switching to a Professional Profile gives you
access to a range of additional features, like a new business information
display, product listings, a newsletter module (if you have a Revue
newsletter), a shortcut to ads, and more.
Professional Category: The Professional Category is an indicator
on a Professional Account’s profile, showcasing what kind of
professional the account represents.
Professional Profile Spotlights: Professional Profile Spotlights
allow professionals to showcase key information about their
business or brand in a designated area on their Twitter profile.
Neither are massive differentiators, but do help to provide trust and
legitimacy to your Twitter presence. Find the option to switch in the settings
of your Twitter account.
Consider verification with Twitter Blue
Twitter Blue ($8 USD per month) is an opt-in, paid monthly subscription thatadds a blue checkmark to your account and offers early access to features,
including: the ability to undo the sending of a tweet, prioritized ranking in
conversations in tweet replies, and longer video uploads (up to ~60 minutes).
As well as marking your business account as your official presence on
Twitter, the prioritized replied could help you to gain more exposure,
particularly if you regularly engage in conversations on the platform.
Twitter Blue for Business
Launched in December 2022, Twitter Blue for Business is a way for
businesses to verify and distinguish themselves on Twitter.
As a Twitter Blue for Business subscriber, you can link any number of
affiliated individuals, businesses and brands to your account. When you do,
affiliated accounts will get a small badge of their parent company's profile
picture next to their blue or gold checkmark - the latter which denote you are
a Twitter Blue subscriber.
Note: Twitter Blue for Business is in running as a pilot scheme for a small
number of businesses at the time of writing, but will roll out more widely in
2023. 
Twitter Marketing and Content Strategy
How's that Twitter profile looking? Pretty good? Now let's look at some
content strategies to help your brand presence on Twitter shine...
Grab attention by playing to the strengths of Twitter’s limit
s
Twitter is a crowded and busy platform whose content moves incredibly fast
compared to other social platforms, so it's important that your messaging is as
clear as possible if it is to grab people’s attention – especially when you only
have 280 characters to play with. Twitter advises that brands should stick to
its ‘three C’s’ approach for optimal tweeting:
Concise
Clear
Conversational
You’ve only got 280 characters, so you need to be concise, but it’s important
to also be clear, and to look to prompt discussion among your audience.Take your time to concoct great tweets: be succinct and clear, remove any
unnecessary words that might overcomplicate your message, keep hashtags to
a minimum (more advice on this later), and always double-check for errors..
If you’ve got too much to say than will fit in one tweet, create a thread
instead (see below).
Note: 
One way to help get your tweets noticed is to play with the formatting.
Space out your tweets with line breaks, experiment with capitalization, and
use emojis.
Use threads to extend the length of your Twitter communication
Sometimes you may need more than one Tweet to communicate a single
message - to add context, provide an update, or to extend a point. There are a
couple of ways to overcome this problem. The official Twitter method is to
create a thread, which is a series of connected Tweets from one person.
How to create a thread
1. Click the Tweet button to draft a new Tweet.
2. To add another Tweet(s), click the highlighted plus icon. 
3. When you have finished adding all the Tweets you’d like included in your
thread, click the Tweet all button to post.
A thread with 2 or 3 Tweets will generally appear connected by a line to
distinguish them as a bundle. When there are 4 or more Tweets in a thread,
the Tweets will be truncated, and users will see an option to "Show this
thread."
Alternatively, a site like TwitLonger (
http://www.twitlonger.com
/)
 
as a
workaround. This site allows you to type as long a message as you like.
When you submit the message, it will be sent out to your followers using
your Twitter account. The first portion will be visible, then a URL will be
displayed to allow followers to click through to read the full message at the
TwitLonger website. Another popular workaround to the tweet character limit
is to write your long message in the Notes on your phone or in Word, then
screengrab the message and upload it as an image
.
Tweets: aim for quality and consistency; don’t spam
Don't post tweets every minute of the day, spamming your followers' feeds
and annoying them enough to unfollow you - be sparing. Independentresearch has shown that posting more than two or three tweets an hour can
result in a decrease in engagement, while Twitter's own research found that
brands that tweet two to three times a day can usually reach an audience that
is equal to 30% of their follower base during any given week. Of course, a lot
of factors can affect this estimation (e.g., if one particular tweet goes viral
and the rest do not) and you can measure this with the site's analytics tool, but
the principal stands - quality always trumps quantity.
Share engaging content, use past success to shape future content 
 
One of the best things about Twitter is that it is an open platform, meaning
that even people who don’t follow you can still stumble across one of your
tweets if one of your followers’ favorites or retweets it. So, with the right
content, you can potentially reach many more people than just the group that
actively follow you. To help attract new attention and build relationships with
customers, share the types of selfless, newsworthy, and engaging content we
talked about in the "
The Best Types of Content to Post on Social Media
"
chapter of this book, including links to useful and interesting content
(whether your own or that of others). Use Google Alerts to be notified of fun,
fresh, and relevant content for your Twitter feed and followers – a single
tweet with an interesting take on a current event could garner you lots of
extra attention. If you are including a link to your own content within a tweet,
consider shortening it beforehand using a site like 
bit.ly
. 
Twitter will shorten
links automatically, but using bit.ly also allows you to customize them for
neatness and analyze the click-through rate, which is great for seeing what
kind of content resonates best with your followers. To compound the impact
of a tweet containing a link, upload an image with it to help it stand out
within people's news feeds.
Note: 
If you don’t have the time or resources to post many of your own ideas
to Twitter, content curation (finding and sharing other people’s blog posts,
reports, videos, etc. – perhaps with a short thought or comment along with it)
is one way to ensure a consistent flow of content, and by tagging the original
creator or author of the content you curated, you’ll increase the chance that
they’ll like, retweet or respond to your tweet. All of this makes your tweet
more engaging and increases the likelihood that it will 
show up on the
timeline of someone who doesn’t follow, you but follows the original creator.
And in turn, they may decide to check you out as well.Use hashtags to group tweets, drive engagement, and research
Use hashtags to group tweets of the same kind and to highlight your message.
Top-trending hashtags appear on Twitter's home page and can easily be found
via Twitter search.
Don't include more than one or two hashtags per tweet, as it can dilute your
message and makes them messy to read; engagement with tweets that include
more than two hashtags tails off considerably, research shows. 
Hashtags are not as important as they used to be on Twitter, but they do still
play a key role in helping to organize tweet discussions, which can highlight
how people are engaging in topic-specific elements and help to get your
content found. As such, it’s worth noting the key hashtags that people are
using in your niche.
Notice what hashtags popular accounts in your niche are using, and its related
recommendations in search. Then, build an expanded list of all these
examples, sort that listing by popularity score (based on overall usage), and
you’ll end up with a fairly comprehensive collection of the top hashtags used
by people tweeting in your niche.
Search hashtags for opportunities to connect
In the same way as you would use keywords in Twitter search to find
ongoing conversations related to your business), use the hashtags and
comments that you find associated with them to reach out to people: be
helpful, offer suggestions and recommendations, etc., as a way to build trust
and authority. Don't be pushy or self-promotional. Be tactful with this
approach, using your discretion to decide when it looks like someone wants
to receive a reply, and when they might not.
Use hashtags to capitalize on trends
One of the most useful features of Twitter analytics – found under the Events
section - is the ability to view data on recurring trends. Recurring trends gives
you access to valuable stats on Tweet volume for commonly used hashtags –
hashtags you can take advantage of to boost your brand awareness on
Twitter. When you're looking for the kind of regularly popular hashtag that
can inspire action and engagement, instead of guesswork, Twitter’s recurring
trends breaks down each top hashtag by gender, age, and location. Using this
information, you can accurately target your hashtag use based on the make-up of your followers.
Tweet your top content several times; schedule for ease
Given the comparatively high number of people an average Twitter user
follows and the number of tweets people post, the main news feed of a user
(without 
segmentation – see Twitter Lists info a bit later on) can become
unfathomably busy. Twitter’s algorithm 
does 
periodically show users a small
selection of tweets they may be interested in (and might otherwise have
missed) towards the top of their timeline (ranked by relevancy – the tweet’s
popularity, connection to the user, etc.) but otherwise, in theory, it then will
show 
all 
of the tweets from all accounts that they follow thereafter in
chronological order. With this in mind, you realize how fleeting, without
Twitter’s algorithm favoring your content for a user or opting for paid
promotion, the appearance (and disappearance) of one single tweet could be.
Note: 
Of course, Twitter’s own search bar is another way users might come
across your tweets and profile. And on that topic, it’s interesting to note that
it isn’t only just Twitter’s search where your tweets might be found, but also
on Google and other major search engines. Savvy businesses will be
rewarded with their tweets showing up in a carousel format toward the top of
Google search results, for example. You don’t need a massive following to
have your tweets appear in search results; the key is simply to tweet and reply
on a regular basis.
To give your tweets – specifically marketing messages, links to blog posts,
etc., not just one-off thoughts - the best chance of being seen, don't be afraid
to post the same content under different guises, several times (i.e., experiment
with unique wording and different headlines for the same article one or two
days apart, then note which wording performed best). If you produce a lot of
valuable "evergreen" blog content, i.e., that which will remain useful no
matter its age, use a service like Buffer (
www.bufferapp.com
) to schedule
and automatically post tweets linking to this cache of content periodically. In
February 2018, Twitter updated its rules to prohibit the sharing of tweets that
are identical or substantially similar to one another across multiple accounts,
so if you’re in this situation, it’s always best to re-jig your copy.
Note: 
On Twitter, many brands simply share the title of a blog post, for
example, followed by a link. There's nothing wrong with this approach, but
you might also want to experiment with other methods to lead into thecontent and to see if they garner more clicks and engagement. These include
sharing a short quote from the article, giving a brief opinion, or asking a
question about it – particularly through Twitter’s simple two-question Poll
function (click the poll icon in the tweet box to set one up).
Another method to get your content that little bit more time and attention is to
sparingly
 retweet your own top tweets a few days on from their original
posting date. Allowing this duration of time ensures that your fans aren’t
bombarded with identical tweets, and gives the room for you to truly discover
which tweets have performed best, and therefore which are the best
candidates for retweeting. You can either perform this strategy manually
through Twitter (use Analytics to discover your most popular tweets ranked
by impressions and engagement and click their timestamp to retweet), or
through a scheduling tool such as Buffer. One advantage of the latter method
is that you’ll be able to schedule the retweets, whereas through Twitter you’ll
have to perform the retweets right away
.
Pin important Twitter posts, use as marketing opportunity
If you want to spotlight a particular tweet, you can pin it to the top of your
feed for extra visibility, especially to reach those who visit your profile
directly, where - all subsequent posts will appear below it. Use a pinned tweet
to highlight one of your most engaged-with tweets, an important
announcement, an upcoming event, a tweet that summarizes your brand and
its mission, to sell, or broadcast a message that spurs emotion and encourages
people to share and spread brand awareness through retweeting, e.g.,
something funny or inspirational. A pinned tweet performs best when it
includes an eye-catching image (to help it stand out), a strong call-to-action
(with trackable link), and a relevant hashtag (your own, or existing popular
one).
Promote and sell with the Twitter widgets and embed options
Twitter has its own equivalent of the Facebook "Like" box, which shows a
live preview of your Twitter stream's latest activity, along with a "Follow"
button and other embed options, including to embed a single tweet. You
could, for example:
Embed tweets from happy customers to place on your website
as testimonials.Embed a widget displaying your Twitter profile on your
website to promote your account to visitors.
Embed a collection of your most popular tweets to use as part
of a blog post.
All Twitter widgets and embed options can be easily setup at the following
link: 
https://publish.twitter.com/
Encourage retweets and social sharing using Tweet This
Short, helpful, and inspirational quotes are a brilliant way to market you and
your business on Twitter. One of the coolest ways to implement this strategy
is via the free Tweet This website at 
https://clicktotweet.com/
Here's how it works:
1
. 
Enter a quote from your blog or website that you want others to
tweet.
2
. 
Click the "Generate Tweet Link" button to create a custom link
URL and embed code.
3
. 
Share the link and/or get the embed code.
If you imagine the following quote is a part of one of my blog posts or a page
on my website, the final result from Click to Tweet might look something
like: 
"Consistency is one of the key strategies to rocking your social media
strategy via @500socialmedia [Tweet This]"
, where ["Tweet This"] is a
clickable link that opens up 
the user's Twitter account, pre-populates the
status update box with my chosen quote, and is ready for them to share with
all of their followers instantly. Notice how I included my @username to add
an element of attribution, which might also gain me some interest. Another
strategy for Click to Tweet involves using it on the "Confirmation" page that
loads after a purchase on your website has taken place, as an opportunity to
encourage someone who has just purchased to share their excitement about
the transaction, e.g., 
"I just bought a copy of 500 Social Media Marketing
Tips - I'll be a pro in no time! #socialmediamarketing [product link]."
Respond to @mentions and DMs in a timely manner, and
with personality
Whenever you receive notification of an @mention of your brand, be sure to
respond as soon as possible. Replying to a customer or fan with a mention isa quick, easy, and hugely powerful way to make someone feel like you’re
really paying attention; it makes them feel happy and appreciated and, in turn,
promotes positive connotations towards your business. A lot of the bigger
businesses don't reply to a large proportion of brand mentions, and it hits
their credibility hard.
As well as mentions, keep a close eye on any direct messages (DMs) you
receive and use them to respond to customers quickly and efficiently, too.
As of April 2015, you can opt-in to receive Direct Messages (DMs) on
Twitter from anyone, whether you follow them or not. In the past, Twitter
users could only send a DM to someone if they followed them first, and
both would need to follow each other for a two-way chat to occur. By opting
in to receive DMs from anyone, you make it easier for customers to initiate
a private conversation with you - great for customer service issues that
demand it and stopping some negative interactions from being broadcast in
the public Twitter feed, where everyone can see them. To opt-in, check the
"Receive Direct Messages from anyone" box in the Privacy and Safety
portion of your Twitter Settings.
Use Twitter Search to discover and connect with customers
Aside from direct @mentions of your brand (those which you’ll receive a
notification about), use Twitter Search to find people who have indirectly
mentioned your business name, website address, area of interest or expertise,
etc., and interact with them to begin building a meaningful connection – in
many cases, they’ll be even more surprised and delighted that you have made
the extra effort to reach out to them.
Upon searching and finding a Twitter user that you think your service can
help, do not be overly aggressive in your attempts to connect or constantly
tout your product or service as a solution - you risk doing more harm than
good with this approach. Instead, your first few interactions should be sincere
and helpful. Play the slow game; add value and your expertise to the
conversation by passing along a helpful blog post or simply asking questions
and showing sympathy for the person's predicament. Make it the 
beginning 
of
your sales funnel, not the last step. This strategy has been shown to be much
more successful in building trust with potential customers, especially as your
approach is essentially "cold calling.
"
You can also target your search by location and date in the Advanced Twittersearch (
https://twitter.com/search-advanced
) for more localized, and time-
specific results and use keywords within quotation marks and the minus
symbol (-) to omit results with unwanted keywords, e.g., '"Paula's Prom
Dresses -tiara"' - any other Boolean search technique will also work. One
cool strategy is to use keywords associated with your business to find the
problems which people are tweeting about and target the issues that your
business can solve. Pair your company's name or related ideas with words
like "bad" or "sucks" to find people spouting negative feedback, and do the
same using common misspellings of your brand name, @mentions, and a
search for your domain name, e.g., "andrewmacarthy.com" to catch instances
of people tweeting about your content. In addition, search using the question
mark symbol ("?") to look for questions related to your brand or industry. On
a similar note, make sure to filter search results to "Show All", not just the
"Top Tweets." You never know, one single helpful tweet could lead to
customer loyalty that lasts for years. 
Twitter search won't display every tweet mentioning your keywords or
hashtag that has ever existed, but it will look at a variety of types of
engagement, such as favorites, retweets and clicks, to determine which
Tweets to show. Although some mentions might be weeks or months old, it is
still worth retweeting or engaging with them, as you never know where a
dormant mention may lead.
Note: 
Warble Alerts (
http://warble.co
) is a nifty free tool that automatically
checks Twitter for the keywords and phrases you select and emails you a
summary once a day.
Save Twitter searches
Use the ‘Save search’ feature on Twitter to quickly access regular searches
that you make, such as those searching for mentions of your brand name and
keywords related to it.
To save a Twitter search on desktop:
1
. 
Type your search query into the search box at the top of the
page and hit return.
2
. 
Click on the “three-horizontal-dots” icon that appears at the top
of the page and select ‘Save search’ from the drop-down menu.To revisit a saved search:
1
. 
Click anywhere in the search box at the top of the page. A list
of your saved searches will appear below the search box.
2
. 
Click on the saved search to revisit results for that query.
Search and 'steal' customers from the competition
If you have a local competitor, search for tweets mentioning their business
name as well as your own. I wouldn't wholeheartedly recommend replying to
the tweets you 
find, because it could come across as too being too desperate
or forward. But just knowing what is being said about your competition can
be enough to give you ideas to help you up your own game and give you a
competitive edge. If you 
do 
decide to respond to tweets mentioning your
competitors (if the rival firm doesn't ever reply, for example), be helpful and
conversational with no put-downs and no hard selling. Hopefully your good
grace will get the customer in question to switch allegiances.
Show appreciation with favorites
For a subtler way to thank your followers for their kind words about your
business, “Like” a tweet by clicking the heart icon next to it. Not only is
“Liking” tweets an easy way to collate customer testimonials - or ‘save’ a
tweet that you want to think about or investigate before replying to (they
appear in the Likes tab on your Twitter profile for easy reference) - but a user
is also notified when one of their tweets is Liked. Different to retweeting,
however, is that this notification is not shared publicly – only with the
individual to whom it applies – so it looks a little less like you are tooting
your own horn… not that that’s a bad thing to do occasionally! Some Twitter
users Like any tweet that happens to mention them, but as your Favorites are
publicly visible via a link at the top of your profile, you may want to use it to
collate messages in a more strategic way, such as a way to "wow!" anyone
who happens to take a peek at the slew of amazing feedback you have
received.
Use images to drive engagement, as a text replacement, and to
tease offers
Research shows that tweets that include photos are significantly more likely
to be retweeted than those without. Twitter also supports animated GIFs,
which loop continuously within the news feed. Note: 
If you tweet using an iPhone, you can instantly transform any iOS Live
Photo into a Twitter GIF. Simply start a new tweet, then choose Photo, select
the image you want to share, tap GIF at the bottom of the post, and tweet as
normal.
Upload multiple images and tag them to boost engagement
In April 2014, Twitter rolled out the ability to attach up to four images to a
tweet (previously limited to just one). Multiple images display as a collage:
one main image and three smaller ones. Brands take advantage of these
collages in many ways: to spell out a single message across the four separate
images, provide simple step-by-step tutorials, or using multiple photos to tell
the story of an event in the life of their company. Along with this feature, you
can tag up to 10 people, e.g., customers, contest winners, business associates,
etc. in each image. The people who are tagged will receive a notification to
let them know, so do take advantage of this as a way to encourage
engagement and start conversations centered on your posts. To top it all off,
the characters used to tag usernames in Twitter images will not deplete any of
the original 280- character space for the accompanying text. To tag people in
a photo, select it once uploaded and type their name or username into 
the
"Who's in this photo?" box. When the tweet is published, the usernames of
the tagged people will appear next to it as live, clickable links.
Note: 
Adding alt-text to your images when uploading them (a literal
description of what the image shows), while making them accessible to the
visually impaired, can also make them more searchable. The included
information can be accessed by Twitter and used to categorize your content.
Activate Twitter Cards to drive website traffic
Twitter Cards allow you to automatically attach rich information (photos,
video, sign-up forms, additional product details, and more) to tweets that are
created when someone shares a link to your website content on Twitter. As
they stand out from ordinary text-only tweets within the site's feed, they can
be a powerful way to boost the number of click-throughs to your website.
Twitter Cards come in a number of different varieties, including:
Summary Card: 
The default option, featuring a title,
description,
 thumbnail, and your Twitter handle. There is also a
similar option, but with a larger image.Photo Card: 
A Twitter Card that features only a photo. A
Gallery Card
 option also exists; these highlight a collection of
four photos.
App Card: 
A Card to promote mobile apps. On mobile views, it
will
 provide a direct download button, e.g., "Download in the
App Store."
Player Card: 
If your brand uses video or audio for promotion,
a player
 card will allow you to embed a piece of media within
your tweet.
Product Card: 
Allows you to include a title, description,
thumbnail image
 and Twitter username attributed to the
product, along with details like as price, location, availability,
and more.
Lead Generation Card and Website Card: 
Cards used to
collect email
 addresses or drive website traffic (see section on
Paid Twitter Advertising for more info).
Offer Card: 
A way for users to add an offer to their credit or
debit card and redeem in store instantly, without a coupon (US
testing only at present).
Implementing Twitter Cards is as easy as inserting a few lines of code onto
your website (the code you use will depend on the type of card). To get
started, visit the following page and scroll down to the "Get started in 4
simple steps" section. From here, click a link to the Twitter Card of your
choice, and track the success of them via your Twitter Analytics account
(more info on this later):
https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/tweets/optimize-with-
cards/overview/abouts-cards
Real-time offers and Twitter-specific codes
Many people follow brands on Twitter specifically to hear about promotions
and 
discounts, so give them what they want! Offer your Twitter followers
special coupons, exclusive discounts, and free samples, to help build your
brand's reputation. Create a striking image to help the offer stand out, and
post it several times to make sure it is seen by as many of your followers as
possible. If you want to measure sales and conversions made specificallythrough Twitter, tweet a tracking code only to your followers and be sure to
ask for it during the transaction. e.g., TWEET20. It is good practice to place a
time limit on your Twitter coupons as a way to drive short-term sales by
increasing the sense of urgency; between 1 and 2 weeks is a decent time for
people to both see and redeem the promotion. For businesses looking to
engage and strengthen relationships with their customers, asking people to
@message or DM you to receive an offer is one powerful strategy - just make
sure you have the means to handle all of the messages you expect to receive!
Twitter contest strategy
A Twitter contest a great way to generate buzz around your brand and attract
new followers and customers, and Twitter’s make-up means it’s an easy and
effective platform for running such a promotion. Let’s take a look at some
best practices. Before you begin, familiarize yourself with the official Twitter
guidelines for promotions (
https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-
policies/twitter-contest-rules
) so that you don't inadvertently break any of the
platform's rules and get your contest off to a terrible start. Some of the most
important considerations include:
Ask entrants to use contest hashtags only with tweets relevant
to the hashtag topic. Requiring people to retweet the original
contest post solves this problem in most cases.
Make a rule that each entrant may only use a single account to
enter the contest. Violation will invalidate their contest entry.
Avoid rules that encourage entrants post multiple duplicate
tweets to enter, e.g. whoever retweets an update the most wins.
Specify that you won’t accept multiple entries on the same
day. 
Specify your rules in your initial contest post so people know exactly how to
enter, and to avoid any disputes later on.
With the ground rules set, it's time to build your contest promotion. To start,
have an end goal in mind, e.g. gaining more followers, promoting a product,
etc. Make the goal specific and measurable. This will also help define the
type of contest you run. The most popular type of contest on Twitter is “retweet and follow to enter"
(great for building brand awareness and follower numbers) - but add another
layer of complexity to the entry, e.g. requiring entrants to add a comment to
the retweet or to tag a certain number of friends, to avoid the contest being
ruined by bots that automatically identify “retweet to enter contests” or
compulsive contest entrants looking for an easy win. You might also want to
consider a "comment to enter" 
contest (good for driving engagement), or a
photo contest based on a specific theme (fantastic for building a pool of user-
generated content that can be used for future posts).
When it's time to pick a winner (particularly for a contest where every entry
has an equal chance of winning, i.e. not creative/judged contests), there are
several options to help you select an individual at random. For a contest
where the main rule is to retweet a post, check out Retweet Picker
(
https://retweetpicker.com/)
 or Tweetdraw
(
https://competitionagency.com/tweetdraw/).
 If you've added an extra rule
like asking people to comment on a tweet, there's also tools like Comment
Picker (
https://commentpicker.com/random-name-picker.php
) or Random
Picker (
https://miniwebtool.com/random-picker/).
Video marketing on Twitter – short clips and live streaming
The Twitter mobile app provides an easy way to film (or import), edit, and
share clips direct to your profile. The maximum length of a Twitter video is
140 seconds and (like on Facebook), videos posted to Twitter play
automatically within users’ feeds. While text is going to be your predominant
method of communication on Twitter, occasionally replying to tweets via
video such as answering a question in a Twitter chat - is a fun and engaging
way to let your fans get to know the people behind your brand. Video replies
are one specific way to use Twitter video for business, but please refer to the
“Explained: The Best Types of Content to Post on Social Media
” chapter of
this book for plenty of ideas for making the most of video marketing,
whatever the platform. 
If you want an even 
more 
dynamic way to interact with your Twitter
followers (and beyond), the Twitter app includes a live streaming video
option. With one tap, you’ll be able to broadcast instantly with your fans – to
show them behind the scenes, to answer questions, to support the launch of a
product, or whatever you like! Here are a few quick tips to ensure that yourTwitter live stream is a hit:
Your live video can appear anywhere that a Tweet can go. This
means that it will be searchable on Twitter, and it can be
embedded on other websites.
Promote your stream in advance – through Twitter and other
avenues,
 to encourage as many viewers as possible to tune in.
Maybe make the stream’s content a one-off so it becomes a
“not-to-be-missed” occasion.  To automatically notify Twitter
followers each time you go live, hit Edit profile on desktop and
check the "Show when I'm LIVE" box beneath your bio.
Host it at the right time: use Twitter analytics to see when your
audience is most often online and host your stream at a time
when they are going to be around to watch!
Add a clear and compelling message to help people identify
your live stream just before you go live. People who follow and
who have 
opted in to notifications will be notified when you go
live (for the current broadcast and those in the future – make
sure you check the " Show when I'm LIVE” option under the
“Edit Profile” menu) and the associated tweet will make up
part of an automated tweet and push notification used to
promote your broadcast.
Join in with the live conversation - acknowledge viewers and
their 
questions and ask for likes and shares as a way to help
build your audience for the next stream.
For additional exposure, embed your live stream anywhere on
the web
 by simply using the embed code from the tweet that
your broadcast generates.
Analyze your performance within the app – number of likes,
views,
 and replays, to see how you can improve your live
streaming for next time.
For ideas and insights into the benefits of using live video on Twitter and
other platforms, check out the 
“Explained: The Best Types of Content to Post
on Social Media” 
chapter of this book.
Host Twitter chats for engagement and authority building
Twitter chats - live, structured conversations between users on Twitter - arean effective way to engage with and build stronger relationships with your
audience, and also encourage new people to follow you. The reason why
Twitter chats are so effective is that the people who participate in them are
the ones that enjoy actively engaging on the social network. Many brands
host weekly Twitter chats as a way to build authority within their niche,
promote their products and services, and to grow their professional network
by interacting with peers. Before you jump in and start your own, I'd
recommend searching for and observing a couple of existing Twitter chats
within your industry to familiarize yourself with how they work and to get a
feel for whether they might be suitable for your own business objectives.
Sites like Twubs (
http://twubs.com/twitter-chats
) feature tons of examples for
you to choose from (or you could simply search the web for "[your keyword]
+ twitter chat), while 
http://www.tchat.io/ 
allows you to easily follow and
reply in real- time to tweets that include a specific hashtag, i.e., the one used
for your chat! If you want to host your own chat, set a date and time, a unique
hashtag (so that others can follow along and join in more easily), and
encourage interaction by promoting the event well in advance. Whether you
host or join a Twitter chat, remember to contribute valuable tweets to the
conversation using the relevant hashtag and retweet others’ great responses to
praise their input.
Note:
 Twitter reply control options let you dictate who's able to respond, or
not, to your tweets. You can limit who can reply to each of your tweets to:
everyone, only people you follow, and only people you mention. Use this
feature to your advantage to help focus the attention of your audience on
certain tweets. For example, you could: 
Conduct more intimate Twitter chats by limiting who can reply
to a tweet (e.g., just the one or two people you @mention in it).
This also makes Twitter chats easier to follow than how they
are traditionally, in a busy hashtag stream.
Or in the case of direct marketing, block replies to emphasize a
tweet's message or focus on a product - rather than risk it being
diluted by a debate in the comments.
Create Twitter Lists to segment tweets and organize prospects
Twitter Lists are perhaps one of the most underutilized functions of the site;
they allow you to easily organize and view the content most worth readingfrom the people you follow and can also be used as a networking tool, i.e., to
interact and engage with the people who you choose to add to lists. Tweets
from people in your Twitter lists appear in a separate feed, which can allow
you to filter out a lot of the 'noise' on the platform. Examples of groups of
people you can sort into Twitter lists include customers, potential customers,
your most passionate fans, people with whom you interact most, professional
contacts and people who inspire you. By checking in on the activity in your
lists, you can more easily pick and choose the most opportune time to reach
out with a conversational message and begin to foster potential relationships.
How to create and add people to a Twitter List:
1
. 
Click on your profile icon at the top of your Twitter profile,
choose 'Lists' and click the 'Create list' button.
2
. 
Give your list a name and description, e.g., Business
Influencers, and choose whether you want to make it public or
private.
3
. 
Search for people to add to your list by username, real name, or
business or brand name, and insert them via the cog menu in
search results or at the top of their profile. You can also use the
same method to add people to a list from your own or anyone
else's list of followers.
Note: 
Joining public lists is a useful way to discover interesting, themed
content to share; these lists also act as ready-made groups of people you
might want to connect with. To follow a public list, go to a profile, click
"lists" and choose the list you'd like to subscribe to. You don't have to follow
a person's profile to follow one of their public lists.
Explore the business potential of Twitter Group DMs
Twitter’s group direct messages – setup via the normal DM option, then
adding names or usernames via a search - enable you to invite up to 20 users
who follow you to join you in a group conversation. When someone joins the
chat, they can invite people who follow them, even if those users don’t follow
you or others 
within the group - a fantastic opportunity to introduce yourself
or be introduced to others. Some other notable benefits of group DMs on
Twitter include making private, one-to-one introductions and connections
with influencers and brand advocates, holding group discussions with fellowteam members, and resolving a pressing customer service issue involving
multiple parties.
Using Twitter for Customer Service
In addition to providing an effective platform for promoting your business
and its products or services, Twitter is also a fantastic medium to handle
customer service issues. Here are a selection of tips to help you optimize your
approach to handling customer queries via the medium of tweets:
Consider a profile dedicated to customer service
Depending on your company's resources and levels of Twitter interaction,
you may want to consider opening a Twitter account dedicated only to
responding to queries from customers. The idea here is that you can use your
brand's main Twitter handle to focus on positive engagement, sharing
valuable content, and posting the odd marketing message - leaving your
secondary account available to host customer service conversations. If this is
something you intend to do, be sure to make clear which account customers
should tweet to with complaints by placing the @username and an
explanation on your website, marketing material, and in your main Twitter
account's bio or header design.
Prevent a barrage of queries with a single public tweet
In the event that something happens that a whole lot of customers are going
to notice and likely tweet to you about, e.g. payments not working on your
website, your store unexpectedly having to close for the day, etc., it’s a good
idea to post one tweet to explain the situation and to pin it to the top of your
feed, so that it can be seen prominently on your profile. This will help
prevent a barrage of messages asking the same question, freeing you to deal
with the more pressing matters at hand.
Switch to a personal Twitter account for serious issues
For the 
most
 serious cases of customer disputes, consider responding from
your personal Twitter account to deal with customers who require special
treatment to keep them happy. It will show the customer, through a personal
message, that you really care about them and, perhaps more importantly, it
will protect your brand image from a storm of controversy away from your
company's main Twitter account.Measuring Twitter customer service success
Measuring the success of customer service on Twitter requires a different
approach to ordinary Twitter activity (covered later in this chapter). Some of
the metrics that you might want to consider analyzing include the number of
@mentions requiring customer service, the response time (how long it takes
you to reply to customer 
queries) and response rate (the number of tweets
actually replied to).
Enable Twitter’s Essential Customer Service Tools
In November 2016 Twitter introduced three great new tools to help
businesses handle customer service queries more smoothly. To set up these
new features, you need to enable them from the Customer Support menu of
your Twitter Dashboard: 
https://dashboard.twitter.com/i/settings/support
 
Show people your account provides support
When you check this box, the phrase "Provides support" will appear next to
your Twitter name in search, and a message button will also be added to your
profile. This option is particularly useful if your brand has multiple accounts,
e.g. one for marketing and another specifically for support; a way to direct
customers where to get help quickest.
Add your support hours
In the past, brands would usually add their available hours of support within
the text of their bio. That space is now freed up, as you can let people know
the best time to tweet or DM you with a dedicated line at the top of your
profile. Tap the "Support hours" button in Settings and enter the hours and
days that best suit your business. Don't forget to select your time zone from
the drop-down box.
Add a Welcome message for DMs
When you add a welcome message, it will appear automatically when people
select to DM you from your profile. A welcome message can be used as a
quick way to greet customers and let them know how you can help.  
Paid Advertising on Twitter Strategy
Whatever your business objective, a variety of tools from hashtags to
advanced targeting make Twitter a powerful destination to build ads. Twitter
brags that its users are in the perfect frame of mind to discover a brand,product, or piece of content, since the main reason that people use Twitter is
to "discover something new and interesting". To begin setting up a Twitter
Ads campaign, you need to gain access to Twitter Ads Manager by visiting
ads.twitter.com.. There are a number of Twitter ad products to choose from,
depending on what goal you want to achieve. Some of the most popular are
as follows:
Followers (Promoted Account): 
Use simple copy that clearly tells people
what you want them to do (follow you!) and spells out the benefits -
receiving deals and discounts, exclusive news, etc. Refrain from adding links
or images that will detract from that all-important “Follow” button. With
promoted accounts, your Twitter username, profile photo and a Follow button
will also appear as a suggestion in strategic spots across Twitter on desktop
and mobile, such as the Who to Follow box and Home timelines. If using this
option, ensure that your profile picture, name, and bio are in 
tip-top shape, as
this, in addition to your copy, is what people will be acting upon.
Website clicks or conversions: 
Combine this option with a Website Card for
greater impact. Unlike an ordinary tweet that may just display a plain link,
Website Cards show a preview photo and additional information about your
site. The idea is that the eye-catching format of these tweets (complete with
image, text caption, story headline and call to action button, e.g., "Read
more...") will allow you to easily display website content within a tweet and
drive relevant traffic to your home page, product page, or an important blog
post.
Tweet engagements: 
Use this option to drive higher levels of engagement on
your Twitter posts; particularly relevant to generating buzz around something
like a product launch, upcoming event, or seasonal occasion.
Carousel ads:
 Use this option to showcase multiple features or products,
promote multiple offers, illustrate various benefits of a product, highlight
multiple reviews and customer testimonials, break up a single image across
multiple frames, or to tell a multi-faceted story.
Twitter ads best practices
Once your Twitter Ads account is up and running, it’s time to start
constructing your ad campaigns. There are five results a campaign can affect:
click-throughs, Tweet impressions, Tweet engagements, followers, and videoviews. Let’s look at the four core elements of a Twitter ad campaign, and
some best practices when you’re building the creative:
Objective:
 Have a clear idea of what you want to accomplish, e.g., getting
website clicks, raising brand awareness, attracting new followers. Knowing
what you want will help you choose the campaign that will optimize results.
KPIS (Key Performance Indicators):
 KPIs are the specific metrics you will
use to measure the results of your campaigns. Each Twitter campaign is
optimized towards a specific KPI, e.g. a video views campaign will have a
KPI of views, and you will be charged when someone watches your video.
Audience:
 Having a concrete idea of your audience will help ensure Twitter
ad success. Whether you are targeting a very niche audience or a broad
swathe of people in a particular location, be considerate of the targeting
options you choose. You’ll find advice on audiences below.
Creative:
 The biggest factor in the success of your ad is ultimately what
people see while browsing Twitter, and it's important that you stand out.
Campaigns with an eye-catching creative will obviously perform better than
those that do not! Video is an increasingly important element of Twitter
advertising, with vertical video ads becoming a standout option for many
advertisers.
Creating effective Twitter ads
It might sound obvious, but all the Twitter Ads you create appear on Twitter
as tweets. Videos, polls, and website links center around the tweet. This is
important to consider, as the placement of all ads will be in the feeds of users,
which will influence your creative approach. When crafting your Twitter ads,
keep the following in mind:
Emphasize urgency: Start your free trial now! Less than 30
tickets remaining!
Avoid distracting hashtags: Twitter recommends that you use
no more than two per ad.
Add subtitles to video ads: Adding captions to videos lets you
to deliver your message to everyone, even those watching with
the sound off.
Discount offer by %, not number: This is especially importantto do for products or services with a value of less than $100. If
your product is selling for $30, for example, "20% off" sounds
much more impressive than "$6 off".
Use a call-to-action: Tell people what you want them to do, in
order to drive action. Tell them to sign up, click to purchase,
follow you for more info, etc.
Twitter Ads targeting advice
Use the knowledge you have of your audience to help Twitter define how
best to target them with your ads. The targeting options may differ depending
on your goal, but include:
Interests: 
As a way to broadly target an audience, picking out interests from
hundreds of categories and sub-categories is a good way to go about it.
Followers: 
This option – more niche than the last - allows you to reach
people with specific interests or who are similar to followers of accounts
other than your own – like competitors, influencers in your industry, and
businesses that 
aren’t 
competitors, but do target a similar audience. Use
Twitter’s search to find usernames to add, and then use the ‘expand your
reach’ link to find more. Adding around 10-25 usernames per campaign will
ensure that you’re reaching a large enough audience.
Tailored Audiences: 
If you already have a CRM (customer relationship
management) list, Twitter can use this to target this audience on the social
network based on data like email addresses, Twitter IDs, web browsing
behavior.
Keywords: 
A way to reach people that engage with or search Twitter using
specific keywords.
Device: 
Reach an audience based on what device they use to access Twitter
.
Geography, Language, and Gender: 
Target an audience by country, state,
zip, language, or their gender in order to increase relevance. 
Once your targeting option is chosen, you'll be able to manually select the
tweets you want to promote or let Twitter automatically select your five most
engaging recent tweets for further exposure.
Note: 
Twitter advises that you shouldn’t make any changes to ads within thefirst five days of a campaign. This allows Twitter’s system to ‘efficiently
calibrate your ads’ via the ‘learning period’, in which Twitter’s ad delivery
system is measuring user response and performance, in order to optimize
targeting. And when you do update your ads, Twitter advises businesses to
make all of their desired changes at once, then let the campaign sit for
another 3-4 days to understand the impact before making any additional
updates.
Twitter ad budgeting and campaign measurement advice
How much is one Twitter follower, website conversion, app install, email
subscriber, etc. worth to you? Consider this and then set a daily and total
budget for your campaign accordingly, either CPC (cost-per-click), CPF
(cost- per-follow), CPL (cost-per-lead) or CPE (cost-per-engagement). All
campaigns end once the budget has been used, so you’ll never be
overcharged. Use an A/B testing approach to Twitter advertising to see which
combination of text and images is driving the most engagement at the lowest
price, and use this knowledge to optimize future campaigns. To help you
figure all this out, the Campaigns Dashboard will show you a number of
metrics related to your paid marketing on Twitter. You may also choose to
setup Conversion Tracking within the Twitter advertising dashboard as a way
to measure return on investment.
Monitor all activity via Twitter's Activity dashboard
Twitter's Activity Dashboard - available via 
http://analytics.twitter.com 
-
gives detailed insight into how your tweets – both paid and organic - are
performing. The dashboard will tell you how many times any individual
tweet has been viewed on mobile and desktops, how many link clicks it has
received, the favorites and retweets it has attracted, and a month-to-month
overview of your activity to show if your progress is on an upward trend.
You'll also find data about your followers (the amount, location, gender, and
their top interests), which can be used to work on content more tailored to
them. Finally, you'll find the option to measure your return on investment by
tracking the actions people take after interacting with your ads on Twitter,
i.e., visiting your website and purchasing a product. Use the combined power
of Twitter's analytics to track the progress of your Twitter strategy, to see
what works and what doesn't, and to tweak your approach accordingly.
Note: 
In the Twitter mobile app, check out the Engagement feature for aquick glance at the performance of any tweet you post. From the tweet's
detail page, tap "View Tweet activity" to see statistics for its views,
engagement, and interactions.Pinterest Tips: 
Pin Your Way to Marketing
Perfection
First launched in March 2010, Pinterest lets users create and organize virtual
pinboards on almost any topic, then share these pins (which are most
commonly images, but can also be in video form) to other Pinterest users and
across the web. Pins can either be uploaded directly from your computer or
mobile device or shared from a website. Pinterest is a terrific visual
marketing platform, with built-in e-commerce tools for buying and learning
more about products. What's more, Pinterest is incredibly well indexed for
search both in the Pinterest app and on Google. If you sell a product,
Pinterest should be high up on your list for a social network to experiment on.
And when you consider that Pinterest is the second biggest driver of web
traffic among social media sites (beaten only by Facebook) and the Internet’s
number one platform for product discovery, it is no surprise that thousands of
businesses, including the biggest in the world, use it as a place to showcase
their brands to an audience of over 350 million active users per month.
Pinterest users visit the site to search for, share, browse, collate, and 
buy
 the
things that they love and that inspire them - and this is where the huge
potential for businesses on Pinterest comes into play. Pinterest occupies a
unique spot amongst social platforms; a place where users go to discover
content related to themselves and their aspirations rather than focusing on
others, and this has means it is a powerful platform for users to be open to
making purchasing decisions and uncovering new brands and products. 
Pinterest success in a nutshell
The most successful businesses on Pinterest share pins that pair captivating
images with content that solves a problem, inspires a user, offers something
desirable or appeals to a hobby or an activity. In short, the best pins represent
the best ideas – they’re inspirational and actionable. Your aim should be to
create pins that have a clear audience, and are engaging for that audience.
Think about how these pinnable traits can be applied to your brand as a way
for people to discover content about the things they love that have beenpinned by you - to encourage engagement and conversation about your
company culture, products and services, and to drive click-through rates to
your content outside of Pinterest.
While 
some 
Pinterest users visit the site with the explicit desire to find a
product
to purchase, others don’t, or are at a different stage of the buying journey.
Therefore, the mix of content you provide should appeal to and positively
influence both types. In short, if the content you post makes someone want to
buy from you, that's great (Pinterest users often create "wish list boards" as a
stepping stone to purchasing products so you'll want to encourage them to
add your products to these while browsing). But if it makes them laugh,
smile, daydream, or think positively about you, that’s a really good sign too.
Pins that aren't solely promotional, but lifestyle-based and influential by
positive association with your business can be just as effective in the long
run. Whether your content offers a helpful tip or motivates a user to take an
action, that’s just more reason for them to 
repin it to one of their boards for
safe keeping and to show off to their followers via their Home screens.
Even if your brand isn't very visual and you don't think the site would be a
very good fit, it pays to remember that Pinterest is as much (if not more)
about collating and sharing images by others, as pinning your own. For
example, a coffee shop may have a board about their drinks and food, but
also about the latest trends in coffee culture - gadgets, music, interior design,
etc. People repin and follow accounts on Pinterest because they appeal to
their passions and needs, not because they love your latest marketing
campaign! Be a resource for pinners and pin with a service mindset, not one
obsessed with profit.
Pinterest Profile Optimization
Pinterest's current layout doesn't give a whole lot of scope for customizing
the look of your profile, but there are still a few key things you must do to
maximize the impact of your account.
Sign up as a business (or convert your personal Pinterest account)
In November 2012, Pinterest ramped up its support for brands by allowing
them to sign up specifically as businesses and also allowed those brands thatalready had a Pinterest presence to convert their personal accounts to ones for
business. To do either, visit 
http://business.pinterest.com
, 
and select the
option that applies to you. Once you're signed up as a business, you'll gain
access to a selection of business-specific resources, including Pinterest
analytics tools, successful case studies and links to Pinterest buttons and
widgets you can place on your website or blog to promote your activity on
the site.
Craft an effective username
The first thing you'll want to get right when signing up for Pinterest is your
username, which will form the basis of your Pinterest profile's URL (e.g.,
www.pinterest.com/yourcompanyname). 
You will want to publicize this
URL both online and in the real world, so try to keep it short, simple and
memorable. The obvious choice is your brand name, but if you have a
keyword or slogan related to your company that could work better (especially
if your brand's name is longer than the 15-character limit), then consider that
instead.
Use the ‘About’ section to your advantage
The description you write in the About section of Pinterest appears at the top
of your profile page, and acts to describe your brand and what you do.
Crucially, however, it will also appear under your Pinterest URL in Google
search results, so make sure to include two or three of your business' most
relevant keywords. Don't overdo the length - 160 characters should be plenty.
For example, mine reads: "Andrew Macarthy, author of the #1 Amazon Web
Marketing Bestseller, 500 Social Media Marketing Tips. Follow for social
media tutorials and infographics!
"
Add your website and verify it for trustworthiness
Pinterest will display a little 'globe' icon at the top of your profile, which will
lead to your website when clicked. It isn't hugely prominent on the Pinterest
profile page, but every little bit helps, so don't leave it blank. To show people
that you are a trusted source of information, Pinterest allows you to verify
your website. Once verified, you’ll earn a tick next to its URL on your profile
and you’ll also gain access to Pinterest web analytics. To verify your website
on Pinterest, click the "Verify website" button next to the box in which you
entered your URL. On the next page, follow the instructions to complete the
verification process. You can verify using an HTML file or a meta tag.Upload a great profile image and customize your cover image
The two most popular types of Pinterest profile images for brands are your
company's logo or, if you are the figurehead of your business, a head and
shoulders shot - smiling and happy, of course. Upload whichever works best
for you.
Pinterest rolled out an update to the layout of its business profiles in spring
2018, which includes a profile cover photo that can be used to show visitors a
selection of your best Pins. It’s not customizable in the same way as other
social networks, i.e. you can’t upload a ready-made banner image like on
Facebook, but you do have some authority over it. Click the pencil icon next
to your cover photo to choose which selection of Pins you want to appear
there. Options include the most recent Pins saved to your profile, the most
recent Pins people have saved from your site and linked accounts, or a
selection of Pins from any existing board of your choosing. If utilizing this
last option, you could choose a board filled with your most-shared pins to
highlight those, or pick a board filled with pins that showcase a particular
product or sale. Or you could make up a custom board filled with images that
reflect your brand image (logo, colors, fonts, etc.), and select that to add a
striking layer of branding to your profile.
Customize the featured boards at the top of your Pinterest profile
As a business user, Pinterest allows you to feature up to five of your most
important pinboards in a looping carousel, which sits at the top of your
profile - it's one of the first things visitors to your Pinterest account will see,
so the perfect way to introduce yourself and show what you can offer - a
collection of your latest products, popular pins from the past, or anything else
that fits your business. To start building your brand’s showcase, visit your
profile on the web and click the edit pencil button in the bottom-right corner
of your featured boards placeholder, or visit the profile section of account
settings.
Pinterest Marketing and Content Strategy
As discussed above, people visit Pinterest to find ideas from brands and
businesses, and they actively seek out ideas and inspiration from great
accounts. As a brand (and as is the case with most social networks), focusing
on a niche group of highly-engaged users will produce far better results thantargeting a broad, unspecified audience. If you focus on sharing consistent
content within your niche, people will start to look to you as a trusted source
of inspiration and information. Focusing on a niche audience will also
produce favorable results within the Pinterest algorithm, which will show
your content to more people who might also be interested in your Pins.
What's more, unlike sites like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter where the
majority of a post's engagement and reach usually occurs within the first 24
to 48 hours of it being published, content on Pinterest will continue to be
discovered over the course of days, weeks, months, and even years. As such,
Pinterest is one of the most powerful social networks for long-term growth
and driving consistent traffic to your website.
Note: 
Pinterest employs what it calls a "smart feed" algorithm, which
measures the quality of a pin based on the attractiveness of its image and the
authority of the 
source website from which it is pinned. Pins that combine
these two elements are given preferential treatment within the site's feed. Of
course, it's all-but-impossible to tell if your pins are being picked out for
special treatment by the smart feed algorithm, but knowledge of this back-
end process should encourage you to consistently share only the most
awesome stuff.
Optimum Pinterest pin image sizes and design
Research shows that taller images encourage more re-pins on Pinterest as
they work better in the way the site stacks pieces of content on top of each
another in its infinitely-scrolling, narrow-blocked grid. So, if you want the
images on your Pinterest account and blog to be viewed and shared more on
Pinterest, focus on creating taller images. This isn't always possible, of
course, but with the ability to use tools like Adobe Spark and Canva to
automatically transform image profiles (e.g. from a square or landscape to tall
and thin), and image types that naturally lend themselves to Pinterest like
infographics and step-by-step "how to" posts (both discussed below), there
are several easy ways to implement this strategy into your Pinterest activity.
Pinterest image size specifics
Pinterest doesn't limit the vertical size of images pinned to its boards, but the
horizontal width of pictures does max out at 735 pixels. Any image width
will work, but it will be resized and displayed at a max of 735 pixels.
Pinterest explains that the ideal aspect ratio for a vertical pin is 2:3. Tocalculate aspect ratio, divide the width of an image by two and the height by
three and you should end up with the same answer. For instance, running the
calculation for a 1,000 x 500 pixel image would result in an answer of 500.
Square images that are 600px wide x 600px tall can work well, too. Also
keep this in mind: Pinterest only lets users pin from web pages where there is
at least one image, and these images need to be a minimum size of 110 × 110
pixels big. So, to encourage pinning from your own website and blog, be sure
to add at least one pinnable image to every page or blog post.
Note: 
The vast majority of Pinterest users access the site from mobile, so it’s
important that your content caters to their smaller screen size. Pinterest
suggests that you tailor pins’ font size so that it is legible on small screens. If
you’re linking back to your own content, it’s also important that the page that
you’re sending users to is mobile friendly, too. In addition, make sure your
pins and your website share a similar look and feel. This continuity has been
shown in studies to result in a noticeably higher lift in online sales. 
Pinterest images’ type and design
As for color and design, lifestyle images are often more effective than
product shots on Pinterest. Much of what works with traditional print
advertising will work on Pinterest, too (angles, graphic backgrounds, color,
use of space, etc.). In addition, a year-long analysis of some half a million
pins by Philadelphia-based startup, Curalate, showed that images
(particularly of products) taken against a plain and minimalist background
tended to do better on Pinterest (in contrast to most other social networks)
than those with too much in the frame. In addition, 
very light and very dark
images were seen not to perform well - somewhere in the middle, then, is
best. Pins that contained multiple dominant colors (rather than just one) were
seen to receive more attention, while bold and warm colors like orange and
red were seen to be repinned more than "colder" colors like blue. Lastly (and
somewhat surprisingly), it found that images 
without 
human faces worked
best on Pinterest - theorizing the reason behind this is that the site is a social
network of "things," where faces are only a distraction, whereas a site like
Facebook is a social network of people. While these trends may work as a
starting point for formulating a Pinterest strategy, I recommend taking them
with a pinch of salt and keeping a close eye on which content best works for
you and your audience.Note: 
According to Pinterest, an unbelievable 97 percent of top search results
on Pinterest are unbranded. For businesses like yours, this presents an
opportunity to stand out and gain critical brand recognition. Pinterest
recommends adding a small logo in one of the four corners of your pin. 
When and what to pin - be consistent and original and utilize the
Seasonal Insights Report
In order to stay in the good books of the Pinterest algorithm and to ensure the
maximum level of exposure for your content, pin regularly and consistently –
a few times a day is a good target - but keep the stream going steadily,
instead of weeks with nothing followed by huge bursts of activity. Pinterest’s
algorithm also prioritizes pins that are new to the web and to the site, so as
soon as you create new content for your website, blog or on other social sites,
be sure to publish it to Pinterest as well.
As Pinterest is one of the web's the go-to places for planning, the site sees an
especially sharp uptick in usage around big seasonal moments, like
Halloween, Christmas, or Mother's Day, etc. These calendar spots are
opportunities for you to maximize your reach in front of a bigger-than-usual
audience, so bust out your calendar and mark the dates where your brand
wants to be especially active on the platform. and resources.
Note: 
As a way to give your Pinterest content more exposure, saving a single
pin to multiple boards is a good idea, but it’s important that you save it to the
most relevant board first – that Pin will get priority in the Pinterest feed when
it is distributed. Saving pins to irrelevant boards won’t help your cause and
may even impede the distribution of your content on Pinterest.
What 
you post will depend on your business, but as statistics reveal that
around 80% of all content on Pinterest is made up of re-pinned pins, aim to
create original and inspiring pins to ensure that, more often than not, you are
in that magic other 20%. When the pins you post includes a product, the
following strategy might help: post one photo of the product on its own (e.g.,
with a plain white background) and another within the setting that it will be
used (e.g., luxury towels in a bathroom). Some people prefer to pin simple
images for inspiration, while the latter strategy gives fans a way to imagine
how the product can fit into their own lives. Of course, 
make sure to link both
pins back to the same sales page of your website.When you pin content from others, build authority within your niche by
sharing stuff that is inspirational, entertaining, accurate, up-to-date, helpful,
and insightful. Other Pinterest users' boards reveal a lot about their likes,
interests, wishes and desires, so use what you can find to turn your profile –
in addition to an advert for your brand - as a destination that serves your
audience. Click on the Explore icon on the Pinterest home page to research
what’s hot with Pinterest users right now, then decide if it is suitable for you
to integrate these trends into your content strategy. Make your account a
more valuable resource by sharing pins from other boards that your fans will
love.
Note: 
Similar to your content and campaigns on other social networks,
timing on Pinterest is everything, from the time of year to when your
audience is most active on the platform. In the case of Pinterest, its
extraordinarily handy “Seasonal Insights” report – released annually – can
help you to pinpoint when best to run certain types of campaigns or ramp up
pinning activity. This section of the site also provides information monthly
on the platforms’ hottest trends across multiple sectors and by country
location. Leverage the Seasonal Insights report and blog to start timing
seasonal campaigns around when people are starting to make specific
seasonal purchasing decisions. Find it here:
https://business.pinterest.com/en/insights
Keep Pinterest board names short and simple
Pinterest boards are where individual, related pins are grouped together. In
naming your boards, while you should be keyword-rich, keep the titles simple
and descriptive so that they can be found easily in Pinterest's search - but
short enough so that the names do not trail off when viewed on your profile.
Each of your board names can have up to 30 or so characters (including
spaces) before being cut off when viewed on your profile page - the
remaining characters can be seen when the board is clicked on. In Pinterest
search, meanwhile, the cut-off point is even shorter, at around 20 characters.
If your board name is more than 20 characters long, try to put the most
relevant keywords at the beginning so that you give it the best chance of
being discovered. Your Pinterest board name will become part of its URL,
i.e.
 www.pinterest.com/username/your-board-name, 
(important for SEO and
discovery on the web), so  choose wisely.Note: 
Many people turn to Pinterest as a search engine (opting for it over
Google, even, for certain searches), so approaching the setup of your content
on the site with an SEO mindset is important - in board names, pin names and
descriptions, and even the file name of your images (more on these shortly).
When creating boards, keep "niche" in mind
If you have spent time on Pinterest, you might have noticed that some of the
biggest brands on the site have created 
loads 
of pinboards; each very specific
in its content. While flooding your profile with pins might seem counter-
intuitive from the "less is more" school of thought, in fact, it could pay
dividends. Here's why: 
because people use Pinterest search a lot to find
content (or come across it via a web search), creating highly targeted boards
gives your pins a better chance of being found and viewed. For example, a
board called "Wedding Inspiration" is very general - there are thousands all
named the same and the chances of yours being found if you are just starting
off as, say, a wedding accessories vendor, are slim. However, a board called
"Floral Pink Wedding Dresses 2020," although less likely to be searched for,
has 
much 
less competition, and therefore gives it a better chance of being
discovered in search results. So, when you create your Pinterest boards, think
unique, specific and niche, and target the content and keywords that you
think your audience will be looking for.
Select an attractive board cover
One pin from each of your Pinterest boards will be used as the board cover.
This image should be eye-catching, attractive and represent the board as a
whole, on your profile and in search results. In short, your board cover should
appeal to users enough to make them want to click and explore its contents in
full. To select a pin as your board cover, visit the board you want to change
the cover of, click the pencil icon at the top, and select the 'Change Cover'
button. Use the arrows to find the pin you want to use as your board cover.
When selecting your board cover image, you can reposition the image to have
the best part featured on the cover. Click Save to apply the change.
Rearrange your Pinterest boards by importance
Pinterest gives you the option to rearrange your boards. All you need to do
from your profile page is to select “drag and drop” from the drop-down menu
above your boards, then hold and drag boards into their optimum positions.
The idea here is to shift your most important boards onto the first couple ofrows. Aside from your profile’s featured picks, think about which of your
boards you want to feature most prominently - based on seasonal promotions,
holidays, current trends, etc., and place them in the prime real estate area of
your Pinterest profile.
Create Secret Boards to collate pins and plan marketing
Pinterest's 'Secret Boards' feature allows you to create an unlimited number
of hidden boards that can be made public at any time in the future. One
simple and effective use for Secret Boards is related to seasonal campaigns,
e.g., Valentine’s Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc. Slowly build up your
campaign’s themed Secret Board throughout the year and when the time
comes, you’ll be well prepared to make it public with a wealth of content
which you can continue to add to during the promotional period. To create a
Secret Board, choose the option at the bottom of your profile page; or, when
creating a board from the 'Add' menu, make sure to switch the Secret Board
slider to 'On'.
Drive repins and web traffic with effective pin descriptions
As Pinterest is one of the world's biggest drivers of traffic to websites,
crafting effective pin descriptions is essential to giving your content the best
chance possible of being discovered when a user searches the site. With the
roll-out of 
Pinterest's Guided Search in April 2014 (a tool that offers instant
keyword suggestions and inspiration to help inspire users into finding exactly
what they want), optimizing your pin descriptions is more important than
ever. My primary advice is to write pin descriptions as a useful and
searchable piece of information, including specific and distinct keywords that
reflect the pin's content and your business, e.g., 
"red, V-neck striped red
sweater from Karen's Apparel, Denver" 
is much better than just 
"wool
sweater"
. If the pin demands it, descriptions that mention how the subject of
the pin provides value work better than straight explanations, so put yourself
into the mind of a customer and write what you think they might want to
know. For example, rather than saying something like 
"We're now selling
these diamond earrings, let us know what you think of them," 
a more
effective description might read 
"The way that the light bounces off these
beautiful diamond earrings is mesmerizing, and they'd go well with any kind
of outfit made for a night out on the town. Click here to buy." 
Some research
has shown that including a call to action in your pin description also helps to
encourage clicks, so you may want to experiment with these, too.Unlike other social networks where shorter copy is king, slightly longer
descriptions work better on Pinterest; just enough to spark a user's curiosity
so that they will feel compelled to click through to your website for more
information. Oh, and just before you publish your pin, add your site content’s
full URL within the description to boost its SEO. Always use the full URL,
because Pinterest has a habit of marking shortened URLs (bit.ly, TinyURL,
etc.) as spam. To encourage repinning (so that your pins are spread
organically to a greater audience throughout the site), your description should
also help people see the value of a pin and explain why they might want to
repin it to one of their own boards. 
As for hashtags, Pinterest allows you to use up a maximum of 20 (keep them
broad, but relevant to your content) to help users find your content. For good
suggestions of what to use, Autocomplete is one solution. To check
Pinterest’s Autocomplete, start typing in the Pinterest search bar, and
whatever Pinterest suggests is likely to be a high-volume keyword.
Modify blog image titles for optimum pinning from readers
The title you give an image when publishing it on your blog (that's the pop-
up message you see when you hover your mouse cursor over it) is the text
that Pinterest lifts to use as a pin's description when that image is pinned by a
blog reader. So, if you encourage blog readers to pin content from your site,
make sure that the image title (and subsequent pin description) appears as
you would like it to when it lands on Pinterest. I often pin from websites
where this hasn't been done, and if I'm not in the mood to optimize someone
else's pin for them so that it doesn't look bad on my profile, then I'll just close
the window and not bother. Don't let your readers do this to you! For
example, the auto-filled description generated by pinning an image of a
fashionable new rocking chair from a blog might appear as “rocking-chair-
new-small.jpg,” when it 
could
, if optimized, contain a full keyword
description of the product
.
Install the ‘Pin It’ bookmarklet and 'Pin It' buttons
The Pin It bookmarklet lets you grab an image or video from any website and
pin it to one of your boards in an instant. Installing this ensures that you can
quickly and easily pin top content to your boards as soon as you find it. When
you visit a website and click 'Pin It' on a page where there is an image you
want to pin (displayed in your browser's bookmarks bar), the bookmarkletwill display thumbnails of all 'pinnable' images on that page. Simply select
the one you want to share, choose the correct board, enter a description, and
hit 'Pin It'. Make sure that you install a Pinterest button on your blog, too
(place it beside the Facebook "Like" and "Tweet" buttons above, below, or to
the side of each blog post). This strategy ensures that your best images are
made as easy for Pinterest users (at least those who don't have the "Pin It"
Bookmarklet) to share as possible. Pinterest also has several choices of
'Follow' buttons, profile preview, and board preview widgets that you can
display on your website to show off your Pinterest presence to potential fans.
Choose the ones that appeal to you and embed them on your website where
people will see them. There are simple step-by-step instructions for choosing
and installing all of these widgets at the following addresses:
https://about.pinterest.com/browser-button
 
(Pin It Button);
https://business.pinterest.com/pinterest-widget-builder
 (Pinterest widgets).
On a related note (and this a strategy that will come into play once you are an
established player on Pinterest), use your most popular pins as an opportunity
to help drive sales 
outside
 of the social network, whether in real-life or on
your website. Case in point is the retailer Target: it highlights various in-store
items with a "popular on Pinterest" card to catch the eye of shoppers
(particularly if they are Pinterest users), and it also has a section of its website
- the Awesome Shop - dedicated to its most pinned content for visitors to
explore. The idea is that when someone sees that a particular item is popular
on Pinterest 
and 
that is has been given the seal of approval by their peers,
they just might be encouraged to invest as well.
Set up Rich Pins for greater visibility and Product Pins to sell 
 
In May 2013, Pinterest began to roll out Rich Pins, a way to make pins more
useful and engaging. With Rich Pins enabled, you'll be able to feature things
like the price and availability of a product, recipe details, maps, etc.,. on top
of and underneath relevant pins. Rich Pins update this information
automatically and display it below a pin in real time by lifting data from your
website. 
Ordinarily, to get started with Rich Pins, you’ll need to prep your website
with meta tags, test out the function and apply to get them on Pinterest.
Getting Rich Pins to work right requires some coding and technical know-
how, so if you're unsure what terms like "oEmbed" and "semantic markup"mean, I recommend getting together with a web developer for a chat and
pointing him or her to 
http://business.pinterest.com/rich-pins/ 
for more info.
Once you overcome the slight technical hurdle, there are plenty of reasons to
use Rich Pins including the likelihood of increased likes, repins, web traffic,
and sales - definitely worth the effort
!
The value of Product Pins (a subset of Rich Pins for selling products via
Pinterest)
As well as the features mentioned above, Product Pins let people buy your
products either without ever leaving Pinterest or by directing a user straight
to your brand website for checkout, and are visible in search results, in
related Pins and on your business profile, creating a seamless buying
experience for your customers. And despite offering a potentially lucrative
sales portal for your brand, Pinterest won't take a cut from sales generated via
Product Pins. With Pinterest being a hub for consumers’ wish lists and a
destination to window shop, Product Pins offer a fantastic opportunity to
businesses, especially those open to impulse buying. 
If you’ll be using Pinterest to promote and sell products 
and 
you use Shopify,
BigCommerce or Salesforce Commerce Cloud to do so, you will be able to
set up Product Pins through these services. Whichever setup route you
choose, once your application has been approved and Product Pins have been
activated (which can take several days), you will be able to pin products from
your web store to an automatically-created products board on your Pinterest
account. This board will be hidden, visible only to you, but the pins you save
there – as mentioned above – will be discoverable within Pinterest’s search
and explore features. Once Product Pins are live in your secret product board,
repin them to your relevant public boards to make them more visible to
customers.
Pinterest's own research shows that Product Pins generate higher click-
through rates than regular pins and make your brand more visible on the site.
What's more, users will receive an email notification if Product Pins they’ve
saved should drop in price, encouraging them to buy right away, particularly
if they weren't quite ready to buy at the original higher price.
Build A Pinterest Catalog for bulk, automatic Product Pin Creation –
and promotion
Pinterest also allows you to bulk upload your online store's full catalog to theplatform and easily turn all your products into dynamic Product Pins all at
once which can be turned into Shopping Ads as well, should you wish to pay
to promote them. In contrast, Rich Pins must be created individually and can't
be promoted as ads. So, if your product catalog is large or updated frequently,
a catalog may be worth considering. To use this feature, you will need:
1
. 
A Pinterest business account
2
. 
A data source - a file containing a list of your products and
their corresponding attributes
3
. 
A claimed website
4
. 
Data source hosting - a way to consistently host and store a
data source of your products that you can send to Pinterest
daily.
If you don’t have all of the above, you can partner with an e-commerce
website to format your products for Pinterest. GoDataFeed
(
https://www.godatafeed.com/
) and Productsup (
https://productsup.io/
) are
two such sites that Pinterest has partnered with.
 
After your data source is approved, Product Pins are automatically created for
every item in the upload. Afterwards, you can sort products into groups and
create Shopping Ads for them. Pinterest then uses the product data from your
data source to show relevant products to interested Pinners all over the
platform. To begin the catalog-building process, visit
http://catalogs.pinterest.com
Become a Verified Merchant to Increase Trustworthiness
The Verified Merchant programme is free to join and helps shoppers to
discover and buy from vetted brands on Pinterest. A badge on your profile
and product Pins will give proof that you're a trusted member of the Pinterest
e-commerce community, and will grab viewers' attention as they decide what
to buy. Once verified, your products can also appear within related product
suggestions, which puts your brand in front of even more people looking for
what you offer. To apply, your account must meet three requirements:
1
. 
Connect your catalog (as described above): Uploading your
feed is the fastest way to get your products onto Pinterest. 
2
. 
Install the Pinterest tag: A tag helps you to track actions that
come from Pinterest. See instructions athttps://business.pinterest.com/en-gb/pinterest-tag
3
. 
Meet Pinterest’s Merchant guidelines, viewable at
https://policy.pinterest.com/merchant-guidelines
Note: 
Once you’re verified, add merchant details to communicate more about
your brand values to allow people on Pinterest to learn about the brand
values and communities you represent, such as “responsibly sourced,”
“invested in good” and “inclusive”. You can also add details that highlight a
community you belong to, including "disabled-owned" and "black-owned."
Merchant details appear on your profile below your business name.
Overlay text on your images to grab attention and encourage interaction
 
Most Pinterest users scan the site's content and don’t take the time to read the
descriptions or comments associated with an image - that is unless the image
grabs their attention first! Images overlaid with easy-to-read, bold text do that
particularly well in drawing people's attention, clarifying the message of the
pin, and encouraging interaction with a call to action. Use free services such
as Canva and Adobe Spark to accomplish this result easily and stylishly.
After all, while it's great to get repins and comments on your pins, one of
your main goals is surely to drive traffic 
off 
Pinterest onto an external
website.
Share videos optimized for Pinterest
Directly-uploaded video files or pinned videos from sites including YouTube
and Vimeo will play directly within Pinterest, so if videos are part of your
marketing strategy, make sure your customers know about them via the site.
 
Pinterest video pointers for success
The general consensus amongst brands (and from Pinterest
itself) is that short videos perform best on the platform. The
ideal length is somewhere between 6 and 15 seconds, so
custom-made uploaded videos will probably be more effective
than the traditionally longer form content of YouTube, but
sharing from YouTube is at least worth testing as a potential
driver of traffic to your channel.
Don’t rely on audio to get your message across, as there is agood chance that users (mobile especially) will have their
sound switched off. Let your visuals speak for themselves, or
use captions or text overlay to explain your message.
Pick a strong cover image to show up in the feed - something
that represents what the video is about in one frame, and which
will help it to stand out amongst the sometimes-overwhelming
amount of other content appearing in users' feeds. If you’re
sharing a video from YouTube, its thumbnail will be what
appears on your boards and in the Pinterest feed - - take a look
at the custom thumbnail tips in the YouTube Tips chapter for
more specific advice on this.
Pinterest has revealed that the best-performing video types are
storytelling videos and how-tos. 
Following on from that last point, one effective idea is to use videos as a way
to demonstrate your products in use, either in isolation or – even better – in a
real-life setting. You could also create a separate video board where you pin
videos from Pinterest and around the web that complement yours, or invite
others to pin their content there. 
While I recommend pinboards made exclusively to draw attention to your
video and presentations, don't be afraid to repin this content (whether you
pinned it directly or as a separate image) to other relevant boards. For
example, a company that sells handmade soaps could pin a video showing its
manufacturing process to its dedicated video board, 
plus 
a board that relates
to the specific product that is being made, e.g., 
Winter Warmer Handmade
Soaps
.
Note: 
If you pin a video from a page on your website on which the video is
embedded (rather than a youtube.com address, for example), Pinterest will
show the directly-playable YouTube video, but the link and description
associated with that pin will be the URL and page name on your site, thus
helping with Pinterest and web search engine optimization. 
Supercharge your video Pin technique to capture attention
The Pinterest feed is competitive by design, with just 4-5 Pins crossing the
feed at a time. If you're handy with video editing software or know someone
who is, visual 
techniques using perspective, white space, color, movement,motion, and depth can be used to really stand out. Below are just a handful of
ideas and techniques for you to try. For more information and visual
examples, check out this presentation:
https://bit.ly/pinterestvideobreakthrough
Add Another Layer
The Pinterest home feed looks and feels like a flat surface. Introduce a second
layer to create the feeling of depth and draw viewers in: Slide an element
from the screen’s perimeter; create depth perception with shadows; have your
product or subject appear from out of the Pin; or use a peel back effect to
reveal your product.
Use Negative Space
Pinterest's grid-like feed offers far more “white” or “negative” space
surrounding content than other platforms. Use this negative space to blur the
lines between a Pin and its boundaries. Positive space is the area that is the
subject; negative space is the area around the subject.
Break the Border
Create perspective by slightly shrinking your Pin content to allow for a small
white border around it — allowing elements to bleed across those edges to
create the illusion that they are moving over the edge. A similar border can
also be used to create space for your creative to shake or move within the
feed.
Screen Play
As well as the four obvious borders of a pin, the screen itself can act as a fifth
- to help your content jump out at viewers. When creating your pin, mimic
the perspective of an object encountering the screen's surface - like someone
smashing the glass or painting it.
Add Rotation
Pins are ordinarily flat and 2D, but you can create a 3D effect adding some
rotational motion to the creative, especially if it moves beyond the border of
the Pin and has uses shadows to create perspective. This is especially
powerful for highlighting a single object, like a new product. And on that
note, if you start your video Pin with an empty canvas, you can drop, pull or
throw elements (like a product) into frame to provoke an immediate reaction
from the viewer. Experiment with Stories on Pinterest
In February 2021, Pinterest began the rollout of Story Pins (now known as
Idea Pins
) to all users – a destination for you to educate, help, and inspire
your audience (and in doing so, promote your business at the same time!).
Idea Pins give your followers a window into people behind your business, in
a way that simply pinning to boards can't. Each Idea Pin can have up to 20
images, videos 
and
 links - think the chance to share detailed step-by-step
instructions or text notes next to a new product range or recipe. Connecting
with your audience in this 
more relaxed and intimate is a sure-fire way to
boost engagement and help turn casual fans and customers into brand
ambassadors.
Pinterest's Idea Pins are different to stories on other platforms because they
intentionally do 
not 
disappear after 24 hours. In fact, Pinterest wants people
to save them to boards and interact with comments, likes, and saves.  Idea
Pins are seen by your followers at the top of their feeds, giving your profile a
spot in prime real estate on the Pinterest app, and acting as a gateway to more
of your content. Since Story Pins can be saved to boards, that makes them
discoverable in Pinterest search. And since millions of people use the site as a
search engine in its own right, they offer a new way for users to find you.
Idea Pins Tips and Best Practices
Pinterest uses the text in your Idea Pins to determine what it's all
about and to be able to show it to the people most likely to be
interested in it. So, use captions to explain your Idea Pin idea. If
you'll be speaking, captions also help people watching with sound
muted (and those with difficulty hearing) to understand and
engage straight away.
Pinterest has also revealed that the text overlay on your Idea Pins
affects how they show up in Pinterest search - 
‘It’s like SEO on
Pinterest: If you pick the right keywords, you’ll reach more
people’.
Idea Pins can be tagged with topics to help Pinterest categorize
them, and doing so with a mix of topics related to your pins will
help make them more discoverable.  For an added SEO boost,
utilize the description box to provide more information andcontext to the story.
Idea pins also allow you to tag products, to make your content
shoppable. These links also allow you to earn commissions
through affiliate links and to partner with brands on sponsored
content.
Despite their prominent position on Pinterest, try not to use Idea
Pins as a place to spam the link to your latest product or to run ads
- your followers won't appreciate it. That said, I don’t personally
see the harm in driving action more subtly - asking for a follow,
re-pin, or even sharing a URL to a useful resource.
Upload a compelling Idea Pin cover to attract views and keep
viewers’ attention- it's what people will see when Idea Pins display
on boards, or the first thing they’ll see when they open an Idea Pin
from the top of the Pinterest app.
Monitor the performance of your Idea Pins to determine optimize
your strategy as you progress. Pin Stats shows closeups, saves,
clicks and impressions for each Idea Pin.
The Board Sticker lets you highlight a specific board via your Idea
Pins in the Pinterest app.
Note:
 You can download and share published Idea Pins on social channels
including Facebook, TikTok, and Instagram. These Idea Pins will be
downloaded as a watermarked 
video that stitches all the Idea Pin pages
together, and finishes with an end card that displays your Pinterest name and
username.
Encourage Pin Takes (or create your own)
A Take is an Idea Pin that has been created in response to another Idea Pin.
Takes appear as responses to the original Idea Pin and can also be seen in
your home feed, from people you follow or on your profile.
Pin Takes are highlighted on the original Idea Pin itself, with the option for
you to select the best of them, which then get priority in the user's displays.
Users are also be prompted to add their own Take when viewing Idea Pins.
Takes encourage your fans to share their personal experiences with products,
or to respond to Idea Pins with a clip of how their own effort turned out (like
making a specific recipe, for example). They can also be used to add context
to craft how-tos and other Pin formats.Both Idea Pins and Takes appear in a dedicated Watch (video) feed on the
Pinterest app, which could be helpful additions to boost in-app engagement.
Interact, mention, and share your best content to community boards.
Consider using a service like PinGroupie (
http://pingroupie.com/
) to find
popular community boards, and share your best content with them. The logic
behind this strategy is that you find a board within your niche that is already
very popular, and you reach out to see if they’d be interested in having you
contribute. Do proceed with caution, however. In noticing that many users
have been using this route as a potentially shady growth tactic, Pinterest has
issued statements about the right and wrong ways to post. As a result,
community boards have been receiving less exposure in the feed than content
from personal boards. So, if you do go down this route, do only contribute
with genuinely meaningful and useful content that will benefit all who see it,
rather than sub-par pins to forcibly boost your views and clicks.
Encourage interaction and drive interest by adding guest pinners 
 
Selectively encourage brand ambassadors and influencers to pin to your
Pinterest profile on a group board (keep an eye on notifications for people
who repin your content a lot, or draw them in from other social networks).
Pinterest's messaging function (launched via the "+" icon at the bottom of the
site) is a useful way to engage with your most loyal and trusted followers,
and invite them to pin with you. Personalize the message to make the
individual feel special and to let them know why they were chosen, what you
want them to do and what's in it for them (money off vouchers, exclusive
access to new products, etc.). The beauty of this strategy is that when an
invited individual pins to your board, their activity shows up in both your
followers’ 
and their 
followers’ feeds. If the guest pinner in question is
popular 
on the site, you can just imagine the potential for increased interest in
your brand. Be picky about the people you invite, restrict just one or two
people to any one board so that they feel special, and give them as much
creative freedom as you are happy to allow. To add a guest pinner, enter their
username in the 'Add another pinner' box when creating a new board.
To supplement your Pinterest efforts further, consider using fan-made user-
generated content to harness quality pins that don’t require your time and
effort to make. A simple way to curate your user-generated content
effectively is to create a private Pinterest board that’s accessible only to youand your team. Use this board to help you collect and sort through all of your
user-generated content, and then repin only the best pins to your public
board. Remember to give credit so that the user can share the thrill of being
hosted by one of their favorite brands, with their own followers.
Share your Pins outside of Pinterest
When sharing your Pinterest post in a status update on Facebook, Twitter, in
an email newsletter, etc., copy the URL of the pin and mark it as a link to
click to "Pin for later," empowering your audience to bookmark content that
interests them. On a similar note, try featuring some of your top pins
(screenshot images of them and add a click-through link) in your email
newsletter, encouraging the Pinterest fans on your list to join you on the site.
One of the most effective ways I use this technique is with infographics. For
example, let’s assume the pinned infographic is called '10 Ways to Delight
Your Blog Readers'. I will copy the image into a photo editor and crop it to
show only the first of the ten ways. I'll then upload and post this shortened
image to Facebook, along with a post that describes the infographic and tells
fans to click through to Pinterest, at the link provided, if they want to see the
other nine points.
Pinterest Board Ideas for Business
VIP board to feature customers
Ask fans of your brand to pin pictures of themselves with their favorite
product of yours and to tag you in the description. You can re-pin those
photos onto a VIP board on your profile. Not only is this a great way to play
to the 'vanity' of your fans (they love to be featured on your boards), but it
also serves to spread the word of your brand around the social network.
Products and services board, give sneak peeks
While you should never use Pinterest as a way to spam your customers with
marketing pins, a couple of boards dedicated to your products and services
won't harm, particularly as Pinterest is such a 
huge 
driver of sales and web
traffic. Fashion brands on Pinterest are experts at this strategy, posting new
boards to reflect the changing season’s must-have looks and provide
exclusive sneak peeks to its fans. A study by Vision Critical for the clothing
brand J. Crew found that nearly a quarter (21%) of Pinterest users visited the
store to buy an item they liked or pinned from its boards. The same surveyrevealed that a whopping 80% tended to buy an item 
within three weeks of
pinning it. To boost this statistic even further, J. Crew tempts customers with
pin descriptions like 
“Love what you see? Our Very Personal Stylist team
can help you pre- order this look before it becomes available on Wednesday
August 21.) Call or email...”
Current campaigns board
Build a board specifically for posting information about your latest marketing
campaigns, offers and deals, so that your customers can find them all in one
place, e.g., Summer Offers, 25% Off Sale, etc. Make sure that you rearrange
your boards to make this one appear near the top of your profile, so that these
limited-time deals are given as much visibility as possible.
Meet-the-team board
Pinterest pins provide the perfect opportunity for your customers to get to
know you and your staff better. Take individual photos of your employees
and use the title and description to tell your customers who they are and what
they do; add other interesting snippets of information, e.g., their hobbies,
favorite movie or why they love working for you! In essence, take customers
behind the scenes, to help them connect more closely with you and your
brand.
Company history board
Take inspiration from Facebook's Milestones feature and use pins to
document the history of your business. Customers love to indulge in the
history and heritage of their favorite brands, and Pinterest provides the
perfect opportunity to let them do this. Showing that your company has a
history improves your credibility; showing your growth and new products
can imply core growth, stability and trustworthiness. Examples of stuff you
can feature as part of your history include storefront or website changes,
product package revisions through the years - and even pictures of you in
your younger days!
Tutorials and how-to board
In such a creative space as Pinterest, putting together tutorials and how-to
videos related to your business or industry works really well. In a step-by-
step process, use one pinned picture, GIF, or video per step to create an easy-
to- follow chain of instructions and increase your exposure at the same time.
Alternatively (and given the evidence that taller images get more re-pins),create
a single tall image made up of several smaller step-by-step photos and
instructions.
Reviews and recommendations board
A great number of people use Pinterest to get shopping inspiration and
associate themselves with brands and retailers. Write up reviews and
recommendations for products that people want and pin them to a board with
a title such as 'Products We Love', whether the items inside are yours or not.
Even if they aren't yours - good karma reciprocates good karma on Pinterest
and you'll see a long-term positive trend if you feature and tag others in this
kind of way
.
Showcase your blog and website
Create a board specifically to pin blog posts and articles that you have created
on your website - it helps to drive traffic to your content. Also use these
boards to highlight and re-purpose old (but still great) blog posts that were
posted before you joined the site.
Pinterest contest strategy
Like other social media outlets, Pinterest is a great way to hold contests to
increase engagement and loyalty. The easier your contest is to enter, the
simpler it is to set up and the more entries you are likely to receive. Examples
include asking entrants to pin images from your business website to enter,
asking fans to upload original images of their favorite products from your
brand (either to their own board or one a brand new one with a name that you
decide), or asking them to pin creations they have made by using one of your
products (for example, a sausage company could ask participants to pin
images and recipes of meals they have concocted in the kitchen).
Run an offer on Pinterest
People love offers - anything with the word ‘free’, ‘discount’ or ‘giveaway’
in it - and the visual nature of Pinterest is a great way to get them noticed.
Either pin images from your website and add a description of the offer
featured there, or upload a pin direct to the site for an 'exclusive to Pinterest
followers' offer. And how about getting even fancier, with something like a
'pin it to unlock' campaign? Upload a pin detailing a special offer and tell
your followers it will only run once the image has been re-pinned 'X' number
of times, encouraging them to like, comment, and re-pin to unlock it!Pinterest analytics strategy
Pinterest's built-in analytics tool (accessed via the drop-down menu on your
profile page or directly at 
https://analytics.pinterest.com/
) provides a top-
down statistical overview of how often content is being pinned from your
website, how many times your pins are re-pinned, how many people are
seeing your pins each day, how many are clicking on them, which devices
they're accessing your content on, and who these people are (based on
location, gender, interests, and languages spoken). You can also glance at the
most recent, most repinned, and most clicked content; click the "Export data"
button to generate a spreadsheet that will give a complete breakdown of likes,
comments and repins of each post. Another very useful section of Pinterest
Analytics is the demographics and interests data underneath the Audience
tab. Use the insights you find here to help tailor future content based on the
types of people who engage with your content 
and 
investigate potential
partnerships via boards that like to repin your posts, or brands that your
audience also engages with.
Advertising on Pinterest
Advertising on Pinterest comes in a number of forms, including – Promoted
Pins (
in various guises), One-tap Pins, Shopping Ads, and Search Ads. Like
other social ads, to generate the best results on Pinterest, you want the
message of the ad to match the message of the landing page. This means
thinking carefully about the design and text overlay of a pin, as well as the
pin description. Let’s take a look at each in turn, and some best practices:
Promoted Pins
 are a way for you to expand the organic reach of pins that you
want more of your audience to see, to build brand awareness, or to drive
traffic to your website. They appear in regular search results and category
feeds and are marked with a "Promoted Pin" label. Pinterest users often save
their favorite Pins (paid ads included) to their own boards, and so, Promoted
Pins generate a lot of impressions and engagements as they get resurfaced
time and again. When you pay to promote a pin, you only pay for the initial
"boost." One amazing feature of a Promoted Pin is that when someone shares
it on their board, the “Promoted” mark disappears, meaning that Promoted
Pin essentially becomes an organic Pin. What's more, any other engagement
or traffic that is generated via comments or re-pins (even after the promotionends) is all free, so, done right, they can be a very cost-effective way of
marketing your content and driving your business goals.
Promoted Pins also include the option to share videos, but while videos at
standard width are the same size as all other Pins on Pinterest, paid ad videos
at maximum width display at around 4x bigger and span right across
Pinterest’s two-column grid. For maximum impact, promoted videos should
be short (between 6 and 20 seconds is a good target to aim for), include your
logo and feature strong branding, ideally visible in the first few seconds to
Pinterest users scrolling through the site. Cinematic Pins are similar to video
Pins, but only animate when users scroll past them in their feed.
Like ordinary pins, the most successful Promoted Pins are informative,
inspirational and useful - not overly promotional. They blend in! Their
branding and logos compliment (not dominate) the pin; they include soft
calls-to-action in an image's text overlay and in the description (e.g., "Up to
40% off," "Shop our sale," "Free shipping") - not price; and their descriptions
are detailed. The copy should spotlight the most compelling aspects of the
pin, and tease what a user can gain from clicking through. Multi-product
images can also perform well, as they cater to different tastes, e.g., showing
off several products from one range rather than just one.
One-tap Pins
 take users to an external website or landing page that you set up
as soon as they are clicked or tapped (rather than showing a close-up of the
Pin and its description as normally occurs). Keeping things uniform and
seamless between the one-tap pin and your landing page (in terms of
language, branding, coloring, filters, etc.,) will help to increase your
conversions. Your aim is to make your ad and webpage look seamless so that
your prospects will trust they’re viewing the same brand when they’re on
your product page.
Search Ads
 were rolled out to all business on Pinterest in the Fall of 2017.
Search Ads allow you to build and serve targeted ads based on searches for
potential products, which essentially give you the opportunity to put an ad in
front of a customer at a moment when they’ve signaled intent or interest in an
idea or 
product. Search Ads also give you the ability to auto-target relevant
searches based on Pinterest's extensive “Taste Graph,” which includes more
than 5,000 interestShopping Ads
Available if you've created a product catalogs and product groups within
Pinterest, you can promote them as Shopping Ads, and Pinterest will target
your audience automatically.
Slideshow for collections ads
Slideshow for collections ads pull products from your catalog into an
automatically generated, attention-grabbing collections ad. This feature
makes building video ads easy (Pinterest shoppers love video), and leads to
bigger baskets since Pinterest's research shows that its shoppers are actively
considering and browsing more than one product at a time, leading to bigger
baskets. 
Shop the Look Ads
Shop the Look Pins (also known as Collections ads) allow you to tag up to 25
items in a single image - white dots highlight different parts of the look.
When they’re ready to buy, your customers can click through to your site to
check out.
Promoted Carousel Ads
Promoted carousel ads allow you to use up to five images within one ad to
market products and tell stories on Pinterest. This format can showcase a
product’s numerous features, drive additional purchases by showing multiple
items in a Pin, or increase awareness with a multi-image brand story.
Idea Ads
Like promoted Idea Pins - full-screen, multi-page presentations, which
include custom links.
1
. 
To get started building any ad type, visit
http://ads.pinterest.com
 and choose what sort of promotional
campaign you want to run, based upon your goals, e.g. Build
brand awareness, Get traffic to your website, or Increase
installs for your app.
2
. 
Next, name your campaign and add in a daily and lifetime
spend cap to ensure that you do not blow your ad spend budget.
The Campaign Placement section is where you'll choose to run
your ad campaign with Promoted Pins, Search Ads, or as is the
default recommended option - both. If you only want to runwith one or the other, click Edit and check the box as
appropriate.
3
. 
At the top of the next page, you’ll be asked to name a group of
ads (several under one campaign, for example), choose the start
and end dates of your campaign and provide a budget for the
group of ads as a whole.
4
. 
To reach the right people at the right time, Pinterest offers a
variety of targeting options to show your Promoted Pins to
specific audiences. Aside from location, gender, language and
device, you can 
also target your ads by using interests (targets
audiences based on other Pins they’ve saved and engaged
with), keywords (targets people when they search for
something specific) or audiences (creating an audience to
target, like retargeting people who have visited our website) —
or a combination of all three. As you choose, Pinterest will
show you an estimate of the impressions that your Promoted
Pin will receive on a weekly basis.
5
. 
Choose relevant keyword terms to describe your pin and help
your target audience find it. Pinterest will suggest related terms,
which you can include if you wish, and the site recommends
that you add at least 30 terms - a mixture of broad and specific
- to increase the reach of your Promoted Pin. When deciding
upon which keywords to target with Promoted Pins, use
Pinterest's Search to help you determine what type of keywords
people are using to find information about your service or
product. In addition, Pinterest ads' robust keyword search tool
can be used as a powerful generator of ideas regarding subjects
to base your promotion around.
6
. 
Choose a CPC (cost-per-click). You only pay when someone
clicks through to your website. Select when you want your
campaign to begin and end (or just keep it rolling). You can
choose to promote an existing pin (search by name or URL),
pin an image from your website, or upload a new piece of
content from your computer. Hint: pins that are performing
well organically (check your analytics for the data) can be great
ones to promote.
7
. 
Click Promote Your Pin to finish. Within the Pinterest adsdashboard, use the conversion tracking tools to see how many
clicks, engagements, and views your Promoted Pin has
received. Combine this data with Pinterest analytics to see how
your Promoted Pins perform and adjust your existing or future
campaigns to work on improving your results.
Note: 
Like other social networks, Pinterest offers a tracker to install on your
website that will help guide your advertising strategy. The Pinterest Tag lets
you follow the behavior of people who click on your Pinterest ads. You will
be able to see how they navigate through your website and whether or not
they convert. Use the Pinterest Tag to measure the performance and ROI of
your ads and improve your targeting for the future. If you're serious about
Pinterest ads, you'll also want to install Enhanced Match, which allows you to
capture even more — like situations when cookies aren’t present. A guide to
installing each can be found at
https://help.pinterest.com/en/business/article/pinterest-tag-implementation-
overviewLinkedIn Tips: 
Network Like Clockwork
LinkedIn is the web's central hub for professionals and businesses to connect
and market their brand, expertise, and skills to the world. Those who use
LinkedIn aren’t necessarily doing so for enjoyment; it’s a professional site,
like a networking event, so your approach to it needs to be treated as such.
People won’t be interested in trivial products; they want to make connections
and find professional solutions. As an individual on LinkedIn, you can -
among other things - use the site to establish a profile and control one of the
top search results for your name online, build a broad network of professional
connections whose knowledge you can tap into, and discover new business
opportunities. 
For businesses, meanwhile, LinkedIn launched the next generation of its
LinkedIn Pages - simply called LinkedIn Pages - in 2019. Unique amongst
other social networks, your LinkedIn Page is the best place to establish your
company as a thought leader, engage your employees and prospects, attract
new talent, publish and share content, and drive high-quality leads. Any
LinkedIn user can follow a company that has set up a LinkedIn Page to
receive and interact with updates, which allows you a chance to drive
awareness of you and your brand. Research by LinkedIn has revealed that
you only need 100-200 followers of your Page to reach the tipping point to
start making an impact and driving engagement, so it's well worth making
sure both it and your personal profile are doing the best job they can.
Note: 
Many of this chapter's tips are prefixed with either "Personal Profile"
or "LinkedIn Page," and some with both. This will help you tell where the
advice given is best applied. Where there is no prefix, the tip is a more
general hint about one of LinkedIn's many features.
LinkedIn Profile Optimization
Personal Profile and LinkedIn Page: Fill them in completely
Make sure you fill out all of the sections on your LinkedIn profiles, and thatyou set up both a personal LinkedIn profile for you individually, and one that
is specifically for your LinkedIn Page. Either page might be the first port of
call for a potential client, so you'll want to make a good first impression.
Important personal profile sections
Your personal LinkedIn profile headline is the first piece of
information a potential connection will see about you (and is
also visible when you share a post, comment on someone else’s
post, or send an invitation to connect), so make it catchy and
individual. Something generic like "Retail Manager" is not
enough - there are millions of those on LinkedIn. Think about
what differentiates you, 
what makes you special and what you
want to be known for. Include the keywords you want people
to find you under within your LinkedIn headline. Familiarize
yourself with the words and the phrases commonly used by
your ideal clients, and work this into your headline. When
someone lands on your profile, your immediate goal is to help
them understand and that you are someone who could be of
service to them. Use LinkedIn Advanced Search with your
chosen keywords and see how your profile appears in
comparison to your competitors. Take note of how many views
your profile has had in the last few days or weeks, then tweak
your LinkedIn headline and watch for any change - hopefully a
positive one!
Make sure your Intro expresses who you are 
as a person
. Your
company website or LinkedIn Page is there to tell people about
your company, but your personal profile is there for LinkedIn
users to learn more about you!
The Experience section is one of the most important parts of
your personal LinkedIn profile, as you can really expand upon
your current and past roles and responsibilities and your
achievements. It's also a really good place for you to drop in
some relevant keywords which will aid your chances of
appearing higher in LinkedIn's search. With a quick glance at
your personal profile, visitors will know what you’ve done ateach of your jobs, can learn more about you and determine
whether you’re someone they want to connect with to foster a
new professional relationship. To make a prospect's job even
easier, use short paragraphs or bullet-pointed lists. If you use
bullets, start your sentences with verbs (past tense verbs for
past positions, present tense verbs for present positions). Rather
than state what you did, tell people what you accomplished or
how you helped the business progress. The more concrete and
quantifiable you can be here, the better. The Intro section as is
also crucial, as it is your first opportunity to write an overview
or statement about who you are and what you can offer your
audience and a chance to show what makes you unique and
desirable to prospective connections. 
The Accomplishments section allows users to add projects,
languages, publications, awards, test scores, courses, patents,
certifications and volunteering carried out to your profile. As
you can imagine if you put yourself in the shoes of a potential
connection, this will add a lot of value to your profile, both in
business terms and showing you off as a well-rounded
individual. So, if you have these details to add, make sure you
do so.
LinkedIn will automatically order your job positions in
chronological order, but you can override this and arrange them
by importance to you (and potential connections) by clicking
on the “multiple lines” 
icon next to any position and then
dragging and dropping it into whatever order you like.
Personal Profile: Optimize your location
Entering your location on LinkedIn might not be 
quite 
as obvious as it
first seems. For example, I have spent a lot of time in Berwyn, IL, a
city that is just a stone's throw from the much bigger and better-known
Chicago - so let's pretend for a moment that I live in Berwyn. If a
prospect scouring LinkedIn was in charge of finding people from the
Chicagoland area, listing my location as Chicago will help me appear
in more search results (if filtered by location), and I will also be seen assomeone "local" to others within my target market. Think about how
this tactic might apply to your location and adjust your profile
accordingly.
How to Create A LinkedIn Page
To add a LinkedIn Page, sign into LinkedIn as a personal user and click on
the "Work" link in the bar at the top of the site. From here, click the Create A
Company Page' link from the drop-down menu. There are a few small
milestones you have to reach and a few simple administrative technicalities to
overcome before LinkedIn will allow you to get started, but it won't take you
long before you're ready to roll. You must have a company email address,
e.g.,
 yourname@yourcompany.com, 
in order to create a LinkedIn Page. You
are not permitted to use an address with a domain such as Outlook or Gmail.
Once your LinkedIn Page is created, you can begin to flesh it out with details
about your 
location, size, contact details, industry, etc.
About Us and Specialties
Obviously, the ‘About Us’ section is very important. Write a high-level
overview of your business that explains your mission and purpose and what
makes you unique - it is the perfect place to start spreading your message and
opening up avenues of conversation with potential partners. LinkedIn will use
this text to help users find you in search, so include keywords and phrases
that clearly describe your business, expertise, and industry focus. The
'Specialties' section of your LinkedIn Page overview is also very powerful.
Here too, enter relevant keywords about who you are and what you do, so
that there is a greater chance that you’ll be found more often in a LinkedIn
search. The ‘Life’ section is an opportunity to show off your company
culture. Use it to highlight your company’s values, provide a snapshot of
your workers’ day-to-day lives and tell people what separates you from other
companies in your industry.
Create Showcase Pages for specific products or services
In November 2013, LinkedIn introduced Showcase Pages, a dynamic
replacement for the old LinkedIn Page "Product and Services" tabs, which
were removed from the site in April 2014. Showcase Pages aren't the same as
LinkedIn Pages, and they don't have all of the same features. Think of
Showcase Pages as children to the parent LinkedIn Page: a way to extend
your LinkedIn presence by posting regular updates about a 
specific 
product,service, department, business initiative, etc., rather than your business as a
whole, and a place where you can share unique and specific aspects of your
brand to a more concentrated and distinct audience. For example, Microsoft
has a main LinkedIn Page, but several Showcase Pages for products and
services Office and Microsoft Training and Certification.
Users can follow and receive updates from Showcase Pages in the same way
as any LinkedIn Page, so keep the top-notch content flowing with images,
links, videos, freebies, etc. When you give your Showcase Page a name,
ensure to include unique keywords that will allow it to be easily identified in
search. If an update appeals to both your wider fan base via your main
LinkedIn Page 
and 
the more niche audience of a Showcase Page, don't be
afraid to re-purpose it. Showcase Pages have their own unique URL for easy
sharing, and also appear on the right-hand side of your LinkedIn Page. After
identifying an area (or areas - you can create up to 10 Showcase Pages) of
your  business for which a Showcase Page would be useful. Here's how you
create one. After you have identified business areas that need a Showcase
Page, click the Edit button on your LinkedIn Page and select ‘Create a
Showcase Page.’
Optimum LinkedIn Page and Showcase Page branding image sizes:
Cover image: 1536 x 768 pixels.
LinkedIn Page “Life” tab cover: 1128 x 376 pixels. 
Logo: 300 x 300 pixels.
Note: 
Download a LinkedIn Page and Showcase page cover photo template
optimized for desktop and mobile screens (and lots of other great stuff) via
the 
Premium Content Bundle 
chapter of this book.
Personal Profile and LinkedIn Pages: add a profile photo,
logo and banner images
On your personal profile, add a recent photo to humanize your presence.
LinkedIn profile pics are 200 × 200 pixels in size. Keep it smart, though -
don't post a photo on your LinkedIn profile of you in your bathing suit on the
beach - a head and shoulders shot of you looking smart and presentable is
best. And as with your profile information, keep your profile photo updated
with your changing look - hairstyles, glasses, wardrobe, etc. This will ensure
that you are recognizable at meetings, conferences and events at which you
and your LinkedIn connections attend!LinkedIn started to roll out Facebook-style cover photos for personal profiles
in the summer of 2014. The recommended size for background photos is
1536 x 768 pixels. Use this space to be showcase your brand personality, help
people understand who you are, what you do and how you can help them -
ideas include a photo of you, your contact details (email, phone, Twitter
handle, etc.) and a call to action. The default landing tab for your LinkedIn
Page on LinkedIn is the Overview tab, and this is where your company logo
and banner image will appear. It's very similar to how your Facebook cover
image looks, but the size is different.
If you want to go a step further to attract attention, the LinkedIn video Cover
Story tool lets you personalize your first “hello,” so you can engage your
audience and reach recruiters. Once you add your Cover Story, an orange
ring will appear around your profile photo, and a preview of your video will
auto-play silently within your photo frame.
Note: 
Download Personal and LinkedIn Page cover photo templates
optimized for desktop and mobile screens (and lots of other great stuff) via
the 
Premium Content Bundle 
chapter of this book.
Personal Profile and LinkedIn Pages: Grab a vanity URL
As with other social networks, LinkedIn offers the ability to create a custom
profile URL to make directing potential clients to your profiles that much
easier. Here’s how:
Personal profile
1
. 
On your profile page, click the "Me" drop-down menu at the
top of the page and choose Settings and Privacy from the drop-
down menu.
2
. 
Click on the Privacy tab and click "Change" next to the Edit
your public profile heading.
3
. 
On the right-hand side, click the pencil to add or edit your
custom LinkedIn URL.
LinkedIn Page
When setting up a LinkedIn Page, you will be able to specify a URL during
the initial setup.Personal Profile and LinkedIn Pages: Add rich visual content 
 
Visual content like images, whitepapers, videos, infographics and even
PowerPoint and Slideshare presentations can be uploaded to make your
personal and company LinkedIn profiles more eye-catching, while
showcasing your achievements, brands that you have worked with and
provided benefit to, your research, and skills at the same time. Examples of
great content to feature include popular blog posts, screenshots of customer
testimonials (like a tweet or product review), or a video of an impressive
speech you gave at a conference. Simply click the pencil icon next to any job
position, then choose to upload a file or share a link to media under the
Media heading.
Personal Profile and LinkedIn Pages: insert bullet points to make your
pages more readable
If you've filled out your LinkedIn profile in full, you've probably got quite a
lot of text there, some of which (achievements, responsibilities, etc.) would
be 
so 
much easier for prospects to read in a bulleted list. As it happens, you
can 
insert bullet points into your LinkedIn profile sections, but it's not
something LinkedIn shouts about. Here's how:
1
. 
Scroll to the section of the profile where you want to add bullet
points and click the pencil icon.
2
. 
Copy and paste a bullet point from any other source (Google
Docs, Microsoft Word, the bullet point Wikipedia page, etc.)
and paste it at the beginning of a line on LinkedIn. I personally
use this website:
http://www.alanwood.net/demos/wingdings.html
3
. 
Write and save your text, and you're done, and your text should
be bulleted.
Personal Profile and LinkedIn Pages: Write for LinkedIn SEO
When you optimize your LinkedIn pages with relevant keywords to you, your
expertise and your business, it stands a chance of ranking higher in Google
and LinkedIn searches. Don't make it too obvious by writing in an unnatural
style that renders it blatant to readers that you are trying to crunch in as many
keywords as possible - but be aware that you'll want to include them
nonetheless. Whenever you gain new skills and expertise, don't forget to add
these into your profile too. LinkedIn allows you to add up to 50 skills, so fillin as many as you can.
The keywords you use should be a mix - from broad terms to those that are
very specific, as you never know which search terms someone will be using
to 
potentially find you. Where you put these keywords matters, too - research
by blogging4jobs.com revealed that your name, headline, company name, job
title, and skills keywords rank the highest. Another important place to use
keywords on your personal LinkedIn profile is in the Experience section,
both for your current and past positions. Use lots of detail, going into the
same amount of depth that you would on your resume about the position you
held, the responsibilities you had and the goals you achieved. Don't be afraid
to brag a bit!
LinkedIn Marketing and Content Strategy
Personal Profile: promote your company through employee profiles 
 
Getting all employees on board with your LinkedIn strategy is crucial to its
success, as it helps to create an extended network that amplifies your
company's standing and influence on the site. Ask your employees to create
their own LinkedIn accounts and to list your company as their employer. If
necessary, provide them with training on how to build a great LinkedIn
Profile, and pass on the benefits that growing their own professional network
can provide. Additionally, you should encourage some of your top employees
to participate in relevant LinkedIn Groups and establish their expertise in the
field. Plus, also consider establishing an employee advocacy initiative for
your organization on LinkedIn. Encourage employees to share content,
highlight accomplishments and get the word out. Rather than being scared
that employee profiles will make them a target for headhunters from rival
firms, see them as reflecting extremely well on your business instead. It is
likely that many of your employees already have LinkedIn accounts and,
sadly, there isn't much you can do to keep them from moving on if they
decide to - just focus on the positives.
Note:
 The My Company tab, accessible from your LinkedIn company page,
acts as an enclosed group space where you can maintain a connection with
your colleagues - sharing internal news, milestones, staff success stories, etc.
It also surfaces trending content that your co-workers are sharing, so overall
acts as a centralized spot for strengthening your workplace community andcultivating employee advocacy.
Personal Profile: follow other companies
Company follows make it possible for you to keep your eye on key events
happening at companies you’re interested in, handy for keeping tabs on the
opposition and for your own inspiration. You can follow or stop following a
company from the “Follow” button on its LinkedIn Page, or by finding it in
LinkedIn Search and clicking the “Follow” button right within the results.
Personal Profile: Use Advanced Search to find prospects and earn trust
that leads to sales/partnerships.
LinkedIn's Advanced Search function (click on the Search box and choose
the “search for people with filters” link) is a great way to find and connect
with potential new prospects. You can filter by relationship, industry,
location, past 
companies, etc., then even create a search alert to be notified
when new results become available. Even if you aren’t able to Connect with
or contact someone instantly because they’re a 3
rd
 degree connection (and if
you don’t subscribe to  LinkedIn’s Premium InMail service in order to bypass
this restriction), you might be able to pick up enough clues from their profile
to contact them outside of LinkedIn, via their website or other social account.
Note: 
If you hit the "Connect" button on someone’s profile, a box will appear
prompting you to compose a customized invite (highly recommended if your
invite is out of the blue, especially if you don’t know the individual). Greet
them by name and add a short note that personalizes your invitation, e.g.,
genuine evidence that you have enjoyed a blog post they wrote or a lecture
they gave which you attended. Complete your invitation by offering a
compelling reason why you should connect with one another. These extra
touches can help to flatter a potential connection, make a good first
impression, and increase your chances of developing a relationship.
Once you have successfully connected with a prospect, send a quick thank
you message and then follow-up with conversation to help the relationship
blossom. Depending on the reasons you connected in the first place and your
overall goals, your follow-up strategy will differ. Ideally, you don't want to
go pitching your service or product right off the bat; get to know your
prospect first, perhaps by picking up on a commonality between yourselves
from the details on their profile. It could be as simple as setting up a reminder
using the LinkedIn Contacts feature to "touch base" over the course of severalweeks, or to sweeten things up by offering a free quote, PDF, or other
valuable resource out of the goodness of your heart. When the relationship is
sufficiently strong, you can think about moving the conversation to other
social networks 
and 
offline as a way to get things moving towards your end
goal, e.g., providing a product or service or striking up a meaningful
partnership.
Personal Profile: Accept quality, relevant invites
In addition to looking to connect with others, start accepting invitations from
those who want to connect with you. The more connections you have, the
larger your expanded network grows, in turn creating more opportunities
down the line. Unfortunately, spammers are present on LinkedIn as they are
on all social networks, so be careful only to accept invites from reputable and
relevant profiles.
A good rule of thumb is to review each invitation request received and make
sure that the person in question has at least completed their profile and added
a photo. Also ensure that the connection is purposeful and relevant to you and
your brand. Do they, in your mind, offer a good reason to connect, or do they
personally tell you why they want to? Do you know them already, or have
they worked in the same industry as you? Finally, always reply when
accepting a genuine and interesting connection request. This is an easy way
to start forming relationships.
Personal Profile: recommend and endorse others
The more you give on LinkedIn, the more you'll get back later on.
Recommend 
and endorse others often - especially colleagues and even
competitors - even if they don't ask you first. Each time you give or receive
an endorsement, it will appear in the LinkedIn news feed for your network,
which means more visibility for you and your brand. As you'll discover,
endorsing somebody almost always results in them returning the favor, and as
your endorsements grow you may even want to move that section towards the
top of your profile to showcase your most valuable skills to potential
contacts. Do keep in mind that you want your endorsements to be received as
genuine and well deserved (more so by other users than the recipient, in a lot
of cases), so don't go overboard on your first round of endorsements for an
individual; spread your efforts out so that it doesn't come across as spammy
or a suspicious act ofover-praising.
Personal Profile, Showcase, and LinkedIn Pages: be visible, valuable
and timely
When you've built up a thriving network of connections, you're going to want
to maintain that reputation. To do this, remain consistently visible, valuable
and timely in your participation in all areas of LinkedIn. Your most recent
activity will appear near the top of your profile, but if you're not very active,
nothing will show. As with other social networks, a rate of activity that works
out at about one or two updates a day is a good target to aim for. Use the
Notifications option at the top of your profile to review the most recent
interactions from your network and respond in a timely manner.
Personal Profile, LinkedIn Pages, and Showcase Pages: What to post?
LinkedIn users are not looking for the same kind of stuff they'll find on
Facebook or Instagram, for example. Your status updates should include a
professional slant.
All page types:
One of the most in-demand content types on LinkedIn, perhaps
unsurprisingly, is industry insights. Research from the social
network shows that 60% of users are interested in industry
insights, over half are interested in company news, and more
than one in four are interested in hearing about new products
and services. As with other social networks, asking questions,
including visual elements, sparking discussions, etc. are all
good tactics. 
For longer form content posted natively to LinkedIn, (discussed
below), examples of popular content includes list posts to share
your favorite business books, blogs, podcasts or productivity
tools; asking your network to comment with questions so you
can share your expertise; taking the time to dispel a common
myth within your industry (positioning you as an informed
expert); and career stories, like writing about a turning point in
your professional life and the lesson it taught you, a success
story about a client or customer you’ve helped, etc. Being
authentic and vulnerable will resonate with your readers and
drive engagement.Use PDFs, PowerPoints and other rich media to highlight what
makes you or your brand shine. LinkedIn states that its users
respond well to behind-the-scenes stories that highlight your
brand’s culture and values.
LinkedIn’s research shows that employees typically have 10x
the social reach of the company that they work for, so share
your employees’ best posts on LinkedIn, and leverage their
networks and individual voice to build a connection to your
brand. You can also share your best @mentions via your
LinkedIn Page.
LinkedIn Pages
The Content Suggestions tab is an amazing tool to help you
discover trending topics and articles to share with your
audiences. Simply select your audience, explore what’s
trending, and instantly share your findings – personalized with
your own take and call-to-action. 
Use the Communities feature to associate up to three hashtags
to your Page that are being used by LinkedIn members. By
associating hashtags with your Page, you can directly engage
with LinkedIn users via the hashtag content feed to build brand
awareness outside of your current followers. And if you think
your community will be interested, you can share the hashtag
content feed directly to them. To associate a hashtag with your
Page, click the Edit icon in the Communities module of your
Page and select "Add a hashtag". Enter the hashtag you would
like to associate to your Page, starting with # and select the
correct hashtag from the dropdown. By default, #[YOUR
COMPANY NAME] is added as your first associated hashtag.
On Pages with over 300 followers, you have the ability to post
targeted updates to tailor different types of content to specific
audiences. Updates can be targeted based on followers’ profile
data such as company size, industry, function, seniority,
geography, and language preference. You can also reach non-
employee followers using these same targeting parameters. To
target an update on your Page:1
. 
Draft your update on the Updates tab of your Page. 
2
. 
Click All Followers at the bottom of the update box and choose
Set Targeted Audience from the dropdown.
3
. 
On the Target audience settings page, select the audience
attributes you want to target. The targeting tool will
automatically show you how many viewers are being targeted
on the right side of the page. This Estimated target audience is
the number of potential people who will see the update on both
their LinkedIn homepage feed and on your Page.
4
. 
When you're finished, hit Save and then post as normal.
Whatever and wherever you publish on LinkedIn, here are some more ideas
to consider to discover and broaden to reach and engagement of your content:
@ mention users who are affiliated with a specific piece of
content to gain exposure to their network. Similarly, share your
best @ mentions to authentically promote your brand.
Add hashtags to your posts to join trending conversations. If
you have a LinkedIn Page, your most-used hashtags will come
to be associated with it.
Keep an eye on the storylines that LinkedIn curates each day—
they are a great resource to see timely stories that are gaining
momentum on LinkedIn.
If you find that LinkedIn's algorithm is throttling your status
updates when they include links, try putting them in the first
comment below the status update instead to see if that helps. If
you do this, make sure to let people know at the end of your
post where they can find it. 
When you start multiple conversations in the comments section
below a status update, your post will be seen in many more
LinkedIn news feeds. Your replies needn't be lengthy to help
reach the feeds of first, second, and third-degree networks.
While it could include a follow-up question to generate more
conversation, it might also simply consist of a one-word
answer or emoji. 
As well as composing your own content, engaging with others'
posts is important to increase your profile's visibility,especially as your comments on other people's posts show up in
the news feeds of your first-degree connections. For example,
when I comment on my friend Mark's status, Mark's post will
appear in the feeds of some of my first-degree connections with
"Andrew Macarthy commented on this" above the post. My
comment appears directly under Mark's post, no matter how
many other comments there are. So, the more comments you
write, the more visibility you'll get on LinkedIn.
For longer form content especially, make sure that the first
sentence of your status update is eye-catching. If your first
sentence doesn't grab someone's attention and make them want
to tap "See More," your update will be ignored. Also, write in
very short paragraphs to keep readers engaged. Most people
will be consuming LinkedIn content from their phones, where
massive blocks of text are a big turn-off.
Optimizing Video Content on LinkedIn
Like its competitors, LinkedIn has fully embraced both pre-recorded and live
video content, with the social network boasting that video is 5x more likely to
spark conversation than any other type of content; and its offering even
includes filters and stickers, features often associated with more casual social
networks like Instagram and Snapchat. If you want to be successful with
LinkedIn video, you need to think about how you can best serve the needs of
the platform's audience. 
Let's look at some of the attributes that help to make
up pre-recorded LinkedIn videos that will be received positively:
Video type: Content is similar to that described above, like telling your
audience about the history of your brand, your motivation for launching your
business and the culture it promotes, etc., imparting wisdom, etc. To give it
all a LinkedIn-esque twist, you might want to tell it while you're live at a
conference, travelling, or in collaboration with business partners.
Video length: Shorter is generally better for LinkedIn, but the right length of
a video doesn't matter so much as the audience watching it from start to
finish. You might want to start with videos that are less than a minute long,
then extend them until you find a "sweet spot" for your audience. Anything
more than 5 minutes, I'd say should be reserved for YouTube. Videos and the algorithm
:
 At present, LinkedIn users are more likely to be
served content from their connections rather than from business pages, and
that it gives more priority to the source of the content (connections) rather
than the format (video, text, image, etc.). So, don't be afraid to share your
video content from both your page and personal profile, if it suits.
Video caption: Only a limited number of characters will appear beneath your
video before a user has to tap or click to read the full caption associated with
it. So, write the first 2-3 lines of copy associated with your video as if that’s
the only thing viewers will see. You can also tag LinkedIn users in your text,
and it's good practice to limit this to people who actually appear in the video,
rather than people you hope to grab the attention of. Links can also be posted
in the text, but adding them may limit the post’s exposure in LinkedIn's feed.
Instead, as with text or image updates, when you want to link to anything
outside of LinkedIn, post the URL in the first comment below the video. 
LinkedIn video metrics: LinkedIn will show you plenty of the video metrics
you will be familiar with (views, likes, and comments), but also a selection of
valuable data points that are specific to the site, namely the job type
company, and location of people who have been primarily viewing your
content. Meanwhile, tracking video shares can be tricky (if someone quotes
your video in their own post, you don’t see that share). As a workaround, add
hashtags to your video post so you can manually search for and therefore
track shares.
The benefits of live video on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Live is the platform's live video streaming feature. Treat LinkedIn
Live like a fresh channel for your existing content ideas - a good option when
you want to achieve top-of-funnel goals like brand awareness and reach. Go
live on your Page to help launch new products, share breaking news,
showcase the people behind your brand, or demonstrate your thought
leadership. When you go live, a subset of your Page followers will be
notified, and you can promote your stream organically or through LinkedIn
ads. In addition, your profile background will show your Live broadcast
when you start streaming, helping to increase the 
visibility of your content.
To gain permission to stream on LinkedIn from your profile or Company
page, you'll need to fill out an application at
https://bit.ly/linkedinliveapplication
 If approved, you’ll receive an emailconfirming your acceptance. Before you can go live, you'll also need to
choose a third-party broadcaster tool; some popular options include
Socialive, Switcher Studio and Restream. 
Note: 
LinkedIn Live can be combined with LinkedIn Events to reach a
targeted audience you want to engage more deeply in a private setting,
whether they follow your Page or not. More on this later in the chapter.
Personal Profile: Publish original "thought leader" content and
grow a tribe of followers
LinkedIn opened up its publishing platform to all users in February 2014. It
allows you to post full blogs (known as Articles) on LinkedIn that become
part of your professional profile and they are also sent out to your network as
a status update. Ideally, you want to use the publishing platform as a way to
share value-driven (non-salesy), expert content to both your current and
potential audience. Potential topics include important trends in your industry,
what advice you would give to someone hoping to enter your field of work,
the biggest challenges your industry needs to solve, etc. There is no word
limit, but some of the best examples so far aren't "full-on blog replacement"
in length either. If you are inspired to come up with something between 400
and 600 words once a week that will build your credibility and strengthen
your standing on the site, that is just what LinkedIn is looking for. A bite-
sized version of a recent blog article isn’t a bad idea (link to the full version
at the end of your post), and – for SEO purposes - make sure to give it a
compelling headline that differs from the original.
To start writing, click on the “Write an article” button at the top of your
LinkedIn home page and a familiar word processing layout (complete with
the options to add links, videos, and images) will appear. Once you've
finished writing, conclude your post with a call to action if necessary, but
definitely include a quick few lines of bio with links back to your LinkedIn
profile, website, or blog. When the post is shared to LinkedIn, re-post it on
your LinkedIn Page and other social networks for maximum exposure, then
keep an eye on the metrics LinkedIn provides to help determine how well
your content is resonating with your audience. As you publish more and the
breadth of your statistics grows, you will be able to replicate the kind of post
that does well.
LinkedIn allows users to add hashtags to ordinary feed posts, but hashtagscan also be added to LinkedIn Articles, helping to surface your articles to
users who may enjoy them. Editing your public profile settings to "Make my
public profile visible to everyone" will enable anyone who searches for that
hashtag to find your article. Then, to add a hashtag to your drafted article:
1
. 
Open your drafted article and click the Publish button.
2
. 
In the pop-up window, include content to introduce your article
and include relevant hashtags within the “Tell your network
what your article is about” field.
Note: 
You may find that LinkedIn gives more exposure to your status
updates than to Articles. If this turns out to be the case, status updates - with
their 1,300 character limit (approximately 250-300 words) means that you
could possibly spend much less time creating content that actually gets more
reach. This might not be everyone's experience, but it’s worth experimenting
with.
Here are a few more quick ideas to help make your LinkedIn content stand
out:
Add a Clickable Link to Images or Videos
Encourage your followers to take further action on or off LinkedIn adding a
clickable link directly onto your images and videos to drive your audience to
your website, an upcoming event, recent newsletter, and more. To add a
clickable link, create a new post in the app with an image or video, tap the
“Add a link” icon, add your URL and custom link text, and post away.
Create Quick, Eye-Catching Posts with Templates
An easy way help text posts to stand out in the Feed and grab your audience’s
attention is with templates.
Head on over to the share box or tap “Post” on mobile, and then tap “Use a
template”. Choose from dozens of customizable backgrounds and fonts, add
your own text, and hit “Share.” Clickable links can be combined with
templates.
Share Swipeable Content with Carousels
Carousels allow you to mix images and videos to help your followers learn in
a digestible way - from step-by-step advice to tips and tricks and industrytrends.
Personal Profile: join and be active in LinkedIn Groups
Whatever your industry, consider getting involved in Groups related to your
industry as a way to connect with others, discuss and learn new ideas, and -
more subtly - as a way to connect with key partners and find out what your
target market is interested in. With the shift in social media usage in the
recent years, closed communities such as Facebook Groups and LinkedIn
Groups might be the next top way to engage your audience – especially if
you are a B2B company. Being actively involved in one or several LinkedIn
Groups can have many benefits for businesses, including:
Building more awareness about you within your target markets.
Positioning your company (or you as an individual) as an
industry thought leader
Nurturing valuable industry relationships.
A showcase for your great industry-leading content and
products.
Generation of interest and inquiries for your business.
Converting Group members to customers and advocates for
your brand.
Using the ideas you find - from popular discussions, statuses
with the most likes and comments, etc. - to help you work on
ideas and topics to feature in your company's status updates.
As with much of social media, leaping into a LinkedIn Group only to self-
promote will not go down well – and may even get you removed. Instead, use
Groups as an opportunity to share posts on a topic of interest to other
members, and to engage in conversations in order to highlight your expertise.
When starting your own discussion (whatever it may be about) draft a
compelling title to encourage views and end your message with an open-
ended question or a call to action to get people to reply. The more popular
your post and the more active it is, the more visibility you will receive. As a
result, people will see that you have important and meaningful insights into
your area of business and may then decide to follow or connect in order to
build a relationship.
Groups can be searched for in the search bar at the top of LinkedIn (filterwith the “Groups” tab in the results). To access and manage your group
participation, select the “Work” menu at the top of your LinkedIn homepage,
then click "Groups." Joining local groups with fewer members may be
beneficial, since their members are more likely to read your posts and there's
a higher chance to make relevant, local connections. Regular positive
interaction, like posting and commenting thoughtful topics and responses,
will raise your standing in the group, while promotional, spam, negative or
inappropriate content will damage it. If a group you intend to join is already
well established, you can easily view and search (via the box at the top of the
page) topics within it to see what type of questions and issues are drawing the
most engagement and whether these are of interest to you and your business.
Start your own LinkedIn Group
If you can't find a Group that's right for you, why not start your own?
Crucially, the most successful LinkedIn Groups are focused on a topic that
has a natural connection to your brand, and less on promoting your brand or
company directly. Having a topic that your customers care about will not
only attract them to be part of your LinkedIn Group, but it will also help keep
the conversations in the group focused and make it easier for you to manage.
Here are some questions to help you decide on your group topic:
What are your goals for the LinkedIn Group?
What are some of the topics that your brand is related to?
What conversations can you have that would be useful to your
customers?
What are some questions that your customers often ask you?
People should join the group because they are interested in the topic, not your
company. Over time, (with you as group leader), members will create a
natural 
connection with the topic and your brand. To create a LinkedIn
Group, choose "Create A Group" from the Work > Groups menu. Fill in as
much detail on the Group creation page as possible.
LinkedIn Group title, Summary, description, and rules
The right LinkedIn Group name is critical to attracting the right
members, so include a simple and specific title that instantly
tells people what the Group is about. Tying your Group nameto a location, e.g., 
"Toronto Entrepreneurs," 
or an industry,
e.g., 
"Hotel Industry Professionals," 
works well.
Add a succinct and keyword-rich Summary (which will appear
in, and
 help your Group be found, in search results. Around
140 characters of your Group description will appear in search
before being cut off, so make them count!).
Add a more detailed description, which will appear on your
Group's
 profile page, and use specific words and phrases that
will encourage people to join and differentiate you from the
competition.
Lastly, but very important - focus on creating a set of clear
group rules.
 Your group rules will help your members
understand what’s expected of them (e.g. no self-promotional
links, profanity, etc.), and having them stated explicitly upon
joining will make it easier for you to manage and moderate
conversations.
Inviting and approving LinkedIn Group members
To cut out the spam that has plagued LinkedIn Groups in the past and to
ensure your Group remains a trusted place for you and your members to
congregate, you can now invite only people whom you’re connected to on
LinkedIn. To invite your connections, click “Manage” on your LinkedIn
Group homepage and choose “Invited Users” on the left. People who aren’t
in your connections can ask to join the group when they discover it in search,
and LinkedIn allows Group owners to pre-approve every member who
attempts to join.
In order to encourage people to find your group more easily and grow its
member base, optimize and edit your group information to include keywords
that prospective members are likely to search for and encourage group
members to invite people to join. If you have the budget, you might also want
to consider advertising your group with LinkedIn Ads. It might be tempting
to think that the bigger your group is, the better it would be. However, many
of the largest LinkedIn Groups have thousands of members and by this stage
are often filled with links and spam. As previously mentioned, it is often
smaller groups with manageable moderation that have the most meaningful
discussions, and the most engaged audience. Make this a consideration as youbegin to grow your group; slow and steady wins the race
.
Setup message templates
One very useful feature of LinkedIn Groups is its message templates, which
allow you to create custom messages that are automatically sent to people
interested in joining your LinkedIn Group. These messages are a great first
point to introduce your Group and your brand to prospective members. If you
don’t customize them, LinkedIn will send out a default message for each of
the following message actions:
Request-to-join Message (to people who requested to join the
group). To go a step further on this one, if you would like
interested people to fill out an application form to join the
group, you can include a form in the request-to-join message.
This way, you can ensure that only people that 
really 
fit your
criteria and are keen enough to make the effort, will get
through:
Welcome Message (to people who you have approved group
membership).
Decline Message (to people who you have group membership).
Decline and Block Message (to people who you have declined
and want to block future requests).
To setup custom message templates, click “Manage” on your LinkedIn Group
page, select “Templates” on the left, then click “Create Template.”
Be active in leading the LinkedIn Group
As the owner of a LinkedIn Group, it is important that you maintain an active
role in discussions and position yourself as its thought leader. Do not expect
the Group to lead itself. Once you’ve created your LinkedIn Group and
invited your connections, your group is likely to still feel quite barren, and
new members might not post anything if there aren’t already any posts in the
group. As a starting measure, I would recommend creating a “Welcome” post
as the group’s first discussion and pinning it to the top of the group (click the
three dots in the upper-right corner of the post and selecting “Feature”.).
Here, you can welcome new members, share what the group is about, ask
them to introduce themselves, and gently remind members to adhere to thegroup rules.
As the ball starts rolling, tips for keeping things moving smoothly include
posting a weekly discussion or question (using a LinkedIn Poll, perhaps),
commenting on existing discussions, and encouraging engagement through
questions and feedback requests. These actions will encourage your members
to post themselves and show them know the type of discussions that are
welcomed. Although starting discussions and participating in them is time-
consuming, your effort will pay off once you have created a culture of
starting meaningful discussions. New members will mimic the actions of
existing members, so if they see only quality conversations and no self-
promotional posts, they’ll be more likely to contribute meaningfully, too
.
Grow your network with LinkedIn Events
LinkedIn's research suggests that the chances of making a connection on the
site increase 2X if people have attended a face-to-face meeting. Enter
LinkedIn Events, which allows you to seamlessly create and join professional
events, invite your connections, manage your event, have conversations with
other attendees, and stay in touch online after the event ends. Setup an event
by visiting the ‘Community’ panel located on the left side of the newsfeed
and click +Create. Next, provide a description, a date and time, a venue, and
then invite your connections using filters such as location, company, and
industry. It's always a good idea to share the event as a post to leverage the
power of the feed to reach relevant attendees. From your event page, you can
easily track attendees and invitees, post updates and interact with other
attendees. LinkedIn will automatically provide timely and relevant
notifications to attendees to make sure they don’t miss any important updates
about your event. Members who have joined the event can also invite people
from their own networks to attend.
Combine LinkedIn Live and LinkedIn Events to host virtual events
Combined with Events, LinkedIn Live allows you to build deeper
connections and drive more engagement with professionals in your target
audience - virtually. Here are some best practices:
Before the event: "Recommend" a post in the event feed to
drive buzz and excitement; share the event's unique URL.
Rather than going live to your entire Page audience, targetspecific segments where appropriate.
During the event: Interact with attendees in the comments of
your LinkedIn Live stream and stream up to four separate
broadcasts into one LinkedIn Event for multi-session
activations. Amplify and promote engagement by sharing
quotes, images and other highlights from the live event to the
LinkedIn Event feed.
After the event: Showcase stream highlights on your Page's
Video tab and solidify connections by engaging with key
members of your target audience from the event's your attendee
list. Share a survey or ask attendees what they’ll take away
from the content, and promote community by encouraging
attendees to connect and network with each other.
The Events tab on your Company Page automatically pulls in a
view of your past, present and upcoming events on LinkedIn,
making it easy for your followers and visitors to find and attend
your events.
Note:
 You can also run Sponsored Content Single Image Ads alongside
organic posts to promote your event. Single Image Ads can get your event in
front of the right professionals and hard-to reach audiences, like executives
and decision-maker
s 
. By including your Event URL as the destination URL
in your campaign, you’ll be able to see how it performs event-specific
reporting metrics, like the total number of registrants, as well as views and
clicks on the ad that led to an event registration. Once you know who’s
interested in your 
content or brand, you can continue the conversation and
nurture leads by retargeting your prior event registrants – simply create a
custom target audience in Campaign Manager based on those who have
RSVPed to any of your LinkedIn Events. 
Personal Profile: Analyze your history with the Data Export Tool
The free LinkedIn Data Export tool provides you with a .csv file complete
with a detailed overview of your past LinkedIn activity. Crucially, the data it
holds can be analyzed to tweak and optimize your LinkedIn profile,
relationship- building strategy (on LinkedIn and away from the site), and ad-
targeting – well worth a look!How to find the Data Export tool and request an archive:
1
. 
Go to the Settings and Privacy section of your profile.
2
. 
In the Account tab, click on the “Getting an archive of your
data” section.
3
. 
Click the "Request Archive" button.
When your archive is ready, LinkedIn will send you an email with a link you
can use to start the download. Some of the most useful archives to explore
and exploit for your benefit include:
Ads Targeting: information to create and target LinkedIn ads
more effectively, based on data about your profile.
Ads Click Data: see which LinkedIn ads you click on.
Skills: review and revise a list of your Interest keywords with a
quick copy and paste from the .csv into your web profile.
Connections: a full list of your connections and their basic info
to help re-target LinkedIn ads.
Endorsements: a full list of people who have endorsed you -
use it to leverage and cultivate relationships with your biggest
fans. Need references too? Export your profile as a PDF via the
Edit Profile drop-down menu from your personal page.
Comments: view all past comments to see if there is anything
you need to follow up or elaborate upon.
Search Queries: A way to see which successful searches you
have made on LinkedIn.
Note: 
If you have clients who are willing to give you access to their LinkedIn
Data files, the above archives will provide invaluable data on the behavior of
your customers as well
.
Company and Showcase Pages: monitor and tweak performance with
analytics
LinkedIn Page Analytics is the perfect place to spend time understanding the
performance of your posts and the professional traits of your Page visitors
and followers (including job titles, company names, and industries). By
analyzing details about the audiences that are reading and sharing your
content, you will be in a good position to deliver more of what they want infuture, and to ramp up efforts to reach your LinkedIn goals, and amplify it
further with advertising.
Note:
 The LinkedIn Pages Competitor Analytics dashboard helps you
understand what competitors are doing and what you can do to set your brand
apart. You can: track follower growth, recent posts, and engagement rates to
see what your competitors are talking about and how LinkedIn users are
responding, while also benchmarking your own 
content creation efforts. See
what's trending on your competitors' pages and industry to help inspire your
own content strategy.
LinkedIn Advertising Strategy
With an optimized LinkedIn profile or Page and knowledge about how to
build a successful content strategy, paid opportunities can be used to find
more people interested in your business and to engage them at scale. With the
data in your analytics, what you’ve been building organically will help you
identify which content resonates best with your audience and help you to
spend efficiently. LinkedIn’s ad platform allows you to connect with users by
serving your ad to a targeted audience in the news feed, their inbox, or
sidebar. You can use these ads to attract new clients, find new employees,
and establish or sustain brand awareness. Although LinkedIn ads aren't cheap
compared to something like Facebook, they can provide immense value for
certain businesses if they’re utilized properly. Here is a brief overview (and
benefits) of each of the main types of LinkedIn ad:
Sponsored Content: 
Similar to boosting a post on Facebook, this increases
the visibility of status updates (images or video) in your audience's feeds.
These ads appear seamlessly, and are only identifiable as ads by a small
“Promoted" marker attached to them. Sponsored content is ideal for
promoting content like blog posts or business announcements, and for driving
engagement. It’s also helpful in spreading awareness of your LinkedIn Page.
To make the most of Sponsored Content, keep the text to a minimum (under
150 characters) and opt for rich, eye-catching imagery that matches the
messaging of your content. Keep any text on your imagery to a minimum,
and make sure it looks good on small screens, as mobile is where the majority
of Sponsored Content engagement occurs. If a particular organic post has
performed well, boost its reach by converting it into Sponsored Content.Note: 
On LinkedIn Pages, make use of Direct Sponsored Content. This
option allows you to share content directly to the news feed, letting you
personalize and test it without first having to share it to your Page.
Sponsored Inmail: 
This LinkedIn ad lets you mass-deliver private messages
to the LinkedIn inboxes of your audience. As an alternative to placing an ad
in the news feed, Sponsored Inmail is highly personalized; users' interest is
piqued by a notification of a message. The best Sponsored InMails are short,
relevant, and conversational. InMails between 200-400 characters are more
likely to receive a response than longer messages, according to LinkedIn. For
a little personalization, use a dynamic macro to pull in the recipient's name or
company in the greeting. You can also add a call-to-action button to the
messages, allowing you to drive conversions effectively, whether you’re
trying to get downloads of your newest 
whitepaper or registrations for an
upcoming event. The other great perk of Sponsored Inmail ads is that they’re
only delivered to users who are actually active on LinkedIn.
Text ads: 
Similar to ads in Facebook’s right-hand sidebar; these will be small
and unobtrusive, off to the side of LinkedIn's feed. Only available only for
desktop placement, text ads are most effective if you want to show your ad to
as many people as possible. You can run text ads even if you don’t have a
LinkedIn Page.
Dynamic ads:
 LinkedIn dynamic ads can be used to hyper-personalize the
LinkedIn ads you serve to users, by pulling each user’s name or profile
picture from their LinkedIn profile and applying it to the ad template you’ve
created – with the ability to add a “Follow” call-to-action. Creating ads that
are deeply relevant to your target audience will significantly increase the
likelihood that they’ll respond. Given the nature of LinkedIn, they can be an
excellent fit for certain campaigns.
Note: 
Your ads account is organized by campaigns. Each campaign has its
own daily budget, targeting options, and ads. LinkedIn recommends that you
create at least 3 ad variations, varying the ad text, calls-to-action, and images
each time. You can create up to 15 different ads within a campaign, and by
doing so, you’ll be in the optimum position to see which ads perform best.
Once a promotion is live, visit your Company and Showcase page's analytics
to see how it performs.To set up an ad, visit the LinkedIn Ads page (
http://ads.linkedin.com
) and
click Create Ad to begin. Whichever ad type you choose, you’ll be able to
target it towards specific audiences based on location, job title and category,
company name and category, group, and more. To help you do this, LinkedIn
rolled out three ways to help advertisers reach their ideal audiences in spring
2019: lookalike audiences and audience templates:
Lookalike audiences is similar to what you find in Facebook's
Ad tool, LinkedIn combines the traits of your ideal customer
with rich data about its users and company data to help you
market to professional audiences similar to your existing
customers, website visitors and target accounts - good for
finding new people who might be interested in what you offer.
Audience templates gives you a large selection of predefined
B2B audiences including job title, skills, groups, etc. that help
you find 
your ideal audience more easily - great if you're new
to LinkedIn ads and want to get started fast.
In order to make your ad spend as effective as possible, spend time to anchor
it with an appealing headline (questions work well, e.g., “Need a Web
Designer?”, an eye-grabbing image (the maximum size is 50 x 50 pixels; use
colors that contrast against the white background of the site) and a strong
call-to-action like “Download”, “Try”, or “Sign Up.”
Video ad tips for LinkedIn
If using video ads on LinkedIn, here are a number of best practices to help
them perform optimally, based on LinkedIn research of nearly 3,500 video
ads:
Include a demo and an offer: 
LinkedIn's research shows that video ads that
show how a product/service works perform well — driving the highest
performance in video completion, engagement, and click-through rates.
Test an offer: 
Audiences will watch until the end of a video ad more often to
see an offer - regardless of its duration.
Display a banner or captions: 
The majority of videos in the LinkedIn feed
are watched with the sound off. Adding a banner or captions can help drive
higher social action from audiences.Keep copy short, with a CTA button: 
Limit copy to three lines or shorter, and
get your key point across in the first two lines - any longer and the "See
more" link will be triggered, which can reduce engagement.YouTube Tips: 
Video Made the Marketing Star
Despite rising competition from Facebook and the presence of other smaller
competitors, YouTube remains the world's most popular online destination
for video creation and sharing, and it is absolutely fantastic as a marketing
tool – a platform designed around a core goal – to give audiences content that
they desire and to keep them watching for as long as possible in order to
share your business and its message. Almost any audience you can think of,
at any time, is looking for videos that entertain, inform, and connect them to
likeminded people and groups that share their passions. YouTube makes it
possible for you to meet the expectations of this audience in a variety of ways
that no other online platform can. Using the power of video in conjunction
with other social media outlets to show your business off to the world has
countless benefits, and this chapter will show you how to reap the rewards
with YouTube.
The Core Foundations of a YouTube Video
Marketing Strategy
Launching a long-term YouTube marketing strategy can be a daunting
prospect, but years of research has identified several factors that almost every
successful YouTube channel demonstrates – not a bad template to follow for
yourself, I’d say:
Decide what you want to create, who you want to target, and what your goal
is
Build video content that addresses your audience’s needs – deciding whether
you want to either inspire (with emotional and relatable stories), educate
(with how-to videos and other useful information), or entertain (by surprising
people, making them laugh, etc.) is one strong and simple entry point at
which to start the brainstorming process. Choosing how you'll engage your
audience in this way will help you define your core message and tone.
Best practices for targeting your audience.
The more you can specifically drill down on the people you want to reach -your target audience - the better the response to your uploaded content will
be. You may already have a good idea of the people you want to reach before
you launch on YouTube, but simply studying content similar to what you
want to create and trying to determine which demographics are engaging with
it.
And as with any social strategy, ask yourself what business goals you want to
achieve and how YouTube will help you to reach them. For example, is it to
build awareness (so that people will be able to find and recognize your
brand); to drive sales (either online or offline); or to grow loyalty (encourage
people to share your brand with others after viewing a video)?
Be consistent – whatever that means to you
One of the cornerstones of a successful YouTube channel is consistency. But
this can mean different things to different people, or a mixture of many
factors such as:
Consistency of upload (like sticking to a weekly schedule).
Consistency of format (like a recurring show or that is repeated
again and again, or even just the same video intros and outros).
Consistency of tone and voice to breed trust and familiarity
with an audience.
Maintaining consistency is proven to increase brand loyalty, set expectations
for your audience, and compels them to subscribe to watch your future
content. If consistency in uploading is one of your goals, for example, build
traction with an audience and maintain your presence by publishing at least
one video per week. If possible, release videos on the same day every week;
viewers like structure and they will know when they can look forward to new
content. If you can't be around to post a video manually, use the feature to
schedule your upload for posting ahead of time - this option is available from
the drop-down menu on the video upload page. 
Make your videos shareable
YouTube uses the term “shareable” interchangeably with “viral” - the idea
that people watch your videos and want to share them straight away. Sharing
or recommending videos is powerful because people are learning about your
brand from the people they trust the most - their friends and family. People
share videos partly because of what the videos say about themselves. Forexample, sharing a funny video demonstrates their sense of humor. Smart
content makes them look smart. How will your videos make people look
when they share them? 
Build a fanbase of loyal subscribers
We can't go any further in discussing YouTube without touching on how
central growing a loyal subscriber base who return to watch all of your videos
is in achieving your business goals on YouTube:
Subscribers tend to spend more time watching your channel
than viewers who are not subscribed. YouTube's algorithm
looks favorably on channels and videos with higher watch time
(literally, the official term for the amount of time someone
invests in watching your videos) and they are more likely to
crop up in search results and recommendations.
Note: 
Your YouTube analytics will also display an average view duration per
video metric and one for your channel’s average overall, - you want this to be
as long as possible. If you can get over 50%, you’re doing really well.
Once a viewer subscribes to your channel, YouTube will be
inclined to share your new uploads in their Subscriptions feed.
However, a viewer being subscribed to a channel does not
guarantee that all of your new uploads will always appear in
their Subscriptions feed (depending on how many channels
they are subscribed to, which channels they watch the most,
and for a variety of other 
unfathomable algorithmic reasons).
The only way to absolutely guarantee that a viewer is notified
when you upload is by encourage them to hit the notification
bell located next to the "Subscribe" button on your channel.
You’ll often hear creators imploring their audience into taking
two actions: “subscribe to my channel and hit the notification
bell so you’re notified every time I upload.” You should do the
same!
Subscribers form the core of your channel’s community.
Interacting with your audience through comments and shout-outs is an important aspect of the YouTube ecosystem. Reward
and engage with fans to foster a community who loves your
videos.
YouTube Channel Optimization
With the basics covered, it’s time to setup and optimize your home on
YouTube – your channel. A well-organized and optimized channel will result
in viewers who are more likely to engage with your content, watch more of it,
subscribe to your offerings, and ultimately invest in spending money with
your business.
Set (or add) your YouTube Handle
Handles are unique and short channel identifiers separate from channel
names, and they start with the “@” symbol. For example, @youtubecreators.
Handles let you find and connect with creators on YouTube.
Your handle will also automatically become the new YouTube URL for your
channel that will make it easy for people to discover you. For example,
youtube.com/@youtubecreators.
To view or change your YouTube handle, visit youtube.com/handle.
Create an engaging YouTube profile and description
Don't ignore your YouTube account's "About" section. Use it to sell your
channel and its benefits to potential subscribers and include all relevant social
media and web links. Fill out a keyword-rich description that will tell people
all about your channel, what they will gain from it, why they should
subscribe, what your upload schedule is, etc. This text will be picked up by
search engines and help your channel to rank higher in search results. The
first 45 or so characters of your description will be visible when your
YouTube channel appears in the "Channels" sub-section of the site's search
results, so pack it with keyword-rich information.
Fill out your Channel Keywords
When people search YouTube, the site does not just return individual videos
for people to watch, it also suggests whole channels that a viewer might be
interested in. So, in the Advanced section of your account's Channel Settings
(YouTube Studio > Settings > Channel), fill in the Channel Keywords sectionwith keywords relevant to your channel, letting YouTube and Google know
what industry it should rank your channel and all its videos for. Don’t go
crazy here, just think 
about the types of search terms that your viewers will
be using, add a couple of keywords and make sure you separate them with
commas.
Brand your YouTube channel effectively
Upload a square, high-resolution (1600 × 1600 pixel) profile photo that is
recognizable at smaller sizes. This avatar will be your channel’s billboard all
over YouTube, including in search results and comments.
In June 2013, YouTube rolled out a new channel layout called the One
Channel design. This new look enables consistent branding across all devices
(desktops, mobiles, televisions, etc.), allows you to reach out to new viewers
via a channel 'trailer' and shows off more of your content to existing
subscribers to keep them watching for longer. The One Channel layout's main
branding opportunity consists of just one main banner that features your
channel's profile photo below it and links to the channel's website and social
media profiles on top of it. YouTube recommends uploading an image that is
2048 × 1152 pixels in size. Inside this massive space are sections that cater to
different screen sizes. For instance, the whole image will be seen on large
televisions, while a central section of 1235 × 338 pixels is the 'safe' area
where your logo will be visible on all devices. Whatever your design, do your
best to feature your brand’s personality in the channel art. Make the audience
feel like they are connecting with a person or character when they arrive at
your channel; this is a tactic that will encourage them to stick around.
Note: 
Download a YouTube channel art template optimized for desktop and
mobile screens (and lots of other great stuff) via the 
Premium Content Bundle
chapter of this book.
Create a trailer for your YouTube channel
Viewers to your channel’s “home” page will see a different featured video,
depending on whether they are already subscribed or not. What this means is
that you can show a trailer that will only appear to people who are not already
subscribed to your channel. This is the perfect chance for you to let viewers
know what your channel is all about and tell them why they should subscribe
– or to feature one of your most popular and engaging uploads. For the
former, you’ll want to keep it short and to the point, eye-catching - andinclude a clear call to action, inviting your audience to subscribe. My trailer
is about 30 seconds long, and I used the simple tools at 
Animoto.com 
to
create a snazzy video that far outperforms anything I could have created
alone with my limited video editing skills.
One other thing I love about channel trailers is that a good portion of the
video's description is displayed adjacent to them. Use this space to describe
what you and your channel have to offer, and don't forget to include relevant
hyperlinks (shortened using tools such as bit.ly so that they are not cut off, as
they will be if they are too long) and a call to action too. To add or edit
channel trailers, click Customization on your main channel page
.
YouTube Marketing and Content Strategy
Regarding successful YouTube content, the site talks about videos that
educate, entertain
 and 
connect
 that the greatest impact, YouTube proposes
three complementary types of content in the following framework: 
help, hub
and 
hero
.
• 
Help content
 refers to the type of things that your target audience is actively
searching for regarding your brand or industry – the most common questions
they will be visiting YouTube to find the answers to. Ask yourself what types
of video can serve as your everyday, bread and butter content? Examples
include product tutorials, how-to content, customer service, etc. Once you've
answered the query, include an invitation to subscribe, like “Hit subscribe
and turn on notifications so you don’t miss our videos - there’s a new one like
this each week.”
• 
Hub content
 refers to videos that are published less frequently, and it’s the
kind of content that gives your audience a fresh perspective on your
customers’ passion and pain points; perhaps focusing on one particular topic
at a time. Episodic videos or a series works best as hub content.
• 
Hero content 
is that which you want to find to a large and broad audience;
marquee events that are designed to whose hope should be to give a notable
boost to your audience growth. Hero content could mean a live-streamed
event, a viral video, cross-promotion with an influential figure, or even a
made-for-YouTube ad. It may also revolve around a holiday like Christmas
or a cultural event like the Oscars. To make the biggest impact as possible,plan ahead and promote the event with ancillary videos in the run-up to it to
build anticipation, and let people know about it via your email newsletter,
other social channels, etc. Ask for your audience's participation in the event
in any way they can be made useful; turn them into advocates who will
promote ahead of the event happening.
YouTube Video Ideas for Business
To be more specific about the advice about content type above, and with over
400 hours of new content uploaded to YouTube 
every minute
, you need a
strategy to ensure that viewers will want to watch yours over others’. Let’s
take a look at some examples. To begin, choose a territory in which you can
thrive and outperform your rivals. For example, are you going to make
inspirational community-driven videos to drive awareness, short and simple
how-to videos to build authority, or funny and shocking videos to get people
sharing? Find the point where your business’ passions overlap with your
customers’ concerns. At this point lies something unique you can deliver to
your fans to earn their loyalty.
One of the easiest ways to judge what type of content will work for your
business on YouTube is to check out the YouTube Trending page (for an idea
of what’s hot on the site overall), or to search for and study other popular
videos within your business niche, and use them as inspiration - make yours
better in every way. What 
are they doing that resonates with their audience?
What is their tone of voice, style and length of video like, etc.? That aside,
here is an additional selection of popular video idea strategies:
Interview experts at trade shows
To spread your reputation as an industry expert, interview your peers at trade
events that you attend and film these interactions to create a YouTube video
afterwards (make sure to get permission from the subject and event organizer
first, though). It's a great form of marketing, particularly if the interviewee is
popular and well respected, and links to your video after you've posted it
online. You could even get someone to interview you - you're an expert in
your field, right? Easy, powerful video content for you right there!
Record product demos and reviews
Rather than 
telling 
people what your product or service can do, why not 
showthem instead? Product demo videos are a great way to demonstrate your
wares to customers. Alternatively, record videos of product reviews - not
necessarily of your own products, but those your customers will be interested
in. For popular examples as proof of how this strategy works, search
YouTube for stuff like reviews of iPads, vacuum cleaners, gym equipment or
any type of consumer goods.
Show viewers around; upload presentations and talks
Take your audience on a tour of your offices and city to help them feel
connected with you and your brand; give them a sneak peek behind the
scenes. Upload recordings of presentations you’ve given, to demonstrate your
authority within your business niche and to show off your public speaking
skills.
Ask your audience to review and promote your products
Ask your audience to use your product in their videos (like product
placement in movies), or to provide reviews, and cross-promote each other.
You can then feature these customer-created videos on other social
networking sites to increase 
your exposure and play to the vanity of your
customers, who will love to see themselves featured on your pages.
Ask and answer questions for your audience
One of the best ways to get and keep your audience engaged on YouTube is
to ask questions for them to answer or ask them to submit questions for you
to reply to. For the former, ask viewers to submit a comment or record and
link to a video response. For the latter ask fans to leave a comment featuring
a question for a chance to see it answered in your next video or, even better,
to video record themselves asking the question, which they then email to you
so that you can feature it in your next upload. Imagine how surprised and
delighted a customer will feel if you show off their feedback in a video,
rather than just respond to it via a reply in the comments.
Announcements and community service
Do you have key dates or occasions in your business' life? Mark them with a
video and thank your customers for their support, e.g., your 1000
th 
customer
or 100
th 
video. Highlight the causes your organization cares about and the
philanthropy you carry out in the local community - make videos that show
you care.News and views - be timely and topical
Are you in a dynamically moving industry? Show your expertise by making
videos to announce and discuss breaking news and information. React to
trending topics in your niche with relevant content when it makes sense for
your audience. Being part of what’s going viral, rising search trends or
breaking news can be critical for certain content. News and politics, sports,
commentary, and opinion content can thrive on topicality.
Collaborate with your peers
Look into collaborating with other, relevant, YouTube channel owners in
order to share audiences, introduce each other to new subscribers and publish
complementary content. In the videos you create together, get your pal to ask
their fans to check your channel out (or a specific video that’s available on
your channel), and link to it in the video description and End Screen. You’ll
also want your collaborator’s viewers to find your channel through searches
for them, so ask them to feature your name and face prominently in the
thumbnail of the video, and include it in the title, tags, and description. For
another little SEO boost, at the bottom of the video’s Info and Settings page,
you can add another creator’s channel as a credit. This connects your channel
to theirs in the YouTube algorithm and can boost the number of times your
channel is recommended off the back of their videos. Lastly, feature brands
that you like and support in the About section of your YouTube channel (and
ask them to do the same). Under the Featured Channels menu, choose "Add
channels", then search for your buddies via their YouTube username or
channel URL
.
Convert podcasts into YouTube videos
Does your company have a podcast? Setup a camera to record them and
upload them to YouTube to expand your reach. YouTube won't let you
upload the audio alone, so create one or several graphics to complement the
topic of the video.
Further Considerations for Optimizing YouTube
Videos
Focus on quality, edit well, and grab FREE YouTube Music
Whatever content you create for YouTube, a basic standard of quality isessential. At a minimum you should ensure that the video quality is high
definition (at least 720p), that the audio is clear and balanced, that the
lighting is good, and (if fitting), you use varying camera angles to add variety
and dynamism to the finished product. Viewers rarely expect YouTube
content to have Hollywood production values, but watching a person talking
down into the tinny microphone of their low-res webcam isn't going to give
anybody a good first impression, or reflect well on your brand. If you're
serious about videos as a social media tool, consider investing in a decent
camera and video editing software, such as Adobe Premier. Include only
necessary footage in
your videos - don't be afraid to cut - and add transitions, overlays and
graphics to help convey your story.
Want free music and sound effects for your videos? Check out the YouTube
Audio Library. It features thousands of royalty-free instrumental tracks
(arranged by mood, genre, instrument and duration) and sound effects that
you can use for free, forever, for any creative purpose (not just in your
YouTube videos). Access it via a link on your Video Manager page, or at
https://www.youtube.com/audiolibrary/. 
Another extremely popular source of
royalty free music for YouTube videos is Incompetech
(
http://incompetech.com/music/royalty-free/
), with tons of great tracks
available for download and use as long as credit is given.
Hook viewers with a teaser or intrigue
With low viewer attention spans and YouTube making it so easy for them to
click away to someone else's content, it is crucial to use the opening seconds
of your video to hook viewers in and keep them watching 
your 
content until
the end. This portion of your video only needs to be a few seconds long, but
its effectiveness can pay dividends towards watch time and viewer
engagement. Examples include:
Showing off the finished result in a "how to" video and telling
your
 audience that this is what they'll have learned to create by
the end.
Offering a mysterious line or quip like
, "What is the link
between a potato
 and unbelievable sales conversion? Keep
watching to find out..."
Stories are another way to pique viewers’ interest, as we are allhardwired to enjoy them. When you begin your video with a
standout moment from the story you tell, people will naturally
want 
to stick around to see how it unfolds. In addition, personal
stories endear the presenter to viewers and can often provide a
helpful segue into more complicated ideas. 
No matter how you hook viewers, make sure your opening gambit relates
directly to the title of your video and that you get into it quickly. After all,
that's why the viewer clicked in the first instance.
What is the best video length for YouTube?
The question 
"How long should my YouTube videos be?" 
is a complicated
one, and the answer depends on a myriad of factors, including the subject of
your videos and your target audience. In short, the "right" length for a
YouTube video is exactly as long as it keeps people watching. Ultimately, the
right length for a video is just long enough to get all of the information across
without unnecessarily padding. You don’t make a video longer just for the
sake of
making it longer, as that’s a sure-fire way to put people off. Although
creating long videos might seem counterintuitive, given the famously short
attention spans of online viewers, longer videos – especially on YouTube -
equate to more watch time, which will lead to a boost for your content in the
algorithm.
Feature calls to action within your videos, build an interactive
End Screen
Depending on where during the video would be most effective, include calls
to action (CTAs) to direct your viewers - do you want them to visit your
website, call you for a quote, watch another video, reply to a question in the
comments, subscribe for more great content, or click the link in the
description? Tell them! CTAs can be implemented in several ways, including
direct from the video host, or as interactive on-screen cards.
Note: 
YouTube allows you to pin a comment (either yours or a commenter’s
to the top of the comments section of any video). This is a great place to add
a call to action and drive engagement. For example, you could ask a question
to encourage comments; promote another video, or remind viewers to check
out your sponsor and affiliate link.YouTube also offers a 
mobile-friendly 
End Screen tool that lets you engage
viewers right as your video finishes and encourages them to watch more. In
the last 5-20 seconds of your videos, you can choose to show overlays that
prompt viewers to watch your other videos, subscribe to your channel, visit
collaborators’ channels, and more. YouTube offers several templates to make
setup quick and easy. Research has shown that the Best for Viewer End
Screen works really well, letting Google select the best video based on the
viewer’s past viewing habits. But if the video is part of a series, make sure
you point viewers to the next video in that series or to a playlist so they can
keep watching. In addition, a Subscribe End Screen will add an on-screen
link featuring your profile photo for people to tap or click to subscribe to
your channel – there’s really no reason 
not 
to include it in your 
videos. As a
general rule, the more CTAs you provide, the less likely people are to choose
any of them, so it’s a good idea to include no more than three links to your
End Screen. To set one up, navigate to the End Screen & Annotations option
within Video Manager and build one from scratch or use one of several
templates.
Note: 
End Screen Cards must be inserted on a per-video basis, but once you
have a favorite or one that performs well (monitor the success of your End
Screens and refine your strategy based on the data via Creator Studio >
Analytics > Engagement tab), you can quickly import it into every new video
you publish. Click Import From Video option and select the video from
which you want to import End Screens.
Experiment with YouTube cards – the evolution of annotations
Launched in the spring of 2015, YouTube cards provide a way to add a layer
of interactivity to your videos. Cards can be used to direct viewers to other
videos, merchandise, websites, playlists, and more, via a menu that appears
within the video player itself - and unlike old school annotations, they also
work on mobile devices. The six types of card currently available are:
Merchandise, Fundraising, Video, Playlist, Associated Website and Fan
Funding. To create a card, click on the “Cards” tab in your Video Editor.
How YouTube cards work
When a card is applied to a video, a teaser for it will appear for a few seconds
at a time you designate. If clicked, the full card will appear. Here, a viewer
will - depending on the card type - see a link, customizable image (cropped toa square), title (50 characters max), and call-to-action (25 characters max). At
any other stage of the video, viewers will notice an icon appear if they hover
their mouse over the player (desktop) or when the player controls are visible
(mobile). At any point, they can click on the icon to view all cards that are
applied to the video.
Making the most of YouTube cards
Cards should be inserted in a contextual manner as a way to
help you
 reach your business goals through video, while also
providing an enriched experience for the viewer. Up to five
cards can be used in any one video.
Don't physically point to a card in your video as it may appear
differently depending on the viewer's device.
Cards work most effectively when they are not placed too close
together, so try spacing them throughout your videos at key
points.
Analyze the performance of cards - and use the date to improve
their function - within YouTube Analytics.
Create Associated website annotations
Associated website cards enable you to add a clickable link to a non-
YouTube URL 
within the video player itself work great for branding
purposes, and as an easy way to direct people either audibly or visually to
click through to your website. Here's how to set one up:
1
. 
Verify ownership of your YouTube account by telephone at
http://www.youtube.com/verify
2
. 
Add your website as an associated website and verify
ownership of it via Google Webmaster Tools - visit
https://www.google.com/webmasters/tools to do this. You'll
need back end access to your site to add some code, so contact
your web developer if you need help here.
3
. 
Back on your YouTube Video Manager page, visit the
"Advanced" section of the Channel Settings menu. Here, add
your website URL to the box next to "Associated website."
When confirmed, a green "Success" circle will appear.
4
. 
You're done! When adding an annotation to your videos,choose the Associated Website type from the drop-down menu
and add your full website URL into the box provided.
Add a branding watermark to your videos
A branding watermark allows you to embed a channel logo to appear across
all of your videos. When clicked, it allows non-subscribed viewers to quickly
and easily subscribe. To access and set it up, click on the Customization
option in YouTube Studio and choose the Branding tab. 
Consider video series’ to increase watch time
One-off videos are the bread and butter of most YouTube creators’ content,
but a planned series of videos will keep viewers engaged over a number of
days or weeks and ensure you of some healthy watch-time statistics. A series
is also useful for chopping what might be one long video into separate,
shorter, more viewable chunks. By planning ahead, you will be able to cross-
reference between a series’ videos when relevant and include links to related
videos on YouTube cards and in the video description – all promoting people
to watch more. One of the other benefits of making a series or clusters of
related content is that they can potentially promote each other indirectly.
When effective, your clustered videos will show up as suggested and related
videos for each other in the sidebar on your own channel, and on other
people’s videos.
One of the key markers any good YouTube series is when every episode can
be fully appreciated by a first-time viewer. In other words, your videos
shouldn't isolate new viewers who stumble upon them – make them as
accessible as possible. Factor this in before you even begin filming. So, when
you launch a video series, make sure to actually tell people that the videos are
part of a series (visually in the title (e.g., 
How to Knit A Winter Scarf: Part 1
)
and audibly (e.g., 
"This is part one of your 
guide to knitting a warm scarf for
winter"
), include quick recaps at the beginning of the videos to bring new
viewers up to speed, and encourage them to subscribe to come back for more
with an end card message and a regular upload schedule. As well as video
titles, series' do best when they include consistent video tags (good for SEO),
themed video thumbnails (so that people can easily see that a group of videos
are related), and when they are organized into a specific playlist (so that a
viewer can click "play" just once and watch the whole series of videos in one
go).SEO Optimization Strategies for YouTube
After Google, YouTube is the world’s second-largest search engine. In fact,
as Google owns YouTube, the search feature on both platforms is engineered
to do one thing: provide the best answer to an inquiry. Videos based upon
highly-searched topics will surface in search results, and some search terms
remain popular for years. Videos that address these search queries will have a
longer shelf life on YouTube. To have your videos rank well in YouTube and
Google search results, your aim should be to reverse-engineer your content to
be as close as possible to the best answer for a particular search term. Before
you even hit record, know what the title, tags, and content of the video are
going to be. When someone searches for your video on YouTube, the site
uses a variety of factors to judge where it will appear in the list of results,
including the number of views, how long people typically watch it, its tally of
likes and comments, how many subscribers your channel has, how often the
video has been embedded, and more.
Note: 
Through your research, you also want to know what content your video
will be competing with, so perform a few searches to see what’s already out
there and think about how you can improve on it - so that your video will
eventually perform better.
To maximize the chances of your video being found, it is imperative that
your videos' metadata is optimized. Here are some tips for doing just that:
YouTube video title SEO
Simply put, titles help viewers decide if they want to watch a video – so it
should work hard to get your videos appearing in search and encouraging
viewers to click.
When coming up with a title for your videos, think about what your audience
is likely to search for and reflect that in the words that you use. For ideas,
look for keywords (either individual words or phrases) in Google Keyword
Planner, or go to the YouTube search bar, start typing, and see how it finishes
your sentence. Those predictions are what real people search for in order of
importance. Your video title should be keyword rich and 
match 
the content
that your video contains. Only the first ~45 characters of your video title are
displayed in the YouTube search results on mobile devices, so make sure youfront-end load the title with your primary keyword phrase(s). Here are some
quick pointers to help get even 
more from your video titles:
Use deliberate capitalization of words to highlight your
content, e.g.,
 'The Top 10 Reasons Facebook Marketing Works'
instead of 'The top 10 reason Facebook marketing works'.
Add colon after your initial keywords and rephrase your title.
For
 example, your video on saving money “Save Money
Easily: The Simple Money Saving Plan.” This will help capture
those people who are searching for videos by using two similar
(but different) phrases.
Make your titles catchy in a way that will encourage users to
click. For
 example, in a video that teaches people how to tie a
bow tie - and 
do it in
 30 seconds or less - which of the
following would be more appealing: "How to Instructions and
Advice About How to Tie A Bow Tie" or "Tie A Bow Tie in
30 Seconds or Less."
Include keywords at the start of your video title and branding
near the
 end, e.g., "How to Fix A Cracked iPhone 14 Screen |
The iPhone 10 Wizard Tutorials".
Note: 
The above advice focuses on the types of searches that people
will make when they already know what they are looking for. A second
school of thought on video titles relates to so-called “intriguing” ones.
They appeal to viewers who aren't looking for topic-specific content.
They focus less on searchable keywords, but instead create a strong
curiosity in the viewer – the type of videos that might be recommended
to users. Often, they have a more creative relationship with their
accompanying thumbnails. Examples might include “the worst day of
my life (not clickbait)” or “why this carrot is black.” 
Write effective video descriptions
The first few sentences of your video description will appear in YouTube
search results, and the same few lines will appear below your content on the
video's individual page followed by a "See More" link that must be clicked in
order to read the rest. Therefore, good practice is to use the beginning of your
video description to accurately describe what your video is all about in one or
two sentences, as this is the most valuable snippet for SEO purposes. Forpeople who click to view your description in full, consider adding the
following information to all of your video descriptions:
A description of your channel and a link to your channel page.
A call to action asking viewers to subscribe and a link to click.
Links to more episodes or related videos and playlists.
Links to your website and social media profiles and a call to
action to follow you.
Information about your channel's video upload schedule, e.g.,
"New videos uploaded every Friday."
Links to useful time-codes for long videos using the X:XX
format, e.g.., "Talk of squirrels starts at 3:44."
Using basic markup parameters, you can draw more attention to parts of
your description (the same also works in comments):
*bold text* → bold
_italicized text_ → italics
-strikethrough text- → strikethrough
Note: 
Often, the links listed above the “See More” section of the description
are placed there for maximum visibility. When adding links in your video
description, type out the entire URL to your website, including the “http://”
prefix, so that YouTube will automatically hyperlink it. Otherwise, people
won’t be able to click through to your site.
Lengthier and more detailed video descriptions that include multiple relevant
keyword variations have a better chance of ranking high for relevant web
searches, because contextual keywords are the heart and soul of Google and
YouTube search queries. A detailed description can help you rank for many
possible related searches, and may even boost your chances of snagging
attention for keywords or phrases you didn’t use.
Tag your video effectively
Tags are descriptive keywords that help people find your videos, so the more
relevant your tags, the more discoverable your video will be. The following
list will help you write tags as effectively as possible:
Come up with a set of standard tags that can be applied to anyvideo
 you upload, e.g., sports, film, food, videogames, etc. -
Set video info defaults for these to automatically appear via
Channel Settings > Upload defaults.
There is no perfect number of tags, but they should always be
topically
 accurate and concise, and you should use enough to
thoroughly describe your video's content.
To help you come up with tags, think about the different
keywords
 that viewers will search find your video; if your
video was split into sections or themes, how would you
describe them in a single word or phrase?
Install a browser extension like VidIQ or TubeBuddy for
Chrome to
 reveal the tags used by other popular videos in your
niche (visit any YouTube video and they'll appear), and see if
you can spot any 
inspiration for your own. These tools will also
give you an idea of how your keywords are ranking once a
video is published - and educate you on improving your
approach in the future. If the extension’s data for keyword
ranking seems all over the place initially, don't fret. YouTube is
constantly testing your video in the opening hours, letting it
spend a few seconds or minutes in a certain market or with a
certain number of users to see how it performs.
To boost your video's search ranking, use quotation marks to
isolate
 important keyword phrases with multiple words, e.g.,
"how to make a paper airplane", as well as typing the phrase
without the punctuation.
Use keywords and phrases from the video title in your tags.
Actively update and optimize archived videos with relevant
tags when new search trends emerge.
Note:
 In July 2018, YouTube began to allow uploaders to add hashtags to
descriptions and video titles to make it easier for viewers to find channels and
content. When clicked, YouTube's hashtags will show a results page with
other videos tagged with the same hashtag. Up to three clickable hashtags can
be included in a video title, but if there are no hashtags in the title, the first
three hashtags in the description (if there are any) will display above thevideo title. Look out for YouTube's Hashtag Autocomplete Suggestions
option, which will display hashtags that you may be looking to add, based on
your entered text, plus insights as to how much each tag is used on the
platform already, further guiding your approach. So, as well as considering
strong keywords for your YouTube video titles and descriptions, adding one
or two relevant hashtags (such as a location or brand-specific hashtag) in the
title, as well as a smattering of a few more in the description, would be a wise
move.
Select the right video category and add a location
Make sure that you submit your YouTube video to the right category. If there
is no exact match (and there often isn't), choose the category that most
closely fits your upload. Videos submitted into irrelevant categories may not
get relevant traffic, so this step is important. If your video could fit into two
categories, select the one where you think it might have least competition to
increase the chances of it being found or even featured. Meanwhile, adding
your location to your YouTube videos will make them geographically
searchable, which can help you get more relevant views. 
Caption all your videos; add the transcript to the description
YouTube’s AI is smart enough to actually listen to the content in the video to
confirm that the substance of the video matches the tags, so words and
phrases that match with (and are related to) the title and description, can
provide you with an extra SEO boost. YouTube will automatically add
closed-captions to your video with its best guess. You can edit and improve
automatically-generated captions in the Edit Video interface using the
Translator Toolkit, if required. In addition, paste your transcript into the
video description, too, as it's a good way to add relevant, 
keyword-rich
information to your content, which will benefit you SEO-wise. In addition, it
will give people an easy way to refer back to different sections of the video,
which is particularly useful if what you are discussing is an in-depth or
complicated subject. To create fully new captions for a video, type out the
text of all the audio, upload it via the "Subtitles and CC" tab, and it will
automatically sync to your content.
Create a custom video thumbnail (or choose the best default option)
Thumbnails act as mini marketing posters for your content and are important
in attracting viewers to your videos wherever they are seen - either onYouTube, in Google search results or embedded on websites.
When coming up with a thumbnail idea, consider who your target audience
is. Existing subscribers might be attracted by a thumbnail that feature familiar
elements, like a photo of you. Whereas thumbnails that attract clicks from a
broader audience might use universally recognizable elements instead. To
give yourself plenty of options, capture plenty of photos or video stills during
your shoot.
Thumbnails, more than any other element, can make or break your videos’
success on YouTube. The reason? Suggested videos. Suggested videos
provide the biggest source of traffic on the site. As someone is watching a
video, your video thumbnail – assuming it appears in the Suggested videos
section - needs to stand out and entice the viewer to click it next.
Here are a few more tips for creating a compelling thumbnail:
Make sure the thumbnail accurately represents the video
content. No
 one will stick around to watch, or trust your other
content, if the thumbnail is deliberately misleading.
Attempt to tell a story with your video thumbnails to encourage
people
 to click on them. For example, construct an image that
sets up or teases a particular situation; make the viewer wonder
what happens next, or what happened to cause what they see. If
the thumbnail works with the video title to amplify the story
you’re trying to tell, that’s even better. Appeal to people’s
emotions.
YouTube recommends a custom thumbnail be sized to 1280 x
720
 pixels, and you can create them in an image editor like
Photoshop or GIMP, or easily online at sites like Canva. Is
your thumbnail still going to be as impactful when seen in
search results or on a mobile device, for example? To check
how your thumbnail will look in practice, zoom out wide
during the design process so you can get an idea.
Give your thumbnails a consistent look and branding, so that
fans can recognize your videos at a glance in the subscription
feeds.Don't be afraid to change up your thumbnail design or update
old thumbnails to reflect changing tastes and trends, and to
attract new viewers. If your video appears in the top 5 results
for a specific keyword, how can you design your thumbnail
(color, elements, and composition) to make it stand out versus
the others?
Some of the other general guidelines YouTube recommends for
thumbnails are making them bright, with high-contrast; well-
framed with good composition; and a foreground that stands
out from the background.
Add video chapters to guide viewers and keep them engaged
When chapters are added to an upload, the video playback timeline is broken
up into a number of chapter lengths, which, when highlighted, expand the
specific timeline section and provide a snippet of text to show what that
segment is about. YouTube will automatically add chapters to some videos,
but you're best making your own for optimized discoverability. Chapters can
be added simply by listing the right time-stamp details in your video
description, e.g. 0:00 Introduction to fly fishing, 2:57 Fly fishing equipment
To ensure your chapters work properly, make sure that the first timestamp
listed in the video description starts at 0:00, and that your video has at least
three timestamps or chapters, with each chapter being 10 seconds or longer.
Testing has shown that when Chapters are enabled, viewers watch more of
the video, and come back to watch more often on average. Chapters also
improve the chance that your YouTube videos will be included in key
moments highlighted when your video appears in YouTube and Google
search results - allowing viewers to jump straight to a specific part of the
video related to their search query.
Note
:
 
YouTube also provides the option for you to insert chapters
automatically – 
just make sure the checkbox “Allow automatic chapters
(when available and eligible)” is checked during upload.
Increasing Views on Your YouTube Videos
The first 24 hours after a video is published are critical to its initial (andpotentially long-term) success. If it attracts views and watch time right away
(and to a lesser degree in the subsequent 7 days), YouTube will notice and
use the measure of that activity to determine where to rank the video more
favorably. To maximize the chances of your video being found upon its
release (and for weeks and months to come), you want to encourage as much
traffic as possible in the first 24 hours, whether it’s from people on your
email list, via posts on social media, or even using some paid traffic to get a
little bit of a boost on that first day.
Leverage other social media to increase reach
Post your video to Facebook (making sure to choose the best
thumbnail).
Tweet about it on Twitter with a couple of relevant hashtags
(also include the prefix "Video:" before the video title, as
although a shortened YouTube URL will show, it may not
always be 
immediately obvious to your followers that you're
sharing visual content - something they are more likely to
engage with.
Pin your video to Pinterest and make sure that the video's title
and a short description is posted along with it, as well as a
couple of relevant hashtags. All of these details will improve
the chances of your content being found by others in their
Pinterest search.
Consider submitting your video to other major video sharing
sites such as 
Dailymotion 
and Vimeo. These sites might not
have the massive popularity of YouTube, but it could be that
your most lucrative customers one day stumble across them
there.
Keep engagement ticking over in between uploads with Community Tab
and Stories
Consider the Community tab on your YouTube channel, which gives you a
simple way to engage with your viewers and express yourself beyond video.
You can discuss topics through text, launch live video, share images,
animated GIFs and more, giving you a more casual way to engage with your
fans more often in between uploads, and in real time. Viewers will be able tosee your posts in the Subscriptions feed on mobile and they can also opt in to
receiving notifications when you post. 
Note: 
The YouTube Community tab is available to creators with 500 or more
subscribers.
YouTube Shorts: Short-form Video Strategy and
Best Practices
YouTube Shorts are (as the name suggests), short videos on YouTube -
categorized as such when they are vertical format and between 15 and 60
seconds long. YouTube Shorts can be filmed and shared via the Shorts
Camera in the YouTube app, or via the desktop site when published with the
#shorts hashtag used somewhere in the title of the video.
Stories launched in 2020, likely in response to the success of other short-form
video like Instagram Reels and TikTok videos. While YouTube is still
undisputedly top dog for long-form content, people's desire for bite-sized,
off-the-cuff clips is something the video juggernaut can't ignore. And as far
as Shorts goes as an additional content strand for growing your channel and
business on YouTube, it might be worth experimenting with - either in
addition to your regular content, or as a standalone venture.
When you're coming up for an idea for Shorts, stick to one main idea that
makes people laugh, inspires them, or teaches them something new.
Examples include:
A quick tutorial
A short review
Amazing facts ("5 things you didn’t know about…”)
Doing an experiment
Telling a compelling story (“You’ll never guess what happened
when…”)
Sharing an oddly satisfying visual
Summarize a blog post
YouTube Shorts Best PracticesYou don't need to script a Shorts video, but do have a good idea in
mind of what you're going to say or show - make every second
count. If your video is 60 seconds long, a good rule of thumb
would be a 5-second introduction, 10 clips of 5 seconds each that
make up the bulk of your video, and a 5-second outro with a call-
to-action.
A variety of visuals delivered speedily is a good way to keep
viewer attention in the Shorts format.
Editing with the Shorts Camera is best for ease and speed, but
posting Shorts via your desktop does have advantages - like the
ability to add text captions, transitions, music and sound effects -
all that can be used to make your video more entertaining to watch
and keep viewers glued until the end.
Add a call-to-action: Viewers CAN like Shorts, but probably much
more effective is asking them to Subscribe. Since Shorts are
designed to be binged one after another, if you lose a viewer
without them subscribing to more of your content, chances are
they will be lost forever.  So if you are going to choose one call-to-
action, I would go for Subscribe - keep it above the bottom quarter
of the screen and insert some arrows pointing down to the
Subscribe button.
If you're uploading a YouTube Short from the Shorts tool, the
video will automatically be recognized as a Short and categorized
as such. But if you're uploading from your desktop, it is important
that you upload in the vertical format and add the hashtag #Shorts
to your title or description. This tells YouTube that the video is
designed to be a Short and it can handle it appropriately.
YouTube Shorts titles can be up to 100 characters in length.
However, when viewed on the app, only around 40 characters of
the title will appear on-screen. This means that you either want to
make your title strictly less than 40 characters long or if it's longer,
that the most important keywords are featured at the beginning of
your title, as this is what viewers will see.You can feature comments posted on your channel in your Shorts
content. Invite your audience to connect with you via this feature
by answering their questions in your Shorts, taking content
requests, reacting to comments in your videos, etc. From the watch
page of your Short or video, tap 'Reply' on a comment and tap
'Create a Short' to feature it in a new short.
You can already choose a thumbnail for your Short in YouTube
Studio, but you can also choose a single frame to act as a
thumbnail within the original upload flow.
Note: 
The ‘Edit into a Short’ option on mobile lets you select a section of
your regular video uploads to cut into a Short.
 
This Shorts conversion process
includes all the regular Shorts editing tools, including text, timeline editor,
filters, etc. You’ll also add new video segments to your converted clips, or
even include sections from your other videos to make up the 60 seconds.
These Shorts will also link back to the original long-form video, so that
viewers can easily view the full content if desired.
Create playlists and sections to group and feature great content
Playlists will lure people in to experiencing the breadth of the content you
offer and encourage multiple video views in one session. 
Playlist best practices
• From the controls on your main Channel page, build playlists to feature
your "Best of..." and most viewed content and to ensure people view a series
of videos in the order that they were intended.
• If a playlist requires context, upload a short and snappy intro video and
place it at the beginning of the list.
• Use Playlist Notes to write conversational asides about individual videos.
• Use call-to-actions, end-cards and links to direct viewers to playlists.
• Feature playlists on your channel page by creating a new Section. Sections
are used to organize videos, playlists on your channel. Sections can sub-
divide your content by genre, theme, show or any other criteria. Effective
organization will help your audience to find the content they are looking for.
Embed a YouTube Subscribe widget on your blog or website
A YouTube Subscribe widget is a little box that you can embed in the sidebarof your website to encourage people to subscribe to your channel, or click
through to check it out. It displays your YouTube channel icon, subscriber
count, the number of videos you have published and, of course, an all-
important Subscribe button. What I like about it most is that it acts as a
permanent advertisement for your video content. I combine my widget with
an embedded playlist that displays my most recently-published video to
compound its effectiveness. For a look at a YouTube Subscribe widget,
further instructions, and the code needed to embed one on your own website,
visit the following link:
 
http://bit.ly/youtubesubscribewidget
Manage comments effectively
Be sure to keep a tab on the comments being left on your video via the
Community option, found in the Video Manager portion of your account. Let
commenters on your videos know that you appreciate what they have to say,
and respond as often as you can. They'll appreciate the time you take to do so,
and YouTube will see it as an engagement boost which could help your video
rank better. Every time you answer a comment on YouTube, your reply
counts, too. So, if you have 30 comments and reply to all of them, your video
now has 60 comments. If you can reply to every comment, you’ll double the
engagement on a video. If everything else is equal but you get 60 comments
and your competitor has 30, your video will outrank theirs.
YouTube also allows you to pin a comment to the top of a video’s comment
section. You can use this to clarify a point in the video, to ask a question and
encourage people to comment, as a place to drive action with another link
and call-to-action, etc.
Paid Advertising on YouTube
YouTube attracts over 2 billion monthly active users – a large and diverse
audience whose primary motivation is to watch video for prolonged periods.
Unlike social networks such as Facebook or Twitter, there is little socializing
or messaging going on, so little to distract them from exposure to ads, which
is a real benefit. And in digital video terms, nothing comes close to
YouTube's targeting options. As well as all of the standard targeting options
(age, location, gender, etc.), you can target viewers of individual channels
and creators, on topics or categories, and based on search history. For
example, a NYC vegan burger joint might target based on searches for "bestvegan food NYC".
With such a large and diverse audience, it makes sense to consider
experimenting with paid advertising on the site. YouTube’s current model
allows you to achieve video clicks for just a few pennies based on keyword
and audience targeting, with the potential for very satisfactory cost per
acquisition. 
Setting up YouTube Ads
In order to run YouTube ads, you will first need to setup a
Google Ads account and link it to your YouTube channel, via
http://adwords.google.com. 
and choose to launch a new video
campaign. In Google Ads, click the "Tools and Settings" button
and look for the "Linked accounts" option. From here, find the
YouTube option and add your YouTube channel. Once
everything is confirmed, you'll be ready to create your first
campaign in Google Ads.
Choose a goal/objective that is relevant to your campaign and
select video as your campaign type. For example, Sales, Leads,
Website traffic, Brand awareness and reach, etc. Next, choose
your campaign subtype from the list provided, which will
affect how your ad is delivered.
Next is bidding, where the standard bidding option is
maximum CPV (cost-per-view), where you will set a limit for
how much you are willing to spend for each view. You'll then
be asked to choose an Inventory type, which will determine if
your ads will appear on channels that are most appropriate for
brands (recommended), or if you want to expand or limit your
reach by serving (or not serving) ads on videos whose content
is more sensitive in nature - may include mild profanity, for
example.
Choosing a YouTube ad type
YouTube offers for main ad formats. Which you choose will depend on the
message you want to deliver, the type of video ad you want to create, and thebudget you have to spend.
Skippable In-stream (TrueView) Ads: these open up before a
video and have an accompanying banner on the right-hand
side. Using the default CPV bidding option, you'll pay when a
viewer has watched 30 seconds of your ad. Since viewers can
skip your ad any time, you must create a video that grabs and
holds their attention, as well as informs them about your
product or service.
Unskippable In-stream Ads (Pre-Roll Ads): up to 15 seconds
long, these in-stream ads have no companion banner, and there
is no call-to-action other than the “Visit advertiser’s website”
link.
Bumper Ads: short unskippable ads under 6 seconds (this is
also the duration that in-stream ads become skippable after).
Video Discovery Ads (Previously In-display Ads): Ads inside
the YouTube platform that advertise one of your videos or
campaigns. These ads can be placed directly in the YouTube
app feed (or home page), and not just next to related videos.
Useful if you want to improve your reach while targeting a
very specific audience.
YouTube ads tips for success
Like all digital advertising, building effective YouTube ads is a process of
experimentation – a mixture of art and science. Here are a selection of
pointers to start you off on a strong footing:
Start with the audience in mind - become intimately familiar
with the content your customers are already consuming on
YouTube., then create videos that are inspired by it (language,
humor, memes, references, setting, etc.). If you have the
resources and the time, you can run surveys and focus groups
to get your answers.
You can also get insights into what your customers are already
watching by setting up a display remarketing campaign and
targeting the audience of paying customers. This ad doesn’t
have to be perfect, because you are only mining data on where
the ads get shown. To see this, head over to placements for theremarketing campaign and select “Where ads showed.” Set the
network to YouTube, and you can see which channels are the
most popular among your customers.
Research has shown that multiple short touchpoints beat a
single longer touchpoint - video ad sequencing in the YouTube
ad setup lets you do just this.
Only make ads as long as they need to be - long enough to
formulate a compelling visual story, but not too long that
viewers will get bored and skip past. Try to grab a viewers’
attention in the first few seconds. 
If advertising your channel, show viewers what you’re all
about. Feature clips of your content and produce the ad in the
same style as the content on your channel.
Use a call to action. Tell viewers exactly what you want them
to do after watching your ad: to subscribe, comment, check out
a playlist, watch your newest video, etc.
Give users time to take action. The last few seconds or so of
your video ad should be reserved to give users time to click or
tap, based on your call-to-action. 
Give your video ad a compelling title. Certain ad titles are
visible to viewers, so use this space to double-down on your
call to action in a prominent position.
For the ads that require it, upload a compelling thumbnail. Use
a clear and creative thumbnail to entice users to click and
watch your video ad.
Tracking the progress of YouTube ads
When your YouTube ads are live, you can track their performance via your
AdWords account. To get a detailed overview of your ad performance
metrics in AdWords, connect your AdWords and YouTube accounts, and in
AdWords for video, enable the "audience" columns to see the number of
views and subscribers generated as a result of them. More success metrics are
also available in AdWords including conversion, reach, frequency and
website clicks. For a quick overview, meanwhile, navigate to the “Traffic
Sources" report in YouTube Analytics to see how much of your channel'sviewership is being generated from your ads. As with all paid advertising on
social media, don't be afraid to experiment with different approaches - cull
what doesn't work and concentrate your time and money on what does.Instagram Tips: 
Snap-happy Marketing Strategy
Instagram has taken the world by storm since launching in October 2010.
Hundreds of millions of people and businesses use the platform as a way to
transform everyday photos and videos with filters and frames, into memory-
laden content, which can then be shared with the world. Chances are that
snapshots and recordings of your brand are already on Instagram, and all of
this content acts as authentic peer-to-peer endorsements of you - essentially
free advertising. With a sound strategy of your own, you can only help to
compound this effect, increasing brand loyalty and driving sales as a result.
Some have even dubbed Instagram "The World's Most Powerful Selling
Tool," such is the level of passion its users show. They’re young, they’re
engaged, and many of them are ready to buy.
Understand the "Culture of Instagram"
The top-performing brands on Instagram all have one thing in common: they
understand what makes the app unique compared to other social networks
and use this knowledge to their advantage.
While the definition of "Instagram culture" has changed over time, at its core
are users who are 
proud 
of the content the images they post - you won't see
hundreds of impulsive selfies and blurry photos in the main feeds of popular
accounts, for instance. As such, there is a definite lean towards quality over
quantity, which sees creators taking their time to carefully compose and
construct photos and videos in their main profile feed (Instagram Stories and
Reels are a different matter, but there’ll be much more on these later); editing
until they are 
just
 right so that when something does eventually get posted to
their Instagram feed, it is poured over by impressed followers, complemented
with lots of likes and comments, and attracts new fans (
"Wow, these guys
post great stuff and get a lot of love; I'm sticking around for more!") 
in the
process. 
And while the above still rings true, Instagram 
has
 seen a noticeable shift in
its overall aesthetic in recent years. What we're seeing is a little less polish
and more authenticity from a lot of top accounts: raw, organic, and naturalimages (and even memes) are also now performing very well on the platform
– particularly in stories and Reels. This is partly because the traditional
Instagram aesthetic has been used to the point of proliferation, but also a
deliberate switch in focus from Instagram itself in the face of stiff
competition from other social media video content, especially TikTok. It no
longer wants to be thought of as the “square photo-sharing app,” but instead
as a general entertainment app driven by algorithms and videos. So, although
picture perfect content still very much has a place on Instagram, it is no
longer the only way to generate high levels of engagement. Indeed, more
casual video content is actively encouraged
.
What are the elements of a top-quality Instagram image?
As you now know, posting any old photo onto Instagram just won't cut it with
the app's savvy audience; you have to be much more inventive and selective.
One canny way to discover what kinds of photos Instagram really wants
brands to post in order to keep fans happy is to look at its recommendations
for Instagram ads:
No heavy use of image filters as a way to mask the "reality" of
a shot, and no text overlays are allowed.
Brands cannot feature their logo in Instagram ads other than as
a natural, non-obvious part of the scene.
Images used as ads must be "true to your brand", i.e., not
shocking or cheesy, and no use of gimmicks.
Photos used for ads should capture "moments", not products. In
other words, ads must not just be a shot of your product, but
something more creative and inspiring.
Ads should use ideas and take cues from the existing Instagram
community, especially from popular hashtags.
As you read through the rest of the advice in the chapter, keep these ideas in
the back of your mind as you think about how you want to shape your own
Instagram strategy. As with a lot of social media theory, they won't apply to
every situation all of the time, but as a good basis for your activity? Pretty
good stuff. By the way, there’s plenty more information and strategy for
Instagram ads at the end of this chapter.
Understand the Instagram algorithm to use it to your advantageIn March 2016, and in response to data showing that people miss, on average,
70 percent of the posts of accounts they follow, Instagram overhauled its
algorithm from showing all posts from people users follow in chronological
order to one that prioritizes what is shown first based on 
"the likelihood
people will be interested in the content, their relationship with the person or
business posting and the timeliness of the post." 
In short, if you want your
Instagram posts to be seen by more people, they need to consistently resonate
with your audience. The more fans like and comment on your posts, the more
likely Instagram's algorithm is to favor subsequent content - pushing it to the
top of news feeds, and limiting the need for paid promotion to get it seen. The
biggest challenge, then, is developing an Instagram strategy that generates
engagement. 
As you start testing ideas, listen to your audience and pay attention to the
engagement each post receives. When someone takes the time to like,
comment or send you a message, they are telling you they enjoy what you are
posting, so continue along that path. In addition, making personal touches,
especially at the start of your Instagram journey, can help you gain
meaningful
growth. For example, taking the extra few seconds to like and reply to
comments shows people that their engagement matters to your brand (plus,
your responses count towards overall engagement and facilitate more
comments, favoring your content in the algorithm). As a result, next time you
post content, they are more 
likely to engage with your account again. Take
the time to build a strong relationship with your followers because their
engagement will cause more people to be exposed to your activity, and this
can lead to a snowball effect in terms of growth.
Instagram Profile and Content Optimization
Convert your Instagram profile for business use
Once your Instagram account is registered, you'll want to convert your
personal profile (the default) to a business account in order to access features
that can help you grow your business, most notably Instagram ads and
Instagram Insights (an analytics tool that can help you understand who is
engaging with your business on Instagram). To switch your profile to a
professional account:1
. 
Go to your profile and tap in the upper right corner.
2
. 
Tap Settings.
3
. 
Tap Account.
4
. 
Tap Switch to Professional Account.
5
. 
Tap Business, then add details, like your business category and
contact information.
From here, you can also connect your business account to the Facebook Page
associated with it, which will make it easier to use all of the features available
for businesses.
Optimize your Instagram bio; add a profile photo that fits a circle 
 
One of the easiest ways to connect with would-be Instagram followers is to
optimize your bio. Make the most of the limited space – just 150 characters -
to encourage to follow you (give them a reason why they should!), or drive
action in another way – visiting your site, telling them how to reach you for
support, etc. If you want to add line breaks to your bio text to make it simpler
to read, simply edit your profile (pressing Enter to add a line break) via the
Instagram desktop site.
Note: 
The "Name" box / headline section of your Instagram profile is
searchable. So rather than it just being your own name or business name (let
your @username or other part of your bio do that for you), populate the
Name box with a phrase that includes specific keywords that you want your
business to be found with, e.g. Food Photographer, South London
Hairdresser, or Luxury Wedding Consultant.
Don't forget to add the URL to your company’s website in your bio section
too – the only place on Instagram where a URL is directly clickable. 
You
might also want to experiment with a multi-URL landing page, either one you
design yourself or via tools like Linktree (
https://linktr.ee/
). The way it works
is that the single, clickable link on your Instagram bio leads visitors to a
simple list of multiple links – to your website, latest blog, shop, to your FAQs
page, etc., all in one handy place. 
Keep the tone of your bio light and fun, include relevant keywords (for SEO),
and Emojis if the mood fits. 
Note: 
If you have an additional Instagram profile or hashtag to promote,adding its @username or hashtag to your bio text will make the handle or
hashtag clickable on your profile. It’s worth remembering that including a
hashtag in your Instagram bio does not make your profile searchable within
that hashtag, so just stick to using your own branded hashtag rather than
something you think might attract new views through search.
Equally as important for your bio is to add a photo of yourself if you're the
figurehead of your company (ideally of your smiley face) or, instead, your
company logo, as this will represent you all across the service. Instagram
uses a circular profile photo, which suits faces better than it does company
logos. If your logo is square and messily cropped when you upload it to your
Instagram profile, use my 
square-logo-into-circle-fit 
template as an easy fix.
Grab it via 
Premium Content Bundle 
chapter of this book.
Instagram action buttons
Instagram allows businesses profiles to add so-called Action Buttons to their
profiles, to encourage engagement. In addition to Call, Text, Message,
Directions, and Email buttons, depending on your business type and goals,
through external app integration, you may also be able to choose from action
buttons like Book, Buy Tickets, Start Order, and Reserve. The action button
that appears on your account will tie directly into the app you select for the
button integration. For example, if you use and select OpenTable, you’ll
automatically get the Reserve action button. To add an action button to your
Instagram account, you need to have an existing account set up with the
third-party with which you plan to integrate. To add an action button to your
Instagram account:
1. Select Edit Profile, scroll down and select Contact Options. From the
Contact Options screen, tap the Add an Action Button option. 
2. Select the third-party app you want to integrate with, e.g., Acuity
Scheduling, Atom Tickets, Booksy, ChowNow, EatStreet, Eventbrite,
Fandango, GrubHub, MyTime, OpenTable, Reserve, Restorando, Resy,
SevenRooms, StyleSeat, Tock, Vagaro, and Yelp. 
3. Enter the URL for the account or page you use on the third-party app to
which you want people from Instagram to be directed via the action button.
Tap Submit.
To maximize your results with the action button, use a call-to-action in post
captions and Stories to let customers know they can book or reserve directlyfrom your Instagram profile. You could also include a short CTA in your bio
description 
to encourage customers to click, or offer an Instagram-exclusive
coupon code.
Note:
 The Instagram app includes a dynamic, searchable map which shows
recent stories, top posts, and relevant guides of tagged locations, and more.
So it's crucial that, if your business as a physical location, that your address
details are up to date - and that you're encouraging customers to tag you in
their content.
Instagram QR Code
Every business on Instagram can generate a QR code that is scannable from
any supporting third-party camera. The idea is that you can print your QR
code so that customers can use it to visit your Instagram account easily. From
there, people can see your store hours, buy items, or just follow your account.
To generate your QR code, visit the QR code option in your Instagram
Settings.
Instagram web profiles
In late 2012, Instagram rolled out official web profiles for users. Log in to
your account; your web profile URL will be
www.instagram.com/yourinstagramusername. 
When an Instagram image link
is posted to Twitter, Facebook, and other sites, a user will be directed to your
web profile when it is clicked. Web-based profiles mean that these people can
comment and/or like the image direct on the web - no mobile app is required.
Marketers can use this knowledge as an opportunity to promote more
interaction among fans.
The Importance of Hashtags on Instagram
Starting from zero – 3 steps to gain traction and grow your following 
 
As a way to underline all of the ideas and information already laid out in this
chapter and a preface to lots more to come, what follows is a no-fuss strategy
that outlines how any brand can grow a new Instagram account from scratch.
Building an organic follower base on Instagram is, in theory, simple: just get
people to see your content and have them hit the "Follow" button on your
profile. This happens in one of three ways:
1
. 
A user sees someone they follow share your content, then tapsthrough to your profile.
2
. 
A user sees your content while browsing various hashtags in
Instagram search and then tap through to your profile.
3
. 
A user gets a notification that you followed or liked them, and
then taps through to your profile.
Note: 
And of course, there’s paid advertising, which, as mentioned above, I
go into more detail about later in this chapter. Paid ads can obviously help to
amplify growth, but the ideas described in this tip are all focused on helping
you to grow a strong foundation of genuine, loyal Instagram followers from
scratch, for free
.
Outcome no.1 is obviously the most desirable, as it means your Instagram
content is admired enough for it to be shared to others, and seen by all of
their followers. However, if you’ve just launched an Instagram profile and
haven’t got any followers to promote your content for you, this is a non-
starter. Instead, let's focus on the other two suggestions – hashtag strategy
and user notifications - to see how they can work for you.
Instagram's system of hashtags is central to any brand’s growth strategy on
the platform (more than any other social network) and it is, to some degree,
very democratic. For example, every photo of someone’s brunch tagged in its
caption with #fridaybrunch will appear in that hashtag's search results, ready
for someone to view it. However, if this brunch-sharer happened to be your
brand and someone who found it in search liked the photo enough to tap
through to your profile, they might hesitate to hit "Follow" when they see that
your follower count is pitifully low. Why follow your brand when they can
follow a similar account with hundreds of thousands of followers, more
content, and perhaps slightly snazzier production values?
So then, posting great content isn't enough on its own. You need to put some
work in to get your profile in front of people and schmooze just a bit to create
a bond to start growing a following. Here’s the three-step process you need to
follow:
1
. 
Develop your content. Think up a niche or subject for content
that you will be able to continually produce fairly easily and at
a steady rate - aim to post at least one photo per day, at least in
the early stages of your growth strategy. Make sure the imagesare high quality, speak to people's emotions (inspires, makes
them laugh, motivates, etc.), that the overall aesthetic is
cohesive - similar branding, filters, colors, etc., and most
importantly, that your Instagram profile's grid represents your
brand as a whole.
2
. 
Develop a list of hashtags to start driving organic traffic.
There's a lot more about how exactly to come up with a set of
powerful hashtags in the next tip, but in essence they should be
relevant to your content and chosen to target keywords that will
help your brand to grow. Pay close attention to how different
groups of hashtags affect the reception of your content. Start
with a couple (rather than the maximum of 30), change them
around, and use the resulting follower growth (or lack thereof)
to discover hashtags that work best for bringing in genuine
fans.
3
. 
Network with others. This is the biggie, and the step where
most brands fall short. Putting in the legwork through cold
outreach is central to growing an Instagram account from
scratch. If people within your community don't know you exist,
they can't follow you. Be genuine about it. Perform a hashtag
search and visit the profile of 
someone in your niche who you
think might follow you. If their content confirms your initial
gut feeling, like a few of their posts, leave nice comments, and
follow them. With any luck, the theory of basic reciprocity (I've
done something nice for you, now you want to do something
nice for me) will mean that they follow you back.
And remember, this strategy won't necessarily produce results overnight –
patience is the key. Repeat the aforementioned steps for a couple of months
as a no-fuss way to kickstart growth on an Instagram account you’re building
from scratch.
Choosing the right hashtags to boost engagement and get discovered 
 
There’s a good reason why many popular Instagram profiles use loads of
hashtags (up to the 30-hashtag limit) in their posts. Through its search and
explore options, Instagram gives major weight to hashtags as a way forpeople to discover things like. People use hashtags to search for content on
Instagram, so using the right hashtags can help put your content in front of
people searching for keywords and phrases associated with your business.
Which hashtags should you use? Use a good mix of broad hashtags related to
your business and industry as a whole (and the post in question): those that
return over 1m results, as well as some more "niche" options - between 1,000
and 10,000 search results returned - as well as some in between - between
20,000 and 100,000 search results. Find inspiration from auto-completed
hashtag suggestions in Instagram search, in the "Related" hashtag suggestions
displayed when you click on a search result, and in the captions of popular
Instagram accounts within your industry. 
There are two main reasons for selecting a mixture of broad and niche
hashtags to include in your posts (as well as some "in between" examples): to
hopefully get your brand to appear regularly within the Top Posts and Recent
Posts sections of the Instagram search results page. "Top Posts" display at the
top of every completed search and are "stickied" there for at least several
hours - these will garner you plenty of attention. Meanwhile, Recent Posts
refresh near the top of search results in real-time - for a tiny duration, but
seen by more people when a mega-popular hashtag is searched (e.g. #fashion)
- and for a longer amount of time, but seen by fewer people when a less-
popular hashtag is searched (e.g. #greywoolcardican). For a full explanation
of this strategy, as well as a more scientific breakdown for selecting and
tracking appropriate hashtags, see the blog post I have written at this link:
http://bit.ly/instagramhashtagstrategy
.
Should you max out the hashtag limit? A study by Trackmaven, found that
using between 5 and 11 hashtags maximized Instagram interactions, but what
works for one business might not work for yours – you’ll need to play around
to find a sweet spot. One simple idea is to spy at how many hashtags
influencers in your industry and your competitors use in their posts and to fall
into the same kind of ballpark, or to track the engagement of your posts when
you experiment with using different amounts of hashtags.
Note: 
If you use the same group of "base" hashtags often, save the list in your
phone's Notes or utilize the text shortcut option in iOS or Android Settings to
pre-
populate the list in an instant. In addition, to keep your posts looking neat
and tidy, hide a long list of hashtags in the first comment of your post (simplycomment right after posting) - Instagram will still pick them up as if they are
within the  post's main caption.
Discover and engage by following hashtags
At the beginning of 2018, Instagram allowed users to start following
hashtags, meaning content from people who are using the hashtags you
follow will pop up in your home feed. It presents an amazing opportunity to
engage organically with other accounts – like current and potential customers
– and as well as a way for you to discover more people, it’s also a way they
can discover you. And if you are thoughtful with your comments, they might
even reciprocate and check out your account. To follow a hashtag, go to the
Explore page, type a hashtag and then tap on the “Follow” button.
Taking Great Instagram Photos: The Basics
The types of images and photos that resonate with Instagram users reflect
many of the themes we discussed in "The Best Types of Content to Post on
Social Media" chapter of this book (featuring customers, promoting products,
going behind the scenes, etc.). Here, you'll find advice about shooting and
optimizing images especially for Instagram's dominant user base, but it can
also be applied to images across all of social media.
Only post your best photos, find inspiration from other users
As mentioned earlier, the best brands on Instagram are extremely picky about
the images they post on their grids. Take your time in creating a collection of
photos that you are really proud of - your very best efforts - as it is this that
will catch the eye of users both when viewed as individual pieces of content
in the app’s feed and when your grid is browsed as a whole. Many of the
biggest brands on Instagram post just once per day, sometimes even less.
Here are some basic photography tips and guidelines that will help to lift the
quality of your work on Instagram:
See the world in squares (but don’t fret about it too much)
Traditionally, photos on Instagram have been squares - like an old Polaroid
snapshot – and this remains the most popular type of composition on the
social network. So even before the shutter closes on your camera, try to
imagine how your composition might appear as a square once the sides are
cropped. However, in August 2015, added the ability to publish photos andvideos in both portrait 
and
 landscape mode, too. So while the majority of
users still post square images (whether out of habit or tradition(!), Instagram
actually 
encourages
 portrait shots in the main feed because they naturally
cover more of a users’ mobile display and can be more engaging as a result.
The rule of thirds
Just as with other forms of photography, the ‘rule of thirds’ is deeply rooted
in 
many of the great Instagram shots. Consider the most important elements
of your shot, then place the subject of the photo at the intersection points of
the grid lines that divide the photo into thirds.
Get symmetrical
Symmetrical shots look great with Instagram. You'll finish with a perfect
square crop of your image. When taking your photo, the key is to center
yourself perfectly and make sure all your lines are absolutely straight.
Play with angles and lines
Instagram is all about encouraging its users to see the world in a new way.
We're all so used to viewing the world from head height, so experiment with
high and low angles, from behind, or at the side, to add interest and intrigue
to your snapshots. In addition, think about incorporating lines into your
photos - natural elements like a line or trees or a road stretching into the
distance - to draw people's eyes into the image, or toward whatever it is you
want them to focus on.
Zoom in on details
To make the most of the relatively small real estate of mobile devices (where
most people will be viewing your Instagram content), make a habit of
focusing in on particular details of products or a service in order to draw
customers in, rather than making blander long or mid-range shots. For
example, a clothing store might highlight the quality dye and material in a
garment, while a
decorating service could go a bit more abstract and use the close-up shot of a
pot of paint and a brush to represent a job well done.
Find inspiration
If you’re lacking inspiration, use Instagram's Explore tab to see the latest
emerging trends on Instagram, and consider implementing them in your own
work.Brand your images consistently and create a cohesive grid
Instagram's popularity blew up, in part, due to the ease with which users can
transform ordinary photos with vintage filters. While these overlays have
remained, over the years its image editing tools have expanded to include a
variety of additional options for photo-tweaking, including straightening, lux,
brightness, contrast, tilt-shift, sharpening, and more. Instagram allows you to
set the strength of each adjustment with a simple slider. Outside of Instagram,
the free and easy-to-use Lightroom and Snapseed mobile apps (for both iOS
and Android) are excellent for editing Instagram photos.
Overall, I'd suggest applying them in a way that is subtle (to align with
Instagram's preferred approach for brands, i.e., natural), and decide on a filter
or color overlay that you will use consistently; one that helps the image to
reflect your brand culture and personality (e.g., fun, playful, serious,
professional, etc.) 
and 
makes your style immediately identifiable within the
feeds of fans. 
Note: 
As a business, your Instagram grid – which is the view users get when
they 
look at your profile all at once – is more important than ever. It’s no
longer just enough to publish great images, your overall profile and grid
needs to shine as one meticulously-planned cohesive whole if you are to
encourage fans to hit “Follow” in the few seconds they view it – especially if
they land there from a Sponsored post that you are paying for! In many cases,
this simply means branding your profile and photos with a consistent color
pallet so that your posts are instantly recognizable. So, as well as focusing on
each individual piece of content, think about cohesiveness that will be created
when they all sit together within your full grid of images. Ask yourself, does
your content look like it belongs as part of a whole, or was it thrown together
in any old style? In order to create a distinctive branded account on
Instagram, learn what your fans like about you and consistently create
content around that theme. If you'd like to organize and test how your
Instagram grid will appear before you publish posts to it (to decide which
layout looks best), planner apps like Preview (
www.thepreviewapp.com
) and
Later (
www.later.com
) are both good options.
Consider not taking your photos in Instagram
If you shoot a photo within Instagram, you are instantly locked into using its
filters and editing tools. As expansive as these options have become, it isoften a better option to shoot a photo with your mobile's native camera app
(or any other digital camera). Doing this will provide you with a 'clean' image
that can be imported into whichever photo editing app you like (VSCO Cam
or Afterlight, for instance - tools that may provide more unique and diverse
filter and image editing options). When you're done, you can then import the
photo into Instagram for final tweaking and publishing. This approach is how
the pros often get such great photos - ones that look so different from
anything that Instagram alone can produce. 
Instagram Content Optimization Strategy
With the basics covered, let’s take a look at how to really optimize the
content you post to the main grid of your Instagram profile, for maximum
impact.
Make the most of the photo caption
The photo caption that accompanies every image on Instagram exists as a
small but crucial part of your marketing strategy - never leave it blank. Use it
as a way to anchor the content of the image, to provide context, reflect your
brand's personality and tone of voice, and encourage your audience to act.
Examples of uses for the caption include adding a description of the product
you are featuring, asking a question or starting a discussion 
and adding a call
to action or including a URL that you want fans to visit. 
Note: 
If your caption’s call to action mentions something like, “Click the link
in our bio to buy!”, always include an @mention of your username
(clickable) right afterwards. This will help to drive more engagement, since
the option to visit your profile’s home page is 
right there
. Never
underestimate the laziness of people when it comes to helping them take
action.
Instagram captions do not have a character limit, so you might wonder how
long your captions should ideally be. The answer is that both short and sweet
captions 
and
 long captions can and do both work well, depending on your
audience. A way that Instagram captions are increasingly being used,
especially by individuals, is to use captions to “talk” to their followers like
writing a journal or addressing friends; sharing their thoughts in a flowy
style, and encouraging discussion.Note: 
URLs written within Instagram captions cannot be clicked on, so make
sure that they are short and memorable, using a service like bit.ly to facilitate
this if necessary. Alternatively, simply include a phrase like "click the link in
our bio.". Your bio is always just one tap away and since the "Website" URL
there 
is 
active, it will save people the time and effort of opening up a separate
browser and typing in a URL, if that is their preference. To further boost the
reach of a post, use a call-to-action that asks fans to share it to their own
Stories.
Use ALT text to boost discovery of your images
Implementing ALT (alternative) text has long been a popular SEO strategy
on websites, but in 2019 it also arrived on Instagram. On the web, ALT text
is used in code as a way to describe the appearance and function of an image
on a page. ALT text displays in place of an image that cannot be loaded,
helps visually impaired users understand what they are seeing and - crucially
- provides improved content/descriptions to search engines, helping them to
properly index an image. What does this mean for ALT text on Instagram?
It's a way to improve the visibility of your photos outside of the app, like in a
Google web search. By adding ALT text to Instagram images, you add
relevancy and weight to your Instagram content, giving it a better chance of
displaying higher up in search results. And in the app directly, it is also of
benefit to visually impaired users. To add ALT text to an image in Instagram,
tap "Advanced settings" on the caption page and choose "Write ALT text".
You'll have a maximum of 100 characters to describe your image.
Got a physical location? Geotag your Instagram posts
Tagging your Instagram posts with your business’ physical location or
anywhere else your photo happens to be taken - geotagging - provides
context, which increases the likelihood that your content will be discovered
by, and suggested to, Instagram users. You’ll find the option to geotag your
location just before you publish an image or video to your main feed
.
Note: 
If you want your bricks and mortar location to appear in Instagram as a
location that can be tagged (rather than just the name of the area it is in),
you'll need to create a Location listing for it via Facebook. Simply go to
create a new post on the Facebook mobile app, click “Check In” and enter
your brand’s name. From here, tap the “Add” button and set up information
about your brand and once submitted, you can search Instagram to see yourresult. One setup, you promote your geotag location and encourage customers
to tag you when they visit. You could, for instance, run contests to get users
to engage more with your location. Set out the rules and make sure entrants
tag your specific location correctly.
Here are a couple of simple but powerful ways you can make use of
geotagging to maximize the visibility of your business and its posts on
Instagram:
Hashtag Locations: 
As you know, using the right hashtags in the caption of
posts on Instagram can give your content more visibility, but you can also use
specific hashtag locations like #london or #miami to give your content the
chance of being suggested to people who are near you. Hashtag locations can
also be used in Instagram Stories, making it easy to tag locations through a
hashtag sticker.
Finding local influencers: 
Imagine you want to get the word out about an
upcoming event you’re hosting, and you want to find local influencers who
might be the right fit, and have the clout, to help you promote it. In the
Instagram search box, ensure the Places tab is selected and type in your
location. Browse through the results to see which users would be a good
match for your brand, then DM them with a proposal to see if they’re
interested in working together.
Comment on location posts: 
It’s wise to keep an eye on the local geotagged
posts; your local area will have a plethora of content your brand can engage
with, and produce opportunities to become more visible to local people (your
target audience, perhaps?).
Stickers in Stories: 
Instagram Stories allows users to use digital stickers on
photos or videos that are based on a geotag. By selecting the “Location”
sticker, you can set it to the geolocations already around you. Remember, you
have to create a location first in Facebook if your geotag doesn’t show up on
Instagram.
Experiment with multiple image posts in Instagram
In February 2017, Instagram introduced the ability to upload between 2-10
photos (or videos, or a combination of both photo and video) to feature
together in one single post via a swipe-able gallery, with one shared captionfor the lot. In the app, you’ll see an icon allowing you to select multiple
photos and videos. Once uploaded, you can tap and hold to change the order,
apply a filter to everything at once or edit them one by one. For brands, this
provides another way to create interesting and engaging content. Some
examples include:
Showing a step-by-step process: 
like a recipe or product
demonstration, one step per photo or video.
Asking a multiple choice question
: Feature the question in the
first image (such as asking for input on a new business logo),
offer several 
choices numbered 1, 2, 3, etc. in the next few
images, and ask fans to comment to vote for their favorite.
Showcase multiple products: 
launching a new product range or
just want to showcase a single product from multiple angles?
This feature is perfect for that.
Tell the story of an event: 
If you look at Instagram Stories as a
way to curate a dynamic tale about your day as it unfolds,
multiple image posts allow you to present a more considered
overview for your feed. Pick the best photos or videos to sum
up the events over a day and present them to your audience in
one succinct post.
"Regram" other users' photos
There is no better promotion for your business to new customers than to show
photos of existing customers enjoying what you offer. Ask for photos to be
submitted to you by happy customers, or - even better - proactively track
them down using specific hashtags. When you find an image you would like
to use, utilize apps like Regram for iOS or PhotoRepost for Android to share
these images on your own feed, and don't forget to tag the person who
originally took the image so that they are notified. For example, pen
manufacturer Sharpie regularly features sketches drawn by its customers, and
Starbucks "piggybacks" on the popularity of Instagram users with large
follow bases, reposting images (with permission, of course) that feature their
products.
Schedule posts to maximize the impact of campaigns and promotions
 
Scheduling Instagram posts will come in handy if you have a lot of pre-prepared content that you want to post consistently, but can really come into
its own as a way to pace and maximize the impact of campaigns or
promotions, e.g., posting themed photos at exactly the same time every day,
or releasing contest details at a set time (having trained customers to come
back to view both). Third party tools like Buffer, Hootsuite, and Later
(
http://later.com
) will allow you to queue content (including caption and
hashtags) for posting on a day and time of your choosing. 
Instagram contest strategy
Instagram contests are hugely popular and can provide a quick, cheap, and
powerful way to encourage fans to engage with your brand and spread the
word about you across Instagram and beyond. Here is a series of simple steps
to help ensure your Instagram contest is a success:
Choose a prize: 
Choose a prize that is unique to your business, e.g., a product
or gift card so that you will attract entrants who are genuinely interested in
your business, not just in winning an iPad or $500 cash, for example. Also,
try to make the size of the prize proportionate to the effort it will take to win
it, which leads us to...
Decide on an entry method: 
Some of the simplest contest entry methods on
Instagram include asking fans to like a photo, follow your account, or re-post
an image to their grid or story. Alternatively, some of the most common entry
methods ask users to post a photo or a video on Instagram in order to be
entered; often tied to 
a particular theme, e.g., food, colors, seasons, their
favorite product from your offering.
Build your contest: 
When you launch the contest with a post on Instagram,
featuring an attention-grabbing title with a short call-to-action will help
maximize entries, e.g., 
“Enter to Win a $100 Gift Card from Sean's Salon!”
A photo of the prize is a great way to entice people to enter to win it. If
you’re giving away a gift card, for example, include an image with the gift
card value in text and a product that people can buy with it. Write the entry
method and prize info in the description - a paragraph with info about the
prize, how to enter and any rules or restrictions for your contest, linked to
with a short URL or a clickable link in your bio.
Monitor progress: 
To help gauge the success of your Instagram contest:Use hashtags to easily track how many photos are being shared
on
 Instagram that have your contest hashtag (ask fans to use
one in the caption for the photos or videos they post as a
requirement for entry, but make sure beforehand that your
chosen hashtag is unique and hasn't been used by someone else
before).
Use Wishpond or Woobox Instagram contest web apps for real-
time 
campaign reports, which allow you to track views, entries,
and conversion rates.
Promote your contest: 
In addition to organic marketing of your competition,
send an email to your mailing list (these are the people most likely to enter),
promote your contest on other social networks, publish Instagram Stories to
encourage entries, etc. and add a banner to the home page of your website. 
Follow-up actions: 
After your contest is over, follow these steps to wrap
everything up neatly:
Showcase winning photos on your Instagram account and other
social channels.
Share a video story showing you choosing the winning photo to
create excitement.
Post teasers for future contests on Instagram to keep your
followers hooked, keep momentum going, and prime followers
for future contests on your Instagram account.
Run regular contests on Instagram to get fans into the habit of
looking forward to them and entering.
Pin comments to highlight important information and influence the
conversation
Instagram allows you to pin up to three comments to the top of a comments
section under a post. The first pinned comment will also be the featured
comment that users see when scrolling through their feed, and the first
comment people will see when they view a post. Pinned comments can be
your own, or from other followers/commenters. 
As well as a way to highlight top fan interactions and influence the tone ofcomment threads, pinned comments can also be used to add follow-up
information to a post. For example, you could post and pin an update to
announce the winner of a contest. To pin an Instagram comment, swipe left
on the comment, tap the thumbtack icon, and tap Pin Comment.
Embed your Instagram photos and videos
When you view an Instagram photo or video on your desktop web browser,
you'll see a share button on the right-hand side (just under the comments
button). Click this button and you'll get an embed code that you can copy and
paste into your website, blog or article. 
Track and analyze your Instagram activity
As well as Instagram’s native Insights tool as a way to track performance as a
way to analyze and improve your Instagram strategy – perfectly adequate for
most - there are plenty of third party options out there, both free and paid.
Two of my favorites are Iconosquare (
http://www.iconosquare.com
) - an
analytics service that provides a variety of metrics for your Instagram
account, including your Top 5 most-liked and followed photos, how often
you use filters and which are your favorites, and your most engaged
followers, as well as management tools like the ability to follow or unfollow
users, like and comment on posts, etc. - and Buffer (
http://www.buffer.com
)
– a platform with both free and paid options that provides you with analytics
and data to help you manage all of your Instagram activity seamlessly.
Video Content Strategy for Instagram
In June 2013, video recording was rolled out to Instagram. The feature allows
users to film clips of up to 60 seconds to share with the app's huge
community and across other social media. The following selection of tips will
help you make the most out of shooting video for Instagram.
Plan your shoot, record outside of Instagram
As editing on the fly is so limited within the Instagram video app, it is wise to
plan your video in advance, as well as the shots that you will use. Without
being forced to record within Instagram, you are free to use your phone's own
camera and/or other apps to create potentially more compelling content
before sharing it to a wider audience via your Instagram profile. Some good
options include combining your phone's native camera with video editing andfilter-adding apps like iMovie, LumaFusion, (iOS) and InShot or FilmoraGo
(Android).
Jerky camera work? Turn on "Cinema" mode
One of the features Instagram is most proud of is 
Cinema
. With the tap of a
finger, Cinema aims to remove as much wobble from your video as possible,
making it seem as smooth and professional as if it was filmed by a
Hollywood camera operator with a Steadicam. At the same step that you
choose a filter for your video, 
you will notice an icon of a shaky camera.
Simply tap this icon to turn Cinema mode on.
Choose a compelling cover frame
After you have recorded a video, Instagram will ask you to add a cover
frame. This will act as a thumbnail for your video in the feeds of your
followers and in search results, so use the slider to choose the most
compelling still shot available from those provided. The more appealing the
image is, the better chance it will catch someone’s eye enough for them to
want to check it out!
Experiment with Instagram's Hyperlapse app
In August 2014, Instagram launched Hyperlapse, an app that allows you to
create cinematic, stabilized time-lapse videos on their mobile device – even if
you move around while shooting. Simply tap to record (for up to 45 minutes),
choose a video speed (up to 12x faster), and share your creation instantly to
Instagram and Facebook. It's worth noting that that 3 minutes of recording
sped up at 12x will generate 15 seconds of video, the current limit for videos
on Instagram, so plan around this figure or you'll have to trim your footage if
you plan on sharing your creation with your Insta-followers. Whether you
choose to share right away or not, all recordings are saved to your Camera
Roll for, if necessary, further editing and disseminating elsewhere.
Coordinate your use of Hyperlapse with other Instagram marketing strategies
(e.g., capturing the atmosphere or story of an event, demoing a product, using
filters to create an on-brand vibe) to produce captivating and engaging
content.
Instagram live video strategy for business
Broadcasting live video on Instagram is easy — just swipe right from the
feed to open the camera, select “Live” and tap the “Start Live Video” button
to start sharing. When you go live, followers may be alerted with a pushnotification, encouraging them to click and view it. If you're lucky, your
video may be chosen to appear in the “Top Live” section of Instagram’s
Explore section, which could put you in front of a much bigger potential
audience. You can also save your broadcast after it’s over, to edit and
repurpose it on Instagram or other social sites later on. If you're keen to
experiment with it – to answer Q&As, run contests, give people a behind-the-
scenes look at your business, hold virtual classes, etc., let as many fans
beforehand know when you're going to go live! 
Below are a few best practices (for more tips on succeeding with live video
for Instagram. Check out the 
Explained: The Best Types of Content to Post on
Social Media 
and the 
Facebook Tips 
chapters of this book, where I’ve also
included more general advice):
Use a combination of Instagram Stories posts and ordinary
Instagram
 posts to promote your upcoming live videos - a way
to boost live views and replay views.
You can schedule your Lives with a feed post up to 90 days in
advance and promote them via a Stories Sticker for Scheduled
Lives.
You can also let viewers join live video streams within the app
via the
 Go Live With option. Once the other person is added to
the live stream, the screen splits into two with the host on the
top and the guest below.
Pin a comment at the beginning of your broadcast to tell people
what
 you’ll be talking about. To pin a comment, type in a
comment of your own, post it, then tap on the comment and
choose Pin Comment.
Upon ending the live video stream, a recap screen appears.
You’ll see
 how many viewers watched the video and have the
option to let your video be viewed again on replay for the next
24 hours. Tapping Share will upload the replay to your Stories.
Although live stream replays disappear from your Stories after
24 hours, they can also be shared as a long-form video on
Instagram where they will remain indefinitely. However, live
video replays won't feature any of the original broadcast’s likesor comments, and the view count will reset. Alternatively, you
can archive your broadcast for up to 30 days – an option which
does retain comments, likes, etc.
Straight after a live broadcast, publish a new post to your
regular
 Instagram feed, letting your audience know the replay
video is available. Outline the topic and key takeaways in the
video so that they get a taste of what you're offering.
Encourage replay viewers to send you a DM in response to the
video
 to ask clarifying questions, and use it as a way to foster
relationships.
For more tips about the types of video content that resonate with Instagram
users, check out the 
“Explained: The Best Types of Content to Post on Social
Media”
 chapter of this book.
Instagram Stories: An Instagram Revolution
When I mentioned earlier on in this chapter that not all Instagram content
requires the same meticulous care as the photos in your main profile grid,
Stories is what I meant. In one of its biggest ever updates, Instagram rolled
out Stories in the summer of 2016, and a gamechanger for brands. The
feature allows users to add a continuous string of photos or videos to their
profile; pieces of content that, in most cases, get automatically deleted after
24 hours. 
Stories have become one of the most popular features of the platform, and
plenty of users are even clicking on their Stories feed before they scroll
through the main feed. Unlike Instagram's highly-curated main profile,
Stories gives individuals and brands a fast, immersive and fun ways to share
photos, videos and text. People use Stories to share and discover content
they're interested in, and businesses can harness the power of Stories to
connect with customers when they're already engaged with the content you
produce; a way for you to promote products, build brand awareness and drive
sales in a way that fits seamlessly into their customers' 
browsing experience.
Think about Instagram Stories as a way to supplement your
main Instagram content with bonus info for followers and to
hook in a new audience to your brand and your main feed usingadditional posts. For example, after publishing something
special in your main feed, you could go into more depth about
the shot or video in a story - show how the shot was set up,
etc., talk a bit about it in a casual way, etc. Alternatively, you
could use Stories to remind fans about your most recent blog
post; finding 3-5 key points that will grab your followers’
attention and turn them into images or videos for the story. If
you’re keen on this strategy, don't forget to tell viewers how to
read more (either with a short bit.ly link, or a Link sticker). 
A good practice to follow is to try to upload multiple Stories at a time to
create a more cohesive, engaging narrative in order to keep viewers
interested. In cases where you want to create heavily branded Stories (rather
than just off-the-cuff images or video), they can be quite time consuming to
put together, but tools like Canva and Animoto both offer some very useful
templates.
Stories features to maximize your Instagram marketing strategy
If you're not naturally creative or you’re short on time, Instagram Stories has
your back with its Create mode. It includes content templates, frames, and all
of the sticker features discussed below.
Layout mode:
 Layout mode provides a range of grid display
styles for displaying multiple images within a single Stories
frame
.
Stickers and drawing tools: 
Stickers are fun and colorful
overlays that can be added to your Instagram Stories - time,
temperature, polls, etc. To add a sticker, snap a photo or record
a video, then tap the smiling-face icon to bring up the stickers
library. Drag the sticker around to place it and use pinch-to-
zoom controls to rotate it and/or change its size. 
Hashtag and location stickers
: Instagram users can search for a
location or hashtag, and if featured as a sticker - see story posts
by you that include that location sticker, hashtag sticker, or
hashtag in the caption. Location Stories from nearby places
(but not Hashtag Stories) will also appear featured in theExplore tab. Only content tagged with a location sticker,
hashtag sticker, or underlined hashtag will appear in the
associated Stories.
Note: 
Adding hashtags to your stories - either just as text (a maximum of 10
can be used in stories) or via a hashtag sticker - is a great way to get your
content discovered by more people. To prevent story hashtags ruining your
aesthetic, pinch 
to shrink your list and hide it behind a GIF or an image
sticker. Or you can select the color tool from the text option and mask them
in a color that perfectly matches your Instagram story background. Instagram
will still register the hashtags as long as they aren't shrunk 
super
 small.
Interactive questions or quiz stickers
 let your followers submit
questions for you to reply to, and answer multiple choice
questions that you publish, respectively. They’re a fun way to
start conversations with your fans and customers, and can be a
great way to open your brand up to them, while also learning
more about what you can do to improve your products and
services. 
The chat sticker
 lets people request to join a live chat group
with you (held in DMs inbox). Some ideas for using Chat on
Instagram include sharing an exclusive deal or pre-order link
with customers, brainstorming ideas as a group, or asking for
customer feedback.
The "DM Me" sticker offers a way to communicate with your
audience one-on-one - to have meaningful conversations, share
important information, and gather feedback. Use it to provide
personalized product recommendations, offer details on
upcoming events, and a way to humanize your brand as you
engage with your community.
The countdown sticker
 can be used to promote time-sensitive
events and offers, giving fans the ability to tap it and set a
reminder for any day and time (up to 1 year later) so that they
can be notified. Fans also have the option to share the
countdown to their own story. Combine the countdown stickerwith Instagram call-to-action buttons and your clickable bio
link to drive sales, sign-ups, promote a live stream, and more.
When anybody turns on the notification reminder for your
countdown sticker, you’ll see it in your notifications on
Instagram, so you'll be able to track the people who are
interested in your event.
The caption sticker
 automatically generates on-screen text
based on the speech Instagram hears in your stories. This is
great for increasing accessibility to your content, and keeping
the attention of those watching with sound off. Do double-
check the captions before you post, and edit them if they
aren’t 100% accurate.
The 
Add Yours sticker 
allows you to turn your Stories into
threads where other users can respond with their own content
that matches a particular prompt, e.g. encouraging followers
to share their "Outfit of the day." When users respond, they’re
added to the profile bubble listing on the sticker, which, when
tapped, lets them 
see all the other responses to the thread,
building a response chain within Stories that can help prompt
more engagement.
Link stickers: 
Allows you to add a link to Stories and direct
fans to a specific site page outside of the app. The Link sticker
looks and functions the same way as others (i.e. question, poll,
and location) - providing increased creator control. It can
toggle to different styles, be resized, and be placed anywhere
on your story for maximum impact. You can also receive quick
reactions and replies on posts that have the link sticker, like
any other story that is shared.
The Cutout sticker allows you to create animated stickers from
any video clip posted to Instagram (if the video is public and
the creator as given permission for it to be used as a Cutout,
that is). And if a user deletes a video you used as a Cutout,
your sticker will also disappear.Boomerang, Rewind, and Superzoom modes: 
A format picker
underneath Stories’ record button lets you select these playful
settings. Boomerang allows you to stitch together a burst of
several photos into a short video that plays forwards and
backwards continuously; make videos that play in reverse with
Rewind, (create visual tricks like dropping an object and
watching it fly up into your hand; capture water in motion and
sharing a rewind of the flow floating back up, etc.); while
Superzoom adds dramatic and suspenseful sound effects while
automatically zooming in on a single subject in three stages
(the resulting video lasts 3 seconds but can be extended up to
15 seconds by holding down the shutter button longer).
Mentions and sharing posts: 
Mentioning people in Stories
works the same as in ordinary Instagram captions and
comments. When you add text to your story, type “@”
followed by a username. The person’s username will appear
underlined in your story and, when someone taps the mention,
they’ll see a pop-up that takes them to that profile. Mentions
are a great way to give a shout-out to customers (like contest
winners or people you regram), influencers you’re working
with, or others. You can also share your own feed posts or
anyone else's into Instagram Stories. The post will then be
clickable in your Instagram Story, and people will be redirected
to it instantly. To do it, go to the post you want to share, tap on
the paper plane icon below the post, and select “Add post to
Story”. To help the post stand out, you can: tap on the post to
change the style of card; pinch the post to change its size; or
use the Pen tool to change the background color.
Stories Highlights and Archives: 
Rolled out in November 2017
to offer a way for Instagram users to showcase story content
that would otherwise disappear after 24 hours, Stories
Highlights allows you to group together Stories you’ve shared
into highlights and feature them at the top of your profile. In
addition, to prevent your stories from disappearing forever
when they expire, all Instagram Stories can now beautomatically saved to your Stories Archive when their 24
hours is up. To turn your Archive on, visit your Instagram
Settings, select ‘Story Settings’ and turn on the ‘Save to
archive’ option.
Combining the Highlights and Archives features means your brand can
resurface the most popular parts of previous Stories, showcasing them to your
audience as a "new" post that sits in prime position on your profile. Some
ideas for business-related Instagram Story Highlights include producing a
welcome message for new fans, promoting a sale, driving traffic to your
website with a call-to-action and link, showcasing customer reviews or
testimonials, or highlighting a selection of posts that utilize your brand’s own
hashtag. 
How to Create an Instagram Story Highlight
1
. 
Tap the profile icon in the bottom-right corner of the screen,
then tap the + button to begin creating a new Story Highlight.
2
. 
Scroll through your archive of past Stories posts and select
each post
3
. 
you want to add to the Highlight. When you’re done, tap
“Next.”
4
. 
Type a name for your Highlight, to appear under it on your
profile.
5
. 
Tap “Edit Cover” to change the Highlight’s cover image.
6
. 
Tap “Add” to save the Highlight to your profile.
Note: 
Want to make custom-branded Highlight covers for your Instagram
profile? The Canva mobile app makes it easy. In the app, choose the Your
Story template, get designing, and save the image ready to upload. To setup a
Highlights cover without sharing it in your Instagram Story:
1
. 
Press and hold your finger on a Highlight.
2
. 
Select “Edit Highlight”
3
. 
Select “Edit cover”
4
. 
Press on the “image” icon at the beginning of the list.
5
. 
If you have a lot of photos and in a Highlight, you might have
to scroll all the way to the left. Then you will see the “image”icon.
6
. 
Choose a cover from your camera roll.
Insights: 
Instagram Stories also includes useful insights to
allow you to track their performance. You'll see the number of
impressions, number of replies your stories received (tallied
when a user clicks “message” while watching a story), and the
number of exits made before your story was complete. You can
view story information from the past hour, seven days, and
fourteen days.
Instagram Reels: An audio-visual mashup
While Instagram has always been a valuable platform for businesses and
marketers, the launch of Reels create new opportunities. Instagram Reels are
full-screen, 
vertical video clips on Instagram that typically include audio
clips and visual effects. Think of them as a mashup of Stories and in-feed
Posts. Reels are highly engaging, and offer huge reach and discoverability
benefits that can help you to quickly grow their audience. Reels have a
similar look and feel to Stories, but like feed posts, Reels can include full-
length captions that users can choose to expand. Users can also interact with
Reels by liking, sharing, and commenting.
Reels gives you up to 90-seconds to record a clip set to music, which can be
shared on Instagram Stories, sent as DMs, or added to the Reels tab on your
profile. If it sounds a bit like TikTok, you'd be absolutely right. Instagram
wants a piece of that pie! There's a huge library of music to choose from, or
you can borrow audio from another video, or record your own original
soundtrack. You can create a Reel from the Reels tab or the “+” menu on the
Instagram home screen.
Much of what businesses share to Reels is similar to much of what I’ve
described in earlier chapters (behind the scenes, offers, shareable tips and
tricks, humor, etc.). However, there are a few more important considerations
to if you’re to make the most of the function:
Nail the hook
 – Keep your objectives in mind and highlight your brandwithin the first few seconds of your Reels clips. For example, if your intent
is conversions, showcase your product or service in action.
Get creative with transitions 
– Creativity is key in short-form video, and
Instagram advises you should look to experiment with transitions to both
entertain your viewers and show off their brand’s personality. There’s no
fixed strategy here: creativity requires testing and development. But by
considering different presentation styles, and watching content from other
brands and creators, you can come up with more engaging, original ways to
frame your clips.
Match the rhythm
 – The majority of Reels are viewed with sound on, so
synching your content to music can play a big role in maximizing your
content performance. Don't forget to use auto-captions to enhance
engagement.
Keep it on trend
 – A key part of generating Reels engagement is aligning
with the organic feel of the feed, which also involves being aware of the
latest trends, and engaging in such, where relevant. Create and encourage
your audience to remix your Reels, or spark a conversation with them in the
comments section.
Explore collaborations
 - Collaborating with influencers drives more
engagement, authenticity and awareness. Top creators know what works.
You can find relevant creators to work with via Meta’s Brand Collabs
Manager tool
.
Add context and CTAs to your captions
Rather than have your Reel dominated by overlay text, use the caption to
offer additional context. Captions also help the Instagram algorithm
understand what you’re sharing and to share it with people who will be
interested in it. And don't forget to use the caption to add an appropriate
call-to-action.
Note: 
Instagram Stories stickers can also be used with Reels, such as the
poll, quiz and emoji slider stickers, giving you additional ways connect with
people through your Reels. Check out the Instagram chapter for more
information on these options.Experiment With Boosting Reels
You can boost reels within the Instagram app to turn them into ads for the
opportunity to reach new audiences and drive more engagement. Boosted
Reels will appear in feed, Stories, the Reels tab and the explore page to help
new customers find your brand. You can boost your reels by finding the reel
in your grid and tapping Boost Post. After running your ad, check your
Insights to learn which ads brought in the most engagement.
Long-form Video Marketing on Instagram
From the summer of 2018 to 2021, long-form on video on Instagram was all
syphoned through a standalone app, IGTV. Since then, to simplify matters,
all video (except Reels) has been integrated into the main app. Anyone can
upload a video of up to 60 minutes in length.
What to post on IGTV
Long-form video on Instagram has been dubbed by some as “the new
podcast”; a place to launch content series' that feature more authenticity and
interesting points of discussion that people crave. Shorter videos of 5-10
minutes long also allow for an expansion of the content that appears in
Instagram Stories, and a more comprehensive touch point for customers to
engage with. If you already post long-form content to Facebook or YouTube,
you might consider re-purposing it on Instagram for added exposure.
Note:
 Breaking up what could be one long video into shorter, more digestible
chunks is often a smart move. Even two-minute-long videos are absolutely
fine as long as you get across what you want to say; brevity almost never
works against you.
Unlike the mishmash of content snippets in stories, Instagram recommends
that long-form videos should be based on a format with a repeatable theme
and style that your audience can expect in every upload. Tutorials and Q&As
are a popular option amongst brands, as are the aforementioned podcast-like
discussions. To 
help you decide what theme(s) to use in long-form videos,
stories can be utilized as a testbed to see what resonates with your audience,
and what you can expand upon. Don’t forget tools like the Question and Poll
stickers (with up to four options for the latter) to survey your audience on
what they want to see.5 Long-form video Strategies for Success
Now you’ve got a good idea about what long-form video on Instagram is all
about and why it can be a powerful tool for business, let’s look at how to
maximize the impact and reach of the content you produce.
Use and optimize video Previews
Video previews are 60-second teasers of your full video content that can be
shared to your main Instagram feed - the first 60 seconds of your full video is
what will be used as a preview. When someone taps on it, they will see a link
to the full video.
With Instagram’s minute-long previews, there is ample time to grab people's
attention and encourage them to act, but at the start and end of the clip is
probably your best chance. You could put your focus in the first 10 seconds
or so, crafting a compelling message that encourages people to tap through to
watch in full right away. Or you could opt for a slow build, leading up to the
60-second mark and ending with a cliffhanger that means viewers won't be
able to resist watching more. Build curiosity and excitement throughout.
Note: 
In addition to the above, when you share a video as part of an
Instagram Story, the first 15 seconds of the video will play, with a 'swipe up'
link prompting viewers to watch the rest
Optimize IGTV covers
As the main aim of an IGTV preview is to drive people to watch your IGTV
videos in full, Instagram offers a few ways to make this more likely. Before
you create a preview, you can also choose:
a cover image to represent your video, chosen from a single
frame of the video an image uploaded from your camera roll.
a profile cover: custom-positioning your thumbnail image into
the square grid on your profile to make it as tappable as
possible. Whatever image you choose, make sure that it grabs
people’s attention. A close-up on someone’s face - to evoke
emotion - is a good idea, as is an unfussy design with colors
that stop people scrolling to take a look.
Optimize IGTV titles and captions for search
IGTV's search only returns results for channels (not specific videos), soconcentrate on writing video captions that will draw attention from non-
followers in the main Instagram feed. And as IGTV is on mobile, any long
IGTV titles will be truncated so make sure the first handful words of your
title grab people's attention and make them want to watch
.
Note:
 When you post an IGTV preview, your IGTV video’s full title
becomes the first line of the caption of that preview. So, you need to select a
title that describes what the video is about and that works both as a title and a
caption. However, if you do want to change your caption or make it more
descriptive, you can always go back and edit the preview post after you have
posted it.
Also include relevant hashtags in your IGTV caption. Your videos will show
up on the corresponding hashtag page on Instagram, where people searching
for or following that hashtag can discover your content. You can even add
clickable links to your IGTV video descriptions - a great way to drive your
IGTV viewers to your website, or to relevant external links.
Promote long-form content
Although long-form video content is disseminated through the
main Instagram app, you can't rely on the platform to carry out
promotion on your behalf. Make use of all the tools that
Instagram offers (and external avenues) to generate as much
buzz around your long-form videos as possible.
A couple of days before a long-form video is due to go live,
this could include teasing screengrabs of the video on your
Instagram stories. As the launch gets closer still, you could add
a Countdown sticker in your stories to encourage people to be
notified when the video goes live.
Depending on the type of video, you may want to invite users
to provide feedback and discuss what they've seen. You can do
this through Instagram Q&As in your stories or through
Instagram Live.
Over the longer term, you can use stories Highlights to save
and collate the links to your long-form videos - easily
accessible from your Instagram profile page.Note: 
Remember to analyze your long-form performance periodically.
Instagram has provided video insights for all video uploads directly within
the app. To view your insights, tap on the three-dot button on any video on
your profile and select Insights. Use the information in your Insights - such as
engagement and retention rate - to help inspire and optimize future content.
Working With Instagram Influencers
Many brands that are getting results with long-form Instagram videos are
partnering with social media influencers to support their marketing. In
particular, micro-influencers - those with a following between 10,000 and
50,000 are a worthwhile group to target.
As a video platform with less competition than the likes of YouTube,
Instagram has provided a fresh opportunity for smaller influencers to gain
real traction. In support of their ordinary Instagram feed, these influencers are
producing long-form content that resonates with their audience - that you can
tap into. Whether 
it's through content containing sponsored product mentions
or just direct payment, the market brand-influencer relationships on
Instagram is only going to grow.
Shopping on Instagram: Seamless Selling to
Customers
Shopping on Instagram was transformed by the introduction of Shops by
Facebook in 2020 - 
a free and easy way to create your own online store on
Facebook and Instagram to sell physical goods, through which customers can
make seamless purchases. On Instagram, products can be tagged for sale in
your main feed post and in stories, through video, Reels, viewable in the
‘Shop’ section of the Explore tab, and the Shop tab - the latter two which
highlight personalized product recommendations for each user, based on the
accounts they follow. Businesses can be featured on Instagram Shop by
consistently tagging products in their content and creating collections of
products in their shop on Instagram. 
Your Instagram shop will be built and managed through Facebook’s desktop
Commerce Manager tool (not anywhere on the Instagram app), 
but before
you can launch a shop and start selling products on Instagram, there are
several preliminary steps you have to complete:1
. 
Check that your business is in a supported market and complies
with Facebook/Instagram’s commerce eligibility requirements
at 
https://bit.ly/ecommerceelebilityrequirements
.
2
. 
Ensure your Instagram profile is converted to a business
account and that it’s connected to a Facebook profile
(necessary, even if you won’t be selling on Facebook).
3
. 
Sign up to Business Manager on Facebook at 
business.facebook.com
4
. 
Within Business Manager, launch Commerce Manager and
connect your Facebook profile.
5
. 
Create a catalog using Catalog Manager and add products.
More information and best practices for catalog management
and optimization are available in the section about Shops in the
Facebook chapter of this book. Do take a look!
Note: 
Depending on your location, you may have the option to utilize the
Checkout feature in Shopping, which allows buyers to seamlessly browse and
purchase your products without ever leaving the Instagram app (i.e. no need
to open a browser and visit your website). If this is available to you, I
strongly suggest you opt-in to it.
With these steps completed, here’s how to set up a shop on Instagram from
your catalog:
1
. 
Go to 
Catalog Manager
.
2
. 
Select the catalog you want to use.
3
. 
Go to the Sales tab.
4
. 
Select Instagram Shopping.
5
. 
Next to Connect an Instagram Profile, select Connect Profile.
Once you've done this, your account will be reviewed and hopefully
approved, normally within a few days. Once approved, to enable product
tagging on Instagram, tap the Get Started alert at the top of your profile. If
you don't see the alert, go to Settings > Business > Shopping > to add a
product catalog.
To tag products in your main feed posts:1
. 
Select a photo and add a caption, effects and filters.
2
. 
Tap Tag Products from the Share screen.
3
. 
Tap the products in the photo you want to tag.
4
. 
Enter the names of the products you want to tag, then select
them as they appear in the search box.
6 Ways to optimize the Shopping experience on Instagram
1
. 
Create at least 9 shopping posts to activate the Shop tab, which
will then appear at the top of your profile. Tapping it will allow
customers to browse and shop through every post that contains
tagged products.
2
. 
You can tag up to a maximum of 5 products per single-image
post or 20 products per multi-image post.
3
. 
Double check that each tag touches the correct product, so
shoppers know which product each tag refers to.
4
. 
You can tag products in already-published posts on Instagram,
so don't forget to return to older posts to capitalize on any
potential customers who might come across them.
5
. 
Create an Instagram Story to let your fans know that they can
now shop your posts.
6
. 
Use Instagram Insights to understand your customers better,
and utilize a catalog containing the most relevant products,
currency and language for them.
Note:
 It's worth mentioning that Product Tags can be used by any Instagram
user (like your customers!) to share and help others discover products from
brands they love). You'll receive a notification when someone tags one of
your products.
Instagram Shopping in Instagram Stories, long-form and Reels
As mentioned above, Instagram's shopping features also extend to Stories,
long-form video, and Reels. There are plenty of benefits of experimenting
with these avenues (utilizing the editing/sound/effects of video on
Instagram), including:
Showing people how a product works, sharing a product review or
recommendation, or answering some FAQs about a product.Featuring new products in an entertaining and immersive way.
Longer form videos, especially, allow you to share detailed
information with your audience in order to help them with their
buying decision.
Collaborating with other brands and businesses to drive sales
between each other’s audiences.
Let’s look at how Shopping works on each of the formats mentioned:
Stories: 
Instagram’s Shopping feature is available in Stories via
Product stickers. What makes product stickers so useful is that it
allows any business to drive customers to their online store -
previously, to activate "swipe up" links in order to achieve the
same thing in Stories, a business must have had over 10,000
followers. 
What's more, tagging products in Stories stickers can be a more
organic, less pushy way to promote and showcase your wares.
Instagram Stories stickers can be added to both images and videos,
and there are four different types to choose from: a shopping bag
icon, a sticker with the product name in rainbow or grey, and
translucent text. To add a product, simply choose the product
sticker and pick the product you want to feature in your story. 
In particular, Stories can be used to share in-the-moment updates,
e.g. 'Item Back in Stock – Shop Now') and behind the scenes
looks, (e.g. 'Product Coming Soon') to inspire connection with
your products. Additionally, turn your tagged Stories into a
highlight so users can shop products after your story expires.
Alternatively, turn on auto-highlight in Stories so your tagged
content lives on in product detail pages after the story expires.
Reels: 
Creators can tag products in Reels, and Instagram users can
select the “View Products” button to either buy, save, or learn
more about the featured products.
Long-form video:
 Tagging products in your videos is simple —
just select which products you’d like to feature on your video just
before you publish it, and your audience will be able to tap tobrowse as they watch.
Instagram Live: 
The live nature of shopping on Instagram makes
it a bit of a different beast to the methods above, with potentially
much greater rewards for businesses. In essence, live shopping on
Instagram lets you become a modern version of shopping
television, and the raw nature of the experience is unique
compared to selling products in static posts or pre-recorded video.
Prior to going live, you can add up to 30 products to a collection to
showcase during the broadcast, and you can pin one item at a time
while live to feature that product. Your chosen product can be
pinned to the screen during the broadcast. When people are
watching you, they’ll be able to tap your featured products to view
the product detail page or continue to make a purchase. As well as
the benefits of Instagram Shopping in Stories, Reels, and long-
form video listed above, encouraging people to tune in to your live
shopping broadcasts can drive real-time demand for your products.
Take full advantage of the intimacy, 
interactivity, and authenticity
of Live Shopping on Instagram to make the experience extra
special for your customers. Once your Live Shopping video ends,
you can share a replay of it to your feed. You’ll have to tag the
products featured separately again, as the live-tagged ones won’t
carry over.
Drive sales with Product Launches on Instagram
For businesses using Checkout on Instagram, you can use Commerce
Manager to set up a Product Launch. The Product Launch feature allows you
to tag and build awareness around one or multiple product that will become
available for purchase in the future - and encourages them to make a purchase
as soon as the product becomes available.
Note:
 To help you manage inventory, Product Launches are required to be
Instagram exclusive for a period of at least one hour, i.e. no selling through
your website at the same time.
Experiment with Guides on Instagram
In late 2020, Instagram rolled out its 'Guides' content display option - a way
to share collections of themed content on your Instagram profile - similar in
style to Pinterest boards. The Guides tab highlights collections of posts underdedicated topic tiles.
Since Guides allow users to follow a curated flow of posts with commentary
— they are great for step-by-step guides, tips, and recommendations. There
are three types of Guides available - 'Places' (to recommend places),
'Products' (recommend favorite products) or 'Posts' (recommend posts you've
created or saved). Product Guides can be featured within your Instagram
Shop, and Guides can also be shared via Stories, providing another way to
promote your collections.
Instagram Guides provides a big opportunity for story-telling and e-
commerce on the app, and may well be worth considering as a supplement to
your other Instagram content.
Instagram Direct: Private and Group Messaging
In December 2013, Instagram Direct was rolled out to the app. Instagram
Direct is a private and group messaging function that allows users to send
photo or video messages to select people – either to a single individual or to
groups of up to 15 people at a time. Whereas in the past, any content posted
on Instagram was sent to the feeds of everyone who followed you 
and 
was
publicly viewable via your mobile or web profile, Instagram Direct messages
do not appear publicly. When you send a message directly (after you take a
photo or shoot a video and are finished editing, select “Followers” to share
the content with everyone or “Direct” to selectively choose who it goes to),
you’ll be able to find out who’s seen your photo or video, who’s liked it and
also watch the recipients commenting in real time via the “folder” icon that
sits at the top of the Instagram home screen. Photos and videos 
that you
receive directly from people you follow will appear immediately in your
inbox, but if someone you’re not following sends you a photo or video
directly, it will be held in your requests list until you decide that you want to
view it. If you choose to view it, further private messages from that user will
no longer need approval.
Instagram Direct is primarily aimed at casual users of Instagram to share
messages privately between one another, but brands and businesses can also
take advantage of this added functionality. Here are just a few ideas on how:Welcome new followers
Record and share a 15-second welcome video, genuinely thanking someone
for following you and telling you what you want them to do next - check out
more of your posts, click the link in your bio, keep following for great new
content, etc. When people can see you and hear your voice, they'll instantly
feel more intimately connected to you and your brand. Depending on the rate
your profile is growing, this strategy can be time-consuming – especially if
each video is individually tailored to the follower (mentioning their name or
username, for example), but could also pay dividends in the long run.
Target your most engaged fans by location and demographics
As you can message up to 15 people privately via Instagram Direct, you can
use this as an opportunity to segment and target your audience based on
location and demographics. To track down your most engaged fans, browse
through your photo stream for the people who most comment and favorite
your content, or often tag their friends as a way to spread awareness of your
brand. Once you’ve identified your most active fans, you can formulate
different group messages to send to various segments of your audience. Use
these as a way to share news on new products, announce giveaways and
contests, conduct Q&A sessions, drive traffic to your website, and more. Of
course, since these messages will be largely unsolicited, you should be 
very
sure, and extra careful
, that sending them will not upset people who are most
likely to be your biggest brand ambassadors.
Conduct customer service
Previously, any customer service issues that arose via Instagram were often
forced to be dealt with within the comments section underneath a photo or
video. Now, public disputes can be ushered into the more private setting of
Instagram Direct. This prevents your comments from being clogged up by
unsightly feedback and prevents your brand image from being damaged. To
make the transition, reply to a complainant in the comments telling them that
you will send/have sent a direct message to them to help solve their issue, and
then go from there. Photos, videos, and text can be used as a way to help
solve problems - choose whichever means of communication works best for
you. To further enhance your customer service via Instagram Direct,
advertise in your bio that people can contact you privately and actively
monitor negative mentions of your brand via your notifications and Instagram
search to jump on and deal with problems before they get the chance to stewand escalate. You can - similar to Twitter - also explore Instagram for
hashtags associated with your product and services, then see if you can offer
helpful advice to anyone talking about your area of expertise, as a way to
break the ice. Again, this tactic works best if you are quite sure that your "out
of the blue" message will not upset the individual in question.
Offer coupon codes / exclusive deals
While occasionally sending coupon codes out to all of your Instagram
followers is a sound tactic in itself, messaging them to an exclusive group of
followers can be even more effective. Make sure that each coupon code you
create is unique so that you can track its success easily and also limit the
quantity and set deadlines for their use to encourage their redemption and
discourage abuse. Tactics include:
Send a direct message including a coupon code to new or
milestone followers (e.g., 50th, 100th, 1000th).
Send a coupon code as an apology for a customer service issue.
Send a coupon randomly to surprise and delight a follower;
encourage the recipient to share it with their friends both on
Instagram and elsewhere.
Give ultra-exclusive sneak peeks
In a very savvy move - and one you can emulate - Kardashian Kollection
offered 15 of its followers an exclusive behind the scenes photo from its
latest fashion collection. To enter, Instagram followers were asked to screen
grab the image which told them of the entry instructions and re-post it with
the hashtag
#KKDIRECT. The promotion received over 4,000 likes and 650 comments in
under 24 hours… and the really clever part? By requesting followers to re-
post the entry instructions, they put their fans to work in helping to drive
more participants. After the promotion, screen grabs of the private messages
being sent to the chosen 15 were posted publicly for transparency.
Utilizing the "Close Friends" feature for business
Rolled out in 2019, Instagram’s “Close Friends” feature allows you to share
Instagram stories with only a select group of people from those you follow.
It's built for individual users, of course, but brands can also make use of it as
a "mailing list" for top customers; to host private events; share updates withemployees which can be added to their own stories; host a contest, and more.
To build your close friends list, select Close Friends from your profile
settings. Instagram will recommend users to add, or you can search for
specific profiles.
Run Instagram Direct contests
Private messaging on Instagram gives you the chance to run more types of
competitions via the app and enables promotions that can be held "ad-hoc"
with smaller prizes. Example strategies include:
Hold a contest where the first person to reply privately with the
answer to a question, or post a certain photo, or tweet with a
certain 
hashtag wins a prize, e.g., “The first 10 people to send
us a photo of themselves wearing a Shawn’s Sweater while
standing in a bucket will win a $10 gift voucher towards their
next purchase!” or “The next 5 people to post a video eating at
Bob’s Burgers with the hashtag #lovebobs will get a very
special Direct message from
us…”
Hold a "friend referral" contest where the winner is the first
person to
 get 5 friends to follow you and mention the username
of their referrer in the direct message.
Host a scavenger hunt, where a clue is sent out to an exclusive
set of
 followers and the next one is only delivered once you
receive the correct answer to the first. The winner is the user
who reaches the end of the hunt - in the real world or virtually
(finding clues hidden on your website, for example) first.
Video chatting in Instagram Direct
In the summer of 2018, private video chat in Instagram Direct was rolled out,
either as a conversation with one person or a group of up to four people of
whom you've already shared direct messages with within the app. Video chat
gives you the experience of real time video in a private space and helps you
feel close and connected to fans, customers, and prospects. To start a video
chat, swipe into your Direct inbox and open any message thread. Tap camera
icon in the right corner, and the video chat will ring your friends’ phones so
they don’t miss it. You could use video chat in Instagram Direct to:Provide customer service. Schedule calls with customers to
answer their questions or resolve issues with a real person on-
camera.
Close a sale. If a potential customer has questions about your
product or service, or is on the fence about purchasing, a quick
live call could be the nudge they need to decide to buy.
Show product demos. Whether offering a first look to prospects
or helping a customer with a newly purchased product, a live
demo can show them how to use your product.
Advertising on Instagram
Instagram’s history with advertising stretches back to 2013, when it
tentatively began to test sponsored content with a select number of big
brands, including Ben & Jerry’s, Michael Kors and Mercedes. Over two
years of research and experimentation later, in September 2015, the app’s
advertising opportunities were opened up to 
all businesses
.
Instagram ads can be used to build brand awareness, drive consideration and
action like website traffic and conversions, to help buyers discover your
products, and optimize your campaigns for your desired business objectives
like driving website leads, app installs sales. Several types of Instagram ads
can only be built via the 
Facebook Ads tool (Instagram was bought by
Facebook in April 2012), so you will need to have a Facebook account to set
them up. In this section we’ll cover some of the essential information you
need to craft successful Instagram ads.
Setting up Instagram ads
To link a Facebook Page to an Instagram account, visit your Page and click
Settings. In Settings, click on Instagram Ads and follow the instructions to
add an account for Advertising. You can also create a new Instagram account
here if you need to. If you use Facebook Business Manager, you can assign
an ad account to an Instagram account by clicking Business Settings >
Instagram Accounts > Click Assign Ad accounts. To authorize one or more
of your ad accounts to use the Instagram Account, check the box next to each
ad account and click Save Changes.
Main feed Instagram ads (which can be a photo or video) appear among theordinary stream of content within the app, identifiable as they are marked
“Sponsored.” Ads in the Explore tab give you the chance to extend your
campaign to additional audiences and be part of what's culturally relevant and
trending, while reaching people who are looking to discover something new. 
Instagram ad basics
All ads will feature a linked call to action button such as
“Learn More”, “Shop Now”, or “Install App”.
Ads can be created in a square or landscape format.
The recommended image size for an Instagram ad in the square
or
 landscape format is 1080 x 1080 pixels. The aspect ratio for
an Instagram ad in the square format is 1:1. If you use the
landscape format, your image or video should have an aspect
ratio of 1.9:1.
Video ads should be no more than 30 seconds long or 30MB in
size.
The caption you use for your Instagram ad will appear below
the
 content and can include up to 300 characters. As a best
practice, avoid using URLs in your Instagram ad's text. URLs
will not be clickable from your ad's text field.
Instagram ads best practices
As you should now be well aware, Instagram is a place people go to discover
and become inspired by the images they see. The best practices for ads reflect
much of what you have learned about content marketing on Instagram so far
– make ads seamless to the experience, not disruptive. As a business, it is
recommended that you focus your Instagram ad campaigns around 3 key
objectives: on brand, concept-driven and well crafted.
On brand
Like organic Instagram content, your ads should be creative, showing your
brand's personality. Find unique ways to incorporate your brand's logo, icon
or a color, but stay consistent with your style between organic and paid
content to drive familiarity. There are a myriad of tools to help you shape ads
for Instagram - and 
there's nothing wrong with giving them a go - but what
you might find is that the native tools that Instagram offers are what resonatesmost with your audience. As you want your ads to blend right in rather than
jar on the experience, elements like stickers, GIFs, hashtags, locations, and
other native features help to make ad content fit right in. More often than not,
what works with your organic Instagram content is a good barometer for the
specific types of content that will work with Instagram advertising. Simply
put, your brand doesn’t need two different content strategies to sell your
products (organic vs. paid) - just one type of content resonates with audiences
on a deep, authentic level.
Concept-driven
When planning your Instagram ad, know what you want to make your
audience think and feel, and what your core message is. With that, you’ll find
it easier to apply some of the following ideas:
Tell a story: Take a series of images that tell a story about your
brand and share them over a period of time.
Experiment with visual styles: Use different filters and color
schemes to create a visual mood with your images. You could
even use a series of different filters to show a change in mood.
Develop a theme: Create a series of unique images that all
share a common theme, e.g., different events from a single day
or an object in a variety of settings.
Well-crafted
With a bit of practice, anyone can create compelling images for Instagram –
ads or not. Here are some ad-specific tips.
Strong Focal Point: Avoid making your images too complex or
busy.
 Instead, focus on one or two places where you want to
draw people's eyes. As a best practice, one focal point should
include a brand logo or another brand element that's
recognizable to your audience.
Framing & Balance: Straighten out images to make them look
cleaner
 and consider symmetry, the rule-of-thirds, and other
composition basics as you're photographing or shooting.
Lighting & Detail: Be sure to use clear and high-resolution
images.
 Pixelated images and those with bad lighting or otherflaws may not perform well.
Caption and hashtags: Don’t forget a compelling tagline and,
crucial
for Instagram, a selection of on-brand and relevant hashtags.
Instagram Stories Ads
Instagram Stories Ads let brands insert a short, full-screen ad - either a static
image displayed for up to five seconds, a carousel ad with up to three images,
or a video of up to 15 seconds long - between stories that users watch within
the app. Stories ads can be utilized just like other Instagram or Facebook ads,
to drive brand 
awareness, announce sales or special events, start a
conversation via direct message, or re-target existing or lapsed customers –
all viewers have to do is swipe up when they see the call-to-action. However,
as Stories ads don't appear in the normal Instagram feed and pop up instantly
between story posts, they're a super direct and intimate way to put your brand
in front of potential customers. Like ordinary stories, Stories ads disappear
forever after 24 hours. 
The creation process for Instagram Stories ads is carried out via the Facebook
Ads tool, just like any other Facebook or Instagram ad, 
but 
to make the
biggest impact, you’ll need to optimize Stories Ads for viewers. Here are a
number of tips to help drive more action through Instagram Stories ads:
Grab attention straight away
Just like an ordinary Instagram story, if a user taps on an Instagram Stories
ad, it will be skipped instantly - and there's no "back" button to save the
situation. That said, the initial second or two of your ad needs to be attention-
grabbing so that viewers stop to view it. Use a combination of visuals, copy,
and font to stop viewers in their tracks. But whatever you do, keep the
message clear and simple to prevent viewers from getting confused and
tapping away.
Show your brand name (but avoid these placements)
People tap through Instagram stories quickly, so ensure that your brand name
and product is clearly visible. That way, even if they don't swipe up to take
action, they might remember who you are to visit later on. Avoid placing any
text in the top-left of the ad or at the bottom in the middle. These areas are
where people's handles and your chosen call-to-action message appearrespectively.
Don't make your ads look like an ad
Instagram users are hypersensitive to ads and can easily tell the difference
between a typical post by a friend versus one made by a slick brand
marketing team. One of the keys to success with Instagram Stories Ads is to
advertise while not looking like an ad, by mirror the expectations of
Instagram users as they watch Stories. For example, a large proportion of
organic Instagram Stories feature videos of real people in real life situations,
so video could, depending on your audience and product, be the best option
overall, rather than graphics and text alone, which sometimes run the risk of
looking like traditional ads. In addition to the basic format of your ad,
experiment with other creative techniques to make them more "authentic,"
with the use of elements like emojis, handwriting, stickers, and built-in
Instagram tools like Boomerang, Hyperlapse and Superzoom.
Optimize the call-to-action
Your Stories ads need to include a clear call to action that encourages people
to swipe up to perform an action. To make swiping up more appealing, use
interactive elements like arrows, stickers, and action-orientated copy to let
viewers know what you want them to do. In addition, use the last few
seconds of your ad to focus solely on the CTA. This two or three seconds lets
the user know that the ad is over and it gives them time to swipe up before
the story disappears
.
Use fast clips with audio
For ads with more than one scene or clip, edits to make the video fast-paced
make for better ads. Facebook found that top-performing Stories ads, on
average, included brief clips with quick scenes. On top of that, Instagram's
research shows that 60% of stories are viewed with sound on, so make sure
that the content you share sounds just as good as it looks.
Mix and match video and static
Research has shown that campaigns with mixed-format assets drive better
performance metrics. Try telling your story through multiple formats to
capture attention and drive conversions.
Add lightweight motion to static campaigns
Research has shown that campaigns that add lightweight motion video tostatic creative achieve a higher conversion lift compared with static images
alone.
Use voice-over and music
Stories ads with voice-over or music drove better lower-funnel results than
ads without sound. Use voice-over or music to enhance your messaging and
value propositions.
Minimize dialogue in branded content ads
Research has shown that in above-average performing branded content, an
average of 10 words were spoken, compared to an average of 115 words in
below-average ads.
Re-purpose existing content for Stories ads
The full-screen dimensions for Stories Ads is different from anything on
Facebook; the recommended resolution is 1080 x 1920 pixels. If you want to
experiment tentatively with Stories ads without building whole new visuals
from scratch, start off by re-purposing existing content created for your social
media marketing campaigns. To make the task easier - specifically for
content not already designed and formatted for Stories - Facebook's Ad
Manager provides full-screen support for all ads to be used in Instagram
Stories. When  you upload an image or video within Ads Manager, it will be
transformed into the full-screen format of Stories, allowing you to run Stories
ads more quickly and efficiently.
Note: 
For Stories ads intended to be shown on Facebook as well, Facebook
Stories is a placement you can add to your Instagram Stories ad campaigns,
meaning that you can deliver your ad in the same full-screen, immersive
environment on Facebook. Ads in Facebook Stories support the same
objective, targeting and measurement capabilities used in Instagram Stories
ads. Along with automatic placements, you'll be able to deliver your Stories
ads where they're most likely to help you reach your campaign goal. This gets
you the best return on ad spend while reaching your target audiences and
optimizing performance in real time across Facebook and Instagram
.
Instagram Shop Tab Ads
Ads in the Instagram Shop tab home page make it easier for people to
discover and shop from brands when they’re already in the mood to browse.Clicking on the ad will take customers to the Product Details Page, where
they can learn more about the item, view additional imagery, and browse
additional products from your brand. They can also save the product to their
wishlist or share it with friends.Snapchat Tips: Self-Destructing
Social Media Marketing
Snapchat, launched in September 2011, is a photo and video-sharing app
centered on one simple premise: all messages shared between friends via
Snapchat will self-destruct, never to be seen again. In most cases, photo and
video messages - Snaps - will disappear between one and ten seconds after
being opened by a recipient (the time limit is specified by the sender), and if
the Snap is not opened, it will automatically delete itself after 30 days. The
only exceptions to this rule are a “one-time or infinity-repeat option for any
single snap, Snapchat Stories, and the potentially game-changing Memories
(more on these features below). Before sharing content with fellow contacts,
Snapchat users have the option to add filters and annotate photos and video
with colorful text and markers.
While media shared via Snapchat only exists for a matter of seconds, if you
switch your thinking to view the time limit as an 
opportunity 
rather than a
limitation, there are plenty of ways that it can be used for effective marketing.
Think about it this way: when a customer is notified of a Snapchat message
from you, first they're excited about what mystery it holds and second they
know that as soon as they open it, they need to pay close attention as it will
soon disappear forever. And if they don't keep checking the app daily, they'll
miss messages, creating sense of urgency to keep up with fleeting
information. Often it’s addictive! By today's standards, 10 seconds of
someone's 
undivided attention 
like this - especially on a medium as personal
as mobile - is gold dust. One of the biggest emotional triggers for brands on
social media is creating the feeling of FOMO (fear of missing out), and the
format of Snapchat's content delivers this in spades. Like all social media, the
best Snapchat content is framed in a way that mirrors the style of the majority
of its users who take advantage of the platform. Where Snapchat is
concerned, this involves humor, sharing secrets, having fun, holding small
conversations, and capturing "shareworthy" moments: the promise of one-of-
a-kind, real-time content is your customer's incentive to follow you, even if
they already do on other channels.
Unlike other social networks, Snapchat isn't about portraying perfection ordriving people to buy your product directly. It's a fun, genuine way to
promote the personality of your brand and share your story in an off-the-cuff,
genuine way. Let’s look at some ways that you can make the most of
Snapchat for your
business…
Take advantage of Snapchat Stories
The Snapchat Stories mode allows you to join multiple snaps together to
create a rolling 24-hour reel of content for 
all 
of your followers to enjoy
again and again. When any snap is added to your story ages over 24 hours, it
disappears and must be replaced with new photos or videos if you want the
story to remain active. If no new content is added to your story, it will
disappear once the newest piece of content expires, and a whole new story
will need to be created. To add content to a 
story, just choose the ‘+’ icon
after taking a photo or recording a video with the app.
While the previous Snapchat content strategies in this chapter allow you to
specifically target individuals, stories are more of a “catch-all” approach that
give followers a better opportunity to view collections of snaps multiple
times. They also act as a central hub to which you can direct fans when you
want them to engage with your Snapchat efforts over a prolonged period of
time and enjoy a more substantial narrative of events. For example, the
Washington Wizards basketball team uses stories to document its game days,
making snaps that show the players arriving, a glimpse of the locker room,
half-time fun, and the result at the end of the game. Similarly, the fashion
brand Jack Wills employs stories to allow its fans to tag along all day at
photo shoots for its newest ranges of clothes, while the online food-ordering
service GrubHub uses stories to give its fans extra time to catch its latest
promotion blasts and coupon codes. What’s more, with the story replies
option, anyone can reply to a specific photo or video within a story by
swiping up from the bottom of the display and opening a new chat window.
This means you can receive instant feedback (and reply to fans!) and it is an
invaluable way to gauge how a live campaign is going.
A sure-fire way to boost the view rates on all of your stories is to think about
the three pillars of storytelling: each one needs a logical beginning, middle,
and end, where each pillar of the story gives your fans a reason to view until
the end. Invite viewers on a journey and keep them asking 
"What's next?"Brands with successful view rates tend to keep their snaps brief and their
stories anywhere between 1 and 2 minutes long. Any longer than that may
negatively impact view rates. One common mistake amongst businesses who
are new to Snapchat is creating mixed-message stories that don’t connect
with their audience. For example, they will create a story by combining
random snaps without context or overarching story. If you 
do 
plan to take a
bunch of one-off snaps, use a longer frequency between each snap to
minimize any confusion. 
Note: 
The Shared Stories option enables you to invite other Snapchatters to
contribute to your Story with their own takes and insights. When you create a
Shared Story, you’ll be able to choose who will be able to contribute, and the
Story will then be viewable by your and their connections, providing
expanded exposure potential.
Use Memories to develop new, repackage, and re-purpose content
In the past, only photos and videos shot within Snapchat could be posted as
snaps or as part of a story. The Memories feature, introduced in July 2016,
changed this by allowing users to upload content from their device's Camera
Roll and save and share old snaps from inside the app for later use. So, now it
is possible to create content in any app or software to be uploaded to
Snapchat, opening up a whole new world of opportunity. Snapped a photo or
shot a video made for Facebook, Twitter, or elsewhere? Now you can re-
purpose it for Snapchat with very little effort. For example, a long YouTube
video can be chopped into 10-second clips to be repackaged as a serialized
Snapchat story. Or if you want to export a top-performing snap to share on
another platform, that is just as easy to do.
Access Memories from Snapchat’s home screen by tapping on the icon of
two mobile phones at the bottom of the app’s opening screen. Here, you'll be
able to import content from your Camera Roll to use within Snapchat.
Alternatively, to save a completed snap to Memories for future use, tap the
arrow pointing downwards at the bottom of the screen. This icon used to save
snaps to your phone, but now tapping on this icon will save your snap
directly to Memories. Saved snaps can be shared to other social networks to
promote your Snapchat content, like attaching it to a tweet or Facebook post,
creating an album of Snapchat photos to tell the story of a day, or stitching
video clips together to create a vlog for uploading to YouTube. Memorysnaps are differentiated against ordinary snaps because they appear with a
white border and a timestamp. Like stories, multiple memories can be
stitched together.
Snapchat Content Ideas
Ask simple questions
As the ability to type long text replies is limited by time and space on
Snapchat, the best kind of questions to ask are those that are easy to digest
and demand a visual response, either by photo or video. For example, a shoe
brand might ask their fans something as simple as "Show us your shoes!" or
"Snap us a photo when you're in our store!” The quicker and easier you make
it for fans to respond, the better
.
Show sneak previews
Snapchat media's brevity makes it a great platform for showing a sneaky peak
behind the curtain of your business, whether it’s news of a new product
launch, an upcoming offer, or something else exclusive only to your friends
on the app. If need be, tease out the content over the course of several snaps
to keep it digestible and to encourage people to look out for more. MTV UK
used this marketing method several times to preview photo stills and video
clips from the new season of its reality television show, 
Geordie Shore. 
The
content was memorable and impactful, reminding people to watch the
program and visit its website.
Offer coupons and special offers
Use Snapchat as a way to send out time-limited coupons or special offers to
your customers. As the promotion will be seen so briefly, make sure that your
message is extra clear and succinct, e.g., "10% off today only with promo
code SNAP" 
and 
consider sending out a “heads-up” snap to alert people to
the day and time that a promotion will be landing in their inbox. The 16
Handles ice cream chain put an interesting spin on this strategy. First, they
asked customers to send them a photo via Snapchat of them eating the chain's
ice cream. 16 Handles would then reply with a coupon code for money off
their next purchase. The customer had to keep the self-destructing message
unopened until they placed their order at the register, then quickly show the
cashier the coupon to receive a discount.
Hold a Snapchat contestAs you know, a contest can be a highly effective way to boost engagement
and awareness of your brand on social media. It is no different on Snapchat.
Here are several methods you can use:
Scavenger hunt: 
Share photo or video clues to a secret
destination, either
 in the real world or online, and allow your
followers to compete to be the first to find it.
Word or picture quiz: 
Send out word or picture clues over a set
period of
 time, building up to a way that followers can win a
prize, e.g., visiting a special page on your site to enter a
keyword revealed over the course of a week, or by sending
back a specific snap.
First snap wins
: Send out a photo or video asking followers to
snap back
 something specific or tweet you a screen grab from a
snap, and the first one to do it wins a prize.
Have fun, be funny
Snapchat's majority audience is teenagers and young adults and the app is
dominated by fun and humorous pieces of content. If your brand image
allows, don't be afraid to have a little fun - pull faces, doodle on top of your
snaps, use Emoji and stickers to tell a story, or surprise your audience with
something that might raise an eyebrow or two! Handing over your Snapchat
account to partners, customers, and different employees can also a great way
to vary your content and 
make it feel more authentic. Branded content on
Snapchat is like nothing else out there, so if you can capture the imagination
of fans in this way, they are more likely to keep opening the snaps you send...
which means the odd promotional one, too.
Note: 
Make it a goal to create snaps and stories that are engaging from start
to finish and screenshot-worthy (a trackable metric in Snapchat – more on
this shortly). As covered in previous chapters, examples might include useful
checklists, inspirational quotes, and discount codes.
Use Paperclip to drive traffic to your website
In a landmark rollout that is an immense help to brands – and will help you
tie many of the suggestions above to your brand’s social media goals -
Snapchat introduced Paperclip in July 2017. The feature allows you to attach
a website URL to a snap. When a user swipes up on the snap, the link you’veentered will open within Snapchat's internal browser, allowing you to push
fans and customers to your content instantly and directly within Snapchat (a
feature previously limited to paid ads). The tool can be accessed by tapping
on the paperclip icon within Snapchat’s toolkit, directly after taking a snap
photo or video.
How to track customers on Snapchat and measure ROI
Unlike some of its rivals, Snapchat does not yet feature an in-depth set of
tools for everyone to and track detailed analytics on the app (Snapchat
Insights is only available to those with a large following). If you’re a smaller
creator, some out-of- the-box thinking is necessary to measure your progress.
Here are several metrics you can utilize go help you determine how
successful you’re growing and engaging your Snapchat following:
Total Opens: 
This is the total number of views across all of your Snapchat
stories. To track your opens and views, you can use a third-party tool like
Snaplytics.io.
Average Open Rate: 
This is the percentage of total estimated followers who
have engaged with any given Snapchat story - comparable to engagement
rates on Facebook. This metric is closely tied to the number of opens.
Screenshots taken: 
Screenshots is the total number of screenshots taken by
users for all of the snaps within a story. This metric tells you how many times
people have saved your snap to their devices. Screenshots are a great
indicator that people found your post valuable or entertaining (whether you
asked them to or not).
Completion Rate
: Completion rate is the percentage of followers who viewed
an entire story from beginning to end; a way to measure the loyalty of your
audience. Do they watch your stories in their entirety or swipe away before
finishing?
Follower growth: 
Follower growth by source is the key metric to determine
where your Snapchat followers are coming from. From there, you can adjust
your strategy.
To view the number of opens and screenshots of individual snaps and stories,
and 
from this data, figure out the other metrics listed above, tap the three little
dots that appear to the right of where you click on your story in the app.How to grow your Snapchat following – Snapcodes and friend referrals
Other than the obvious "market your Snapchat presence and username
everywhere", one of the simplest ways to encourage the growth of your
audience on Snapchat is to ask existing followers to encourage their friends
to add you on the app. Following is made easy courtesy of your profile’s
Snapcode, which when photographed by a customer using the app’s built-in
camera, will add you automatically – grab an editable, printable version at
https://accounts.snapchat.com/accounts/snapcodes
). When asking existing
fans to refer their friends, make sure you get them to snap you the name of
the friend who will be adding you, and when they do, send both users a little
reward as a thanks (discount code, unique content, etc.)
Custom URL Snapcodes
In addition to “follow our profile” Snapcodes, in early 2017, Snapchat added
a feature that allows users to turn 
any 
link into a Snapcode that can be used to
open web pages within Snapchat. To create a Snapcode:
1
. 
Open Snapchat Settings, select Snapcodes, and then “Create
Snapcode.
2
. 
Paste the URL of the chosen web page and add an image that
will appear within the Snapcode (Snapchat will automatically
pull images from the web page as possible options).
3
. 
The completed Snapcode will be saved to your camera roll and
can be inserted anywhere you like: embedded on a website,
posted to Facebook, Instagram or Twitter, on flyers, menus,
etc.
As a way for brands to track Snapcode usage, Snapchat provides in-app
analytics (total number of scans over the past three months, as well as the
percentage of people who opened the link after scanning it) for Snapcodes
that have been scanned at least 100 times. If you're not reaching that number
consistently, converting your link on bit.ly is an alternative method to track
Snapcode progress.
Quick and effective Snapchat content creation tips
To make the most of visuals on Snapchat, do this first: Navigate straight to
Settings (cog icon), tap "Manage" under the Additional Services option and
turn on Filters, and Special Text.The Loop tool for videos lets you decide if your Snap plays
once or
 loops until the viewer is ready to tap to the next Snap –
very handy if you’re going to be stringing together multiple,
short video clips.
To add background music to video snaps, begin playing a track
on
 your mobile (either one saved to your device or streamed in
an app like Spotify), then open Snapchat and begin recording –
the portion of the track that plays during the recording will be
dubbed into the video automatically.
Snapchat provides hundreds of cute and vibrant emoji and
stickers to
 decorate your snaps. To access the emojis and
stickers, take your snap then tap the folded paper icon on the
top of your screen. Tap 
to choose a sticker, drag it around,
pinch and twist to resize and rotate. You can add as many as
you like! To "pin" an emoji or sticker to a moving object in
your video snaps, tap and hold it above an object to stick it in
place.
Submit your content to Spotlight
In late 2020, Snapchat took a page from TikTok’s playbook with the roll out
of the Spotlight tab. The Spotlight feed features a range of short video clips,
both from public and private Snap accounts. Users can submit their best
Snaps for consideration, with the app distributing a pot of cash amongst the
best submissions – based on view counts and other factors determined by
the Snapchat team. The idea is that Spotlight incentivizes users to post
original, creative ideas to Snapchat on a consistent basis. Check Spotlight
out and consider submitting your own clips in return for the chance to gain
extra exposure.
Advertising on Snapchat
Snapchat advertising is an exciting advertising channel for marketers,
especially if your target audience is in the 13-34 age bracket, who make up
the vast majority of its users. And as luck would have it, Snapchat offers a
pretty straightforward, yet comprehensive ad creation suite for businesses.
Get started at 
http://ads.snapchat.com
.To run successful ads on Snapchat, you have to focus on delighting the
people who are going to view them. People who use Snapchat do so to be
entertained, not to feel like they're getting the hard sell from brands. When
you're brainstorming ideas, think about what grabs your customers' attention,
what makes them smile, and will make them want to interact with you. In
essence, work to produce ads that allow people to have fun while learning
more about your business, products, and services. And as far as a structural
approach goes, Snapchat has shared that advertising on its platform is most
effective when brands leverage multiple ad products tied to a defined
advertising goal.
Before you start building your Snapchat ads, cementing the objective for your
ad campaign will help you figure out which ad format you should use, how it
should look, how people should engage with it, and how its success will be
measured. Snapchat provides businesses with three main ad objectives: 
Awareness: to help people get to know your brand and
products better. 
Consideration: to help you drive app installs, website visits,
video views, engagement, new leads.
Conversions: to help you drive specific actions on your website
or to drive more online product sales.
Note: 
The above options relate to the Advanced Create option available in
Snapchat ads, giving you full control over your ads. For a simpler and
quicker 
solution, you might prefer Instant Create, allowing you to create a
single ad in less than 5 minutes.
The ad format you choose will depend on your campaign objective, who
you’re trying to reach and how you want viewers to interact with and respond
to your ad. Let’s take a look at what’s available:
Snap Ads: 
a single image or video (Top Snap) that allows you to add an
attachment so your audience can take an action immediately - like visiting
your website or installing your app. 
Story Ads: 
These ads appear as a tile consisting of 3-20 Snap Ads when users
view the Discover section of the app. The best time to use Story Ads is when
your objective is to drive conversions, generate leads or boost engagementand awareness. They’re really useful for telling deeper, richer content stories
or offering a comprehensive product overview.
Snapchatters can tap a preview tile to open the Story Ad, so keep make sure
your brand logo pops on the image so that people can easily identify it in the
fee, and keep headline copy captivating, clear and concise. Tease what people
might learn or how they will benefit from tapping into your Story. Avoid
using your first Story Ad Snap as an introduction and drop users right into the
action, since the Tile should give user’s an introduction to the Story. Ensure
the Story aligns with the initial message shown on the Tile so users feel the
Story Ad delivers on what they chose to engage with.
Collection Ads:
 These ads allow Snapchat users to view and shop for the
products you sell online. A Collection Ad is a Top Snap with four tappable
tiles to feature products.
AR Lenses:
 These ads allow your fans to alter their appearance using
augmented reality, and are best used for driving engagement and boosting
brand awareness.
Filters:
 These ads that display as an additional layer on top of the content that
Snapchat users make themselves. They are best utilized when tied to a
specific location (like a store, salon, café, etc.) that users will visit in the
flesh. When a customer uses your filter, they can send it directly to their
friends to join in on one-to-one communication or share them out to their
story for everyone to see. Filters overlay users' snaps, so relevance is key.
They should be simple in design (try to use less than 30% of the screen and
conjure up something that complements the moments customers enjoy at
your business and the snaps they will be applied to). Think about keeping
your filter’s message general enough so it feels contextually relevant to every
person who sees it.
Commercials: 
non-skippable six-second video Snap Ads that allow you to
drive awareness within Snap’s high-quality premium content, with sound on.
Commercials differ from Snap Ads as they are running in between our
premium content. 
With Snapchat’s data, you can target users based on their demographics and
their online 
and 
offline interests and behaviors. You can also use your owndata to reach your customers and similar users on Snapchat.
Here are some targeting best practices from Snapchat:
Keep your 
audience size less than 20 million people for the
same creative.
Create an ad set for each unique group of people you’re trying
to reach.
Test Lookalike Audience for prospecting and finding new
customers.
Try using multiple ads per ad set so you can see how different
creatives perform with the same audience.
Snapchat ads best practices
You can either create an ad from scratch or edit one of the pre-designed
templates. As for the content of your Snap Ad, it’s up to you! If you’re stuck
for ideas, a simple selfie video is a good first option, because they look like
stories from friends and make the ad experience familiar to other users.
Snapchat’s own research shows that 
“Ads which feature UGC [user
generated content] look and feel, Snapchat inspired features, and speaking to
camera are significantly stronger at driving view- through.” 
Whatever your
creative, here is a selection of best practices to help ensure your ad is
effective:
Establish brand moment before the two-second mark to
maximize
 your ad’s awareness, but avoid opening on a solid
frame with a logo or product shot only; start with immediate
action and a compelling element, like a product reveal or brand
iconography
- 
opening with moving footage provides a moment to hook viewers.
 Ensure
that your ad is descriptive about what the user gets once they swipe up.
Ads should seek to mirror the bite-sized and linear storytelling
of
 Snaps. Although the maximum length of video permitted is
10 seconds, Snapchat actually recommends trying to keep your
ad’s duration closer to below 6 seconds. Its research revealsthat between 3 and 5 seconds is the sweet spot for Snap Ad
length to drive action, and that an offer message (if available)
should be delivered within second two or three.
Use voiceover call to actions to encourage users to swipe up,
and
 choose the most appropriate of the available call to action
buttons to display, e.g. Install Now or Download for app
installs.
If promoting an app, feature a person using it, and screenshots
of it, along with key metrics to demonstrate the value of
downloading it.
Test all types of Snap ads from video, to stills, to gifs or
cinemographs (one per ad set)
Align creative with targeting where possible - higher relevancy
leads to higher swipe and conversion rates!
Interestingly, Snapchat has found that incremental exposures to
an ad
 increase lift in resonance metrics (i.e. the more times a
person sees an ad, the more they are likely to remember it),
despite having a negative impact on view duration. So, it
recommends that you focus on driving resonance metrics rather
than view duration. This is why 
capturing your audience in the
first few seconds, and persuading them to swipe up if called
for, is so important.
The final step of Snap Ad creation is to tell Snapchat the website, app page,
or video that you want users to see when they swipe up. Once your Snap ad is
launched, you can visit the Snapchat Ad Manager at any time to monitor its
performance, edit the schedule or budget, or download a report about your
results.
Snapchat, launched in September 2011, is a photo and video-sharing app
centered on one simple premise: all messages shared between friends via
Snapchat will self-destruct, never to be seen again. In most cases, photo and
video messages - Snaps - will disappear between one and ten seconds after
being opened by a recipient (the time limit is specified by the sender), and if
the Snap is not opened, it will automatically delete itself after 30 days. The
only exceptions to this rule are a “one-time or infinity-repeat option for anysingle snap, Snapchat Stories, and the potentially game-changing Memories
(more on these features below). Before sharing content with fellow contacts,
Snapchat users have the option to add filters and annotate photos and video
with colorful text and markers.
While media shared via Snapchat only exists for a matter of seconds, if you
switch your thinking to view the time limit as an 
opportunity 
rather than a
limitation, there are plenty of ways that it can be used for effective marketing.
Think about it this way: when a customer is notified of a Snapchat message
from you, first they're excited about what mystery it holds and second they
know that as soon as they open it, they need to pay close attention as it will
soon disappear forever. And if they don't keep checking the app daily, they'll
miss messages, creating sense of urgency to keep up with fleeting
information. Often it’s addictive! By today's standards, 10 seconds of
someone's 
undivided attention 
like this - especially on a medium as personal
as mobile - is gold dust. One of the biggest emotional triggers for brands on
social media is creating the feeling of FOMO (fear of missing out), and the
format of Snapchat's content delivers this in spades. Like all social media, the
best Snapchat content is framed in a way that mirrors the style of the majority
of its users who take advantage of the platform. Where Snapchat is
concerned, this involves humor, sharing secrets, having fun, holding small
conversations, and capturing "shareworthy" moments: the promise of one-of-
a-kind, real-time content is your customer's incentive to follow you, even if
they already do on other channels.
Unlike other social networks, Snapchat isn't about portraying perfection or
driving people to buy your product directly. It's a fun, genuine way to
promote the personality of your brand and share your story in an off-the-cuff,
genuine way. Let’s look at some ways that you can make the most of
Snapchat for your
business…
Take advantage of Snapchat Stories
The Snapchat Stories mode allows you to join multiple snaps together to
create a rolling 24-hour reel of content for 
all 
of your followers to enjoy
again and again. 
When any snap is added to your story ages over 24 hours, it
disappears and must be replaced with new photos or videos if you want the
story to remain active. If no new content is added to your story, it willdisappear once the newest piece of content expires, and a whole new story
will need to be created. To add content to a story, just choose the ‘+’ icon
after taking a photo or recording a video with the app.
While the previous Snapchat content strategies in this chapter allow you to
specifically target individuals, stories are more of a “catch-all” approach that
give followers a better opportunity to view collections of snaps multiple
times. They also act as a central hub to which you can direct fans when you
want them to engage with your Snapchat efforts over a prolonged period of
time and enjoy a more substantial narrative of events. For example, the
Washington Wizards basketball team uses stories to document its game days,
making snaps that show the players arriving, a glimpse of the locker room,
half-time fun, and the result at the end of the game. Similarly, the fashion
brand Jack Wills employs stories to allow its fans to tag along all day at
photo shoots for its newest ranges of clothes, while the online food-ordering
service GrubHub uses stories to give its fans extra time to catch its latest
promotion blasts and coupon codes. What’s more, with the story replies
option, anyone can reply to a specific photo or video within a story by
swiping up from the bottom of the display and opening a new chat window.
This means you can receive instant feedback (and reply to fans!) and it is an
invaluable way to gauge how a live campaign is going.
Note: 
A sure-fire way to boost the view rates on all of your stories is to think
about the three pillars of storytelling: each one needs a logical beginning,
middle, and end, where each pillar of the story gives your fans a reason to
view until the end. Invite viewers on a journey and keep them asking 
"What's
next?" 
Brands with successful view rates tend to keep their snaps brief and
their stories anywhere between 1 and 2 minutes long. Any longer than that
may negatively impact view rates. One common mistake amongst businesses
who are new to Snapchat is creating mixed-message stories that don’t
connect with their audience. For example, they will create a story by
combining random snaps without context or overarching story. If you 
do 
plan
to take a bunch of one-off snaps, use a longer frequency between each snap to
minimize any confusion.
Use Memories to develop new, repackage, and re-purpose content
In the past, only photos and videos shot within Snapchat could be posted as
snaps or as part of a story. The Memories feature, introduced in July 2016,changed this by allowing users to upload content from their device's Camera
Roll and save and share old snaps from inside the app for later use. So, now it
is possible to create content in any app or software to be uploaded to
Snapchat, opening up a whole new world of opportunity. Snapped a photo or
shot a video made for Facebook, Twitter, or elsewhere? Now you can re-
purpose it for Snapchat with very little effort. For example, a long YouTube
video can be chopped into 10-second clips to be repackaged as a serialized
Snapchat story. Or if you want to export a top-performing snap to share on
another platform, that is just as easy to do
.
Access Memories from Snapchat’s home screen by tapping on the icon of
two mobile phones at the bottom of the app’s opening screen. Here, you'll be
able to import content from your Camera Roll to use within Snapchat.
Alternatively, to save a completed snap to Memories for future use, tap the
arrow pointing downwards at the bottom of the screen. This icon used to save
snaps to your phone, but now tapping on this icon will save your snap
directly to Memories. Saved snaps can be shared to other social networks to
promote your Snapchat content, like attaching it to a tweet or Facebook post,
creating an album of Snapchat photos to tell the story of a day, or stitching
video clips together to create a vlog for uploading to YouTube. Memory
snaps are differentiated against ordinary snaps because they appear with a
white border and a timestamp. Like stories, multiple memories can be
stitched together.TikTok Tips: The Social Media
Disruptor
TikTok is a short-form video app that describes its mission as one to "inspire
creativity and bring joy". TikTok is all about giving users innovative tools
and a platform to express themselves creatively and authentically, and offers
a large suite of creative effects that help users bring their individual stories to
life, from interactive filters to voice and camera effects and a massive library
of music.
Since launching in 2017, the social network TikTok has exploded in
popularity across the globe. By the summer of 2019, it had amassed more
than 500 million users worldwide - that's more than both Twitter and
Snapchat, and a quarter of Facebook's total userbase of 2.1 billion in much
less of the time than Facebook took to reach the same number. 
TikTok entered the market as a new medium for online expression, not just
another social network. Given this, in general, you can’t just import your
Facebook and Instagram posts (Reels aside) to TikTok and vice versa.
TikTok has also become the defining social media app of Generation Z. So, if
your products appeal to a younger demographic, TikTok is a perfect fit, with
the vast majority of its audience in their teens and twenties. 
Young social media are seeking a certain validation that comes from the
content they publish on social networks, and TikTok makes it easy for them
to create authentic content that’s a truer representation of themselves than
offered on other platforms that are often saturated with “fake news” and
highly polished posts from both individuals and businesses.
Content-wise, TikTok has been dubbed by some as a mix between Vine,
Twitch, and Snapchat. More specifically, TikTok has become 
the
 go-to place
to find and share funny, whimsical, creative, and offbeat video content -
bizarre memes, inside jokes, lip-synching, and bite-sized comedy sketches.
While the likes of Facebook and Instagram focus on showing you contentfrom people you already know or have chosen to follow, TikTok aims to
continually introduce users to 
new
 and fresh content from complete strangers.
TikTok democratizes content, not serving you content based on a poster’s
popularity and follower count (largely the case on other social networks), but
instead what might interest a particular user. In theory, this means you can
have an overnight success after posting just one video. With follower counts
out of the picture, a new account with a great idea has just as much chance of
going viral as a famous star or huge company.
This approach – one of constantly publicizing new content - encourages them
to publish their own content because they know there's a better chance than
on other platforms that they can get discovered and grow their own
following. In order words, while people go to the likes of Facebook and
Instagram to see what their 
friends or celebrities are up to, most TikTok users
login to see others' creativity 
and
 to join in to get seen themselves. As the
global marketing manager of TikTok US, Stefan Heinrich once said, its users
“aren’t just watching. They’re creating in response.”
Another major element of TikTok's success is how it has managed to tap into
the changing way people are consuming social, putting community at the
heart of its experience. Over recent years, we've seen a huge growth in
communities (see Facebook Groups and its hundreds of millions of global
groups) where people can share ideas and start conversations with like-
minded individuals. This goes for brands, too, who have been encouraged to
foster their own communities. TikTok is providing the kinship users desire,
while avoiding the potential toxicity on other platforms. 
TikTok: The Basics
For businesses of all sizes, the possibilities of leveraging TikTok as a
platform to reach new audiences is an exciting one - especially if your target
audience is drawn to TikTok 
and
 your content strategy matches what they
demand to watch. But with TikTok being such a social media disruptor, it can
be difficult for brands to know where to begin, especially since most
seasoned marketers have grown comfortable with the way established social
networks such as Facebook and Twitter have conditioned us to utilize their
platforms. In this section, I want to break down the essence of TikTok as a platform
even more, and also give a multitude of suggestions for how you can use it to
benefit your business (whether you decide to post on the platform or not).
I think it’s important to emphasize the core basics once again briefly. Videos
from TikTok users are, on the whole, authentic, creative, and improvised.
Whereas users on other social networks strive for perfection in the content
they post (on Instagram main feeds in particular, less in Stories), TikTok is
all about showcasing ordinary people being entertaining and funny - people
visit the app to have a good time.
The importance of music on TikTok
Inserting a music track into the background of a video is another central
component to a large proportion of popular content on TikTok - used to set
the mood, influence the way a video is cut together, stop people scrolling to
watch, and to convey and elicit an emotional response. So, your choice of
song can be the difference maker between a video making an impact (perhaps
blowing up!) and otherwise missing the mark and disappearing without a
trace.
TikTok's free Commercial Music Library provides access to hundreds of
thousands of pieces of licensed music and sounds to use on the app.
Obviously, setting your sights on songs that are already popular on the
platform is a sensible strategy, which leads nicely onto the topic of trends –
where the most-watched (and for 
businesses, some of the biggest potential for
building awareness and engagement exist).
In order to capitalize on sound, TikTok advises that brands should look to:
Turn your own audio into a promotional tool in the app, which
could even fuel a new trend.
Create new sounds - look to create original sounds for your
promotions for use in their TikTok campaigns.
License popular audio - brands are able to organize their own
licensing deals for music clips, which could be helpful if you're
looking to tap into trends.
TikTok trends
The popularity of content on TikTok is defined by videos from niche creatorsin every category imaginable, and short-lived trends
.
 Whereas a YouTube
trend might stretch out for weeks or even months at a time (e.g. "Visiting the
Worst Rated Hotel in X City), what's wildly on TikTok often changes within
the span of just a few days.
There’s a specific section of the TikTok app where you can check all the
trends that are currently popular on the platform, and it is also visible on
desktop at 
https://www.tiktok.com/trending
. As well as the latest videos from
users, check out the Discover section for popular trends centered around a
particular song, challenge, or hashtag. The library of effects that people can
use for continuity of content when they’re taking part in a challenge or
fueling a trend is one of the main reasons people compare TikTok to
Snapchat. 
TikTok interactivity
TikTok users can interact with content in much the same way as other
platforms - following, sharing, and liking are all present. However, the app
also throws up some unique and compelling features, most prominent are:
Duets, which allow people to combine an existing video made
by someone else with a new one of their own.
Video reactions, which allow users to react to other videos on
the platform in real-time, while they're recording themselves.
TikTok Marketing Strategies for Business
TikTok’s engaging, interactive environment is the perfect place for brands to
connect with their audiences. As a community built on creativity and
participation, TikTok users are hungry to discover new things. It's a place
where creativity runs free, with no limits or judgements
.
Brands that understand this and provide entertainment that contributes to the
TikTok experience are enjoying huge reach and engagement on the platform,
leading to more sales and greater return on investment. Instead of your story
being dismissed as another ad, it can be celebrated as part of the TikTok
experience.
TikTok makes it easy for you to find the right audience for your business,based on an individual's interests. TikTok prioritizes content each user
already cares about in the For You feed, meaning they're always discovering
new things they're likely to enjoy. These constant surprises keep users
coming back to the platform, and encourage purchase behavior.
It's not about the fame of your brand or the size of your budget: it's about
entertaining, sparking joy and speaking directly to your people - telling your
story in the most creative and genuine way.
Here are five ways you – as a business - can take advantage of the platform
and its community of hundreds of millions of users:
Join a challenge, jump on a trend, or create your own
As I mentioned earlier, trends on TikTok appear and disappear rapidly, and
being on trend is essential if you want your brand to be seen as relevant, and
as a means to drive as much engagement as possible. TikTok's trending
section will highlight what's hot on the platform at the current moment in
time. Whether it's #thechairchallenge or videos set to Ariana Grande's latest
chart hit, have a browse around for a trend that you think you could make
work for your brand, and get involved. If your following is big enough to
generate some traction, you might even want to try and start your own trend
or challenge.
Producing content at speed – as trends demand - usually means that your
production value will take a hit, but as you'll quickly discover, TikTok users
are more than willing to accept less polished content if it's on-trend. This
approach of publishing short and sharp messages to cut through the noise on
social media isn't necessarily exclusive to TikTok, but does play positively
into the hands of a platform that has nurtured a particular type of expectation
for content - one that doesn't take much time or effort to create.
Note:
 If you’re going to post TikTok content based on challenges or trends,
really try to understand them before uploading anything, and try to be as
authentic as possible. You will need to plan what you’ll publish, of course,
but the appeal of TikTok is that you get to see the real brand and the real
people behind it. Generation Z amongst the least tolerant of advertising, so
direct selling and pushiness won't work on them. These savvy social media
users are willing to engage with brands on their level - so building content
that ties into your community - is the way to go.Create your own content
Jumping on trends isn't the only way to make a head start on TikTok. If
you're 
happy to utilize the platform as a way to share video content similar to
what you would on other social networks, chances are that you'll find an
audience for it. Of course, it won't harm for you to give it a TikTok twist to
appeal to the young demographic that use the app, with appropriate music
and a smattering of humor, perhaps.
Experiment with TikTok Now
Making deeper connections possible and delivering entertainment in a fun
format, TikTok Now allows you to capture what you're doing in the moment
using your device's front and back camera. You'll receive a daily prompt to
capture a 10-second video or a static photo to easily share what you're up to.
Look for TikTok Now in the Friends tab.
Encourage UGC
Since TikTok promotes authentic content as part of its design, businesses can
make user-generated content a pillar of their strategy on the platform -
encouraging people to mention your product or service because they enjoy it
and want to share that with others. Once the ball is rolling, be part of the
conversation and help to shape it.
Use TikTok for social listening
Even if Gen Z is not your target audience, you'd be wise to pay attention to
what’s happening on TikTok - to remain ahead of the curve and find
inspiration in the unique content that’s being shared on the platform.
You might not even know it, but your brand or trends, movements, products,
or concepts surrounding your industry could be generating buzz on TikTok as
we speak. For example, when the makers of hair cream product Strictly Curls
noticed abnormally high sales of its product at Walmart, it was TikTok that
was behind the jump in purchases. People who liked the product had taken to
TikTok to share their positive experience with using it. It might not be your
specific product or service that's trending on TikTok as in this case, but by
using TikTok's search function to monitor what your target audience is
creating content about, you may 
be able to uncover some valuable consumer
insights. And you can use what you learn to shape your own content on
TikTok and other social networks, or even to influence the kind of product
and service that you offer.Partner with TikTok Influencers
As has become increasingly popular elsewhere, one of the smartest methods
to generate brand awareness and start building a following on TikTok is
through already-popular creators whose content and worldview aligns with
your brand. 
In particular, micro influencers (up to 100,000 followers) and nano
influencers (up to 1,000 followers) are a particularly fruitful crop of
individuals to aim to work with on TikTok. As well as being less established
than those on other platforms, these "less famous" influencers don't project
the disconnect that social media users increasingly feel with celebrity
influencers with millions of followers when being sold to. 
As alluded to above, any paid-for or sponsored content on TikTok should not
be set up as a blatant advertising spot - subtle and as seamless (alongside
other TikTok content) is what you should aim for. That said, transparency is
always a good move - and will be appreciated by TikTok users. Where a post
is paid for or a partnership is in place, clearly state it as such in the post's
caption.
Expand your reach, build trust and find someone who's a good fit for your
brand using TikTok's Creator Marketplace. With it, you can search for a
Creator based on number of followers, interest, region, gender, age, and
more. Once you've found someone you like the look of, send your campaign
details directly to them - and once they've accepted the invitation and posted
a Sponsored Video, you can oversee the creative process and monitor its
performance in real-time.
Switch to a Business Account for Analytics
TikTok offers all users the ability to switch their account from an ordinary
one to a Business Account. A Business Account provides additional tools to
help you grow and track your performance, such as insights on things like
your weekly and monthly views, follower growth, and trending videos. To
setup a Pro Account:
1
. 
From your profile page, open the Privacy and Settings tab
2
. 
Choose "Manage My Account"
3
. 
Tap "Switch to Business Account" and follow the steps from
there4
. 
Once you activate your Business Account, you'll find a new
analytics button under your account options.
More TikTok Best Practices
In addition to the strategies above, here is a further selection of pointers to
keep in mind when building content for TikTok success:
Entertainment is everything when it comes to connecting with
customers, with only a few seconds to make an impact. The brands
that have the most success create addictive, likeable, shareable
content.
Engage your audience: Post content that keeps them coming back -
ask questions, interact with followers, reply to comments, and
encourage them to create their own videos.
Post regularly: TikTokers use the platform multiple times a day, so
make sure to post regularly, capitalise on key moments and stay
relevant by using popular and relevant hashtags - while still being
your most authentic self. When you discover what resonates with
your audience, make sure to amplify it with paid ads. Showing up
on the For Your page will keep you at the front of your audience's
mind.
Tell a story: Whether 10 seconds, 60 seconds, (or even up to 10
minutes long), create a narrative to hook your audience from the
beginning. Make it memorable! TikTok’s official recommendation
for a tell-a-story sweet spot (data-backed we can presume) is
between 21-24 seconds.
Be authentic: You don't have to be perfect; the more natural and
relatable you are, the more your content will resonate with users.
Share your journey, both the ups and downs, to help build a
relationship with your audience. Celebrate your successes and
embrace your failures!
Show your face: Let your audience see the human side of your
business. TikTok care about people and emotion more thanproducts, so don't be afraid to let your personality shine through.
Focus on value, not going viral: Don't try to beat the algorithm!
Just focus on entertaining your audience and your engagement will
grow naturally.
Explore TikTok tools: From text, voiceovers, filters, polls,
stickers, Q&As and Duets, there's a ton of ways to help your
content stand out and spark interaction.
Use a call to action: Make reaching your website or browsing your
products effortless with a CTA button. As well as this, don't forget
to use the caption page to describe your TikTok, 
tag Creators, and
share your video across different channels.
Going Live on TikTok: Best Practices
TikTok requires you to be at least 16 years old and have 1,000 or more
followers to go live on the platform. As for what to broadcast, much of what I
have covered in other chapters also applies to TikTok. However, here are a
handful of TikTok-specific best practices to help your live broadcast attract
an audience and perform well:
Post a feed video directly before your live stream is about to begin. If
someone watches it while you are live, they will see a special icon that they
can tap to jump straight into the live broadcast.
When you hit the button to go live, you'll see a box to enter a caption for your
live stream. Use this space to write a title that will entice people to watch.
Using hashtags in your title is a great way to make your live broadcast more
discoverable on TikTok.
You’ll also see a cover photo for your live stream (which by default is your
profile photo). This will be recognisable enough for most of your followers,
but you can change it if you wish.
Also, when the LIVE Intro option, when switched on, will display a short
message to viewers when they 
join your stream. Use it as a way to welcome
viewers to your broadcast, encourage them to interact, and to follow you.Set up a TikTok Shop to Sell Your Products
A TikTok Shop lets you sell products directly on TikTok, through in-feed
videos, LIVEs, and the product showcase tab. You can apply to open a
TikTok shop through TikTok Seller Center. Upload the necessary documents,
add products, link your bank account, and you'll be ready to go.
The best strategies for selling on TikTok share much of the same ideas as
shared in earlier chapters of the book, covering promotion in videos, video
ads, and live streams. Of course, this being TikTok, your content will
perform better with a TikTok-styled slant - the biggest, as previously
mentioned, being that TikTok is primarily an entertainment platform. That's
what people visit the app for, and that's the kind of content its audience reacts
to - whether promotional or not.
Paid Advertising on TikTok
There's no one-size-fits-all way to get yourself noticed on TikTok, but using a
mixture of organic and paid content is the best way to boost your presence
and establish connections.
TikTok ads are similar to other paid social media ads, but they do have their
quirks. There are a good few types of ads you need to be aware of:
In-Feed Ads: ads that appear between feed posts (the cheapest
form of TikTok advertising; most suitable for small and
medium-sized businesses). They look similar to native
TikToks, so they blend organically into the feed.
TopView: a special type of in-feed ad, guaranteed to be the
first in-feed ad that users see. Can be up to 60 seconds long, but
don't auto-play.
Note: 
A related ad type on TikTok, Spark ads, enable you to sponsor
already-trending organic content that aligns with your offerings (like
someone making a video using your product), in order to get an
association boost without having to create anything yourself, or even
commission a creator to do so. The videos are converted into In-FeedAds or TopView ads.
Instant Page ad: these ads load super-fast are easy to build and
customize for your brand. Users can view videos and images,
swipe through carousels, or click on buttons to explore another
destination - 
all without leaving the TikTok app, making your
sales funnel more seamless, and potentially helping to drive
traffic and grow sales.
Brand Takeovers: ads that appear immediately when the app is
opened.
Branded Hashtag Challenges: useful because they build brand
awareness largely through user-generated content. They appear
on the app's Discover page, with links to a branded landing page
that provides information about the challenge, the brand’s
website link, and existing UGC under that hashtag. Branded
hashtag challenges are particularly effective they’re fun, giving
fans the opportunity to be creative and express themselves.
Branded Effects: ads allow brands to create AR overlays that
TikTokers can use in their videos.
If you need inspiration, TikTok's Ad Library tool enables you to search for
the best performing TikTok ad campaigns by vertical, and region. Here are a
few things to keep in mind as you launch your first TikTok ad campaign:
Be authentic
The
 
creative in your ads should be consistent with your brand image and
resonate with your target audience.
Use influencers wisely
If working with an influencer, picking the right one 
to share your message
with their audience will make a major difference to the returns on your ad
spend. For example, a Tomoson study showed that for every $1 spent on
influencer marketing, a brand could see $6.50 in return. You can find
influencers in the Users tab of the discovery page. Just enter a topic in the
search bar.  
Use Smart Video Soundtrack
Smart Video Soundtrack is a free creative tool offered by TikTok that
automatically pairs appropriate music with your video ad.
Utilize the Dashboard
The Dashboard is where you’ll start when you open Ads Manager. It’s also
where you can get a snapshot of your ad’s status and performance. At a
glance, you’ll see how your ads are performing across several important
KPIs. With a few extra clicks, you can delve deeper and prepare customized
reports. On the Campaign page, you can see results all the way down to the
single ad level.
Make ad creation easier with the TikTok Video Editor
The TikTok Video Editor is an online smart editor allow you to quickly and
accurately produce native-feeling content with TikTok-style elements,
including popular music, fonts, colors and more. You can easily add custom
subtitles, crop assets, and cut scenes exactly how you want in moments. The
video editor tool is accessible via the 'Create a Video' menu in TikTok Ads
Manager
.
Note:
 TikTok also offers two highlight-worthy integrations: Vimeo and
Canva help small businesses advertising on TikTok streamline two main
areas - ad production and creative.
Vimeo Create is an AI-driven video production tool that allows
advertisers to produce and publish ads directly into the TikTok Ad
Manager within minutes, using TikTok-optimized video templates.
Canva's library of TikTok ad templates make content creation
effortless while reducing the time and cost it would traditionally
take to design creative from scratch.
These tools make it simple and easy to create high quality content for ads,
with hundreds of templates to guide you through the process.
“Promote” ads on TikTok
TikTok also offers a Facebook Boost-like ‘Promote’ option to all business
users. With Promote, you can turn any organic TikTok video into an ad,
directly within the app. You can access TikTok’s Promote option via the fireicon on each video, through TikTok’s Creator Tools menu, or via Business
Suite.
1. Select the video that you want to promote (preferably one of your best-
performing organic videos to reach more people with your most popular
content).
2. Set up your promotion: Choose a goal for your campaign (more views,
website visits, or follows), set a budget and length of time to run the
promotion, and select the audience you want to reach.
3. Watch your numbers grow: After your promotion is approved, you can
check in to see how your video is performing and how many new people are
engaging.Social Media Marketing FAQs and
Miscellaneous Advice
Social media marketing is an ever-growing, ever-changing sector, but there
are a number of core elements that will help you ensure a steady foundation
to your social media ventures.
Should I keep my social media posts short?
While many studies will advise you to keep text in your social media posts to
a minimum in order to cater to low attention spans and mobile users, my
advice is different. The reason? Studies like these will have covered a
spectrum that includes text-heavy posts with low engagement that are often
the result of poor writing practices, and short posts like memes that only
generate lots of cheap, low quality engagement. My advice is to put the
quality
 of your written content first and see how a mixture of lengths affects
your engagement rates, rather than worrying about sticking strictly to a set
character limit.
When is the best time to post on social media?
Depending on which study you read, the "best" time to post on social media
to maximize organic reach and engagement will differ wildly. Some will
offer general guidance: advising you to post at the time of day when most
people are likely to be checking social media, i.e., first thing in the morning
and in the evenings. Others will recommend that you use hard evidence -
tools like Facebook Insights and its "When Your Fans Are Online" data, and
Google Analytics' activity -  to determine what time of day your posts receive
the most engagement, and stick to posting around those hours. Alternatively,
there's the "late night infomercial effect" school of thought. This states that
you should post content in the twilight hours, at a time when there will be
much less competition in peoples' news feeds, when an international audience
(if you have one) is most likely to spot your updates, and to boost the chance
that your posts might - as a result of being published at night - be the first
thing fans see when they wake up in the morning. As goes the advice on
similar issues, there is no "one size fits all" answer, so the key to finding out
when 
your
 best time to post on social media comes down to experimentation.
Use all of the suggestions above to run a few tests, then tweak your strategyuntil you find the single method (or a combination) that works best for you.
As always, re-evaluate your approach from time to time to ensure your posts
are performing as well as they can be.
Don't post for 'empty' engagement
One of the biggest traps that many businesses fall into is that of posting
certain kinds of posts as bait to encourage likes and comments. The most
obvious examples of this are 
'Fill in the Blank'
 and 
'Click LIKE if you think X
is X..."
 sort of posts on Facebook. While these are great for occasional use,
they do not give you a very accurate overview of fans and customers who are
really engaged with your content and how successful your efforts really are.
Anybody can post an image of a cute kitten to get likes, but what real impact
does it have on your fans' opinion of your brand?
Search the web for social mentions of your brand
While I've touched on the different ways that you can use individual social
networks to discover and track mentions of your brand, one popular (and
free!) "catch all" solution to see real-time activity, understand your content's
reach, and get a top-down idea of your brand reputation, is SocialMention
(http://www.socialmention.com)
.
Type in and search for your brand name and keywords related to your
company and experiment with the different filters found in the drop-down
menu. For each mention found, the site provides a set of overall metrics
particular to it, including the sources where it is found and whether people
are interacting in a positive or negative fashion. Hover over each metric with
your cursor for a short definition of each.FREE E-book Updates FOREVERDownload My Essential Social
Media Marketing Premium Content
Bundle
What is the Premium Content Bundle?
The Premium Content Bundle is a selection of incredibly useful social media
marketing resources - instantly downloadable - to help you reach and surpass
your social media marketing goals.
What will I get?
Download the Premium Content Bundle today and you'll gain instant access
to all of the following:
20 Social Media Profile Branding Templates:
 Expertly designed
templates for Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn, and more.
Ideal Social Media Image Size List:
 an at-a-glance view of the
optimum image sizes to use for posts, profile design, and ads for
the biggest social networks.
Social Media Strategy Plan Questionnaire:
 24 questions to help
you plan and shape a social media marketing strategy tailored to
your business.
2 Social Media Content Calendars:
 plan and chart your social
media marketing posts in advance for a more stress-free,
optimized content strategy. Covers all the major social networks.
Social Media Strategy Progress Tracker
: Easily track and chart
the growth of your social profiles over time – followers, referral
traffic, and more.
Social Media Competitor Analysis Questionnaire:
 A
questionnaire and chart to help you analyze your main competition
on social media. Use the information you gather to inspire your
own content strategy tactics, and outperform your rivals!
50% off my premium Udemy video courses:
 Half-price access
to my top-rated Udemy video courses, 
How to Use Instagram for
Business
 and 
How to Use Snapchat for Business
.
10% off my Social Media Marketing Services:
 an instantdiscount on all of my consultancy and design services. Nice!
How much is the Premium Content Bundle?
 
The Premium Content Bundle costs 
$7.00 (USD
), and there are two payment
options:
1. Purchase access for a one-time payment of $7.00 to grab all the goodies
within a 30-day time frame, 
OR
2. Purchase a subscription for $7.00 per month to show your ongoing support
for me and my work (free Kindle book updates, blog posts, video tutorials,
etc.) and to have 
unlimited 
access to all of the latest/updated Premium Bundle
Content wherever and whenever you like.
Where do I purchase the Premium Content Bundle? 
For more information about the Premium Content Bundle goodies and to
purchase yours, visit
www.andrewmacarthy.com/premiu
mI Need You: Help Make This Book
Even Better!
Outdated, not-working tips
As hard as I work to keep the content of 
500 Social Media Marketing Tips
 as
fresh and up-to-date as possible, small details and technicalities can fall
through the cracks. If you try out a tip or instruction and notice that it is out
of date or no longer working as it should, please, 
please
 let me know via the
contact details in the “About the Author” section of this book so that I can
rectify the issue in the next version.
Typos and grammar
The same as the above goes for typos or grammatical errors. I do my best to
weed them out as often as possible, but as the book is updated so frequently,
there is always a chance that they will sneak their way in! If you spot any
glaring errors that you think need my attention immediately, do get in touch,
so I can change them at the first available opportunity. Thank you very much!
Got a tip to share?
If you have a tip that you think deserves a place in any section of 
500 Social
Media Marketing Tips
, then drop me a line via the "About the Author"
section. I'd love to feature you and your genius ideas!Hire Me: Social Media Design, 
Analysis and Management
Since writing 
500 Social Media Marketing Tips
, I have been contacted by
many businesses who want help with their social media strategy - either from
the beginning of their venture, or just for reassurance that they are on the
right path. I am pleased to say that I offer a range of tailor-made, affordable
one-off services and ongoing consultation packages to build and manage
social media marketing for your business
. 
 My rates are very reasonable and
negotiable depending on your needs and budget. Services offered include:
Social Media Strategy Audit / Analysis
Social Media Profile Setup and Design
Social Profile Management and Audience Building
Social Media Strategy and Profile Design Analysis And
Recommendations
If you would like more information on pricing or would like to get me on
board to help you with social media in any way, please visit the 'Hire Me'
page at my website, 
http://www.andrewmacarthy.com
 or email me on
amacarthy85@gmail.com
I look forward to hearing from you!About the Author
Andrew Macarthy is a social media consultant from Swansea in Wales, UK.
His #1 Web Marketing Kindle Bestseller, 
500 Social Media Marketing Tips
,
has helped thousands of businesses with simple, practical advice to optimize
their social media activity and make the most of the sector's marketing
opportunities.
In his spare time, Andrew enjoys running, Nintendo videogames, acoustic
guitar, and Swansea City FC.
Any Feedback or Questions?
Email me at amacarthy85@gmail.com or contact me via my website or the
following social networks:
Website / blog: 
http://www.andrewmacarthy.com
Facebook: 
http://www.facebook.com/500socialmediatips
Twitter: 
http://www.twitter.com/andrewmacarthy
Pinterest: 
http://www.pinterest.com/andrewmacarthy
YouTube: 
http://www.youtube.com/user/500socialmediatipsOne Last Thing...
If you found this book helpful and believe it is worth sharing, would you
please take a few seconds to let your friends know about it? If it turns out to
make a difference in their lives, they’ll be forever grateful to you, as will I.
In addition, if you have a few moments now to leave a short review on the
Amazon product page, please, please do. Something that only takes you a few
moments will help me out today and for years to come.
All the best, and thank you so much for reading 
500 Social Media Marketing
Tips
.
Andrew
.