A new era of 
generative AI 
for everyone
The technology underpinning 
ChatGPT will transform work 
and reinvent businessTable of 
ContentsWelcome to AI’s new inflection point
How did we get here? | Milestones in the journey to generative AI
Consume or customize: Generative AI for everyone
A look ahead at the fast-paced evolution of technology, regulation and business
Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials
The future of AI is accelerating
Glossary and References
Authors03
04
05
08
12
19
21
22
2
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Introduction
Welcome to AI’s new inflection point 
ChatGPT has woken up the world to 
the transformative potential of artificial 
intelligence (AI), capturing global attention 
and sparking a wave of creativity rarely seen 
before. Its ability to mimic human dialogue 
and decision-making has given us AI’s first 
true inflection point in public adoption. 
Finally, everyone, everywhere can see the 
technology’s true disruptive potential for 
themselves. 
ChatGPT reached 100 million monthly 
active users just two months after launch, 
making it the fastest-growing consumer 
application in history.1A foundation model is a generic term for 
large models with billions of parameters. With 
recent advances, companies can now build 
specialized image- and language-generating 
models on top of these foundation models. 
Large language models (LLMs) are both 
a type of generative AI and a type of 
foundation model. 
The LLMs behind ChatGPT mark a significant 
turning point and milestone in artificial 
intelligence. Two things make LLMs game 
changing. First, they’ve cracked the code on 
language complexity. Now, for the first time, 
machines can learn language, context and 
intent and be independently generative and 
creative. Second, after being pre-trained 
on vast quantities of data (text, images or 
audio), these models can be adapted or fine-
tuned for a wide range of tasks. This allows 
them to be reused or repurposed in many 
different ways.Business leaders recognize the significance 
of this moment. They can see how LLMs 
and generative AI will fundamentally 
transform everything from business, to 
science, to society itself—unlocking new 
performance frontiers. The positive impact 
on human creativity and productivity will be 
massive. Consider that, across all industries, 
Accenture found 40% of all working hours 
can be impacted by LLMs like GPT-4. This 
is because language tasks account for 62% 
of the total time employees work, and 65% 
of that time can be transformed into more 
productive activity through augmentation 
and automation (see Figure 3). 
3
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |How did we 
get here? 
Milestones in the journey 
to generative AIMachine learning: Analysis and prediction phase
The first decade of the 2000s marked the rapid advance 
of various machine learning techniques that could analyze 
massive amounts of online data to draw conclusions –  
or “learn” – from the results. Since then, companies have viewed machine learning as an incredibly powerful field 
of AI for analyzing data, finding patterns, generating 
insights, making predictions and automating tasks at a 
pace and on a scale that was previously impossible.
Deep learning: Vision and speech phase
The 2010s produced advances in AI’s 
perception capabilities in the field of machine 
learning called deep learning. Breakthroughs 
in deep learning enable the computer vision that search engines and self-driving cars use 
to classify and detect objects, as well as the 
voice recognition that allows popular AI speech 
assistants to respond to users in a natural way. 
Generative AI: Enter the language-mastery phase
Building on exponential increases in the size and 
capabilities of deep learning models, the 2020s will be 
about language mastery. The GPT-4 language model, 
developed by OpenAI, marks the beginning of a new phase in the abilities of language-based AI applications. Models 
such as this will have far-reaching consequences for business, 
since language permeates everything an organization does day to 
day—its institutional knowledge, communication and processes.2
4
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Consume or 
customize: 
Generative AI 
for everyone
5
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Consume or customize: Generative AI for everyone
Consume or customize: Generative AI for everyone
Easy-to-consume generative AI applications like 
ChatGPT, DALL-E, Stable Diffusion and others are 
rapidly democratizing the technology in business 
and society. The effect on organizations will be 
profound. The ability of LLMs to process massive 
data sets allows them to potentially “know” 
everything an organization has ever known—the 
entire history, context, nuance and intent of a 
business, and its products, markets and customers. 
Anything conveyed through language (applications, 
systems, documents, emails, chats, video and audio 
recordings) can be harnessed to drive next-level 
innovation, optimization and reinvention.
97% of global executives agree AI 
foundation models will enable connections 
across data types, revolutionizing where 
and how AI is used.3We’re at a phase in the adoption cycle when 
most organizations are starting to experiment 
by consuming foundation models “off the shelf.” 
However, the biggest value for many will come 
when they customize or fine tune models using 
their own data to address their unique needs:
Consume  
Generative AI and LLM applications are ready to 
consume and easy to access. Companies can 
consume them through APIs and tailor them, to 
a small degree, for their own use cases through 
prompt engineering techniques such as prompt 
tuning and prefix learning.
Customize  
But most companies will need to customize  
models, by fine-tuning them with their own data, 
to make them widely usable and valuable. This will 
allow the models to support specific downstream 
tasks all the way across the business. The effect 
will be to increase a company’s efficacy in using 
AI to unlock new performance frontiers—elevating 
employee capabilities, delighting customers, 
introducing new business models and boosting 
responsiveness to signals of change. 
6
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Consume or customize: Generative AI for everyone
Companies will use these models to reinvent the 
way work is done. Every role in every enterprise 
has the potential to be reinvented, as humans 
working with AI co-pilots becomes the norm, 
dramatically amplifying what people can achieve. In 
any given job, some tasks will be automated, some 
will be assisted, and some will be unaffected by the 
technology. There will also be a large number of 
new tasks for humans to perform, such as ensuring 
the accurate and responsible use of new  
AI-powered systems. 
Consider the impact in these key functions:
Advising. AI models will become an ever-present 
co-pilot for every worker, boosting productivity 
by putting new kinds of hyper-personalized 
intelligence into human hands. Examples include 
customer support, sales enablement, human 
resources, medical and scientific research, 
corporate strategy and competitive intelligence. 
Large language models could be useful in 
tackling the roughly 70% of customer service 
communication that is not straightforward and 
can benefit from a conversational, powerful and 
intelligent bot, understanding a customer’s intent, 
formulate answers on its own and improve the 
accuracy and quality of answers.4Creating. Generative AI will become an essential 
creative partner for people, revealing new ways 
to reach and appeal to audiences and bringing 
unprecedented speed and innovation in areas like 
production design, design research, visual identity, 
naming, copy generation and testing, and real-
time personalization. Companies are turning to 
state-of-the-art artificial intelligence systems like 
DALL·E, Midjourney and Stable Diffusion for their 
social media visual content generation outreach. 
DALL·E, for example,  creates realistic images and 
art based on text descriptions and can process up 
to 12 billion parameters when transforming words 
into pictures. Images created can then be shared 
on Instagram and Twitter.5
Coding.  Software coders will use generative AI to 
significantly boost productivity — rapidly converting 
one programming language to another, mastering 
programming tools and methods, automating code 
writing, predicting and pre-empting problems, 
and managing system documentation. Accenture 
is piloting the use of OpenAI LLMs to enhance 
developer productivity by automatically generating 
documentation – for example, SAP configuration 
rationale and functional or technical specs. The 
solution enables users to submit requests through 
a Microsoft Teams chat as they work. Correctly 
packaged documents are then returned at speed — 
a great example of how specific tasks, rather than 
entire jobs, will be augmented and automated.Automating.  Generative AI’s sophisticated 
understanding of historical context, next 
best actions, summarization capabilities, and 
predictive intelligence will catalyze a new era 
of hyper-efficiency and hyper-personalization 
in both the back and front office—taking 
business process automation to a transformative 
new level. One multinational bank is using 
generative AI and LLMs to transform how it 
manages volumes of post-trade processing 
emails—automatically drafting messages with 
recommended actions and routing them to the 
recipient. The result is less manual effort and 
smoother interactions with customers.
Protecting. In time, generative AI will support 
enterprise governance and information security, 
protecting against fraud, improving regulatory 
compliance, and proactively identifying 
risk by drawing cross-domain connections 
and inferences both within and outside the 
organization. In strategic cyber defense, LLMs 
could offer useful capabilities, such as explaining 
malware and quickly classifying websites.6 
In the short term, however, organizations can 
expect criminals to capitalize on generative AI’s 
capabilities to generate malicious code or write 
the perfect phishing email.7
7
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |A look ahead at the  
fast-paced evolution  
of technology,  
regulation and  
business
8
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |A look ahead at the fast-paced evolution of technology, regulation and business 
A look ahead at the fast-paced evolution of technology, regulation and business 
Moments like this don’t come around often. 
The coming years will see outsized investment 
in generative AI, LLMs and foundation models. 
What’s unique about this evolution is that the 
technology, regulation, and business adoption 
are all accelerating exponentially at the same 
time. In previous innovation curves, the 
technology typically outpaced both adoption 
and regulation. 
The technology stack
The complex technology underpinning 
generative AI is expected to evolve rapidly 
at each layer. This has broad business 
implications. Consider that the amount of 
compute needed to train the largest AI models 
has grown exponentially – now doubling 
between every 3.4 to 10 months, according to 
various reports.8 Cost and carbon emissions 
are therefore central considerations in 
adopting energy-intensive generative AI. Figure 1: Each layer of the generative AI tech stack will rapidly evolve
Applications: Generative AI and LLMs will be increasingly 
accessible to users in the cloud via APIs and by being embedded 
directly into other applications. Companies will consume them 
as they are or will customize and fine-tune them with proprietary 
data. 
Fine-tuning: The importance of model fine-tuning will create 
demand for a multidisciplinary set of skills spanning software 
engineering, psychology, linguistics, art history, literature and 
library science.
Foundation models: The market will rapidly mature and diversify 
as more pre-trained models emerge. New model designs will 
offer more choices for balancing size, transparency, versatility and 
performance. 
Data: Improving the maturity of the enterprise data lifecycle 
will become a prerequisite for success – requiring mastery of 
new data, new data types and immense volumes. Generative AI 
features within modern data platforms will emerge, enhancing 
adoption at scale.
Infrastructure: Cloud infrastructure will be essential for deploying 
generative AI while managing costs and carbon emissions. Data 
centers will need retrofitting. New chipset architectures, hardware 
innovations, and efficient algorithms will also play a critical role.“The hottest new programming 
platform is the napkin.”  
 
Paul Daugherty, Accenture Group Chief Executive 
& Chief Technology Officer  
 
Referring to the use of OpenAI to generate a working website 
from a napkin drawing
9
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |A look ahead at the fast-paced evolution of technology, regulation and business 
The risk and regulatory environment 
Companies will have thousands of ways to 
apply generative AI and foundation models 
to maximize efficiency and drive competitive 
advantage. Understandably, they’ll want to get 
started as soon as possible. But an enterprise-
wide strategy needs to account for all the 
variants of AI and associated technologies they 
intend to use, not only generative AI and large 
language models. 
ChatGPT raises important questions about the 
responsible use of AI. The speed of technology 
evolution and adoption requires companies 
to pay close attention to any legal, ethical and 
reputational risks they may be incurring. 
It’s critical that generative AI technologies, 
including ChatGPT, are responsible and 
compliant by design, and that models and 
applications do not create unacceptable risk 
for the business. Accenture was a pioneer in 
the responsible use of technology including 
the responsible use of AI in its Code of 
Business Ethics from 2017. Responsible AI is the 
practice of designing, building and deploying 
AI in accordance with clear principles to 
empower businesses, respect people, and 
benefit society — allowing companies to 
engender trust in AI and to scale AI with 
confidence.AI systems need to be “raised” with a diverse 
and inclusive set of inputs so that they reflect 
the broader business and societal norms of 
responsibility, fairness and transparency. When 
AI is designed and put into practice within an 
ethical framework, it accelerates the potential 
for responsible collaborative intelligence, 
where human ingenuity converges with 
intelligent technology. 
This creates a foundation for trust with 
consumers, the workforce, and society, and 
can boost business performance and unlock 
new sources of growth. Figure 2: Key risk and regulatory questions for generative AI
Intellectual property: How will the business protect its own 
IP? And how will it prevent the inadvertent breach of third-party 
copyright in using pre-trained foundation models?
Data privacy and security: How will upcoming laws like 
the EU AI Act be incorporated in the way data is handled, 
processed, protected, secured and used?
Discrimination: Is the company using or creating tools 
that need to factor in anti-discrimination or anti-bias 
considerations?
Product liability: What health and safety mechanisms need 
to be put in place before a generative AI-based product is 
taken to market?
Trust: What level of transparency should be provided to 
consumers and employees? How can the business ensure the 
accuracy of generative AI outputs and maintain user confidence?
Identity: When establishing proof-of-personhood depends on voice 
or facial recognition, how will verification methods be enhanced and 
improved? What will be the consequences of its misuse?
10
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |A look ahead at the fast-paced evolution of technology, regulation and business 
The scale of adoption in business
Companies must reinvent work to find 
a path to generative AI value. Business 
leaders must lead the change, starting 
now, in job redesign, task redesign and 
reskilling people. Ultimately, every role 
in an enterprise has the potential to 
be reinvented, once today’s jobs are 
decomposed into tasks that can be 
automated or assisted and reimagined for 
a new future of human + machine work.
Generative AI will disrupt work as 
we know it today, introducing a new 
dimension of human and AI collaboration 
in which most workers will have a “co-
pilot,” radically changing how work is 
done and what work is done. Nearly 
every job will be impacted – some will 
be eliminated, most will be transformed, 
and many new jobs will be created. 
Organizations that take steps now to 
decompose jobs into tasks, and invest 
in training people to work differently, 
alongside machines, will define new 
performance frontiers and have a big leg 
up on less imaginative competitors.
Nearly 6 in 10 organizations 
plan to use ChatGPT for learning 
purposes and over half are 
planning pilot cases in 2023. 
Over 4 in 10 want to make a 
large investment.954%
48%
36%
40%
43%
33%
34%
31%
28%
30%
26%
30%
26%
28%
27%
25%
26%
24%
24%
20%12%
14%
21%
14%
9%
13%
7%
9%
11%
9%
13%
6%
8%
6%
6%
8%
6%
6%
5%
5%24%
26%
28%
29%
14%
21%
12%
22%
33%
35%
20%
13%
16%
15%
15%
17%
14%
13%
14%
11%10%
12%
15%
18%
34%
33%
46%
38%
27%
26%
41%
50%
50%
50%
52%
50%
54%
57%
56%
64%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Banking
Insurance
Software & Platforms
Capital markets
Energy
Com munications & Media
Retail
Industry Average
Health
Public Service
Aerospace & Defense
Automotive
High Tech
Travel
Utilities
Life Sciences
Industrial
Consumer Goods & Services
Chemicals
Natural ResourcesFigure 3: Generative AI will transform work across industries
Work time distribution by industry 
and potential AI impact
Based on their employment levels in the US in 2021
40% of working hours across 
industries can be impacted by 
Large Language Models (LLMs)
Why is this the case? Language tasks account for 62% of total worked time 
in the US. Of the overall share of language tasks, 65% have high potential 
to be automated or augmented by LLMs. 
Source: Accenture Research based on analysis of Occupational 
Information Network (O*NET), US Dept. of Labor; US Bureau of 
Labor Statistics.
Notes: We manually identified 200 tasks related to language (out 
of 332 included in BLS), which were linked to industries using their 
share in each occupation and the occupations’ employment level 
in each industry. Tasks with higher potential for automation can 
be transformed by LLMs with reduced involvement from a human 
worker. Tasks with higher potential for augmentation are those in 
which LLMs would need more involvement from human workers.Higher potential for 
automationHigher potential for 
augmentationLower potential for 
augmentation or 
automationNon-language
tasks
11
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the 
generative AI era:  
Six adoption 
essentials
12
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials
Dive in, with a 
business-driven 
mindsetTake a people-
first approach Get your 
proprietary  
data ready Invest in a 
sustainable tech 
foundationAccelerate 
ecosystem 
innovation Level-up your 
responsible AI
6
5
4
3
2
1
13
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials1Dive in, with a business-driven mindset
Even when new innovations have obvious advantages, 
diffusing them across an organization can be challenging, 
especially if the innovation is disruptive to current ways of 
working. By experimenting with generative AI capabilities, 
companies will develop the early successes, change agents 
and opinion leaders needed to boost acceptance and spread 
the innovation further, kick-starting the transformation and 
reskilling agenda. 
Organizations must take a dual approach to experimentation. 
One, focused on low-hanging fruit opportunities using 
consumable models and applications to realize quick returns. 
The other, focused on reinvention of business, customer 
engagement and prodicts and services using models that are 
customized with the organization’s data. A business-driven 
mindset is key to define, and successfully deliver on, the 
business case.
As they experiment and explore reinvention opportunities, 
they’ll reap tangible value while learning more about which 
types of AI are most suited to different use cases, since the 
level of investment and sophistication required will differ 
based on the use case. They’ll also be able to test and 
improve their approaches to data privacy, model accuracy, 
bias and fairness with care, and learn when “human in the 
loop” safeguards are necessary.
98% of global executives agree AI foundation 
models will play an important role in their 
organizations’ strategies in the next 3 to 5 years.10A bank uses enhanced search to equip 
employees with the right information
As part of its three-year innovation plan, 
a large European banking group saw an 
opportunity to transform its knowledge 
base, empower its people with access to 
the right information, and advance its goal 
of becoming a data-driven bank. Using 
Microsoft’s Azure platform and a GPT-
3 LLM to search electronic documents, 
users can get quick answers to their 
questions — saving time while improving 
accuracy and compliance. The project, 
which included employee upskilling, is 
the first of four that will apply generative 
AI to the areas of contract management, 
conversational reporting and ticket 
classification.
14
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials
2Take a people-first approach 
Success with generative  
AI requires an equal attention on 
people and training as it does on 
technology. Companies should 
therefore dramatically ramp up 
investment in talent to address 
two distinct challenges: creating 
AI and using AI. This means 
both building talent in technical 
competencies like AI engineering 
and enterprise architecture 
and training people across the 
organization to work effectively 
with AI-infused processes. In our 
analysis across 22 job categories, 
for example, we found that 
LLMs will impact every category, 
ranging from 9% of a workday at 
the low end to 63% at the high 
end. More than half of working 
hours in 5 of the 22 occupations 
can be transformed by LLMs. Figure 4: Generative AI will transform work across every job category
57%
49%
28%
45%
25%
27%
21%
33%
31%
30%
29%
22%
29%
27%
29%
23%
25%
23%
15%
16%
8%
14%
9%6%
13%
32%
14%
26%
20%
24%
9%
9%
9%
8%
15%
7%
8%
6%
8%
5%
4%
4%
1%
8%
2%
0%14%
14%
23%
35%
26%
25%
25%
58%
22%
44%
31%
40%
59%
31%
23%
50%
9%
7%
7%
9%
17%
8%
7%23%
24%
17%
6%
22%
28%
30%
0%
38%
17%
32%
22%
6%
34%
43%
19%
61%
66%
75%
75%
66%
76%
84%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%Office and Administrative Support
Sales and Related
Computer and Mathematical
Business and Financial Operations
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media
Life, Physical, and Social Science
Architecture and Engineer ing
Legal
Occcup ation Average
Mana gement
Personal Care and Service
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical
Commu nity and Social Service
Healthcare Support
Protective Service
Educational Instruction and Library
Food Preparation and Serving Related
Transportation and Material Moving
Construction and Extraction
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair
Farming, Fishing , and Forestry
Production
Building and Grounds Cleaning and MaintenanceWork time distribution by major 
occupation and potential AI impact
Based on their employment levels in the US in 2021
In 5 out of 22 occupation 
groups, Generative AI can 
affect more than half of all 
hours worked
Source: Accenture Research based on analysis of Occupational 
Information Network (O*NET), US Dept. of Labor; US Bureau of Labor 
Statistics.
Notes: We manually identified 200 tasks related to language (out 
of 332 included in BLS), which were linked to industries using their 
share in each occupation and the occupations’ employment level 
in each job category. Tasks with higher potential for automation can 
be transformed by LLMs with reduced involvement from a human 
worker. Tasks with higher potential for augmentation are those in 
which LLMs would need more involvement from human workers.Higher potential for 
automationHigher potential for 
augmentationLower potential for 
augmentation or 
automationNon-language
tasks
15
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials
2In fact, independent economic research indicates that 
companies are significantly underinvesting in helping 
workers keep up with advances in AI, which require 
more cognitively complex and judgment-based tasks.11 
Even domain experts who understand how to apply 
data in the real world (a doctor interpreting health data, 
for example) will need enough technical knowledge of 
how these models work to have confidence in using 
them as a “workmate.” 
There will also be entirely new roles to recruit, including 
linguistics experts, AI quality controllers, AI editors, 
and prompt engineers. In areas where generative 
AI shows most promise, companies should start by 
decomposing existing jobs into underlying bundles of 
tasks. Then assess the extent to which generative AI 
might affect each task — fully automated, augmented, 
or unaffected.Figure 5: Reinventing a customer service job, task by task
To assess how specific jobs will be reinvented with AI, an Accenture analysis decomposed 
one customer service job into 13 component tasks. We found: 
4tasks would continue to be performed 
primarily by humans, with low potential 
for automation or augmentation.
4tasks could be fully automated — 
such as gathering, classifying, and 
summarizing information on why a 
customer is contacting the company. 
5tasks could be augmented to help 
humans work more effectively — such 
as using an AI summary to provide a 
rapid solution with a human touch.
Importantly, new job tasks might also be needed to ensure the safe, accurate and responsible use of 
AI in customer service settings, such as providing unbiased information on products and pricing. 
16
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials3Get your proprietary data ready  
Customizing foundation models will require 
access to domain-specific organizational data, 
semantics, knowledge, and methodologies. In the 
pre-generative AI era, companies could still get 
value from AI without having modernized their 
data architecture and estate by taking a use-case 
centric approach to AI. That’s no longer the case. 
Foundation models need vast amounts of curated 
data to learn and that makes solving the data 
challenge an urgent priority for every business. 
Companies need a strategic and disciplined 
approach to acquiring, growing, refining, 
safeguarding and deploying data. Specifically, they 
need a modern enterprise data platform built on 
cloud with a trusted, reusable set of data products. 
Because these platforms are cross-functional, with 
enterprise-grade analytics and data housed in cloud-
based warehouses or data lakes, data is able to break 
free from organizational silos and democratized for 
use across an organization. All business data can 
then be analyzed together in one place or through a 
distributed computing strategy, such as a data mesh. 
Read more on the practices data-mature 
companies are using to maximize enterprise 
data value: A new dawn for dormant data: 
Unleash the intrinsic value of enterprise 
data with a strong digital core on cloud.4Invest in a sustainable tech foundation
Companies need to consider whether they have the 
right technical infrastructure, architecture, operating 
model and governance structure to meet the high 
compute demands of LLMs and generative AI, while 
keeping a close eye on cost and sustainable energy 
consumption. They’ll need ways to assess the cost 
and benefit of using these technologies versus other 
AI or analytical approaches that might be better 
suited to particular use cases, while also being 
several times less expensive.
As the use of AI increases, so will the carbon 
emissions produced by the underlying infrastructure. 
Companies need a robust green software 
development framework that considers energy 
efficiency and material emissions at all stages of the 
software development lifecycle. AI can also play a 
broader role in making business more sustainable 
and achieving ESG goals. Of the companies we 
surveyed that successfully reduced emissions in 
production and operations, 70% used AI to do it.12 
17
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Embrace the generative AI era: Six adoption essentials5Accelerate ecosystem innovation 
Creating a foundation model can be a complex, 
compute-intensive and costly exercise. And for 
all but the very largest global companies, doing it 
entirely on their own will be beyond their means 
and capabilities. The good news is that there is a 
burgeoning ecosystem to call on, with substantial 
investments by cloud hyperscalers, big tech players, 
and start-ups. Global investment in AI startups 
and scale-ups is estimated to exceed $50 billion in 
2023 alone.13 These partners bring best practices 
honed over many years, and can provide valuable 
insights into using foundation models efficiently 
and effectively in specific use cases. Having the 
right network of partners—including technology 
companies, professional services firms and academic 
institutions—will be key to navigating rapid change.6Level-up your responsible AI 
The rapid adoption of generative AI brings fresh urgency 
to the need for every organization to have a robust 
responsible AI compliance regime in place. This includes 
controls for assessing the potential risk of generative AI 
use cases at the design stage and a means to embed 
responsible AI approaches throughout the business. 
Accenture’s research suggests most companies still 
have a long way to go. Our 2022 survey of 850 senior 
executives globally revealed widespread recognition 
of the importance of responsible AI and AI regulation. 
But only 6 percent of organisations felt they had a fully 
robust responsible AI foundation in place.
An organization’s responsible AI principles should be 
defined and led from the top and translated into an 
effective governance structure for risk management 
and compliance, both with organizational principles 
and policies and applicable laws and regulations. 
Responsible AI must be CEO-led, beginning with a focus 
on training and awareness and then expanding to focus 
on execution and compliance. Accenture was one of the 
first to take this approach to Responsible AI years ago, 
with a CEO-led agenda, and now a formal compliance 
program. Our own experience shows that a principles-
driven compliance approach provides guardrails while 
being flexible enough to evolve with the fast pace 
of changing technology, ensuring companies aren’t 
constantly playing “catch up.” 
To be responsible by design, organizations need to move 
from a reactive compliance strategy to the proactive 
development of mature Responsible AI capabilities 
through a framework that includes principles and 
governance; risk, policy and control; technology and 
enablers and culture and training. 
18
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |The future of AI  
is accelerating
19
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |The future of AI is accelerating
This is a pivotal moment. For several years, 
generative AI and foundation models have been 
quietly revolutionizing the way we think about 
machine intelligence. Now, thanks to ChatGPT, 
the whole world has woken up to the possibilities 
this creates. 
While artificial general intelligence (AGI) remains 
a distant prospect, the speed of development 
continues to be breathtaking. We’re at the start of 
an incredibly exciting era that will fundamentally 
transform the way information is accessed, 
content is created, customer needs are served, 
and businesses are run. 
Embedded into the enterprise digital core, 
generative AI, LLMs, and foundation models will 
optimize tasks, augment human capabilities, and 
open up new avenues for growth. In the process, 
these technologies will create an entirely new 
language for enterprise reinvention. Businesses are right to be optimistic about the 
potential of generative AI to radically change how 
work get done and what services and products 
they can create. They also need to be realistic 
about the challenges that come with profoundly 
rethinking how the organization works, with 
implications for IT, organization, culture, and 
responsibility by design.
Companies need to invest as much in evolving 
operations and training people as they do in 
technology. Radically rethinking how work gets 
done, and helping people keep up with technology-
driven change, will be two of the most important 
factors in realizing the full potential of this step-
change in AI technology. 
Now’s the time for companies to use 
breakthrough advances in AI to set new 
performance frontiers—redefining themselves 
and the industries in which they operate.
20
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Glossary
ChatGPT is a generative AI chatbot interface built on top of OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 
large language model (see below). ChatGPT (and ChatGPT plus, which uses 
GPT-4) allows users to interact with the underlying AI in a way that seems 
remarkably accurate and feels surprisingly human. You can ask it to explain 
a subject, write an essay, run a calculation, generate some Python code, or 
simply have a conversation. 
Generative AI is the umbrella term for the ground-breaking form of creative 
artificial intelligence that can produce original content on demand. Rather 
than simply analyzing or classifying existing data, generative AI is able to 
create something entirely new, whether text, images, audio, synthetic data, or 
more. 
Foundation models are complex machine learning systems trained on vast 
quantities of data (text, images, audio, or a mix of data types) on a massive 
scale. The power of these systems lies not only in their size but also in the fact 
they can quickly be adapted or fine-tuned for a wide range of downstream 
tasks. Examples of foundation models include BERT, DALL-E, and GPT-4.
Large Language Models (LLMs) represent a subset of foundation models 
that are trained specifically on text sources. GPT-3, for instance, was trained 
on almost 500 billion words from millions of websites.14  
Its successor, GPT-4, can take image as well as text as inputs.
Fine-tuning is the process by which foundation models are adapted for 
specific downstream tasks using a particular dataset. That can include 
everything from the hyper-specific (training a model to compose emails 
based on your personal writing style) to the enterprise level (training an LLM 
on enterprise data to transform a company’s ability to access and analyze its 
core intelligence).
Data is the fundamental bedrock of generative AI. Not only in training 
foundation models themselves, but also in fine-tuning those models to 
perform specific tasks. In an enterprise context, examples might include 
everything from legacy code to real-time operational data to customer 
insights.References
1. ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base - analyst note, Reuters, February 2023  
https://www.reuters.com/technology/chatgpt-sets-record-fastest-growing-user-base-analyst-note-2023-02-01/
2. The Next Big Breakthrough in AI Will Be Around Language, Harvard Business Review, September, 2020  
https://hbr.org/2020/09/the-next-big-breakthrough-in-ai-will-be-around-language
3. Accenture Tech Vision 2023 
4. ChatGPT Is Coming to a Customer Service Chatbot Near You, Forbes, January 2023  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/rashishrivastava/2023/01/09/chatgpt-is-coming-to-a-customer-service-chatbot-near-
you/?sh=730eeab97eca
5. How AI Transforms Social Media, Forbes, March 2023  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2023/03/16/how-ai-transforms-social-media/?sh=739221ca1f30
6. Large AI Models have Real Security Benefits, Dark Reading, August, 2022  
https://www.darkreading.com/dr-tech/large-language-ai-models-have-real-security-benefits
7. OPWNAI: Cybercriminals starting to use ChatGPT, Checkpoint Research, January, 2023  
https://research.checkpoint.com/2023/opwnai-cybercriminals-starting-to-use-chatgpt/
8. Accenture Technology Vision 2023
9. CXO Pulse Survey, conducted by Accenture Research, February 2023
10. Accenture Technology Vision 2023
11. The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies - American Economic Association (aeaweb.org)
12. Uniting technology and sustainability, Accenture, May, 2022  
Technology Sustainability Key to ESG Goals | Accenture
13. Pace Of Artificial Intelligence Investments Slows, But AI Is Still Hotter Than Ever, Forbes, October, 2022  
https://www.forbes.com//sites/joemckendrick/2022/10/15/pace-of-artificial-intelligence-investments-slows-but-ai-is-still-hotter-than-
ever/?sh=853d8124c76c
14. OpenAI’s GPT-3 Language Model: A Technical Overview, Lambda, June, 2020  
https://lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3
21
A new era of generative AI for everyone  |Authors
Paul Daugherty
Group Chief Executive &  
Chief Technology OfficerBhaskar Ghosh
Chief Strategy Officer,  
Accenture Karthik Narain
Lead – Accenture Cloud First
Lan Guan
Lead – Cloud First, Data & AIJim Wilson
Global Managing Director – Thought 
Leadership & Technology ResearchThe authors would like to acknowledge 
Tomas Castagnino, Elise Cornille,  
Ray Eitel-Porter, Linda King,  
Amy Sagues, Ezequiel Tacsir and 
Denise Zheng for their contributions.
About Accenture
Accenture is a leading global professional services company 
that helps the world’s leading businesses, governments and 
other organizations build their digital core, optimize their 
operations, accelerate revenue growth and enhance citizen 
services—creating tangible value at speed and scale. We are a 
talent and innovation led company with 738,000 people serving 
clients in more than 120 countries. Technology is at the core of 
change today, and we are one of the world’s leaders in helping 
drive that change, with strong ecosystem relationships. We 
combine our strength in technology with unmatched industry 
experience, functional expertise and global delivery capability. 
We are uniquely able to deliver tangible outcomes because 
of our broad range of services, solutions and assets across 
Strategy & Consulting, Technology, Operations, Industry X and 
Accenture Song. These capabilities, together with our culture 
of shared success and commitment to creating 360° value, 
enable us to help our clients succeed and build trusted, lasting 
relationships. We measure our success by the 360° value we 
create for our clients, each other, our shareholders, partners and 
communities. Visit us at www.accenture.com.Contact us
For more information, contact the Accenture Generative AI/
Large Language Model Center of Excellence at:  
LLMCoE@accenture.com.
Copyright © 2023 Accenture. All rights reserved.  
Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture
Disclaimer: This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our professional advisors. This document refers to marks owned by third 
parties. All such third-party marks are the property of their respective owners. No sponsorship, endorsement or approval of this content by the owners of such marks is intended, expressed or implied.