Advancing from practice to performance
From insights to action, the path to extraor dinary v alue s tarts here. 
The art of AI maturity
Contents
AI maturity:  
Why it matters
05Appendix Practice  
makes  progressAI maturity:  What it is
 
08 13 17 29 35AI Achievers  advance from practice to performanceHow AI Achievers master their craft
 2
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceComputer scientist John McCarthy  
coined the term “artificial intelligence” in 1955, proposing that, “every aspect of learning … can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it."
1 
Today, so much of what we take for granted in our daily lives stems from machine learning. Every time you use a wayfinding app to get from point A to point B, use dictation to convert speech to text, or unlock your phone using face ID ... you're relying on AI. And companies across industries are also relying on—and investing in—AI to drive logistics, improve customer service, increase efficiency, empower employees and so much more. Despite these ever-expanding use cases, when it comes to making the most of AI’s full potential and their own investments, most organizations are barely scratching the surface. 
In fact, only 12% of firms have 
advanced their AI maturity enough to achieve superior growth and business transformation, according to Accenture’s extensive analysis of approximately 1,200 companies globally. We call them the  “AI Achievers.”
Another 25% of firms are somewhat 
advanced in their level of AI maturity, while the remaining 63% (the majority) are still mostly testing the waters.This journey to AI maturity has been in high gear for years. Pre-pandemic (2019), AI Achievers already enjoyed 50% greater revenue growth on average, compared with their peers. And in 2021, among executives of the world’s 2,000 largest companies (by market capitalization), those who discussed AI on their earnings calls were 40% more likely to see their firms’ share prices increase—up from 23%  
in 2018, according to analysis by Accenture.
12%  
of firms have 
advanced their  
AI maturity enough to a
chieve superior 
performance and growth.Executive summary
In fewer than 70 years, artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved from a  
scientific concept to a societal constant. 
63%  
of firms are still  
testing the AI waters.
 3
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceWhile there’s clearly a science to AI, our findings demonstrate there is also an art to  
AI maturity. Achievers are not defined by the sophistication of any one capability,  but by their ability to combine strengths across strategy, processes and people. 
Here are five ways AI Achievers master their craft:
 
1.  Their top leaders champion AI as a str ategic priority  
for the entire organization.
2.  They in
vest heavily in talent to get more from their  
AI investments.
3.  They industrializ
e AI tools and teams to create  
a strong AI core.
4.  They de
sign AI responsibly, from the start. 
5.  They prioritiz
e long- and short-term AI investments. 
Our machine learning models suggest that the share of AI Achievers will increase  
rapidly and significantly, more than doubling from the current 12% to 27% by 2024. 
In short, advancing AI maturity is no longer a choice. It’s an opportunity facing every 
industry, every organization and every leader. What do AI Achievers do differently?
 4
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAI maturity: Why it mattersThe art of AI maturitySource: Accenture Research
Note: Our estimate is derived from a natural language processing analysis of investor calls of 
the world’s 2,000 largest companies (by market cap), from 2010 to 2021, that referenced “AI” and “Digital” in tandem with “business transformation,” respectively. Data was sourced from S&P earnings transcripts.AI maturity: Why it matters
So, it’s no surprise that in 2021, 46%   
of CEOs (
of the world’s 2,000 largest 
companies by market capitalization) 
mentioned AI on their earnings calls.2  
Our survey of over 1,600 C-suite executives and data-science leaders from the world’s largest organizations found that nearly 75% of companies have integrated AI into their business strategies and reworked their cloud plans to achieve AI success. 
And companies are putting those plans 
into practice: Nearly a third (30%) of all AI pilot initiatives are subsequently scaled to deliver wide-ranging outcomes, from accelerating R&D timelines for new products to enhancing customer experiences. The companies leading the way are already seeing the results—42% said that the return on their AI initiatives exceeded their expectations, while only 1% said the return didn’t meet expectations. 
AI, accelerated
With early successes building confidence in AI as a value-driver, we estimate that AI transformation will happen much faster than digital transformation—on average,  16 months faster (Figure 1).Figure 1: W e project that AI transformation will take less time than digital transformation
There is a growing consensus that AI is absolutely 
essential to competitive advantage. 
 6
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceFigure 2:  Evolution of companies' AI-influenced revenue share from 2018 to 2024* The incentiv e to move quickly is strong. 
We found, for example, that the share of 
companies’ revenue that is “AI-influenced” more than doubled between 2018 and 2021 and is expected to roughly triple between 2018 and 2024 (Figure 2).
Given the evidence, it’s easy to see 
why companies plan to increase and accelerate their AI investments. In 2021, 19% of companies dedicated >30% of their tech budgets to AI development. By 2024, 49% of companies intend to.
 
Source: Accenture Research 
Note: *2024 = projectedNote: Color indicates the achieved AI-influenced revenue threshold within each time period. 
*Definition of “AI-influenced” revenues:  
 
a. Sale
s of existing products and services made possible through better AI-driven insights on customers, supply chain, channels  ; b. Sale
s 
of new products and services made possible by human + AI  , c.
 Higher prices through dynamic pricing ML algorithms. These sales include 
some cannibalization and net new revenues. In contrast, this definition is excluding higher efficiencies in production operations thanks to AI.  
 7
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAI maturity: What it isThe art of AI maturityAI maturity: What it is
To uncover strategies for AI success, 
Accenture designed a holistic AI-maturity framework. Fittingly, our analysis itself was conducted using AI. 
We applied machine learning models 
to unravel massive survey datasets and uncover drivers of AI maturity that would have been impossible to detect using more traditional analytical methods  (more on the methodology in  the Appendix). 
 
Our re
search found that AI maturity 
comes down to mastering a set of key capabilities in the right combinations—not only in data and AI, but also in organizational strategy, talent and culture—to give companies a strong competitive advantage. (See pages 36 and 37 for key capability descriptions.) 
 
This includes f
oundational AI 
capabilities—like cloud platforms and tools, data platforms, architecture and governance—that are required to keep pace with competitors. It also includes “differentiation” AI capabilities, like AI strategy and C-suite sponsorship, combined with a culture of innovation  that can set companies apart.If most organizations are racing to embrace AI, why 
are some seeing more value than others?
AI maturity measures the 
degree to which organizations have mastered AI-related capabilities in the right combination to achieve high performance for customers, shareholders and employees.
 9
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceSource: Accenture Research analysis based on a sample of 1,200 companies Figure 3:  Onl y 12% of organizations are AI Achievers The companies that scored best  
in both categories are the AI Achievers.  AI Builders show strong foundational capabilities and average differentiation capabilities, while AI Innovators show strong differentiation capabilities and average foundational capabilities.
Achievers, Builders and Innovators 
collectively represent just 37% of surveyed organizations—Achievers accounted for 12%, Builders for 12% and Innovators for 13% (Figure 3). 
A fourth group we’re calling AI 
Experimenters—those with average capabilities in both categories—make up the majority (63%) of those surveyed. 
 10
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceSource: Accenture Research 
Note: *2024 = estimated scores. Industries’ AI maturity scores represent  
the arithmetic average of their respective Foundational and Differentiation index. Figure 4: Levels of AI maturity by industry, 2021 and 2024* For the world’s 2,000 largest firms by 
market cap, the percentage of Achievers was even smaller: 10%. These numbers suggest that large firms may struggle to make the large foundational and cultural shifts needed to become AI Achievers.
Taken together, Achievers, Builders and 
Innovators tend to have more resources (such as technology, talent and patents) to deliver on their AI visions and to transform their organizations. Examples can be found across a wide range of industries: healthcare, financial services, life sciences, utilities, retail, energy  and more.
AI, applied
While industries like tech are currently far ahead in their respective AI maturity, the gap will likely narrow considerably by 2024 (Figure 4). Automotive is betting on a big surge in sales of AI-powered self-driving vehicles. Aerospace and defense firms anticipate continued demand for AI-enabled remote systems. And the life sciences industry will expand its use of AI in efficient drug development. Still, there is enormous room for growth in AI adoption across all industries and an enormous opportunity for those organizations that choose to seize it. 
For industry laggards like financial 
services and healthcare, a range of  factors may be contributing to their relatively low AI maturity—including  legal and regulatory challenges, inadequate AI infrastructure and a shortage of AI-trained workers.
 11
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performance• One food delivery service uses deep 
learning to guide drivers to the best delivery routes. AI models analyze more than 2,000 variables, from the latest food ordering trends to traffic conditions, to make real-time recommendations.
• A large chemicals and energy firm is using drones and AI-powered computer vision to monitor its equipment and remote locations.  The upshot: More frequent inspections at lower cost to the company and fewer safety risks for  its maintenance workers. 
• A Middle East-based telco uses AI-driven virtual assistants—which can communicate in different Arab dialects as well as in English—to deftly handle some 1.65 million customer calls each month. • A large Australian telco deployed AI to quantify the effectiveness of its individual marketing initiatives. The firm was able to measure some 4,000 different marketing metrics and, in the process, has created a world-class marketing performance insights capability, with a range of strategic and tactical applications. The telco is using insights gained from Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM) to optimize the allocation of marketing spend, messaging and media.
• A leading solar-panel installer is using satellite photos and deep-learning algorithms to create fully automated rooftop-installation plans and price estimates. In addition to offering end customers an industry-first ability to self-design their systems, the company expects its AI-led design efforts to ultimately lower the firm’s sales costs by 25%.• In the public sector, Metro de Madrid, one of the world’s oldest urban rail systems, deployed AI algorithms to sift through mountains of data—on everything from air temperature at individual stations, to train frequency and passenger patterns, to electricity prices—to reduce its annual energy intake  by 25%.
• A major US-based beverage bottler used AI to consolidate data sources and measure the effect of promotions on different retailers and markets, boosting the bottler’s annual sales  by 3%. AI, applied across industries
 12 The art o f AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAI Achievers advance from 
practice to performanceThe art of AI maturityFigure 5: AI Achievers outperform in nearly all capabilities
Pre-pandemic (2019), they already enjoyed 
50% greater revenue growth on average, versus their peers. And today, they’re 3.5 times more likely than Experimenters to see their AI-influenced revenue surpass 30% of their total revenues.
These companies are going above 
and beyond, deploying AI solutions to solve problems, spot opportunities and outperform their peers. What sets the AI Achievers apart?
Mastery of multitasking
When compared with all other groups, AI Achievers demonstrate high performance across a combination of capabilities. They are not defined by the sophistication of any one individual capability, but  by their ability to combine strengths across strategy, processes and  people (Figure 5). 
By comparison, Innovators typically  
excel at securing senior sponsorship and embrace training for all employees, but they lack the foundational capabilities required to support AI at scale. 
Builders, on the other hand, excel  
at creating data and AI platforms, but  they tend to be weaker at cultivating AI fluency and the innovation culture that  is needed to drive adoption. AI Achievers advance from  
practice to performance
AI Achievers thrive when it comes to traditional 
performance metrics.
Source: Accenture Research
Note: Each square represents one of the 17 key capabilities. The square is filled in when the AI profile is 
outperforming against peers (higher than the average across all companies in terms of % of companies reaching the mature level).
14
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performance
Figure 6: Achievers excel at turning AI pilots into production
Source: Accenture Research 
Note: Score 0-100, ranging from 0 = AI use case not started, 50 = AI use in early stage, 100 = having AI programs in place for 
full productization. The chart shows the average scores for AI use cases of different functions, between Achievers and other firms. Those differences are statistically significant after controlling for industry, geography and company size; see Appendix for more details.Turning pilots into production
Achievers have largely moved beyond the AI investment 
“tipping point,” going from experimenting with new AI in isolation to applying AI at scale to solve critical business problems (Figure 6). Achievers are 25% more likely to  scale AI pilots across the enterprise compared  with Experimenters.
Take product development as an example: Procter 
& Gamble (P&G) uses “explainable AI” algorithms to harness its proprietary data and formulation models and recommend product improvements. If, for example, the company wants to increase the foam in its dishwashing liquid without changing the price, in-house software developers can now ask the explainable AI to recommend a replacement ingredient. If, however, that new ingredient modifies the liquid’s color, developers can then instruct the AI to search for a new ingredient—and so on and so forth. 
P&G also relies on AI to generate product formulations 
that are more likely to perform as expected, resulting in less physical testing of new products. The payoff is lower product-development costs, as well as the ability to better tailor products for specific markets and launch them faster.
15
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceFocusing beyond 
financial metrics 
Achievers also develop strong 
relationships with customers—by  building trust, reducing churn and boosting the quality and safety of offerings. Our stakeholder performance model showed with high statistical significance that Achievers score 8% higher than Experimenters on customer experience (see Appendix for more  on methodology).
Additionally, they double down on their 
commitment to sustainability by, for instance, rigorously measuring and reducing their greenhouse gas emissions, consuming water and other natural resources more economically and  using AI responsibly. 
Accenture’s Sustainable Technology 
survey of more than 500 multinational companies found that of the surveyed firms that managed to reduce emissions from their operations, 70% used AI to achieve those reductions. Likewise, of the surveyed companies that made strides in measuring and disclosing their carbon footprints more transparently, 75% used AI to make such progress. 
One US-based utility company conducts 
remote monitoring of its extensive grid infrastructure via satellites, drones and other surveillance tools. With the help of advanced analytics, machine learning and computer vision, the company is able to quickly identify and prioritize areas for maintenance, improve public safety and mitigate the effects of climate change.
The stakeholder performance  
model revealed the value-creation gap between Achievers and other companies is significant when it comes to sustainability.
16
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceThe art of AI maturity
Five success factors
How AI Achievers 
master their craftHow AI Achievers 
master their craft  
It’s worth noting that the potential for 
AI-mature organizations will evolve along with the technology itself. High performance today will ultimately become business-as-usual tomorrow.
 
Toda
y’s AI Achievers have set the standard 
and are poised to remain leaders. While there is clearly a science to AI, they’ve shown us there is also an art to AI maturity.
 
They ha
ve demonstrated that excellence 
in areas like vision and culture are just as critical as algorithmic integrity. Our research uncovered five key success factors for AI Achievers.
 
 18
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceCompanies can create strong AI 
strategies, but unless those strategies receive enthusiastic support from the CEO and the rest of the C-suite, they’re likely to flounder, competing with other initiatives for attention and resources. 
Achievers are more likely to have formal 
senior sponsorship for their AI strategies: we found that 83% of Achievers have such sponsorship, while only 67% of Builders and just 56% of Experimenters have it. 
Our research also suggests that the  
best AI strategies tend to be bold, even when they have modest beginnings.Bold AI strategies, in turn, help  spur innovation. And for the CEOs of Achievers,  creating a culture of innovation is itself a deliberate, strategic move—one that is used as a vehicle for experimentation  and learning across the organization. 
In fact, 48% of Achievers embed 
innovation in their organizational strategies, while just 33%  of Experimenters do.         Champion AI as a strategic priority 
for the entire organization, with full sponsorship from leadershipSuccess Factor 01
"In the last five years, we  
started to use AI as one of our main drivers in the business. Five years ago, AI was not critical at all … [but today] it’s becoming critical. I would say, between 0 and 10, [AI] has become something like an 
8."3
CEO of a German automotive parts  
and equipment manufacturer
 19
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceFor instance, Lendlease Digital (part of 
multinational Lendlease Group) hopes to produce architectural blueprints for buildings using generative design and AI, then use those blueprints to manufacture actual buildings in factories—fitting together all the pieces like LEGO sets. 
The company’s bold vision starts at the 
top, led by the CEO of Lendlease Digital, William (Bill) Ruh. 
To encourage such end-to-end innovation, 
Achievers implement systems and structures that help employees showcase their innovation experiments and seek constructive feedback from leadership. For instance, Achievers tend to be the first to embrace new tools that encourage their employees to experiment and innovate. We found that 16% of Achievers are already using platforms that allow workers to easily pose questions and share ideas with colleagues across the company—compared to 4% of Experimenters. That number will only grow as these companies expand their pools of AI talent. 
83%  
of Achievers have 
CEO and senior sponsorship.
 20
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceWith a clear AI strategy and strong CEO 
sponsorship, organizations are more likely to invest heavily in creating data and AI fluency across their workforces. While AI proficiency must start at the top, it can’t end there. 
We found, for example, that 78% of 
Achievers—compared with just 56% of Builders and 51% of Experimenters—have mandatory AI trainings for most employees, from product development engineers to C-suite executives.
Because Achievers prioritize efforts to 
build AI literacy in their workforces, it’s no surprise that their employees are also more proficient in AI-related skills. This makes it much easier to  scale human and AI collaboration  and ensure that AI permeates  the organization.
Nearly half (44%) of Achievers  
have employees with consistently  high AI skills competencies, while Innovators (33%) and Experimenters (30%) have significantly fewer such employees, on average. Furthermore, Achievers have employees with higher competencies in almost all data- and AI-related skills.Success Factor 02
Invest heavily in talent to get more  
from AI investments
 21
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAchievers also develop proactive AI 
talent strategies to stay at the forefront of industry trends. In addition to hiring, this could mean partnering with or acquiring specialist companies to fill critical roles (such as data or behavioral scientists, social scientists and ethicists). It also means having a plan to get these diverse, multidisciplinary workers to collaborate, create and sustain maximum value from the company’s data-science capabilities.
In 2018, US utility Exelon established an 
Analytics Academy. This training upskilled employees like Jeffrey Swiatek, who, at the age of 41, transitioned from his longtime role as a maintenance worker into a higher-paying position as a quantitative engineer. Swiatek has since used his training to write predictive software that saved Exelon an estimated $1 million over eight years on equipment maintenance.
4Japanese e-commerce giant Rakuten established an “AI Promotion Department” in 2016 to accelerate efforts to infuse AI into the company’s 70+ diverse businesses. By 2018, the department helped turn more than 30 AI pilot  projects into successful offerings.
5 
And a leading Southeast Asian oil and gas firm built an AI-powered, “gamified” learning platform to expand employees’ digital fluency. It also created a cloud-based performance reviewer that scrutinized a decade’s worth of employee data to recommend workers best suited for various digital roles. The innovation saved the firm’s HR department significant time filling positions. It also reduced scope for managerial bias in promotional decisions and helped workers assess and close digital-skills gaps. 78%  
of Achievers have 
mandatory AI trainings for most employees, from product development engineers to C-suite executives.
 22
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAnother priority for Achievers involves 
building an AI core: an operational data and AI platform that taps into companies’ talent, technology and data ecosystems, allowing firms to balance experimentation and execution. An AI core helps organizations productize their AI applications and integrate AI into other applications, which makes differentiation with AI more seamless.
An AI core also works across the cloud 
continuum (e.g. from migration to innovation), provides end-to-end data capabilities (foundation, management and governance), manages the machine learning lifecycle (workflow, model training, model deployment) and provides self-service capabilities. AI cores are, in turn, managed by dedicated interdisciplinary teams of machine learning engineers, data scientists, data-domain experts and systems engineers.
To build AI cores, Achievers harness 
the power of internal and external data, making that data trustworthy and storing it in a single enterprise-grade cloud platform—complete with appropriate usage, monitoring and security policies.
To extract value from their data quickly 
and effectively, Achievers are also 32% more likely, on average, than Experimenters to either develop custom-built machine learning applications or work with a partner that offers solutions-as-a-service. Achievers are also more likely than Innovators to use AI for innovation, tapping into readily available developer networks that can swiftly productionize and scale successful pilots. Success Factor 03
Industrialize AI tools and  
teams to create an AI core
 23
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceA major insurer used to rely on its 
employees to manually administer claims—a tedious process that cost over $500 million annually—even before the firm’s billion-dollar payouts to policyholders. The company explored native cloud-storage systems and AI more aggressively, with the goal to store, analyze and track images and other unstructured data to support claims processing. By industrializing its AI tools and teams, the company targeted efficiency gains of 5% in its first year alone, with longer-term cost savings of more than $100 million annually.
A European energy company created 
a digital factory to help empower employees to use analytics and AI-driven insights in their daily jobs.
  Among other 
initiative
s, the digital factory trains field 
engineers to work with, and improve, machine learning models. The factory  also provides mandatory data and AI training to all managers, as well as reskilling and upskilling support to the firm’s entire workforce. Thanks to the organization’s increased investment in AI-savvy talent, its business department now receives new, AI-powered apps within five months of initiating their development—compared with an 18-month wait, on average, before the digital factory was built. More broadly, by 2025, the company expects its digital factory to boost its bottom line by $1.5 billion annually.
To strengthen their AI cores, Achievers 
often collaborate with external experts to stay on top of of breakthroughs in science and engineering. In 2020, for example, American Express partnered with the Indian Institute of Technology Madras to create a Data Analytics, Risk and Technology laboratory at the prestigious university.
6 Such innovation ecosystems 
help Achievers develop AI apps tailored specifically to their needs. 
 24
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAs companies deploy AI for a growing 
range of tasks, adhering to laws, regulations and ethical norms is critical to building a sound data and AI foundation. The potential for regulatory changes in many countries makes the challenge even more daunting.
In a separate Accenture study of 850 
C-suite executives, we sought to gauge attitudes towards AI regulation and assess organizations’ readiness to comply. 
Nearly all (97%) respondents believed 
that regulation will impact them to some extent, and 77% indicated that compliance is a company-wide priority. Interestingly, many organizations view AI regulation as a boon rather than a barrier to success. The ability to demonstrate high-quality, trustworthy AI systems that are  “regulation ready” will give first movers  a significant advantage in the short- and long-term, enabling them to attract new customers, retain existing ones and build investor confidence. 
Achievers are consciously applying 
responsible AI with greater urgency than their peers. Achievers are 53% more likely, on average, than Builders and Innovators to be responsible by design: designing, developing and deploying AI with good intention to empower employees and businesses, and to fairly impact  customers and society—allowing companies to engender trust and  scale AI with confidence. Success Factor 04
Design AI responsibly, from the start
 25
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceFor companies, the upshot of  
being responsible by design is  an improved ability to meet future requirements, better mitigate risks  and create sustainable value for themselves and their stakeholders.
For instance, the Monetary  
Authority of Singapore (MAS), the country’s central bank and financial regulator, recognized the benefits that AI can provide to financial firms. Yet MAS was also wary of the threat posed to firms and markets by the illegal and/or unethical use of AI. To guard against this, MAS helped launch the Veritas initiative together with the financial industry, which aims to support the responsible use of AI in the  finance industry.The initiative has, among other achievements, produced a practical methodology and toolkit—the first of its kind—that offers detailed guidance on how to use AI leveraging the FEAT principles, i.e. fair, ethical, accountable and transparent.
Novartis is creating effective 
accountability mechanisms and risk-management controls to keep AI-powered operations and services aligned with the company’s core values. In addition, notes Klaus Moosmayer, Novartis’ Chief Ethics, Risk and Compliance Officer, it’s designed to, “provide ... a clear framework for ethical use of AI—enabling [employees] to challenge their own decisions  and biases.”
7
Even though only 6%  
of the companies surveyed had already implemented responsible AI practices, 42%  of surveyed companies aspire  to do so by the end of 2024. 
 26
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceTo avoid being left behind, most 
companies need to aggressively increase their spending on data and AI. One reason Achievers get more out of AI is simply because they invest more in it. 
We found that in 2018, Achievers devoted 
14% of their total technology budgets to AI, while in 2021 they devoted 28%. In 2024, they plan to devote 34%. 
Achievers also understand that their AI 
investment journey doesn’t have a finish line. There is, they frequently note, no “peak AI.” These companies know they have only scratched the surface of their AI transformations and that the quality of their investments matters just as much as the quantity. For Achievers, continued investment largely involves expanding the scope of AI to deliver maximum impact, while “cross-pollinating” AI solutions and redeploying resources in the process.
As part of its efforts to create a more 
data-driven organization that can offer customers highly personalized digital service, Walgreens Boots Alliance migrated from legacy databases to advanced cloud databases and analytics, and built some 100 high-value AI products that create detailed customer profiles and help the company better optimize inventory and prices. The company has been committed to its data- and AI-led transformation since 2020 and doesn't intend to slow down anytime soon.Success Factor 05
Prioritize long- and short-term  
AI investments"I’m on a journey that doesn’t  
stop with a move to the cloud.  I’m in the middle of rebuilding  an organization shifting from  being extremely operational  into an organization that is transformational."
Francesco Tinto, global CIO, SVP,  
Walgreens Boots Alliance
 27
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceThe share of AI Achievers 
will increase rapidly and significantly, more than doubling from the current 12% to 27% by 2024. 
 28
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performancePractice makes progressThe art of AI maturityBy 2019, there was evidence that  
scaling AI beyond proofs of concept had a significant impact on ROI.
8 Then the 
pandemic hit. For many organizations, enterprise-wide transformation was an urgent means of survival. For others, it quickly became a catalyst to thrive. 
 
 AI Achie
vers are thriving. Across industries, 
they’ve moved past cloud migration to innovation. They’ve capitalized on cloud’s scale and computing power to tap into new data sources and AI technologies that are widely available. But AI isn’t their secret to superior performance. It’s how they’re approaching AI that makes them different. They’ve established that AI maturity is as much about people as it is about technology. As much about strategy as it is about implementation. As much about responsibility as it is about agility.
 While Achie
vers are advanced relative 
to their peers, they’ll set new standards  for high performance as their own  maturity evolves.
 
Other organizations should be asking que
stions to assess their own AI maturity. 
To help get started, Figure 7 has some sample questions for C-suite leaders, according to Accenture’s AI maturity assessment. There are also tools available to help benchmark AI maturity and establish clear paths to progress and performance.
 
 As AI technologie
s become more 
prevalent, the future of all businesses is going to look very different—some will  lead the change, and some will be subjected to it. Those who transform will be the  ones whose teams master the art  of AI maturity, using cloud as the  enabler, data as the driver and AI  as the differentiator. 
 
Ho
w can AI help you differentiate?  Practice makes progress
The concept of using AI to solve business problems isn’t new. 
"AI, for us, is really the 
technology that we’re pushing...W e want to make sure that AI and machine learning is embedded in everything we do."
Francesco Tinto, global CIO, 
SVP, Walgreens Boots Alliance 
 30
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceFigure 7: AI maturity assessment: sample questions for C-suite leaders 
Source: Accenture Research• Does your C-suite have clear accountability for data and AI strategy and execution?
• How do you identify potential value, and how are business cases prioritized—considering the potential risks and alignment 
with the overall strategy of the organization?
• Are you allocating enough delivery resources to build AI products and services in-house, and are you able to get the most 
out of your ecosystem partners?
• To what extent do you have a cloud platform and technology strategy that supports your AI strategy?
• Do you have an effective, enterprise-wide data platform, as well as strong data management and governance practices,  to meet business needs?
• Are you using data science and machine learning teams effectively across the lifecycle of AI development?
• Is your data- and AI-literacy strategy aligned to your business objectives?
• To what extent have you prioritized data and AI fluency for senior leaders, business stakeholders and employees across  your organization?
• Do you have a holistic talent model to scale, differentiate, retain and develop AI talent (diverse, dedicated teams of  machine learning engineers, data scientists, data-domain experts and data engineers)?
• How are you institutionalizing a data and AI culture within your organization?
• Do you have an enterprise-wide framework to help you operationalize responsible data and AI from principles to practice?
• Are you applying a consistent and industrialized responsible data and AI approach across the complete lifecycle of all  
your AI models?
• Are you methodically tracking the evolution of AI-related laws and regulations across the different jurisdictions in which you  operate, while anticipating and preparing for future changes?Category Key questions
Talent and CultureData and AI CoreStrategy and Sponsorship
Responsible AI
 31
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceSanjeev Vohra
Global Lead – Applied 
Intelligence
Ajay Vasal
Growth & Strategy Lead and Centre for Data & Insights Lead – Applied Intelligence
Philippe Roussiere
Accenture Research Innovation  and AI Global Lead
Lan Guan
Lead, Cloud First  – Data & AI
 
Praveen Tanguturi, PhD
Thought Leadership Research  Principal DirectorMeet the authors Research director
 32
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceContributors
Contributors: Rahul Basole, Mariusz Bidelski, Marcin Bodziak, Tomas Castagnino, 
Joe Depa, Ray Eitel-Porter  , Michelle Ganchinho, Michal Hadr
ys, Andy Hickl, David Kimble, 
Carrie Kleiner, Andra Najem, Linda Ringnalda, Paridhi Sharma, Joanna Syczewska, Ezequiel Tacsir, Jonathan Thomas, Jakub Wiatrak, and Yingchuan Zhu
 
 Mark
eting + Communications: Kathy King, Alisyn Abney, Alexa MoutaResearch Leads  
Yuhui  
Xiong
Research Manager
Deeksha  Khare Patnaik
Research Manager
 33
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceThe art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performance About the research
Revenue (USD)
887
266 20715897 CountriesIndustries 
116
65
98
111
93
87
77
42 69
102
38
76
65
173
403
 34177
131
106
105
102
99
98
98
97
94
93
91
89
86
85
64Appendix
Survey
From August to September 2021, Accenture surveyed 1,615 C-suite executives at 1,176 of the world’s largest companies—present in 16 industries and headquartered in 15 countries. 
Interviews and case studies
We interviewed 25 CEOs, Chief Data Officers and Chief Analytics Officers. We also interviewed Renée Richardson Gosline (Senior Lecturer at MIT Sloan School of Management and Principal Research Scientist at MIT’s Initiative on the Digital Economy) and Christine Foster (Chief Commercial Officer at The Alan Turing Institute), as well as numerous AI experts at Accenture. Through research and client work, we also developed over 40 company case studies on AI transformation.
Design thinking
We ran a MURAL session with more than 15 senior data scientists to validate our AI maturity model. Economic modeling and data scienceTo assess companies’ AI maturity, as well as other measures of performance, we took the following steps:
1. 
 Identified ke
y capabilities of AI 
maturity  
We sought to understand the key capabilities that contribute to reaching both an “entry” level of AI maturity (i.e. deriving at least 10% of revenues from AI-influenced initiatives from 2018 to 2021) and a higher level of AI maturity (i.e. deriving more than 30% of revenues from 2018 to 2021). To do this, we built two machine learning models that account for more than 80 capabilities that contribute to the two different levels of AI maturity (see box below).  R
i = β0+β1Xit + β2 Capabilitiesit-1 + 
β3 ∆Capabilitiesit + β4Capabilities 
Interactionsit,t-1 + eit 
 
  Ri represents the level and evolution 
of a company’s AI-influenced revenues 
(sustaining at >10%, reaching >30%) With i = company, t = 2021 and t-1 = 2018, X
it includes controls for industry, 
firm size and company location (country).   The model is a linear probability Lasso model, a K-fold cross-validation with 10 folds performed.
2. 
 Defined "f
oundational" and 
"differentiation" capabilities In our models, we classified Capabilities
it-1 and ∆Capabilitiesit as AI 
foundational capabilities; Capabilities Interactions
it,t-1 are—as the name 
suggests—capabilities with interaction, with strong senior sponsorship and a well-defined AI strategy. We classified these interaction terms as AI differentiation capabilities.  From our models, we discovered that AI foundational capabilities have stronger explanatory power in the first model of “sustaining at >10%” than AI differentiation capabilities; in the second model of “reaching over >30%”, AI differentiation capabilities have stronger explanatory power. In other words, AI foundational capabilities are essential to building the necessary foundation for organizations to enter the AI race. Meanwhile, AI differentiation capabilities are key for organizations to reach the next level of AI maturity.
3. 
 Built the AI maturity index W
e built two indexes that measure 
companies’ AI foundational capabilities and AI differentiation capabilities, respectively, as identified by our two models. An overall AI maturity index is built as the arithmetic average of both AI foundational index and AI differentiation index, which is indicative of their probability of achieving high AI-influenced revenue. The median maturity index of all companies is 36/100.
 35
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performance4.  Constructed AI profile s based on 
foundational and differentiation 
capabilities The AI foundational capabilities and AI differentiation capabilities indexes were then used to construct a matrix. We used the top quartile as a threshold on both axes to cluster all the companies from the survey into four groups:
• AI Achievers—the top quartile on both foundational and differentiation median maturity index: 64/100
• AI Builders—the top quartile on foundational but not on differentiation median maturity index: 44/100
• AI Innovators—the top quartile on differentiation but not on foundational median maturity index: 50/100
• AI Experimenters—all remaining companies median maturity index: 29/1005. 
 Me
asured Achievers’ financial 
premium To assess AI Achievers’ financial performance, we used data from S&P Capital IQ to build the following regression model: Revenue growth
i = 
β0+β1Xi + β2 AI Achiever + ei 
(i = company, AI Achiever as the dummy variable, and X
i including controls 
for industry, firm size, and company location).
6. 
 Me
asured Achievers’ stakeholder 
performance To assess Achievers’ stakeholder performance in the areas of customer experience, sustainability, workforce, and supply chain, we built scores from 0-100 in these respective areas using data from FactSet, Arabesque, Oxford Economics, and S&P Capital IQ, which measure companies' performance against their industrial peers. The difference between Achievers and other companies is highly statistically significant (p < 0.01) for customer experience and sustainability.  The following offers more detail on each area.• Customer experience reflects how companies strengthen their sales pipeline by developing strong customer relationships; our measures include consumer trust, customer churn, product quality and safety, and an overall customer-centric mindset.
• Sustainability reflects how companies strengthen their commitment to environmental stewardship; our measures include greenhouse gas emissions, ecological management, resource use, water and waste efficiency, and various environmental solutions.
• Financial reflects how companies deliver profitable growth and operate efficiently.
• Workforce/employee experience reflects how companies unlock their workforces’ full potential; our measures include compensation, employment quality, employee turnover, occupational health and safety, and training and development.
• Supply chain reflects how companies manage risks associatedwith their supplier networks and inventory levels; our measures include supplier diversification, supplier risk, and inventory management.
7. 
 Me
asured the speed of AI 
transformation vs. the speed of digital transformation  To understand how fast companies undergo AI transformation compared to digital transformation, we used the frequency of mentions of both terms on companies’ earnings calls as a proxy. To do this, we performed a natural language processing analysis of investor calls of the world’s 2,000 largest companies (by market capitalization), sourced from the S&P earnings transcripts database. (Note: Our analysis included 744 companies with a consistent history of earnings calls during 2010-21.) Finally, we built predictive S-Curve models that estimated the time, henceforth, that it would take for 90% of such companies to mention the aforementioned terms on their earnings calls.
 36
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceStrategy and Sponsorship 
1. Senior Sponsorship: Organizations 
have an AI strategy that is developed by the Chief Analytics Officer, Chief Data Officer, Chief Digital Officer or an equivalent. The CEO and the Board actively sponsor and share accountability for the strategy and associated AI initiatives. 
2. AI Strategy: Organizations not only have a core AI strategy aligned to the overall business strategy, but they also dedicate tools and tactics to execute it and continuously track their performance against that strategy. 
3. Proactive vs. Reactive: Organizations have the resources (such as technology, talent and patents) to proactively define and demonstrate how AI can create value vs. apply AI as a reaction to a need. They’re first-movers instead of fast followers in terms of applying AI for business value.
4. Readily Available AI and ML tools: Organizations work with an ecosystem of technology partners to access machine learning models and tools  to help innovate new products  and services.
5. Readily Available Developer Networks: Organizations tap into an ecosystem of technology partners to access developer networks that support the development of new products and services.
Data and AI Core 
6. Build vs. Buy: Organizations develop custom-built AI applications or work with a partner who offers solutions-as-a-service, vs. purchase “off-the-shelf” AI solutions with little-to-no customization. 
7. Platform and Technology: Organizations apply the necessary cloud, data and AI infrastructure, software, self-serve capabilities and industry best practices, and they adopt the latest tools available from platform and technology partners. 
8. Experimentation Data—Change: Organizations improved their use of experimentation data between 2018 and 2021, effectively translating into a higher data and AI maturity. Experimentation data is the use of internal and external data to design new models and generate new insights. To do that, organizations use enterprise-grade cloud platforms to keep data clean and trustworthy, and to support decision making at greater speed and scale.  
9. Data Management and Governance: Organizations scale their data management and governance practices to increase data quality, trust and ethics across entities —e.g. by implementing master data management and ensuring security, compliance and interoperability. 
10. Data Management and Governance—Change: Organizations improved their data management and governance practices between 2018 and 2021, effectively translating into a higher data and AI maturity.  Key Capabilities
 37
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceTalent and culture 
11. Mandatory AI Training: Organizations 
enforce AI-specific training programs to improve AI fluency, which are tailored for senior leadership and specific functions, e.g. salesforce, product engineers, etc. They also create deliberate opportunities for employees to learn and apply AI in their roles. 
12. Employee Competency in AI-Related Skills: Organizations regularly measure the competency level of employees to determine where further training is needed to improve overall acumen. They measure and build expertise in critical areas like coding, data processing and exploration, business analytics, domain and business acumen, machine learning, visualization and more. 13. Innovation Culture Embedded: Organizations ensure innovation is part of the day-to-day work environment. They encourage mindsets, behaviors and routines that all serve as a vehicle for experimentation, collaboration and learning from ideation to product development to market launch. 
14. Innovation Culture Encouraged: Organizations promote and reward innovative mindsets and behaviors including entrepreneurship, collaboration and thoughtful  risk-taking. 
15. AI Talent Strategy: Organizations have an AI talent strategy—hiring, acquiring, retention—that evolves to keep pace with market or business needs. They also have an AI talent roadmap for hiring diverse AI-related roles, beyond just ML engineers—such as  behavioral scientists, social scientists, and ethicists.  
Responsible AI 
16. Responsible AI: Organizations have an industrialized, responsible approach to data and AI across the complete lifecycle of their AI models—an approach that can meet changing regulatory requirements, mitigate risks, and support sustainable, trustworthy AI. 
17. Responsible AI—Change: Organizations have improved their responsible data and AI practices between 2018 and 2021, effectively translating into a higher data and  AI maturity. 
 38
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceReferences
1  https://news.stanford.edu/news/2011/october/john-mccarthy-obit-102511.
html#:~:text=John%20McCarthy%2C%20a%20professor%20emeritus,He%20was%2084
2  Accenture Research analysis of the world’s 2,000 largest companies by market capit
alization mentioning AI in their earnings calls. Formula is based on CEOs of 
companies that had earnings call in 2020, and CEO was present at the call, and CEO mentioned AI. 46% of these CEOs mentioned AI in their earnings calls, in 2021 up from ~35% in 2017.
 
3 Accenture Interview
4  https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/13/business/coronavirus-retraining-workers.html5  https://global.rakuten.com/corp/careers/topics/engineering3/ 
6  https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/software/american-express-sets-up-data-analytics-risk-technology-lab-in-iit-madras/articleshow/77925793.cms
 
7  https://www.novartis.com/about/strategy/data-and-digital/artificial-intelligence/our
-commitment-ethical-and-responsible-use-ai  
8 https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/artificial-intelligence/ai-investments
 39
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performanceAbout Accenture
Accenture is a global professional services company 
with leading capabilities in digital, cloud and security. Combining unmatched experience and specialized skills across more than 40 industries, we offer Strategy and Consulting, Interactive, Technology and Operations services—all powered by the world’s largest network of Advanced Technology and Intelligent Operations centers. Our 710,000 people deliver on the promise of technology and human ingenuity every day, serving clients in more than 120 countries. We embrace the power of change to create value and shared success for our clients, people, shareholders, partners and communities. Visit us at www.accenture.com.
Disclaimer
This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our professional advisors. 
Copyright © 2022 Accenture. All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.About Accenture Research
Accenture Research creates thought leadership about 
the most pressing business issues organizations face. Combining innovative research techniques, such as data science led analysis, with a deep understanding of industry and technology, our team of 300 researchers in 20 countries publish hundreds of reports, articles and points of view every year. Our thought-provoking research developed with world leading organizations helps our clients embrace change, create value, and deliver on the power of technology and human ingenuity.About Applied Intelligence
 
Applied Intelligence is A
ccenture’s approach to scaling 
AI for clients by embedding AI-powered data, analytics and automation capabilities into business workflows, accelerating time to value with a powerful global alliance, innovation and delivery network that can deploy and scale AI within any market and industry. 
The art of AI maturity—Advancing from practice to performance