Advancing from practice to performance
From i nsights to action, the pa th to extraordina ry value starts here. 
The art of AI maturity
Growth Markets
Asia Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America Contents
AI maturity:  
Why it 
matters
06Appendix Practice  
makes  
progressAI maturity:  
What it is 
09 14 17 29 35AI Achievers  
advance 
from 
practice to 
performanceHow AI 
Achievers 
master their 
craftForeword
03Executive 
summary
04
 2
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAs artificial intelligence technologies 
become more prevalent, some 
organizations will lead the change, and 
others will be fast followers. With growing 
confidence in AI as a value driver, we 
see companies in Asia Pacific, Africa, the 
Middle East, and Latin America (Growth 
Markets) evolving and maturing along with 
the technology itself. 
Also, governments in these markets, 
including China, Singapore, and India, 
have announced ambitious national 
AI strategies. In the Middle East, AI is 
at the center of all national economic 
development plans over the next few 
years. 
While AI continues to attract board level 
attention and investment, the AI maturity is still evolving. Within the Growth Markets, 
the AI maturity is picking up pace with 
17% of companies are what we call “AI 
Achievers”—that is, they leverage AI’s full 
potential. 
In this report, we look at what the AI 
Achievers are doing right. Our findings 
demonstrate that Achievers are not 
defined by the sophistication of any 
one capability, but by their ability to 
combine strengths across strategy, 
processes, and people by scaling AI. The 
five ways in which AI Achievers master 
their craft are — 1. Their top leaders 
champion AI as a strategic priority for 
the entire organization. 2. They invest 
heavily in talent to get more from their AI 
investments. 3. They industrialize AI tools 
and teams to create a strong AI core. 4. They design AI responsibly, from the start. 
5. They prioritize long and short-term 
AI investments.  In the report, we delve 
deeper into each of these success factors. 
In most cases the right intentions are yet 
to be converted into actions. While most 
companies have begun their Responsible 
AI journey, the majority (94%) are yet to 
operationalize across all key elements of 
Responsible AI. To move from principles to 
practice, organizations need a structured 
approach to be responsible by design.
We hope that the ‘Art of AI maturity’ 
will serve as an inspiration for business 
leaders to pave the way for a successful 
AI maturity journey for their enterprises. 
With the strong industry momentum, we 
project the number of AI Achievers, to nearly double (to 32%) by 2024 in Growth 
markets. 
Because high-performance today will 
become business-as-usual tomorrow, 
there’s an impetus to move quickly and 
move now. The art of AI maturity – a Growth Markets perspective
Foreword
Senthil Ramani
Senior Managing Director,  
Growth Markets, Applied 
Intelligence
 3
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsToday, so much of what we take for 
granted in our daily lives, from travel to 
shopping, relies on machine learning (ML). 
Companies across industries are investing 
in AI to drive logistics, improve customer 
service, increase efficiency, empower 
employees and so much more.
Like their peers in developed economies, 
few organizations in Growth Markets 
(GMs)  are capitalizing on AI’s full potential.
According to our analysis of approximately 
500 companies in GMs, only 17% of firms 
have advanced their AI maturity enough 
to achieve superior growth and business 
transformation. We call them the    
“AI Achievers.”Another 30% of firms are somewhat 
advanced in their level of AI maturity, 
while the remaining 53% (the majority) are 
merely testing the waters.
This decades-long journey to AI maturity 
is now in high gear. Even pre-pandemic 
(2019), AI Achievers already enjoyed 56% 
greater revenue growth, on average, 
compared with their peers. And in 2021, 
executives who discussed AI on their 
earnings calls were 96.7% more likely to 
see their firms’ share prices increase—up 
from 64.2% in 2018.In short, advancing AI maturity is no 
longer a choice. It’s an imperative for  
every industry, every organization and 
every leader. 17%  
of firms have advanced  
their AI maturity enough 
to achieve superior 
performance and growth.Executive summary
In fewer than 70 years, artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved 
from a scientific concept to a societal constant.
53%  
of firms are still  
testing the AI waters.
 4
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsWhile there’s clearly a science to AI, our findings demonstrate there is also an art to  
AI maturity. Achievers are not defined by the sophistication of any one capability,  
but by their ability to combine strengths across strategy, processes and people. 
Here are five ways AI Achievers master their craft: 
1.  Their top leaders champion AI as a strategic priority  
for the entire organization.
2.  They invest heavily in talent to get more from their  
AI investments.
3.  They industrialize AI tools and teams to create  
a strong AI core.
4.  They design AI responsibly, from the start. 
5.  They prioritize long- and short-term AI investments. 
Our machine learning models suggest that the share of AI Achievers will increase  
rapidly and significantly, more than doubling from the current 17% to 32% by 2024. 
In short, advancing AI maturity is no longer a choice. It’s an opportunity facing every 
industry, every organization and every leader. What do AI Achievers do differently?
 5
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAI maturity: Why it mattersThe art of AI maturitySource: Accenture Research
Note: Our estimate is derived from a natural language processing analysis of investor calls of 
the world’s 2,000 largest companies (by market cap), from 2010 to 2021, that referenced “AI” 
and “digital” in tandem with “business transformation,” respectively. Data was sourced from S&P 
earnings transcripts.AI maturity: Why it matters
In 2021, 46% of CEOs mentioned AI on 
their earnings calls—when they did, their 
share prices were 96.7% more likely to 
increase.
In Growth Markets specifically:
• 67%  of companies have integrated 
AI into their business strategies and 
reworked their cloud plans to achieve 
AI success. • 38%  of companies said the return 
on their AI initiatives exceeded their 
expectations (compared to 42% 
globally). Only 2% said the ROI did not 
meet expectations.Figure 1: W e project that AI transformation will take less time than digital transformation
There is a growing consensus that AI is 
essential to competitive advantage. 
AI, accelerated
AI is now widely considered a value 
driver. We estimate AI transformation will 
happen much more quickly than digital 
transformation—on average, 16 months 
faster (Figure 1).
 7
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsFigure 2: Evolution of companies' AI-influenced revenue share from 2018 to 2024* There’s great incentive to move quickly. We found, 
for example, that the share of company revenue that 
is “AI-influenced” more than doubled between 2018 
and 2021 and is expected to roughly triple by 2024 
(Figure 2). In response, companies plan to increase 
and accelerate their AI investments. In 2021, 21% 
of companies dedicated more than 30% of their 
tech budgets to AI development. By 2024, 49% of 
companies intend to do the same.
Source: Accenture Research 
Note: *2024 = projected, N = 585Note: Color indicates the achieved AI-influenced revenue threshold within each time period. 
*Definition of “AI-influenced” revenues:  
a. Sales of existing products and services made possible through better AI-driven insights on customers, supply chain, channels ; b. Sales 
of new products and services made possible by human + AI , c. Higher prices through dynamic pricing ML algorithms. These sales include 
some cannibalization and net new revenues. In contrast, this definition is excluding higher efficiencies in production operations thanks to AI. 
33%
 8
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAI maturity: What it isThe art of AI maturityAI maturity: What it is
Fittingly, our analysis itself was conducted 
using AI. We applied machine learning 
(ML) models to unravel massive survey 
datasets and uncover drivers of AI 
maturity that would have been impossible 
to detect using more traditional analytical 
methods. (More on the methodology in 
the Appendix.) 
Our research found that AI maturity 
gives companies a strong competitive 
advantage. Unlocking this advantage 
comes down to mastering a set of key 
capabilities in the right combinations—not only in data and AI, but also in 
organizational strategy, talent and  culture. 
(See pages 37 and 38 for key    
capabilities descriptions.)
This includes foundational AI 
capabilities—like cloud platforms and 
tools, data platforms, architecture and 
governance—that are required to keep 
pace with competitors. It also includes 
“differentiation” AI capabilities, like 
AI strategy and C-suite sponsorship, 
combined with a culture of innovation that 
can set companies apart.W e designed a holistic AI maturity framework to 
uncover common strategies for AI success. 
AI maturity measures the 
degree to which organizations 
have mastered AI-related 
capabilities in the right 
combination to achieve high 
performance for customers, 
shareholders and employees.
 10
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsSource: Accenture Research analysis based on a sample of 1,200 global companies and 491 are from Growth MarketFigure 3:  Only 17% of organizations are AI Achievers The companies that scored best in both 
categories are what we call “AI Achievers.” 
Meanwhile, “AI Builders” show strong 
foundational capabilities and average 
differentiation capabilities, while “AI Innovators” 
show strong differentiation capabilities and 
average foundational capabilities. Trailing these 
cohorts are a fourth group we’re calling “AI 
Experimenters”—those with average capabilities 
in both categories.
In Growth Markets, Achievers accounted for 
17% of all firms surveyed, Builders for 18% and 
Innovators for 12%. Together, Achievers, Builders, 
and Innovators represent 47% of surveyed 
organizations—10% higher than their combined 
global representation (37%). AI Experimenters 
make up the majority (53%) (Figure 3).
vs. 13% (Global) vs. 12% (Global)
vs. 12% (Global) vs. 63% (Global)Companies struggling
to materialize their
AI strategyCompanies that are capitalizing
the power of AI by building
on strong foundation and
a differentiated strategy
The marjority of companies
without strong AI foundations
and clear AI strategyCompanies with strong AI
foundations but unclear
differentiation strategy
 11
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsN = 516  | Source: Accenture Research analysis based on a sample of 1,200 global companies and 491 
are from Growth Market 
Note: *2024 = estimated scores. Industries’ AI maturity scores represent the arithmetic average of 
their respective Foundational and Differentiation index.Figure 4: Levels of AI maturity by industry, 2021 and 2024* AI, applied
While industries like tech are currently far 
ahead of others in AI maturity, the gap 
will likely narrow considerably by 2024. 
In fact, there’s growing demand for AI 
in the life sciences industry, due to the 
presence of top research institutions in 
Growth Markets, rising investments in 
the research studies of various diseases, 
and accelerated advancements in drug 
discovery and delivery. In addition, various 
airlines and airport authorities in Growth 
Markets are increasingly investing in AI 
for airport safety, predicting flight arrivals 
more accurately, customer service 
chatbots, operational efficiency, etc. In other industries, a range of factors 
may be contributing to relatively low AI 
maturity. Financial Services institutions, for 
example, still struggle to move projects 
into production and scale AI across the 
organization. Meanwhile, healthcare 
organizations have been slow to adapt to 
the AI transformation. But many are either 
experimenting with or actively pursuing 
AI-enabled tools to bridge the huge gaps 
in resources and meet challenges created 
by rapidly aging societies (Figure 4).
 12
The art of AI maturity—Growth Markets• A Middle East-based telecom 
operator uses an AI-driven 
bilingual virtual assistant to handle 
approximately 1.5 million customer 
interactions—in both Arabic and 
English—across multiple channels 
each month.
• A large chemicals and energy firm 
is using drones and AI-powered 
computer vision to monitor its 
equipment and remote locations.   
The upshot: More frequent 
inspections at lower cost to the 
company and fewer safety risks for  
its maintenance workers.• One coral conservatory used AI for 
reef restoration. Its cost-effective 
edge computing solution and 
strategically placed underwater smart 
cameras allowed for non-invasive 
observations, from tracking the 
migration of fish to colder climates  
to monitoring illegal fishing in 
protected waters.
• One of the world’s largest metals and 
mining companies wanted to enable 
intelligent, value-driven decision-
making across its commercial 
ore value chain. The company’s 
AI engagement resulted in better 
detection of possible disruptions 
in supply chains and a proactive 
approach to recovery planning.• The third-largest bank in Thailand 
used AI to unlock the value of data to 
enhance experiences for consumers, 
optimize operations and fuel future 
growth. Their ongoing, multi-year 
transformation journey combines 
advanced data and analytics 
capabilities with people-focused 
processes and tools.
• A leading Japanese cosmetic 
company used data and AI-driven 
insights to track marketing ROI, 
gauge shifts in consumer behavior 
in a post-pandemic world and drive 
strategy for sales growth.• A large holding company leveraged 
AI for workforce transformation. AI 
and ML models were used to match 
professional skillsets to specific 
company roles. Turns out 55% of 
recruits were matched with optimal 
positions, increasing performance 
and retention by 3X.
• A leading Indonesian telecom 
company deployed a best-in-class 
AI-powered virtual agent for cost-
optimization and improving customer 
satisfaction scores.
• A leading retail company leveraged 
data and AI to create differentiated 
propositions for their brands. 
Within nine months, they scaled 
the business resulting in $10M from 
new revenue streams. It’s aiming to 
achieve a $25M incremental revenue 
target by 2025.AI, applied across industries
 13 The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAI Achievers advance from 
practice to performanceThe art of AI maturityFigure 5: AI Achievers outperform in nearly all capabilities
So it’s no surprise they thrive when it 
comes to traditional performance metrics. 
Pre-pandemic, they already enjoyed 
56% greater revenue growth on average, 
versus their peers. And today, they’re 3.7 
times more likely than Experimenters to 
see their AI-influenced revenue exceed 
30% of their total revenues.
What sets the AI Achievers apart?
Mastery of multitasking
When compared with all other groups, AI 
Achievers demonstrate high performance 
across a combination of capabilities. They are not defined by the sophistication 
of any one capability, but by their ability 
to combine strengths across strategy, 
processes and people. 
In comparison, Innovators typically excel 
at securing senior sponsorship and 
embrace training for all employees, but 
they lack the foundational capabilities 
required to support AI at scale. 
Builders, on the other hand, excel at 
creating data and AI platforms, but they 
tend to be weaker at cultivating AI fluency 
and the innovation culture that is needed 
to drive adoption. (Figure 5)AI Achievers advance from  
practice to performance
AI Achievers are going above and beyond, deploying AI 
solutions to solve problems and identify new opportunities. 
Source: Accenture Research
Note: Each cube represents one of the 17 key capabilities. The cube is highlighted when the AI profile is 
outperforming against peers (higher than the average across all companies in terms of % of companies 
reaching the mature level).
Achievers Builders Innovators Experimenters
 15
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsFigure 6: Achievers excel at turning AI pilots into production
Source: Accenture Research 
Note: Score 0-100, ranging from 0 = AI use case not started, 50 = AI use in early stage, 100 = having AI programs in place for 
full productization. The chart shows the difference in terms of average score for AI use cases of different functions, between 
Achievers and other firms. Those differences are statistically significant after controlling for industry, geography, and company 
size; see Appendix for more details.Turning pilots into production
Achievers have largely moved beyond the AI investment 
“tipping point,” going from experimenting with new AI in 
isolation to applying AI at scale to solve critical business 
problem (Figure 6). Achievers are 36% more likely to scale AI 
pilots across the enterprise compared with Experimenters.
A multinational telecom company with a major market 
in Japan was facing the challenge of unsubscribing users. 
They wanted to drive data-led transformation for improving 
efficiency and driving business growth. They also aimed at 
strengthening their team of data scientists by upskilling their 
existing workforce and hiring talent. 
A joint venture company was established to help their 
business challenges. The joint venture created end-to-end 
data infrastructure across their business and enable them to 
scale it with cloud migration. The company leveraged data-
led transformation to create hyper-personalized offers for 
clients and drive business growth. Combining data scientist 
training and analytics & BI environment we were also able to 
upskill their team and create a future-ready workforce.
 16
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsThe art of AI maturity
Five success factors
How AI Achievers 
master their craftHow AI Achievers 
master their craft  
It’s worth noting that the potential for 
AI-mature organizations will evolve 
along with the technology itself. High 
performance today will ultimately become 
business-as-usual tomorrow. 
Today’s AI Achievers have set the standard 
and are poised to remain leaders. While 
science is at the center, they’ve shown us 
there is also an art to AI maturity. 
They have demonstrated that excellence 
in areas like vision and culture are just 
as critical as algorithmic integrity. Our 
research uncovered five key success 
factors for AI Achievers.
 18
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsCompanies can create strong AI 
strategies, but unless those strategies 
receive enthusiastic support from the 
CEO and the rest of the C-suite, they’re 
likely to flounder.
Achievers are more likely to have formal 
senior sponsorship for their AI strategies. 
We found that 86% of Achievers in 
Growth Markets have such sponsorship, 
while only 60% of Builders and just 56% 
of Experimenters have it. Our research also suggests that the 
best AI strategies tend to be bold, even 
when they have modest beginnings. 
Bold AI strategies help spur innovation. 
For CEOs of Achievers, creating a 
culture of innovation is itself a deliberate, 
strategic move—one that is used as a 
vehicle for experimentation and learning 
across the organization. In fact, 59% of 
Achievers embed innovation in their 
organization’s strategies, while just 33%  
of Experimenters do.Champion AI as a strategic priority 
for the entire organization, with full 
sponsorship from leadershipSuccess Factor 01
 19
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsFor instance, Lendlease Digital (part of 
multinational Lendlease Group) hopes 
to produce architectural blueprints for 
buildings using generative design and AI, 
then use those blueprints to manufacture 
actual buildings in factories—fitting 
together all the pieces like LEGO sets. The 
company’s bold vision starts at the top, led 
by the CEO of Lendlease Digital,   
William Ruh.
To encourage such end-to-end innovation, 
Achievers implement systems and 
structures that help employees showcase 
their innovation experiments and seek 
constructive feedback from leadership. 
For instance, Achievers tend to be the 
first to embrace new tools that encourage 
their employees to experiment and 
innovate. We found that 25% of Achievers 
in Growth Markets are already using 
platforms that allow workers to easily pose questions and share ideas with colleagues 
across the company—compared to 6% of 
Experimenters. That number will only grow 
as these companies hire more AI talent.
86%  
of Achievers have 
CEO and senior 
sponsorship.
 20
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsWith a clear AI strategy and strong CEO 
sponsorship, organizations are more likely 
to invest heavily in creating data and AI 
fluency across their workforces.
We found that 76% of Achievers—
compared with 66% of Builders and 
59% of Experimenters—have mandatory 
AI trainings for most employees, from 
product development engineers to 
C-suite executives. Because Achievers 
prioritize efforts to build AI literacy in their 
workforces, their employees are also more 
proficient in AI-related skills. This makes it 
easier to scale human-AI collaboration.We also found that 56% of Achievers in 
Growth Markets have employees with 
consistently high AI skills competencies, 
while Innovators (42%) and Experimenters 
(35%) have significantly fewer such 
employees, on average. Achievers also 
develop proactive AI talent strategies to 
stay at the forefront of industry trends. 
In addition to hiring, this can mean 
partnering with or acquiring specialist 
companies to fill critical roles (such 
as data or behavioral scientists, social 
scientists and ethicists). It also means 
having a plan to get these diverse, 
multidisciplinary workers to collaborate, 
create and sustain maximum value from 
the company’s data-science capabilities.Success Factor 02
Invest heavily in talent to get more 
from AI investments
 21
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsWhat does this look like in practice? 
Japanese e-commerce giant Rakuten 
established an “AI Promotion Department” 
in 2016 to accelerate efforts to infuse 
AI into the company’s 70+ diverse 
businesses. By 2018, the department 
helped turn more than 30 AI pilot projects 
into successful offerings.
And a leading Southeast Asian oil and 
gas firm built an AI-powered, “gamified” 
learning platform to expand employees’ digital fluency. It also created a cloud-
based performance reviewer that 
scrutinized a decade’s worth of employee 
data to recommend workers best suited 
for various digital roles. The innovation 
saved the firm’s HR department significant 
time filling positions. It also reduced 
scope for managerial bias in promotional 
decisions and helped workers assess and 
close digital-skills gaps.54%  
of Achievers in Growth 
Market have employees with 
consistently high AI skills 
competencies, while Innovators 
(42%) and Experimenters (35%) 
have significantly fewer such 
employees, on average.
 22
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAnother priority for Achievers is building 
an AI core: An operational data and AI 
platform that taps into companies’ talent, 
technology and data ecosystems, allowing 
firms to balance experimentation and 
execution. An AI core helps organizations 
productize their AI applications and 
integrate the technology into   
other applications.
An AI core also works across the 
cloud continuum (from migration to 
innovation), provides end-to-end data 
capabilities (foundation, management 
and governance), manages the machine 
learning lifecycle (workflow, model 
training, model deployment) and 
provides self-service capabilities. AI 
cores are, in turn, managed by dedicated 
interdisciplinary teams of machine 
learning engineers, data scientists, data domain experts and systems engineers. 
To build AI cores, Achievers harness 
the power of internal and external data, 
making that data trustworthy and storing 
it in a single enterprise-grade cloud 
platform—complete with appropriate 
usage, monitoring and security policies.
To extract value from their data quickly 
and effectively, Achievers in Growth 
Markets are also 43% more likely, on 
average, than Experimenters to either 
develop custom-built, machine-learning 
applications or work with a partner that 
offers solutions-as-a-service. Achievers 
are also more likely than Innovators 
to use AI for innovation, tapping into 
readily available developer networks that 
can swiftly productionize and scale  
successful pilots.Success Factor 03
Industrialize AI tools and  
teams to create an AI core
 23
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsTo strengthen their AI cores, Achievers often 
collaborate with external experts to stay 
on top of breakthroughs in science and 
engineering. In 2020, for example, American 
Express partnered with the Indian Institute 
of Technology Madras to create a Data 
Analytics, Risk and Technology laboratory at 
the prestigious university. Such innovation 
ecosystems help Achievers develop AI apps 
tailored specifically to their needs.
A leading Indian bank deployed AI at scale 
to achieve higher growth and efficiencies 
across multiple verticals, such as retail 
and SMB, liquidity & risk management, 
wealth management and more. It identified 
priorities and devised a roadmap including 
strategy, technology & infrastructure, and 
talent. With an enterprise-wide data lake and 
AI/ML platform, as well as a robust literacy 
program, they were able to leverage the 
value of data and AI across the organization. 
 24
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAdhering to laws, regulations and ethical 
norms is critical to building a sound 
data and AI foundation. The potential for 
regulatory changes in many countries 
makes the challenge even more daunting. 
In a separate Accenture study of 850 
C-suite executives, we sought to gauge 
attitudes toward AI regulation and assess 
organizations’ readiness to comply. 
Nearly all (99%) respondents believed 
that regulation would impact them to 
some extent, while 81% indicated that compliance is a company-wide priority. 
In fact, many organizations view AI 
regulation as a boon rather than a  
barrier to success.
The ability to demonstrate high-quality, 
trustworthy AI systems that are “regulation 
ready” will give first movers a significant 
advantage in the short- and long-term, 
enabling them to attract new customers, 
retain existing ones and build   
investor confidence.Success Factor 04
Design AI responsibly, from the start
 25
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAchievers are consciously applying 
responsible AI with greater urgency than 
their peers. In Growth Markets, they are 
on average 36% more likely than Builders 
and 64% more likely than Innovators to 
be responsible by design. This means 
Achievers are designing, developing and 
deploying AI that empowers employees 
and businesses, and impact customers 
and society fairly. 
For instance, The Monetary Authority of 
Singapore (MAS), the country’s central 
bank and financial regulator, recognized 
the benefits that AI can provide to 
financial firms. Yet MAS was also wary of the threat posed 
to firms and markets by the illegal and/or 
unethical use of AI. It helped launch the 
Veritas initiative, which aims to support 
the responsible use of AI in the finance 
industry. The effort has produced a 
practical methodology and first-of-its-
kind toolkit that offers detailed guidance 
on how to use AI leveraging the FEAT 
principles—fair, ethical, accountable  
and transparent.
Even though only 8%  
of the companies surveyed 
had already implemented 
responsible AI practices, 42%  
of surveyed companies aspire  
to do so by the end of 2024. 
 26
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsTo avoid being left behind, most 
companies need to aggressively increase 
their spending on data and AI. One reason 
Achievers in Growth Markets get more out 
of AI is simply because they invest more 
in it. We found that in 2018, Achievers 
devoted 15% of their total technology 
budgets to AI, while in 2021 they devoted 
29%. In 2024, they plan to devote 36%.
Achievers also understand that their AI 
investment journey doesn’t have a finish 
line. There is, they frequently note, no 
“peak AI.” These companies know they 
have only scratched the surface of their 
AI transformations and that the quality of 
their investments matters just as much 
as the quantity. For Achievers, continued 
investment largely involves expanding the 
scope of AI to deliver maximum impact, 
while “cross-pollinating” AI solutions and 
redeploying resources in the process.For example, the Saudi government’s 
National Center for Artificial 
Intelligence is on a mission to unlock 
the value of data and AI as a national 
asset to fulfill the larger digital vision of 
the country. The center accelerated the 
development of AI capabilities in priority 
sectors like energy, healthcare, agriculture 
and government—and it will play a pivotal 
role in the execution of the country’s 
national AI strategy. Early returns have 
been so successful that the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia will allocate the strategy a 
budget of $20 billion by 2030.Success Factor 05
Prioritize long- and short-term
AI investments
In 2018, Achievers 
in Growth Markets 
devoted 15% of their 
total technology budgets 
to AI. In 2021, that rose 
to 29%. By 2024, they 
expect to devote 36%.
 27
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsW e project the share of 
AI Achievers in Growth 
Markets to nearly double 
(from 17% to 32%) by 2024.
 28
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsPractice makes progressThe art of AI maturityThe concept of using AI to solve business 
problems isn’t new. By 2019, there was 
evidence that scaling AI beyond proofs 
of concept had a significant impact 
on ROI. Then the pandemic hit. For 
many organizations, enterprise-wide 
transformation was a matter of survival. 
For others, it became a catalyst to thrive.
AI Achievers in Growth Markets are 
thriving. Across industries, they’ve moved 
past cloud migration to innovation. 
But the AI itself isn’t the secret to their 
superior performance—it’s how they’re 
approaching AI that makes them different. 
They’ve established that AI maturity 
is as much about people as it is about technology. As much about strategy as it 
is about implementation. As much about 
responsibility as it is about agility.
Every organization should be assessing 
its own AI maturity. To get started, Figure 
7 has some sample questions for C-suite 
leaders, according to Accenture’s AI 
maturity assessment. There are also tools 
available to help benchmark AI maturity 
and establish clear paths to progress and 
performance.
As AI technologies become more 
prevalent, the future of all businesses 
is going to look very different—some 
will lead the change, and some will be subjected to it. Those who transform 
will be the ones whose teams master 
the art of AI maturity, using cloud as the 
enabler, data as the driver and AI as the 
differentiator.
How can AI help you differentiate? Practice makes progress
The concept of using AI to solve business problems isn’t new. 
 30
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsFigure 7: AI maturity assessment: sample questions for C-suite leaders 
Source: Accenture Research• Does your C-suite have clear accountability for data and AI strategy and execution?
• How do you identify potential value, and how are business cases prioritized—considering the potential risks and alignment 
with the overall strategy of the organization?
• Are you allocating enough delivery resources to build AI products and services in-house, and are you able to get the most 
out of your ecosystem partners?
• To what extent do you have a cloud platform and technology strategy that supports your AI strategy?
• Do you have an effective, enterprise-wide data platform, as well as strong data management and governance practices,  
to meet business needs?
• Are you using data science and machine learning teams effectively across the lifecycle of AI development?
• Is your data- and AI-literacy strategy aligned to your business objectives?
• To what extent have you prioritized data and AI fluency for senior leaders, business stakeholders and employees across  
your organization?
• Do you have a holistic talent model to scale, differentiate, retain and develop AI talent (diverse, dedicated teams of  
machine learning engineers, data scientists, data-domain experts and data engineers)?
• How are you institutionalizing a data and AI culture within your organization?
• Do you have an enterprise-wide framework to help you operationalize responsible data and AI from principles to practice?
• Are you applying a consistent and industrialized responsible data and AI approach across the complete lifecycle of all  
your AI models?
• Are you methodically tracking the evolution of AI-related laws and regulations across the different jurisdictions in which you  
operate, while anticipating and preparing for future changes?Category Key questions
Talent and CultureData and AI CoreStrategy and Sponsorship
Responsible AI
 31
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsSanjeev Vohra
Global Lead, Applied 
Intelligence
Ajay Vasal
Growth & Strategy Lead and 
Centre for Data & Insights 
Lead, Applied Intelligence
Philippe Roussiere
Accenture Research Innovation  
and AI Global Lead
Lan Guan
Lead, Cloud First,                          
Data & AI 
Praveen Tanguturi, PhD
Thought Leadership Research  
Principal DirectorMeet the authors Research director
Senthil Ramani
Senior Managing Director, Growth 
Markets, Applied Intelligence
Vineet Narang
Data Science Managing 
Director, Growth Markets, 
Applied Intelligence
 32
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsContributors
Contributors: Pranav Arora, Rahul Basole, Mariusz Bidelski, Marcin Bodziak, Tomas Castagnino, 
Joe Depa, Ray Eitel-Porter  , Jean-Claude El-Sabbagh, Michelle Ganchinho, Michal Hadrys, 
Andy Hickl, David Kimble, Carrie Kleiner, Sonali Kulkarni, Andra Najem, Hussein Ragy,  
Linda Ringnalda, Paridhi Sharma, Joanna Syczewska, Ezequiel Tacsir, Jonathan Thomas,  
Aleena Varkey, Satish Viswanathan, Jakub Wiatrak and Yingchuan Zhu.
 Marketing + Communications: Alisyn Abney, Surabhi Chatterjee, Alexa Mouta, Karthick Paulraj 
and Venkat Subramanian.Research Leads 
Yuhui  
Xiong
Research Manager
Deeksha  
Khare Patnaik
Research Manager
 33
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAccenture surveyed 1,615 executives 
(including CEOs, C-Suite, CAIO’s and Data 
Science Leaders) from the world’s largest 
organizations (with revenues greater than  
$1 billion). The survey was carried out across 
15 countries and 16 industries, and fielded 
between August and September, 2021. 
In this report we have highlighted the AI 
maturity trends in Growth Markets.
Survey includes those organizations who 
have at least agreed upon some basic AI 
strategy and have begun implementing 
relevant tools, to those who have a core AI 
strategy  in place.About the research
Revenue (USD)
887
266  20715897
$1 - $4,9 billion 
$5 - $9,9 billion 
$10 - $19,9 billion
$20 - $49,9 billion
$50 billion or more CountriesIndustries 
Australia (116 )
Brazil (65)
Canada (98 )
China (111 )
France  (93 )
Germany  (87 )
India  (77 )
Israel  (42 )Italy  (69) 
Japan  (102 )
Singapore  (38 )
South Africa  (76) 
Spain  (65) 
UK  (173  )
US  (403 ) Financial services (Banking, Capital markets, Insurance)  
Tech (High Tech and Software & Platform)  
Automotive (OEM, Auto-ancillary, Auto-parts)  
Retail
Consumer Goods & Services  
Public Services (Focus on NA)
Telecommunications, Media & Entertainment  
Utilities
Life Sciences (Pharma & Biotech)  
Chemicals
Energy (Oil & Gas Upstream, Downstream)  
Natural Resources (Metals & Mining, Forest Products)  
Healthcare (Payers)  
Travel & Transport (Hotel & Passenger)
Industrial Equipment  
Aerospace & Defense  177
131
106
105
102
99
98
98
97
94
93
91
89
86
85
64
 34
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAppendix
Survey
From August to September 2021, 
Accenture surveyed 1,615 C-suite 
executives at 1,176 of the world’s largest 
companies—present in 16 industries and 
headquartered in 15 countries. In this 
report we have highlighted the AI 
maturity trends in Growth Markets.
Interviews and case studies
We interviewed 25 CEOs, Chief Data 
Officers and Chief Analytics Officers. 
We also interviewed Renée Richardson 
Gosline (Senior Lecturer at MIT Sloan 
School of Management and Principal 
Research Scientist at MIT’s Initiative on 
the Digital Economy) and Christine Foster 
(Chief Commercial Officer at The Alan 
Turing Institute), as well as numerous AI 
experts at Accenture. Through research 
and client work, we also developed 
over 40 company case studies on AI 
transformation.
Design thinking
We ran a MURAL session with more than 
15 senior data scientists to validate our AI 
maturity model. Economic modeling and data science
To assess companies’ AI maturity, as well 
as other measures of performance, we 
took the following steps:
1.  Identified key capabilities of AI 
maturity  
We sought to understand the key 
capabilities that contribute to reaching 
both an “entry” level of AI maturity (i.e. 
deriving at least 10% of revenues from 
AI-influenced initiatives from 2018 to 
2021) and a higher level of AI maturity 
(i.e. deriving more than 30% of revenues 
from 2018 to 2021). To do this, we built 
two machine learning models that 
account for more than 80 capabilities 
that contribute to the two different 
levels of AI maturity (see box below). 
 
Ri = β0+β1Xit + β2 Capabilitiesit-1 + 
β3 ∆Capabilitiesit + β4Capabilities 
Interactionsit,t-1 + eit 
 
 
 Ri represents the level and evolution 
of a company’s AI-influenced revenues 
(sustaining at >10%, reaching >30%) 
With i = company, t = 2021 and t-1 = 2018, 
Xit includes controls for industry, firm 
size and company location (country).  
 
The model is a linear probability Lasso 
model, a K-fold cross-validation with 10 
folds performed.
2.  Defined "foundational" and 
"differentiation" capabilities 
In our models, we classified 
Capabilitiesit-1 and ∆Capabilitiesit as AI 
foundational capabilities; Capabilities 
Interactionsit,t-1 are—as the name 
suggests—capabilities with interaction, 
with strong senior sponsorship 
and a well-defined AI strategy. We 
classified these interaction terms as AI 
differentiation capabilities. 
 
From our models, we discovered 
that AI foundational capabilities have 
stronger explanatory power in the first 
model of “sustaining at >10%” than 
AI differentiation capabilities; in the second model of “reaching over >30%”, 
AI differentiation capabilities have 
stronger explanatory power. In other 
words, AI foundational capabilities are 
essential to building the necessary 
foundation for organizations to enter 
the AI race. Meanwhile, AI differentiation 
capabilities are key for organizations to 
reach the next level of AI maturity.
3.  Built the AI maturity index 
We built two indexes that measure 
companies’ AI foundational capabilities 
and AI differentiation capabilities, 
respectively, as identified by our two 
models. An overall AI maturity index 
is built as the arithmetic average of 
both AI foundational index and AI 
differentiation index, which is indicative 
of their probability of achieving high 
AI-influenced revenue. The median 
maturity index of all companies is 
36/100.
4.  Constructed AI profiles based on 
foundational and differentiation 
capabilities 
The AI foundational capabilities and AI 
differentiation capabilities indexes were 
 35
The art of AI maturity—Growth Marketsthen used to construct a matrix. We 
used the top quartile as a threshold on 
both axes to cluster all the companies 
from the survey into four groups:
• AI Achievers—the top quartile on 
both foundational and differentiation 
median maturity index: 64/100
• AI Builders—the top quartile 
on foundational but not on 
differentiation median maturity 
index: 44/100
• AI Innovators—the top quartile 
on differentiation but not on 
foundational median maturity index: 
50/100
• AI Experimenters—all remaining 
companies median maturity index: 
29/100
5.  Measured Achievers’ financial 
premium 
To assess AI Achievers’ financial 
performance, we used data from 
S&P Capital IQ to build the following regression model: Revenue growthi = 
β0+β1Xi + β2 AI Achiever + ei 
(i = company, AI Achiever as the dummy 
variable, and Xi including controls 
for industry, firm size, and company 
location).
6.  Measured Achievers’ stakeholder 
performance 
To assess Achievers’ stakeholder 
performance in the areas of customer 
experience, sustainability, workforce, 
and supply chain, we built scores from 
0-100 in these respective areas using 
data from FactSet, Arabesque, Oxford 
Economics, and S&P Capital IQ, which 
measure companies' performance 
against their industrial peers. The 
difference between Achievers and 
other companies is highly statistically 
significant (p < 0.01) for customer 
experience and sustainability.  
The following offers more detail on 
each area.
• Customer experience reflects 
how companies strengthen their 
sales pipeline by developing 
strong customer relationships; our 
measures include consumer trust, customer churn, product quality 
and safety, and an overall customer-
centric mindset.
• Sustainability reflects how 
companies strengthen their 
commitment to environmental 
stewardship; our measures include 
greenhouse gas emissions, 
ecological management, resource 
use, water and waste efficiency, and 
various environmental solutions.
• Financial reflects how companies 
deliver profitable growth and 
operate efficiently.
• Workforce/employee experience 
reflects how companies unlock 
their workforces’ full potential; our 
measures include compensation, 
employment quality, employee 
turnover, occupational health 
and safety, and training and 
development.
• Supply chain reflects how 
companies manage risks associated
with their supplier networks and 
inventory levels; our measures include 
supplier diversification, supplier risk, 
and inventory management.7.  Measured the speed of AI 
transformation vs. the speed of 
digital transformation  
To understand how fast companies 
undergo AI transformation compared 
to digital transformation, we used 
the frequency of mentions of both 
terms on companies’ earnings calls 
as a proxy. To do this, we performed 
a natural language processing 
analysis of investor calls of the world’s 
2,000 largest companies (by market 
capitalization), sourced from the S&P 
earnings transcripts database. (Note: 
Our analysis included 744 companies 
with a consistent history of earnings 
calls during 2010-21.) Finally, we 
built predictive S-Curve models that 
estimated the time, henceforth, that it 
would take for 90% of such companies 
to mention the aforementioned terms 
on their earnings calls.
 36
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsStrategy and Sponsorship 
1. Senior Sponsorship: Organizations 
have an AI strategy that is developed 
by the Chief Analytics Officer, Chief 
Data Officer, Chief Digital Officer 
or an equivalent. The CEO and the 
Board actively sponsor and share 
accountability for the strategy and 
associated AI initiatives. 
2. AI Strategy: Organizations not only 
have a core AI strategy aligned to the 
overall business strategy, but they 
also dedicate tools and tactics to 
execute it and continuously track their 
performance against that strategy. 
3. Proactive vs. Reactive: Organizations 
have the resources (such as 
technology, talent and patents) to 
proactively define and demonstrate 
how AI can create value vs. apply AI as a reaction to a need. They’re first-
movers instead of fast followers in 
terms of applying AI for business value.
4. Readily Available AI and ML tools: 
Organizations work with an ecosystem 
of technology partners to access 
machine learning models and tools  
to help innovate new products  
and services.
5. Readily Available Developer 
Networks: Organizations tap into an 
ecosystem of technology partners 
to access developer networks that 
support the development of new 
products and services.
Data and AI Core 
6. Build vs. Buy: Organizations develop 
custom-built AI applications or work with a partner who offers solutions-
as-a-service, vs. purchase “off-the-
shelf” AI solutions with little-to-no 
customization. 
7. Platform and Technology: 
Organizations apply the necessary 
cloud, data and AI infrastructure, 
software, self-serve capabilities and 
industry best practices, and they adopt 
the latest tools available from platform 
and technology partners. 
8. Experimentation Data—Change: 
Organizations improved their use 
of experimentation data between 
2018 and 2021, effectively translating 
into a higher data and AI maturity. 
Experimentation data is the use of 
internal and external data to design 
new models and generate new 
insights. To do that, organizations use 
enterprise-grade cloud platforms to keep data clean and trustworthy, and 
to support decision making at greater 
speed and scale.  
9. Data Management and Governance: 
Organizations scale their data 
management and governance 
practices to increase data quality, 
trust and ethics across entities 
—e.g. by implementing master data 
management and ensuring security, 
compliance and interoperability. 
10. Data Management and Governance—
Change: Organizations improved their 
data management and governance 
practices between 2018 and 2021, 
effectively translating into a higher data 
and AI maturity.  Key Capabilities
 37
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsTalent and culture 
11. Mandatory AI Training: Organizations 
enforce AI-specific training programs to 
improve AI fluency, which are tailored 
for senior leadership and specific 
functions, e.g. salesforce, product 
engineers, etc. They also create 
deliberate opportunities for employees 
to learn and apply AI in their roles. 
12. Employee Competency in AI-
Related Skills: Organizations regularly 
measure the competency level of 
employees to determine where further 
training is needed to improve overall 
acumen. They measure and build 
expertise in critical areas like coding, 
data processing and exploration, 
business analytics, domain and 
business acumen, machine learning, 
visualization and more. 13. Innovation Culture Embedded: 
Organizations ensure innovation is part 
of the day-to-day work environment. 
They encourage mindsets, behaviors 
and routines that all serve as a vehicle 
for experimentation, collaboration 
and learning from ideation to product 
development to market launch. 
14. Innovation Culture Encouraged: 
Organizations promote and reward 
innovative mindsets and behaviors 
including entrepreneurship, 
collaboration and thoughtful  
risk-taking. 
15. AI Talent Strategy: Organizations have 
an AI talent strategy—hiring, acquiring, 
retention—that evolves to keep pace 
with market or business needs. They 
also have an AI talent roadmap for 
hiring diverse AI-related roles, beyond just ML engineers—such as  
behavioral scientists, social scientists, 
and ethicists.  
Responsible AI 
16. Responsible AI: Organizations have 
an industrialized, responsible approach 
to data and AI across the complete 
lifecycle of their AI models—an 
approach that can meet changing 
regulatory requirements, mitigate risks, 
and support sustainable, trustworthy AI. 
17. Responsible AI—Change: 
Organizations have improved their 
responsible data and AI practices 
between 2018 and 2021, effectively 
translating into a higher data and  
AI maturity. 
 38
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsReferences
1  https://news.stanford.edu/news/2011/october/john-mccarthy-obit-102511.
html#:~:text=John%20McCarthy%2C%20a%20professor%20emeritus,He%20
was%2084
2  Accenture Research analysis of the world’s 2,000 largest companies by market 
capitalization mentioning AI in their earnings calls. Formula is based on CEOs of 
companies that had earnings call in 2020, and CEO was present at the call, and 
CEO mentioned AI. 46% of these CEOs mentioned AI in their earnings calls, in 
2021 up from ~35% in 2017. 
3 Accenture Interview
4  https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/13/business/coronavirus-retraining-workers.
html5  https://global.rakuten.com/corp/careers/topics/engineering3/ 
6  https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/software/american-express-sets-
up-data-analytics-risk-technology-lab-in-iit-madras/articleshow/77925793.cms 
7  https://www.novartis.com/about/strategy/data-and-digital/artificial-intelligence/
our-commitment-ethical-and-responsible-use-ai  
8 https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/artificial-intelligence/ai-investments
 39
The art of AI maturity—Growth MarketsAbout Accenture
Accenture is a global professional services company 
with leading capabilities in digital, cloud and security. 
Combining unmatched experience and specialized 
skills across more than 40 industries, we offer Strategy 
and Consulting, Interactive, Technology and Operations 
services—all powered by the world’s largest network of 
Advanced Technology and Intelligent Operations centers. 
Our 738,000 people deliver on the promise of technology 
and human ingenuity every day, serving clients in more 
than 120 countries. We embrace the power of change to 
create value and shared success for our clients, people, 
shareholders, partners and communities. 
Visit us at www.accenture.com.
Disclaimer
This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our 
professional advisors. This document makes descriptive reference to trademarks that may be owned by others. The use of 
such trademarks herein is not an assertion of ownership of such trademarks by Accenture and is not intended to represent 
or imply the existence of an association between Accenture and the lawful owners of such trademarks.
Copyright © 2023 Accenture. All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.About Accenture Research
Accenture Research creates thought leadership about 
the most pressing business issues organizations face. 
Combining innovative research techniques, such as 
data science led analysis, with a deep understanding of 
industry and technology, our team of 300 researchers 
in 20 countries publish hundreds of reports, articles and 
points of view every year. Our thought-provoking research 
developed with world leading organizations helps our 
clients embrace change, create value, and deliver on the 
power of technology and human ingenuity.About Applied Intelligence 
Applied Intelligence is Accenture’s approach to scaling 
AI for clients by embedding AI-powered data, analytics 
and automation capabilities into business workflows, 
accelerating time to value with a powerful global alliance, 
innovation and delivery network that can deploy and scale 
AI within any market and industry. 
The art of AI maturity—Growth Markets