 1
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
From i nsights to action, the pa th to extraordina ry value starts here. 
The human paradox  
From customer centricity to life centricity 2
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityPeople are facing a world that feels out of control. At a time when 
economic, social, environmental and political upheaval is turning 
almost everything we know upside down, people are finding 
themselves in a multi-directional tug-of-war. 
Faced with the pressure of all these external forces at once, their 
decisions boil down to trade-offs between what they want, what 
they need and what options are available. 
The results can seem ... contradictory.
People are prioritizing themselves ... but want to effect change for 
others. They want to follow their values ... but not at the expense 
of value. They’re taking matters into their own hands … but also 
want companies to hold their hand.
These kinds of inconsistencies might not be new, but they’re 
increasingly considered normal—and even good.1 In fact, new 
Accenture research reveals that up to 69% of consumers globally 
who admit to behaving inconsistently think that paradoxical 
behaviors are both human and acceptable.2 69%
of consumers globally 
who admit to behaving 
inconsistently think that 
paradoxical behaviors are 
both human and acceptable.  3
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
“I made a conscious decision not to be 
defined by things I have to do in life and 
still make time to grow myself.”3
 - British consumerConsumer needs are changing fast—and 
companies will have to evolve just as quickly 
if they want to stay relevant.  
Oversimplifying segmentation and underestimating the impact 
of life forces on behavior have led to a growing disconnect 
between what companies think their customers want and what 
consumers say they want. To bridge the gap, businesses need 
to widen their aperture and move from focusing only on the 
consumption of customers to seeing their customers as they 
see themselves: multifaceted, complex and doing their best to 
adapt to unpredictable life circumstances out of their control. 
It’s time for companies to move from customer centricity to 
life centricity. 4
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Consumers are showing they are 
comfortable being multi-dimensional, 
but many businesses continue to see 
them in just one way: as walking wallets.  
 
Companies are focused on finding simple ways to define 
consumers and predict their behaviors. But our research 
reveals a major disconnect between what consumers say 
they most value from companies and what companies 
appear to be investing in (see Figure 1).4
     A crisis  
        of relevance 5
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Figure 1 
Signals  
of a  
disconnect 
What matters most to 
consumers is not what 
companies appear to 
be investing in.
Source: Accenture 
Research. See page 25 
for more information.
Occasional Shopping
Customers 
1  Sustainability
2  Trust
3  Personal Growth
4  Convenience
5  Recognition
6  Fun1  Convenience
2  Fun
3  Recognition
4  Personal Growth
5  Sustainability
6  TrustCompanies
Banking
Customers 
1  Trust
2  Convenience
3  Personal Growth
4  Fun
5  Recognition
6  Sustainability1  Convenience
2  Personal Growth
3  Recognition
4  Sustainability
5  Fun
6  TrustCompanies
 Customers 
1  Convenience
2  Trust
3  Personal Growth
4  Recognition
5  Sustainability
6  Fun1  Recognition
2  Fun
3  Personal Growth
4  Convenience
5  Sustainability
6  TrustCompaniesEveryday Shopping
Customers 
1  Trust
2  Fun
3  Convenience
4  Sustainability
5  Personal Growth
6  Recognition1  Recognition
2  Convenience
3  Sustainability
4  Fun
5  Personal Growth
6  TrustCompaniesTravel
Customers 
1  Recognition
2  Trust
3  Personal Growth
4  Fun
5  Convenience
6  Sustainability1  Recognition
2  Convenience
3  Personal Growth
4  Trust
5  Fun
6  SustainabilityCompaniesHealthcare
Customers 
1  Convenience
2  Sustainability
3  Recognition
4  Trust
5  Fun
6  Personal Growth1  Personal Growth
2  Recognition
3  Convenience
4  Fun
5  Sustainability
6  TrustCompaniesInsurance 6
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityThe disconnect is broadly felt on both sides: Up to 64% of 
consumers wish companies would respond faster to meet 
their changing needs,5 while up to 88% of executives think 
their customers are changing faster than their business 
can keep up.6
This mismatch puts retention rates at risk and constrains 
companies’ efforts to attract new customers. A growing 
number of consumers—up to 67%, a jump from 51% one 
year ago7—expect companies to address their changing 
needs in new ways. More than half say company and brand 
names are not as important to them as they used to be, 
and that what they look for in a product or brand is likely to 
change depending on circumstances.8  Though broad analysis of this kind can only partially 
capture such a complex challenge, what it signals is still 
urgent: At a time when consumer choice has never been 
higher—and the cost of switching to a new brand has 
never been lower—a relevance gap this significant could 
come at great cost if not addressed. 
One thing is clear: The old playbook for relevance is now 
obsolete. It’s time to take on a new strategy.“Stop hiding behind focus groups and marketing hype, 
and speak to people with an honest voice.”
 - British consumer
64%of consumers wish 
companies would 
respond faster to meet 
their changing needs. 88%
of executives think their 
customers are changing faster 
than their business can keep up.  7
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Life forces  
causing  
     relentless  
         instability 
The world as we know it today is 
radically different from the world of two 
years ago … or even two months ago . 
With its impossible-to-overstate impact on every area 
of our lives, the COVID-19 crisis spurred people to 
reevaluate what was important to them. 8
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityIn fact, up to 72% of consumers say that 
external factors such as inflation, social 
movements and climate change are 
impacting their lives more than in the past.9 
Consumer prices are skyrocketing at 
their highest rates in 40 years,10 while 
the war in Ukraine indicates long-term 
consequences for global markets, food 
prices and political stability.11 Major societal 
and cultural movements around the world 
are magnifying conversations around social 
justice issues, just as increased political 
polarization and a growing distrust in 
government and media complicate the 
path to change.12  Technology has democratized access to 
information, with Web3 and the metaverse 
hinting at a creative and dynamic future, 
but up to 43% of consumers say technology 
advancements have complicated their lives 
just as much as they have simplified things.13  
With external forces exerting more 
pressure, and a list of practical and ethical 
considerations that keeps getting longer, 
people are facing more complex and more 
frequent decisions than ever before. To help 
make them, they are looking to the people 
they trust the most: themselves.72%
of consumers say that external factors 
such as inflation, social movements and 
climate change are impacting their lives 
more than in the past. 
60%
of consumers say their priorities keep 
changing as a result of everything going 
on in the world. But it’s more than just the pandemic: A non-stop barrage of 
external life forces—economic, social and beyond—is affecting 
day-to-day decisions in unavoidable ways.  9
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Purpose,  
         redefined
Forced to adjust to circumstances beyond their 
control and armed with technology that gives them 
more access to expertise than ever, consumers are 
developing a stronger sense of self-reliance.14  
 10
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityThey’re taking control:
“The purpose of using digital technology 
is to help myself. I won’t let it control me. 
I will keep my conscience and be the 
master of myself.” 
 - Chinese consumerThey’re making changes:
“It has been a rough two years for 
everyone with COVID, but I took 
it as an opportunity to change 
direction in my life, and I have not 
regretted it.”
 - British consumerThey’re wrestling with fears:  
“At the moment, I’m worried about 
whether I can afford basics like 
food and electricity, as everything 
is so expensive.”
- British consumer 11
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityToday, up to three-quarters of consumers around the world say 
they feel empowered to make key decisions in their own lives.15  
They are more self-assured in setting 
priorities and feel a greater sense of 
responsibility to make decisions that benefit 
themselves, their families and society. 
Our research indicates that this self-
empowerment is on the rise.
As people become more self-reliant, they 
are also rethinking the values that drive 
them. Up to two-thirds of consumers say 
they have completely reimagined what’s 
important to them in life—a 10 percentage 
point increase over the prior year.16 And up 
to 62% say many new things are important 
to them because of what’s going on globally 
and locally.17 But redefining a sense of purpose amid a 
backdrop of unstable external life forces 
opens the door to inconsistencies, between 
what we believe or want and what we 
actually do. Some 61% of consumers say 
their priorities keep changing as a result of 
everything going on in the world.18 As those 
priorities change, so do decision-making 
behaviors.
Now, they are ready to act in their own best 
interests—because if they won’t, who will?
“I’ve been through challenging situations and made bold 
decisions that turned out to be right. Now, I feel more 
confident in myself—and more empowered.”
- Indian consumer
 12
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
In an environment of perpetual change, 
consumers are working to reconcile 
their core values and sense of purpose 
with the demands and practicalities of 
everyday life.
Making peacewith paradoxes
“We are buying high-class food for 
our pet, but we are going to fast 
food restaurants ourselves.”  
- American consumer 13
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityCustomers prioritize themselves ...  
but want to effect change for others
Even as up to 66% of consumers say their decision-
making is driven by their own needs,19 some 72% feel they 
can personally impact the world and their communities 
through behaviors and buying choices.20 
 
They’re taking things into their own hands …  
but also want companies to hold their hand
Though they are feeling newly empowered to make key decisions 
on their own, as many as 67% expect companies to understand and 
address their changing needs during times of disruption.21   The net-effect is a growing acceptance of 
paradoxes, in which people make peace with the 
often contradictory and conflicting consumption 
decisions they make moment to moment. The results can be messy and inconsistent: 
Customers prioritize values ...  
but not at the expense of value
More than half of consumers say the pandemic motivated 
them to adopt a more sustainable lifestyle,22 but up to 65% say 
price increases have led them to select lower-cost brands on 
recent purchases.23   
They care about their impact …  
but don’t know how to act on it
Nearly 70% of consumers are worried about the impact of 
climate change on their lives24—but continue to struggle to 
make sustainability a top priority over other needs.25 14
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
These paradoxical decisions are not new—  
humans have always been highly inconsistent, 
after all. What’s changed is the increasing 
frequency and comfort with which they are made. 
It’s not that people are abandoning their values when  
making these decisions. They understand that perfect is the 
enemy of the good and accept that compromises are a fact of life 
when they are just trying to do their best. 
As people become more self-reliant and more willing to accept 
the paradoxes in their own decision-making, they feel better 
prepared to meet future challenges. “I’m following my own rules, listening 
to my own voice of reason and living 
the way I want.”
 - South African consumer 15
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Businesses once looked to a product-centric approach 
focused on performance. 
Then they shifted to a customer-centric strategy, meant to prioritize experience. But 
now, the dynamics are more complicated. Until companies stop oversimplifying their 
customers and start accepting that they are ever-changing, multi-dimensional people 
deeply impacted by unpredictable external forces, they’ll find themselves stuck.
They need to become life-centric.
Life-centric businesses deeply understand the different forces shaping customers’ 
lives and deliver the most relevant solutions for those contexts. Companies that 
embrace a life-centered approach—one that takes into consideration the humanity of 
the consumer, their shifting modes and the unpredictable life forces that come into 
play along the way—are best positioned to thrive in the future.
To move toward life centricity, companies need to do three things.life centricity From customer 
centricity to  
 16
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
01See customers  
            in their full life
For years, businesses have tried to come 
up with personas and profiles that sort their 
customers into tidy categories with predictable 
behaviors. And they’re coming up short. Our 
research shows that as consumers lean into 
their self-reliance and accept the inevitability of 
paradoxes, they are breaking every convention. 
By only focusing on static segmentation 
models and expecting a straight-line customer 
journey, companies risk missing out on the 
deeper insights underpinning behavior—and 
the ability to drive new value and relationships. The way forward is to take a holistic, 
dynamic view of who customers are and 
what motivates their behaviors—and to treat 
them as more than just buyers.
A key requirement is to rethink their 
data. Data can reveal information about 
consumers and their behaviors in a 
revolutionary way—but numbers alone can’t 
paint a whole picture. Businesses need to 
rethink how they collect data, as privacy 
concerns and regulation impact collection, 
and what they are looking for, as a greater 
need for finding the human side in the 
numbers emerges. 17
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityCase in point  
Allstate lets you  
choose your own road
Pressure for change: 
 
Owning a car can be fun and freeing. But for 
those that only use their vehicle occasionally, 
the monthly insurance costs can be a burden—
especially as gas prices are on the rise.
 The life-centric solution: 
 
Milewise® by Allstate is a new type of car 
insurance where customers only pay per 
mile they drive. It comes with the same 
reliable coverage and claims service as 
traditional insurance, but for as low as  
US$1.50 a day, plus a small mile rate.26 
 
Why it works:  
 
This insurance puts customers firmly in the driver’s seat. Whether they’re planning a cross-
country road trip or a bi-weekly grocery shop, Milewise® has the flexibility to meet their 
needs. It offers more control and transparency on their insurance costs—and shows one-
size-fits-all isn’t the only way.
 18
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Solve for                      
         shifting  
      scenarios 
Life-centric businesses are prepared 
to adapt and deliver relevant options 
across their products and services to 
accommodate the shifting life forces 
impacting their customers. 
Consider where they are in terms of two 
key factors: time and control. Decision-
making often hinges on whether something 
is required right now or can wait until 
later. Time-based considerations (short-
term versus long-term needs, urgent 
versus unrestricted schedules) can change 
moment to moment, but always shape the 
way consumers make choices. Also crucial 
is their appetite for control. People have a sliding scale of willingness 
to defer to others’ expertise versus a 
desire to take control of their own options. 
Sometimes they want something highly 
specific; other times they value inspiration 
and new ideas. 
Meeting these changing needs means 
turning paradox into product: If consumers 
are learning to accept their own 
inconsistencies and acknowledging the 
paradoxes in their day-to-day decision-
making, companies can find ways to 
cater to their conflicts. Offering options 
that combine values and priorities in new 
ways will speak to consumers who are 
reevaluating what they want and need.
Ultimately, businesses need to abandon the 
idea of one-size-fits-all products or services 
and focus on flexible options. If customer 
needs are forever in flux, companies 
must be prepared to connect with them 
regardless of circumstances. 02 19
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityCase in point  
Saying “yes” to life  
with Santander Sim
Pressure for change:
A personal line of credit can be life changing, 
especially when the pace of life makes long-
term planning hard and unforeseen expenses 
inevitable. In Brazil, many people have no or 
little access to affordable credit, due to the 
limitations of legacy data and processes. The life-centric solution:
Santander wanted to make affordable credit 
more widely available to Brazilian citizens, 
regardless of their bank account status. So it 
launched Santander Sim, a digital platform 
that is now the fastest and simplest way to 
apply for a personal loan in Brazil, with a 
decision time of approximately two minutes 
per loan.27
Why it works: 
When people need money, the word they most often hear is “no.” By cutting down on the 
time to process and the requirements needed to get a personal loan, Santander Sim helps 
people say “yes” to life without delay. 
 20
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Simplify  
           for relevance            03
Amid the pressure of life forces and the chaos 
of everyday life, what customers ultimately 
need is simplicity. They are drawn to anything 
that cuts through the noise and makes their 
decision-making—and their lives—easier. 
Businesses that want to stay relevant need to 
find ways to clear the path for consumers to 
walk easily.
To do this, companies can look to data, artificial 
intelligence and expert inputs to help draw 
connections between their customers’ needs 
and the external life forces that are influencing 
them. Using technology combined with human 
expertise offers the qualitative and quantitative 
information necessary to understand what 
customers are facing and come up with 
creative solutions quickly. But simplifying the consumer experience 
is impossible if organizations do not also 
simplify from within. Companies must be 
ruthless about prioritization and dynamic 
and continuous in how they evolve. This 
requires creating interoperability across all 
customer-facing functions (such as product 
innovation, marketing, sales, service and 
commerce), with an integrated technology 
stack across platforms and ecosystems. 
Companies that are focused on simplifying 
are best positioned to pivot as needed in a 
changing environment. 
 21
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityCase in point  
Blue Buffalo  
grows beyond the bowl
Pressure for change:
Nearly one in five US families expanded during 
the pandemic to include a new pet.28 But, as 
many learned, pet care is plenty of work. And 
with information and resources scattered 
across multiple sources, it can be hard to know 
what to trust.The life-centric solution:
In light of increased adoptions, pet food 
company Blue Buffalo sought to become 
equal parts food purveyor and trusted 
guide. It launched Buddies, a digital app 
that serves pet-care content and helps pet 
parents track their furry friends’ health, 
connect with other pet owners and chat 
with Blue Buffalo advisors.29  
Why it works: 
By aiming to simplify the lives of pet owners and its own operations to deliver 
on these services, Blue Buffalo has become a trusted partner to pet parents, 
transforming the pet-care experience. 
 22
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
Global instability isn’t going away. 
So as consumers work to navigate it, businesses must embrace a life-centric approach 
that helps them meet customers’ ever-changing circumstances and priorities. 
By seeing customers in their full lives, businesses will be prepared to serve them no 
matter what external forces are in play. 
Expanding options, addressing consumer values and connecting with them in new 
ways opens the door to ongoing growth and innovation. With this approach, life-
centric businesses will be best positioned to meet the future—no matter what new 
challenges are around the corner. 
Putting  
life 
front  
and  
center 23
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityBaiju Shah
Senior Managing Director 
Chief Strategy Officer,  
Accenture Song  
 
Baiju is the Chief Strategy Officer for 
Accenture Song, responsible for the 
global growth strategy. Throughout 
his career, Baiju has traversed 
technology, strategy, design and 
marketing. His specialty is combining 
these crafts to create new growth and 
relevance for people and for business. 
Baiju also serves as a professor of 
growth innovation at Northwestern 
University and is based in Chicago. 
Dr. Edwin van der Ouderaa
Senior Managing Director 
Global Lead,  
Customer, Sales & Service 
 
Edwin is the global lead for 
Accenture’s Customer, Sales & 
Service practice. He also serves as 
Accenture’s global lead of Digital 
Banking. Edwin partners with 
clients to design and activate digital 
customer experiences at scale and 
advance growth agendas through 
insights and innovation. He is based 
in Belgium.
Rachel Barton
Senior Managing Director 
Europe Lead,  
Accenture Strategy 
 
Rachel leads Accenture Strategy 
in Europe. Working with some 
of the world’s biggest brands, 
Rachel advises business leaders 
on how they can drive growth and 
transformation agendas through 
disruptive technologies, data and 
leading-edge customer strategies. 
Rachel is based in London.
Agneta Björnsjö
Global Research Lead,  
Accenture Song  
With more than 20 years of 
experience in market and 
business research, Agneta’s role 
is to design and lead a variety of 
research initiatives that open up 
new perspectives and support 
provocative thought leadership. 
She is based in Stockholm.
Authors 24
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityAcknowledgements
Marvin Miranda
Global Executive Strategy Director, 
Accenture SongResearch Lead
Agneta Björnsjö
 
Research
Juliana Azuero 
Josh Bellin 
Konstanty Chyb 
Agata Dowbor 
Christopher Eich 
Ajay D. Garg 
Atul Gautam 
Carrie Klein 
Michael Malinoski 
Julia Malinska 
Anna Marszalik 
Regina Maruca 
Taurai Nyaruwata 
Sotirios Papoutsis 
Linda Ringnalda 
Gabriel Schmittlein 
Joanna Syczewska
 Marketing + Communications Lead
Joe Taiano
Marketing + Communications Team
Quezia Soares 
Elisabeth Edvardsen 
Sally Faust 25
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricityAccenture conducted a survey of 25,908 
consumers aged 18+ across 22 countries to gain 
an understanding of how their preferences, 
beliefs and behaviors are evolving as they 
navigate the changing world around them. 
Fieldwork was conducted between January and 
February 2022, with follow-up surveys in April 
and June of the same year. 
The follow-up surveys included 13,000 
consumers across 12 countries. To deepen the 
understanding of our survey findings, Accenture 
ran online focus groups with 385 participants 
across seven countries in March 2022. 
 Figure 1 modeling
Customer ranking: To understand which 
dimensions are most predictive of a consumer’s 
decision to stay with a current provider, Accenture 
Research built a set of machine learning models 
to account for 95 different attributes across six 
industries. These attributes were collected through 
our global consumer survey fielded January to 
February 2022. 
The survey evaluated the importance of each 
attribute at different consumer decision points as 
well as the performance of their current provider. 
To account for intrinsic differences among 
consumers, the models also included a wide range 
of respondents’ individual characteristics beyond 
traditional demographics, such as mindsets and 
decision-making status. The models were estimated 
using a Random Forest classification algorithm. 
After identifying the optimal model for each of 
the industries in scope, we extracted the average 
importance of each attribute (i.e. the improvement 
to predictive accuracy) of each dimension variable 
to define the attributes’ predictive power.
 Company ranking: The company ranking 
is based on analysis of natural language 
processing models on corporate earning 
calls with the goal of understanding which 
six dimensions we tested —convenience, 
trust, recognition, personal growth, fun, and 
sustainability—are most frequently discussed 
by corporate executives. 
To properly classify our proprietary NLP 
algorithm, we manually mapped hundreds 
of earnings calls snippets to the experience 
dimensions. We used this tagged dataset to 
estimate a classification model and assign the 
dimensions to earnings calls from 320 unique 
companies across six different industries for 
the period from 2020 to 2022.About the research 26
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity1 Loizos Heracleous and David Robson, BBC, “Why the 
‘paradox mindset’ is the key to success,” November 11, 
2020.
2Accenture Research, global consumer survey, June 2022 
(n=5,486).
3 All quotes from online focus group sessions hosted from 
March 15-23, 2022, across UK, US, South Africa, India, 
China, France and Brazil, unless otherwise indicated.
4 Accenture Research econometric model of consumer 
loyalty using global consumer survey January 2022 to 
February 2022 (n = 25,908) and Accenture Research 
natural language processing analysis of company 
earnings call transcripts (S&P Global Transcripts)  
(n = 1640 sentence extracts from 2020-2022).
5 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, January to 
February 2022 (n=25,908).
6 Accenture, Global Executive Research fielded January to 
March 2022 (n=850).
7 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, January 
to February 2022 (n=25,908); Accenture Research, global 
consumer survey 2021 (n=25,444).8 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, June 2022 
(n=13,165).
9 Ibid.  
10 Paul Wiseman, Associated Press, “EXPLAINER: Why US 
inflation is so high, and when it may ease,” April 12, 2022.
11 Holly Ellyatt, CNBC, “From soaring food prices to social 
unrest, the fallout from the Russia-Ukraine war could be 
immense,” April 21, 2022.
12 Edelman Trust Barometer 2022 Global Report.
13 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, June 2022 
(n=13,165).
14 Salena Zito, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, “Global instability 
driving Americans to a new, old habit: self-reliance,” April 
22, 2022.
15 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, January to 
February 2022 (n=25,908).
16 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, January 
to February 2022 (n=25,908); Accenture Research, global 
consumer survey 2021 (n=25,444).
17 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, June 2022 
(n=13,165).
18 Ibid. 19 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, January to 
February 2022 (n=25,908).
20 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, June 2022 
(n=13,165).
21 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, January 
to February 2022 (n=25,908); Accenture Research, global 
consumer survey 2021 (n=25,444).
22 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, June 2022 
(n=13,165).
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.
25 Accenture Research, global consumer survey, April 2022 
(n=13,085).
26 Allstate, Milewise® from Allstate, accessed July 7, 2022.
27 Santander, Emprestimo Sim, accessed July 7, 2022.
28 ASPCA, “New ASPCA Survey Shows Overwhelming 
Majority of Dogs and Cats Acquired During the Pandemic 
Are Still in Their Homes,” May 26, 2021.
29 Blue Buffalo, Buddies, accessed July 7, 2022.References 27
The human paradox: From customer centricity to life centricity
About Accenture
Accenture is a global professional services 
company with leading capabilities in digital, 
cloud and security. Combining unmatched 
experience and specialized skills across more than 
40 industries, we offer Strategy and Consulting, 
Song, Technology and Operations services—
all powered by the world’s largest network of 
Advanced Technology and Intelligent Operations 
centers. Our 699,000 people deliver on the 
promise of technology and human ingenuity every 
day, serving clients in more than 120 countries. 
We embrace the power of change to create 
value and shared success for our clients, people, 
shareholders, partners and communities. 
Visit us at www.accenture.com
Disclaimer
This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our professional 
advisors. This document refers to marks owned by third parties. All such third-party marks are the property of their respective owners.  
No sponsorship, endorsement or approval of this content by the owners of such marks is intended, expressed or implied. 
Copyright © 2022 Accenture. All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.About Accenture Song
Accenture Song accelerates growth and value for 
our clients through sustained customer relevance. 
Our capabilities span ideation to execution: growth, 
product and experience design; technology 
and experience platforms; creative, media and 
marketing strategy; and campaign, commerce 
transformation, content and channel orchestration. 
With strong client relationships and deep industry 
expertise, we help our clients operate at the 
speed of life through the unlimited potential of 
imagination, technology and intelligence.About Accenture Research
Accenture Research creates thought leadership 
about the most pressing business issues 
organizations face. Combining innovative 
research techniques, such as data science led 
analysis, with a deep understanding of industry 
and technology, our team of 300 researchers 
in 20 countries publish hundreds of reports, 
articles and points of view every year. Our 
thought-provoking research developed with 
world leading organizations helps our clients 
embrace change, create value, and deliver on 
the power of technology and human ingenuity.