 1From i nsights to action, the pa th to extraordina ry value starts here. 
The life centricity playbook  
Proven strategies for growth through relevanceThe life centricity playbook
 2
After years of global volatility, black swan events continue  
to upend the world as we know it, yet leaders are finding  
their toolboxes offer limited options to thrive amid the 
upheaval. Attracting and motivating talent has become more 
difficult, while initiatives meant to induce growth often fail  
to gain traction.
At the same time, people are becoming increasingly 
unpredictable—even paradoxical—in their choices.1 As they  
face economic, social, environmental and political instability, 
they are continuously reassessing their values and sense of purpose. They seek to balance their needs with the constant 
pressures of external life forces, while still demanding more, 
better and faster from the companies with which they interact. 
Amid these ongoing challenges, we surveyed 1,700 global 
C-suite leaders over the course of two survey runs. What we 
learned underlines the key issue of today: In our most recent 
survey, more than 95% of both B2C and B2B executives told us 
that they believe their customers are changing faster than they 
can change their businesses. That’s up from 88% of executives 
just a few months prior.When the growing gets tough…
The life centricity playbook
 2
Consensus is often hard to reach among C-suite executives, 
but as we spoke with them for our latest research, there was 
unanimous agreement on one thing: It has likely never been 
more challenging to achieve meaningful growth.
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5The life centricity playbook
 3
Many are turning to technology in hopes that a new digital approach will reshape 
their operations and keep them a step ahead of their competitors. But while nearly 
all executives (95% in our recent survey) are accelerating their transformations,  
an astounding 97% of them acknowledge that, at best, this effort allows them to 
keep pace but will not on its own help them create new growth. 
Within our research, however, we discovered an important ray of light: some 
companies are beginning to break out. The highest growth companies in our study 
are widening their strategic aperture, transforming in ways that position them to 
drive new growth and relevance. They’re moving beyond basic digital upgrades 
and instead using technology more creatively to solve emerging customer needs. 
Most important, our analysis found that the companies gaining momentum are  
not using strategies that are product-centric or customer-centric—they are 
becoming life-centric. 
of executives 
acknowledge that, 
at best, turning to 
technology merely 
allows them to keep 
pace, not gain ground97% 
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
 3
The life centricity playbook 4
Our research has found that companies which are furthest on to road to life centricity 
are best positioned to maintain their relevance and thrive.2 They are three times more 
likely to outperform their peers on speed-to-market and almost five times more likely  
to outperform on customer lifetime value. 
They’re also positioned to jump to the front of the growth race. Our modeling analysis 
predicts that companies who lead in life centricity will outpace the growth rate of their 
peers by nine percentage points annually. In fact, companies that lag furthest behind 
in life centricity are likely to shrink year-on-year. For a $10 billion company, this could 
mean the difference between growing $4 billion in new annual revenues over five years  
or shrinking by $1 billion in the same period. Businesses today need to take a 
broader view that allows them to 
see customers in their full lives 
and adapt to their ever-changing 
needs and priorities. We call this 
life centricity. The way forward:
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
A life-centric
approach
 4
The life centricity playbookIntroduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
Our model predicts that otherwise similar companies—similar-sized peers in the same industry 
and country—will achieve vastly different growth trajectories depending on the extent of their 
life-centric capabilities.
 5
3.2x
4.9x2.8x
3.1xmore likely to outperform 
peers in revenue from  
new business
more likely to outperform 
peers in customer  
lifetime valuemore likely to 
outperform peers in 
profitability growth
more likely to 
outperform peers in 
speed-to-market
Year 0 1 2 3 4 5$10bn$14bnRevenue (USD)
$9bnCompanies leading in life centricity are:
Lagging  
-$1bnLeading in life centricity  
+$4bn
* Predictive modeling analysis based on Accenture‘s life-centric business executive survey, 2022*
The life centricity playbook 6We had previously offered a framework to approach life 
centricity: See, Solve and Simplify.3 From our latest analysis, 
we’ve been able to further distill these three steps into the 
plays that leading companies are making to activate them. 
Seeing requires a profound understanding of people’s  
lives and the forces that affect them, through human  
and machine intelligence. 
Solving requires moving away from the perceived 
constraints of an industry (total addressable market)  
to embrace the expansive need states of modern life  
(total addressable needs). We have seen leading companies 
approach this in two ways: “outside-in,” finding new 
customer needs and creatively rising to the occasion to fill 
them, and “inside-out,” creatively finding new applications 
for existing capabilities, technology and talent. Simplifying requires two plays as well. The first is through 
integrating customer-facing functions like marketing, sales, 
service and product into a single connected “experience 
continuum” that makes customer interactions delightful 
and easy. The second is building the internal operational 
fluidity that allows that continuum to be supported by  
an agile and dynamic organization. 
Each of the five plays uncovered by our analysis  
represents a way that companies on the road to life 
centricity are focusing their investments to capture  
new growth amid uncertainty, and every one of them 
confers a lasting advantage. We believe that any  
single life-centric play can be used on its own but has 
compounding effects if combined with the others. 
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
The life centricity playbook 7
5 life-centric 
plays to drive  
growthGain a profound 
understanding of people 
Broaden your canvas 
for value creation
Creatively transcend 
industry norms
Design a delightful 
experience continuum
Build a fluid operation 
across functions
Play #1
Play #2
Play #3
Play #4
Play #5
The life centricity playbook 8
understanding of people Gain
a profound
The life centricity playbookThe combination of human and machine intelligence is allowing us to understand—
more deeply than ever before—people and the forces that affect them. Today, to see 
people merely as static buyers of products, unaffected by the chaotic life forces that 
surround them, leaves immense opportunities for value creation on the table. 
People play multiple roles in their lives: parent, citizen, friend, student, or activist,  
to name a few. With the right intelligence in place, leading companies can identify  
and understand these roles, and the needs and desires that stem from them, to find 
greater opportunities for adding value to people’s lives. 
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
more likely to achieve 
highest levels of 
profitability growth
more likely to achieve 
highest levels of 
employee retention16% 
19% Growth potential:*
 9
* Based on our analysis of survey data from companies in our study that our model determined were focused on this play.
From: To:
Seeing people  
as “buyers” with  
static personasSeeing people as multi-dimensional, 
through dynamic data and life force 
monitors 
The life centricity playbookIntroduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
Further, forces such as political, technological, cultural or environmental 
change affect life to a far greater degree than ever before. Intelligence 
once again comes to the rescue, allowing leaders to proactively predict 
the impacts of these changes by monitoring these life forces in an 
always-on way. 
Through methods and technologies like artificial intelligence, analytics, 
ethnography, trend forecasting and deep qualitative and quantitative 
research, leaders can create more dynamic, expressive customer 
segments that evolve as their customers do. This dynamic view allows 
them to spot proactive opportunities for growth, both from  
a B2B and B2C perspective. 
It’s worth noting that this culture of deep understanding often extends 
to employees as well, with companies that demonstrate this trait 
significantly improving employee retention. 
 10
The life centricity playbookThe life centricity playbook
 11Using data topersonalize
connections
BEFORE:  
“In today’s world, people expect us to  
be digital … They expect us to use data to 
better target and give them solutions they 
need,” says one member of Kimberly-Clark’s 
C-suite. But companies in the consumer 
products space often end up at arm’s length 
from customers, as retail operations stand 
between the two. The personal-care products 
manufacturer needed a new way to connect 
directly with its customers.4, 5 
 AFTER:  
Kimberly-Clark wanted to connect more emotionally 
with its customers and open a two-way dialogue.  
To achieve this, its solution involved pulling  
first-party data to the fore, and collating brand data 
from different sources to build a cohesive picture  
of its customers’ needs. The new digital connections 
mean Kimberly-Clark can connect in a personalized 
way—for example, by offering new parents 
informational tools and loyalty rewards on its  
Huggies mobile app or by reaching out to people 
buying cold medication to help them find Kleenex 
and other products they might need.6, 7 
 THE LASTING ADVANTAGE:  
This play unlocks a human insight advantage. 
Kimberly-Clark is better able to identify users’ 
needs across services and brands, giving 
its limitless opportunities to play a more 
meaningful role in its customers’ lives,  
now and in the future. The play in action: Kimberly-Clark
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5Broaden
 12
your canvas 
creationfor value
The life centricity playbookIntroduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
 13
As people are rethinking their sense of purpose, they expect businesses to align with their 
values and address the bigger problems they see in their lives and the world at large.8 
Companies that take a narrow view of their role in society and the marketplace miss the 
opportunity to provide solutions to unmet needs—and reap the resulting profits. Those 
that don’t broaden their mission around social, environmental, economic and other 
values put their relevance at risk. 
In this new world, how you meet these needs is just as important as meeting them.  
As people—both in business and in their personal lives—come to grips with the finite 
amount of resources on earth, the innovators who can turn scarcity into abundance 
through technology and ingenuity will win the growth battle.
more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
market share growth
more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
customer lifetime value26% 
24% From: To:
A focus on financial 
value while meeting 
existing needs A focus on sustainable growth through 
solving unmet needs: providing customer, 
social, environmental and employee value Growth potential:*
* Based on our analysis of survey data from companies in our study that our model determined were focused on this play.
The life centricity playbookThe life centricity playbook
 14for customerssustainable value
Creating
BEFORE:  
Johnson Controls, Inc. (JCI) was an industrial 
company that revolved around building 
management solutions and products such  
as electronics, batteries and HVAC 
equipment. It saw a growing need in the 
market for bigger-picture solutions:  
“We recognized that CEOs and companies 
were investing in highly productive work 
environments, not controls on an HVAC 
chiller or sensors,” says the company’s  
global marketing executive.9 AFTER:  
JCI took a big leap, giving up reliable income streams such as its 
lead battery business, that were profitable but had limited growth 
or future appeal.10, 11 Through intelligently monitoring life forces, 
it found that concern for the environment was growing globally, 
and that remote work was putting renewed pressure on buildings’ 
value proposition.12 As such, the company reoriented itself as 
a sustainability partner for the world’s biggest companies, and 
moved towards an AI- and software-focused approach.8, 13  
To help reduce the 40% of carbon emissions that come from 
buildings globally, JCI developed an ecosystem of AI-led solutions 
that improve safety, customer experience and environmental 
sustainability.14 Its digital and AI efforts have already contributed 
to revenue growth in 2021 and 2022.15
 THE LASTING ADVANTAGE:  
Making this play helps create an enduring 
sustainability advantage. By building  
new core competencies and transforming  
its business model around the sustainable 
and regenerative growth that is being 
demanded by customers in a resource-
constrained world, JCI was able to help 
future-proof its business and ensure 
relevance for decades to come.The play in action: Johnson Controls
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5 15
transcendindustry normsCreatively 
The life centricity playbookCompanies often define themselves by their industry, drawing 
comparisons with peers pursuing similar goals or taking pride  
in being labeled an “industry leader.” As intelligence broadens the 
potential value brands can deliver, and as customers increasingly 
permit brands to play different roles in their lives, it has never been  
a better time to shed the boundaries of industry and find new,  
creative ways to apply technology and talent to solve new problems. 
Consider the case of ride-sharing apps that expanded from  
connecting people with cars to offering scooters, motorbikes,  
bicycles, food deliveries, product orders and more. They saw themselves as competition not just for taxis, but for any point-to-point 
movement of people and goods. 
By connecting their deeper understanding of customers’ lives to 
potential new uses for talent and technology, companies can expand 
beyond the boundaries of their traditional industry and into a broader 
ecosystem of meeting people’s needs. It’s not just a technology 
update; it’s an entire mindset makeover, one that brings creativity into 
the boardroom to seize opportunities for value creation, growth and 
relevance in the process.
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
more likely to achieve the 
highest levels of revenue 
growth from new ventures
more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
speed-to-market32% 
29% 
 16
From: To:
Extracting incremental 
growth from existing 
technology and talent Driving exponential growth by finding 
creative new applications for technology 
and talent outside of industry norms Growth potential:*
* Based on our analysis of survey data from companies in our study that our model determined were focused on this play.
The life centricity playbookThe life centricity playbook
 17Thinking industry bordersbeyond
BEFORE:  
Cellular technology giant Qualcomm hit  
it big in the smartphone era, but it needed 
to find avenues for the future.16, 17 “We 
capitalized on the smartphone boom, and 
it took us from being a small start-up into 
the billions. But there’s that next difficult 
transition of growth, which is: how do you 
not be a one-trick pony?” says one of the 
company’s product executives.16
 The play in action: Qualcomm
AFTER:  
“The question moved on from how can we sell more 
smartphones? to where else can we apply the same 
technology and skills?” The answer: helping people connect. 
Instead of sticking strictly to telecommunications, it looked 
to the auto industry, as car companies sought to integrate 
smart features and automation.16, 18 Today, nearly every car 
on the road includes some of Qualcomm technologies.19 
Its history with connectivity devices made for a natural 
transition into the world of smart home products, smart city 
initiatives, smart factory development and more.16, 20 Now, its 
platforms allow towns, schools, ports, hospitals and others 
to deploy digital tools without hefty up-front costs.21 
 THE LASTING ADVANTAGE:  
This play unlocks a lasting creative 
advantage. By expanding its view and 
taking a more creative approach to growth, 
Qualcomm found a host of new ways 
to leverage its engineering capabilities, 
product networks and R&D investments to 
break into entirely new industries, achieving 
greater growth and relevance—all while 
establishing a creative and entrepreneurial 
culture that will likely endure.
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5continuumDesign
a delightful 
experience 
 18
The life centricity playbookIntroduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
customer satisfaction
more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
speed-to-market26% 
26% 
 19
From: To:
Overcomplicated, under-
performing experiences that 
fail to satisfy customersThoughtful connectivity across 
all customer-facing functions for 
a simpler, engaging experienceGrowth potential:*
* Based on our analysis of survey data from companies in our study that our model determined were focused on this play.Technology is often touted as a way to make things easier but as 
new tools, platforms and functionalities proliferate, and the lines 
between physical and digital worlds blur, it’s actually making customer 
experiences more challenging. Companies are adding tech that serves 
a specific silo, such as marketing or sales, but are failing to account 
for connections between those functions. This over complicates 
the experience for the user, without achieving the utility that the 
technology promises. We call this a “complexity tax.” A life-centric approach aims to eliminate complexity tax by designing 
for simple but significant interactions across a unified experience 
continuum. To achieve it, all customer-facing functions (including 
product, marketing, commerce, sales and service) should be 
connected across a single data and experience platform. The full scope 
of the customer experience needs to be thoughtfully considered  
in a way that understands and responds to their needs in real time  
and draws actionable insights from those engagements.
The life centricity playbookThe life centricity playbook
 20
BEFORE:  
Fukuoka Financial Group (FFG) found Japan’s 
digital-native consumers were increasingly  
averse to a brick-and-mortar banking 
experience.22 “I realized there were few services 
that met customers’ needs in reality ... there was 
no process of developing services and products 
[that address] what the customer really wants 
and the potential needs that the customers 
themselves were not aware of,” says one member 
of the bank’s C-suite.23 Rather than just adding 
a basic app or website on top of its traditional 
banking structure, the company wanted an 
entirely new model that put technology—and  
the role it plays in customers’ lives—front  
and center.22, 23  Setting up for anadaptable future
AFTER:  
FFG created Minna Bank, a unique digital entity and  
the first ever with a full cloud banking system.22 To meet 
digital-native customers’ needs, it takes a mobile-first 
approach and breaks typical financial services silos 
through user-friendly twists, such as the ability to  
see aggregated account activity from multiple banks. 
Useful tools, such as QR codes for deposits and 
transfers, aim to make customers’ lives easier.24 More  
critically, Minna Bank’s cloud-based system allows 
Banking as a Service (BaaS) and a flexible API  
structure. This way, non-financial institutions can 
integrate banking services seamlessly into their 
offerings for a simplified customer experience  
and greater integration into the multifaceted lives  
of their customers.23, 25THE LASTING ADVANTAGE:  
This play sets companies up to maintain  
a continuing experience advantage.  
By unifying a person’s entire banking 
activity into a single, delightful platform 
with synchronicity across media, Minna 
Bank was able to provide tremendous 
value to customers while simplifying  
their financial lives.The play in action: Minna Bank
The life centricity playbook
 20
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5 21
a fluid operation 
Build 
across functions
The life centricity playbookIntroduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
An incredible experience continuum is often most effective when paired with the fluid and 
agile operating practices that enable it. Solving the latter, however, can be challenging. 
Some executives may wonder which plagued their business first: intractable processes or 
overly rigid culture? Either way, the resulting inflexibility permeates everything the company 
does—and is notoriously hard to dislodge. In fact, it’s becoming more intractable: 88% of 
executives told us that their organizations became more risk averse because of the pandemic. 
Though adhering to routine can seem like the safer, more comfortable option, it opens 
companies to tremendous risk. In today’s world, the pressure of life forces demands constant 
pivoting, which makes that lack of adaptability a dangerous liability.
From: To:
Misaligned teams that 
operate in silos and develop 
organizational inertia De-siloed teams that 
operate fluidly and fuel 
organizational energy more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
revenue growth
more likely to achieve 
the highest levels of 
profitability growth28% 
23% 
 22Growth potential:*
* Based on our analysis of survey data from companies in our study that our model determined were focused on this play.
The life centricity playbookIntroduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
Companies can combat this inertia and renew organizational energy 
by looking inward and reconfiguring operations for flexibility and 
fluidity. Many organizations look inward to drive new efficiencies, 
but the companies best set up for the future are rethinking their 
operations with an eye towards unlocking new growth opportunities. 
A life-centric approach is about better understanding the needs  
of people—not just customers, but a company’s own internal talent 
as well. Automation can streamline routine tasks to free up talented 
teams for more complex, human-centered work, and leading-edge 
human and machine teams can significantly augment and accelerate 
desired outcomes.
Unifying workflow systems and platforms, as well as incorporating 
agile organizational design, can create the efficiencies needed  
to boost productivity and profitability. Breaking down silos can 
unleash the communication and creativity that drives innovation.
 23A life-centric approach is about 
better understanding the needs 
of people—not just customers, 
but a company’s own internal 
talent as well.
The life centricity playbook 24
The life centricity playbookRevolutionizinginternalculture
BEFORE:  
Shiseido was one of Japan’s leading 
cosmetics brands, but its local shares  
had been slowly decreasing year after  
year. The company wanted to shift 
from mass marketing to an experiential 
marketing strategy but faced resistance 
from long-time partners and internal 
processes.26, 27 “No matter how wonderful 
the strategic thinking and the technical 
planning is, at the end of the day, people 
have to operate and execute. And if  
their culture and mindset does not 
change, they will always revert to the  
old way of doing things,” says one  
C-suite executive.26AFTER:  
In the interest of better reaching its customers, Shiseido  
revamped its internal culture and its internal technology  
in Japan. It underwent a digital cloud transformation that 
allowed better data usage and operational capabilities.27, 28  
This facilitated broader access to its skin analysis tool on 
websites and in-store tablets, which grew its websites’ 
reach users to 230 million in just a year.27 In an effort to 
focus on customer lifetime value, the company moved away 
from over planning and risk aversion in favor of continuous 
experimentation. It instituted training programs around 
design thinking and project management so employees could 
meaningfully contribute to a more agile environment.27, 29 To 
upend the idea of “chain of command,” Shiseido empowered 
its 8,000 beauty consultants with more responsibilities, 
emphasizing that not every good idea needed to come from 
the C-suite.27  THE LASTING ADVANTAGE:  
This play delivers a lasting operational 
advantage—one that continually opens 
opportunities to evolve at the speed of 
life. Shiseido’s improved internal culture 
set it up to make faster decisions closer 
to “the front line,” i.e. at the sites where 
the company interacts with customers’ 
lives. Shiseido’s digital upgrades started 
to bring basic capabilities up to speed 
but grew into a greater transformation 
of both the customer experience and 
the company’s overall cultural mindset.The play in action: Shiseido
Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5 25
Putting the plays  
 25
In an increasingly complex and rapidly changing world, 
life centricity offers an opportunity for businesses to 
unlock lasting advantages that deliver new growth and 
relevance—even in the face of today’s unpredictable 
business environment. 
There is no single path to life centricity but focusing investments and 
leadership attention toward these plays can start companies on their 
way. Each one helps strengthen connections with customers and 
provides a new step toward meaningful, sustainable growth.Introduction Play #1 Play #2 Play #3 Play #4 Play #5
into
action
The life centricity playbookAuthors
Baiju Shah  
Senior Managing Director 
Chief Strategy Officer,  
Global Growth & Product  
Innovation Lead, Accenture Song 
 
Baiju is the Chief Strategy Officer 
for Accenture Song, responsible 
for the global growth strategy. 
Throughout his career, Baiju has 
traversed technology, strategy, 
design and marketing. His specialty 
is combining these crafts to create 
new growth and relevance for 
people and for business. Baiju 
also serves as a professor of 
growth innovation at Northwestern 
University and is based in Chicago.
Nevine El-Warraky    
Managing Director 
Global Consumer Goods Lead, 
Accenture Song 
 
Nevine is the Accenture Song 
Global Consumer Goods Lead and 
specializes in Growth Strategies, 
Digital Transformation, Commerce 
Evolution & Marketing Operating 
Models. Nevine has over 30 years 
marketing and consultancy experience, 
having spent the first 10 years of her 
career as an operational marketer at 
Unilever working across categories and 
geographies followed by a period at RB 
running their Home portfolio in the UK. 
Nevine is based in London. 
Marvin Miranda    
Senior Manager 
Global Executive Strategy Director, 
Accenture Song 
 
Marvin is the Global Executive 
Strategy Director for Accenture  
Song, responsible for pioneering  
new strategic innovation. Marvin 
thrives at the intersection of  
business transformation, technology, 
and marketing, using the power 
of brand thinking to transform 
businesses from the inside out.  
Marvin is based in New York.  
Joshua Bellin   
Senior Principal
Thought Leadership Research Lead,  
Accenture Song
Josh oversees Accenture Song’s 
thought leadership research 
initiatives and is a Senior Principal  
in Accenture Research. Over his  
16 years at Accenture, Josh has 
worked to position Accenture on  
the leading edge of business insight 
and has helped clients understand 
what it takes to win growth and 
relevance in the next era of 
competition. Josh is based in Boston. 
 26
The life centricity playbook 27
Acknowledgements
Research
Ravi Rajkumar Advani
Agneta Bjornsjo
Gaurav Khetan
Carrie Kliener
Ivy Lee
Michael Malinoski
Regina Maruca
Taurai Nyaruwata
Linda Ringnalda
Konrad SucheckiContributors
Bill Theofilou
Dan Hornbarger
Pat Connolly
Nick Law
Olof Schybergson
Brooke Karathanos
Mark Curtis
 27
The life centricity playbookTo study how companies are responding to the evolving (and often paradoxical) demands of customers 
in today’s rapidly changing world, Accenture Research conducted executive surveys as well as a series 
of executive interviews. The surveys were conducted in two waves (in February–March and June–August 
of 2022), each drawing feedback from 850 CXOs across 14 countries and 19 industries. This was used as 
the basis for predictive modeling of company performance, as well as a clustering analysis that revealed 
the five distinct plays. The interviews included 30 executives from companies based in 11 different 
countries and 12 industries.About the research
 28
The life centricity playbookAccenture, “The human paradox,” July 26, 2022
The companies who scored in the top 20%, based on our life centricity capability assessment
David Droga and Baiju Shah, Harvard Business Review, “Keeping up with customers’ 
increasingly dynamic needs,” September 27, 2022
Accenture Research expert interview (conducted by research vendor).
Adweek, “Kimberly-Clark Doubles Down on Consumer-Centric Experiences,”  
accessed October 10, 2022
Accenture Song Case Study, “Reimagining a global icon for a digital-first future,” 
accessed October 10, 2022
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services White Paper, “Consumer-Goods Firms Dig Deeper 
into Data for Superior Customer Experience,” April 2021
Accenture, “The human paradox,” July 26, 2022
Accenture Case Study, “Johnson Controls and Accenture,” accessed October 11, 2022
Accenture Research expert interview (conducted by research vendor)
Design News, “Johnson Controls Leaving Batteries Behind,” November 21, 2018
Accenture Newsroom, “Johnson Controls and Accenture Join Forces on New AI-enabled 
OpenBlue Innovation Centers,” June 23, 2022
Fierce Electronics, “Johnson Controls teams with Accenture on smart building and 
sustainability, buys Tempered for security,” June 23, 2022
Yahoo News, “Johnson Controls Executives Analyze Critical Importance of Decarbonization 
and Indoor Air Quality at 2022 AHR Expo,” February 9, 2022
Johnson Controls, “Fiscal Q3 2022 Earnings Conference Call,” August 4, 20221
2
3
 
4
5 
6
 
7
 
8
9
10
11
12
 
13
 
14
 
1516 
 
17
 
18
 
19
 
20
 
21 
 
 
22
 
23
24
 
25
 
26 
 
27
28
29References
Accenture Research expert interview (conducted by research vendor)
ZDNET, “Qualcomm diversifies into IoT, auto and soon data center and edge 
computing,” November 5, 2020
Silicon Angle, “Qualcomm’s diversification strategy pays off as it crushes 
expectations on earnings,” April 27, 2022
Forbes, “Qualcomm wins yet another major automaker with its digital chassis,”  
April 14, 2022
Creative Strategies, “Qualcomm’s Diversification Strategy Takes Shape at MWC22,” 
accessed October 10, 2022
ZDNET, “Qualcomm rolls out IoT as a Service for 30 different verticals,”  
September 28, 2021
Accenture Case Study, “Minna Bank: Japan’s first digital bank,”  
accessed October 11, 2022
Accenture Research expert interview (conducted by research vendor) 
Retail Banker International, “Minna Bank – the new Japanese bank with digital natives 
at its core gets off to a flier,” January 10, 2022 
Business Wire, “Minna Bank to Commence Operations in May 2021 as Japan’s First 
Digital Bank,” March 25, 2021 
Accenture Research expert interview (conducted by research vendor) 
WWD, “Weak demand in Japan weighs on Shiseido’s earnings,” August 10, 2022 
Accenture Case Study, “Change that’s more than skin deep,”  
accessed October 11, 2022
Cosmetics design-asia, “Human touch: How Shiseido is using tech to make 2021  
‘the year of the empowered beauty consultant’,” March 30, 2021 
 29
The life centricity playbookThe life-centric playbook
 30
About Accenture
Accenture is a global professional services 
company with leading capabilities in digital, 
cloud and security. Combining unmatched 
experience and specialized skills across more 
than 40 industries, we offer Strategy and 
Consulting, Technology and Operations services 
and Accenture Song—all powered by the world’s 
largest network of Advanced Technology and 
Intelligent Operations centers. Our 721,000 
people deliver on the promise of technology 
and human ingenuity every day, serving clients 
in more than 120 countries. We embrace the 
power of change to create value and shared 
success for our clients, people, shareholders, 
partners and communities. 
Visit us at www.accenture.comAbout Accenture Song
Accenture Song accelerates growth and value 
for our clients through sustained customer 
relevance. Our capabilities span ideation to 
execution: growth, product and experience 
design; technology and experience platforms; 
creative, media and marketing strategy; and 
campaign, commerce transformation, content 
and channel orchestration. With strong client 
relationships and deep industry expertise, we 
help our clients operate at the speed of life 
through the unlimited potential of imagination, 
technology, and intelligence. About Accenture Research
Accenture Research creates thought leadership 
about the most pressing business issues 
organizations face. Combining innovative 
research techniques, such as data-science-led 
analysis, with a deep understanding of industry 
and technology, our team of 300 researchers 
in 20 countries publish hundreds of reports, 
articles and points of view every year. Our 
thought-provoking research developed with 
world leading organizations helps our clients 
embrace change, create value and deliver on 
the power of technology and human ingenuity.
Disclaimer 
This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our professional advisors. 
This document refers to marks owned by third parties. All such third-party marks are the property of their respective owners. No sponsorship, 
endorsement or approval of this content by the owners of such marks is intended, expressed or implied.
Copyright © 2022 Accenture. All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.