Provocative thinking, transformative insights, tangible outcomesACCELERATING  
THE 5G FUTURE  
OF BUSINESS  
The possibilities sound endless – but what  
do businesses actually expect (and worry about) 
from next generation connectivity?2
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSFrom the launch of the first 5G devices to trials of city hotspots,  
2019 was the year 5G truly caught hold of the public’s attention. And 
over the next decade and beyond, we will continue to see consumers, 
business, the economy and society transformed by 5G’s capabilities. 
As organizations around the world are already discovering, 5G will 
drastically alter how they operate and compete, unlocking entirely  
new use cases and business models across industry verticals. But  
the path to a 5G future is paved with many challenges. To lead the  
race, businesses in every industry need to get ready now for the 
coming 5G revolution.
So what are global businesses actually looking to see from 5G in the 
coming years – and how will they go about overcoming the difficulties 
they encounter? That’s what Accenture set out to discover in our latest 
research, building on our 2019 5G study. From expectations and 
concerns, to plans for implementation, here’s what we unearthed.
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS 3GREAT   
EXPECTATIONS:   
ATTITUDES  
TO 5G
4
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS
If there’s one thing most decision makers can 
agree on, it’s that 5G won’t just change the 
game – it will create a more seismic impact 
than any wireless technology evolution to 
come before it. Eight in ten (79%) businesses 
believe that 5G will have a significant impact 
on their organization, of which 57% believe it 
will be ‘revolutionary’ – whereas less than a 
quarter (24%) felt the same about 4G. 
And expectations around 5G aren’t just high: 
they’re also richly varied. Eight in ten (79%) 
agree that 5G will help them become more 
connected in what they do, while 78% believe 
it will create opportunities for new business. 
It’s also expected to bring productivity gains 
(77%), benefits for society as a whole (76%), and 
improvements in operations, such as monitoring 
new areas of the business. 
Meanwhile, in terms of tangible outputs from 
5G, there’s plenty to be excited about – and the 
majority of respondents believe these benefits 
will be seen within the next four years:Percentage of businesses who expect the following to happen within the next four years
Give mobile  
employees the  
support they need 
when they are out  
in the fieldUpgrade to 5G 
phones and networks 
so employees can 
use crucial mobile 
applications faster and 
with more reliability
Create more flexible 
networks for our 
employees - potentially 
replacing leased lines 
and WIFIAllow employees  
to work remotely
Create new  
applications capable 
of monitoring and 
controlling remote sites 
and equipment 24/7 Adopt new connected 
technology solutions 
which can react to 
emerging situations 
within seconds
Within two years Within four years Increase from the 2019 research
67 % 19 % 17 +
 67 % 18 % 17 +
63 % 19 % 17 +
 64 % 18 %
61 % 20 % 20 % 18 +
 61 % 20 +
5
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSThe early adopter impact
Despite the excitement – and increased  
belief in how soon all of this will happen –  
5G adoption is still in its infancy. While over  
half (54%) of businesses are either  
testing or have part-deployed some level of  
5G capability, a further 34% are yet to  
use it in any way. However, it’s likely these 
figures will shift rapidly over the coming years. 
So far, only 10% of businesses report  
they are using 5G widely across the business. 
But as these respondents reveal, the more  
‘early experience’ a business has with 5G, the 
more inclined they are to feel enthusiastic 
about its potential. Those already using it widely 
are almost twice as likely to feel it will have a 
revolutionary impact than those who are yet  
to adopt it. 
The signs are positive. But as with all new 
technologies, mass-adoption won’t be a 
straightforward process – with multiple 
challenges to tackle before 5G ambitions can 
be monetized and transformed into tangible 
business benefits.Government and the public 
sector are trailing behind 
the 5G curve, with 49% yet 
to adopt 5G in any form. 
The healthcare industry is 
leading the way: 16% say 
they’re using it throughout 
the organization.
Extent to which 5G has been adopted
34 %
28 %26 %10 %
We are yet to adopt 5G
We have piloted it
Don’t knowWe are using it widely throughout our organizationWe are using it in some areas but not all
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS 6CHALLENGES 
AND  
CONCERNS7
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSFor all their enthusiasm, businesses aren’t 
necessarily sure about the impact some of  
5G’s features will deliver: only two in five believe 
real-time data transfer, high capacity, and a 
faster service will revolutionize their industry 
over the next five years. 
There are also a number of perceived barriers 
to adopting 5G applications and technology 
– although for the most part, these concerns 
have diminished from 2019 to 2020. From a lack 
of understanding or an internal skills gap, to 
changing employee behaviors and upfront costs, 
the nature of these concerns is varied. 
The only concern to have grown over the last 
year is the threat 5G poses to security. And given 
how high this issue stands on most business’ 
agenda, this urgently needs to be addressed. Barriers to adopting applications and technology using 5G in the next three years
Security concerns Upfront investment 
will be too great Getting employees 
to embrace new 
ways of working We have concerns 
about the potential 
health impact  
of 5GWorried software 
developers won’t 
be ready
35 %32 %
2020 201931 %36 %
 26 %29 %
 26 %
 24 %28 %
We lack the internal 
skills to take 
advantage of 5GOur current 
telecoms partners 
don’t have enough 
understanding of 
our industry sectorWe’re afraid of 
being one of the 
first adopters and 
getting it wrongWe don’t have 
a good enough 
understanding of 
how we can use 5GWe don’t  
believe the use 
cases will provide 
enough ROI
17 %
 23 %23 %
 21 %26 %
 21 %26 %
 23 % 18 %
8
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSSecurity: 
A double-edged sword  
The link between 5G and its perceived security 
risks is complex. Overall, businesses believe  
5G will make their business more secure  
(68%). But there are security challenges inherent 
to 5G network architecture, including user 
privacy, number of connected devices,  
multiple networks, service access and supply 
chain integrity.
Overall, the risk is distributed across network, 
infrastructure and user environments. Devices 
and people pose the largest threat (53%), 
although this is only marginally more than the 
corporate network itself (52%). Meanwhile, 74% 
believe that having more connected, intelligent 
devices increases their risk of data breaches. 
Controlling individual devices – and technology 
users themselves – is notoriously tricky. While 
there are many security products on offer to 
tackle network attacks, human threat (whether 
malicious or inadvertent) clearly poses a real 
risk. Businesses will need to invest in plenty of 
education and draw up clear policies for usage. Biggest 5G security challenges for the organization
User privacy Number of different types 
of connected devicesMultiple networks 
being used on the same 
hardware, creating 
pressureNumber of different 
corporate networks we 
need to access
Challenging Most challenging
32 %12 %
 32 %11 %
 31 %9%
 29 %6%Overall volume of devices 
(exclusive of type)Access to the service 
provider networkComplicated business 
ecosystem (suppliers and 
customers)Supply chain integrity
41 %19 %
 34 %13 %
 36 %15 %
 37 %14 %
9 ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSOf those who are yet 
to adopt 5G, only 58% 
believe 5G will make their 
employees safer. But this 
rises to 81% for those 
already using 5G, showing 
that lived experience of  
5G should lay security 
fears to rest. Navigating complexity 
With that in mind, it is little wonder that 
businesses are concerned about the additional 
complexity that 5G will create, and the steps 
required to navigate this challenge successfully. 
Three quarters (74%) believe 5G means they’ll 
need to redefine many of their policies and 
procedures relating to security. 
Two thirds (62%) are also worried that  
5G will leave them more vulnerable to cyber-
attacks than their existing networks, requiring 
greater vigilance and further security work. All  
of this extra work comes at a price – and there 
are other financial concerns around 5G, too.10MAKING  
5G  PAY
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS11
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS
It comes as no surprise that one of the biggest 
challenges businesses are facing with 5G is 
cost. The cost of operationalizing 5G has been 
widely discussed across industries – so despite 
its benefits, four in five respondents believe that 
the cost of managing their IT infrastructure and 
applications will increase. 
Which isn’t to say this isn’t a price worth paying. 
But it does mean businesses will need to find 
ways to ensure they’re getting a return on this 
investment. It’s hardly surprising, therefore, 
that using 5G to innovate is seen as the most 
important challenge (52%). When it’s time to 
build a use case, the ability to demonstrate that 
a business is setting itself apart through its 5G 
investment will be crucial. 
The most difficult challenge, meanwhile, is 
ensuring devices are optimized for 5G – a 
problem which may well link to concerns  
around device security. Using 5G to innovate in our business
Bringing technology and teams 
together to make 5G workCreating the business case for 5G Understanding how we use  
the networkMaking sure we have devices  
that are optimized for 5GRunning new networks based  
on 5G capacityMost important challenges in relation to 5G
Most difficult challenge Most important challenge
52 % 39 %
 45 % 43 %
 43 % 38 %
42 % 27 %
 37 % 37 %
 31 % 35 %
12
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSNone of these challenges are insurmountable, 
particularly with the support of the right 
partners and expert advisers. After all, an 
impressive 90% of businesses believe  
they can ultimately identify the business 
opportunity 5G presents. The trick here is 
turning opportunity into tangible outputs,  
and identifying what needs to happen in order 
to achieve this goal.
 
Looking outwards  
to move forward 
So – how can they go about this? For most 
businesses, this means seeking external help:  
72% believe they need help to imagine 
the future possibilities for connected solutions 
with 5G.
And when developing custom solutions to 
unlock 5G’s potential, the majority will look 
outside their own business to make this happen. 
Four in ten (42%) expect to access solutions in 
the market that are 5G-ready, while 43% plan to 
work with partners to develop custom solutions. 
14 %
How businesses will develop 
applications reliant on 5G
We will work with partners  
to develop custom solutions
We will access solutions in  
the market that are 5G-ready
We will build our own  
in-house solutions
13
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESSAs to who those partners are, businesses are 
most inclined to work with software and services 
companies (44%). For service providers such 
as telcos, businesses say they are least likely to 
work with this group to develop new capabilities. 
That’s despite how well placed this industry 
theoretically is to offer support in this area.With their proven history 
of providing secure 
connectivity across 
diverse locations, the 
advent of 5G offers telcos 
a clear opportunity to 
pivot from ‘dumb pipe’ 
operators to facilitators 
of 5G ecosystems, like the 
Internet of Things (IoT). 
Their expertise in building 
secure, high-speed 
infrastructure should put 
them in pole position to 
consult on creating and 
integrating IoT networks – 
but as this research shows, 
there’s work to be done 
before businesses truly 
understand what telcos are 
capable of. 
Partners that businesses are most likely to work with
44 % 43 % 31 % 24 % 24 %
Software and  
services companies 
(including SI)Cloud  
companiesEquipment 
providersCommunications 
service providersAll of these
14GEARING  
UP FOR THE  
5G FUTURE 
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS15
ACCELERATING THE 5G FUTURE OF BUSINESS
It’s clear that global businesses recognize the 
huge potential of 5G, and many are ready and 
waiting to take advantage in the early years of 
the new decade. 
But there are also barriers to jump (and 
complex issues to grapple with) before 5G can 
truly become a vehicle for business growth 
and innovation. And while early-adopters are 
showing positive signs, these hurdles loom all 
the larger for those not yet using 5G extensively. 
Organizations that want to lead the 5G race have 
many decisions to make. From feasibility issues 
to priority use cases, new business models and 
device strategies, organizations must negotiate 
a world of operational complexity while keeping 
on top of costs. The right strategy – and indeed, 
strategic partnerships – will be vital. With this in 
place, businesses will be well primed to define 
their 5G vision… and then accelerate its journey 
to reality.To learn more about
Accenture 5G Acceleration 
Services and how we can  
help you forge a new path  
to value with 5G, visit:  
Accenture.com/
Accelerate5GCopyright © 2020 Accenture.
All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.About Accenture 
Accenture is a leading global professional services 
company, providing a broad range of services and 
solutions in strategy, consulting, digital, technology 
and operations. Combining unmatched experience 
and specialized skills across more than 40 industries 
and all business functions — underpinned by the 
world’s largest delivery network — Accenture works 
at the intersection of business and technology to 
help clients improve their performance and create 
sustainable value for their stakeholders. With 
505,000 people serving clients in more than 120 
countries, Accenture drives innovation to improve 
the way the world works and lives.
Visit us at www.accenture.com/Accelerate5GMethodology 
Through interviews with 2,623 business and 
technology decision makers, Accenture asked 
businesses across 12 industry sectors to share their 
understanding of 5G, how they have adopted it so 
far, and what they perceive its potential impact to be. 
Benchmarked against the same research completed 
in 2019, our 2020 research involved respondents 
from the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain, 
Germany, France, Italy, Japan, Singapore, the United 
Arab Emirates and Australia.