Life Reimagined 
Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers
From i nsights to action, the pa th to extraordina ry value starts here. 
Global consumers have new motivations 
beyond price and quality.
They are ready to abandon brands that 
don’t support their reimagined values.
And to pay more to those that do.
2
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersA majority of consumers—across backgrounds, 
demographics and geographies—have reimagined 
their values and purpose over the past 18 months. 
They’ve made a consequential shift to focusing 
on what matters most for them in life; and their 
motivations for what and how they buy are, 
accordingly, meaningfully different. Research into 
these changes reveal an enormous new white space  
in which brands must differentiate themselves 
anew to survive and discover new paths to growth. 
Consumers will leave brands that don’t recognize  
their new priorities—and they will pay more for  
those that do. It’s time to ask: What will motivate 
consumers to stay? What will motivate them to pay? The pandemic compelled consumers— 
en masse—to shift their expectations more 
rapidly and completely than we’ve seen at any 
other time in history. Specifically, as COVID-19 
impacted populations country by country, 
individuals looked inward, elevating concepts 
of relationships and responsibility, and re-
evaluating their priorities. Suddenly, they were 
seeing themselves and the world in a different 
light.1 Significant numbers of them are now 
applying these new mindsets to where, what  
and how they buy. Through their purchase 
choices, they are purposefully seeking 
to influence their communities and the 
environment, and to confirm how they see 
themselves in the world.
3
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAccenture’s recent survey of more than 25,000 consumers 
across 22 countries, with follow-up focus groups in five 
countries, bears this out: a full 50% of consumers2 say that 
the pandemic caused them to rethink their personal purpose 
and re-evaluate what’s important to them in life. Forty-two 
percent say the pandemic made them realize they need to 
focus on others more than themselves. 
These consumers—we call them the “Reimagined”—are 
changing their buying habits accordingly across all  
14 industries we covered. In doing so, they are creating 
immense opportunities for companies that respond by 
resetting strategies and setting new standards for meeting 
and exceeding their expectations. Our research revealed 
preferences that are powerful enough to drive both brand 
switching (“should I stay?”) and willingness to spend more 
(“would I pay?”). 
Just 17% of consumers—those we call the “Traditional”—said 
they were unchanged by the pandemic. Thirty-three percent 
have mindsets that are still evolving, but many of them 
are shifting as well, and—coupled with the Reimagined—
represent an opportunity for companies to capture 
significant market share.
Industries covered in the scope of our 
consumer survey
>   Automotive  
>   Consumer electronics  
>   Consumer goods  
>   Fixed service providers  
 (broadband/telco)  
>   Gas and electric utilities  
>   Healthcare  
>   Life insurance  >   Oil and gasoline  
>   Online entertainment  
>   Property and  
 casualty insurance  
>   Retail  
>   Retail banking  
>   Travel and tourism  
>   Wireless services  
4
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers   Reimagined Consumers  
  (Agree + Strongly Agree)      
    Evolving Consumers   
  (Unsure)       
   Traditional Consumers  
  (Disagree + Strongly Disagree) 
Base: All respondents (N=25,444)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021
50%
33%17%
Reacting to the statement  
“The pandemic made me 
totally revise my personal 
purpose and what is 
important for me in life”Figure 1: The Reimagined represent significant buying power
5
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers“[I am] valuing time with family, 
friends, the people I love and who are 
important to me in general. To know 
that tomorrow does not exist and that 
the next second may be the last.”   
Brazilian consumer4Reimagined consumers:  
Who are they?
What stands out most about the Reimagined is 
not what makes them different, but what makes 
them the same. Our survey captured insights 
about age, gender, location, employment, 
income, life changes and other demographic 
information. We discovered that the Reimagined 
don’t have discernible—or presumptive—
demographic distinctions. They are, in fact,  
a generally heterogenous group. 50%  
of the Reimagined say that many companies 
disappointed them by not providing enough support 
and understanding of their needs during challenging 
times—versus 14% of the Traditional.
In fact, although everyone, everywhere, had their own deeply 
personal experience and reaction to the pandemic, these 
consumers have mainstreamed purchasing considerations 
that were once peripheral and confined to demographic 
subsets. In the recent past, for example, it was younger 
consumers for the most part who expected a brand’s larger 
purpose to align with their outlook on life.3 A broad group of 
consumers now seeks that connection.
6
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers72% 
of the Reimagined expect companies 
they’re doing business with to 
understand and address how their 
needs and objectives change during 
times of disruption—versus 27% of  
the Traditional.
7 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersWhile the disparities in the 
mindsets of consumers between 
countries could be explained by 
cultural differences, they also are 
an accurate representation of the 
disproportionate impact of the 
pandemic on some countries and 
indicate that consumer preferences 
will continue to evolve in waves, 
similar to the pandemic’s effects.
   Reimagined  Consumers  
  (Agree + Strongly Agree)      
    Evolving Consumers  
  (Unsure)       
   Traditional Consumers  
  (Disagree + Strongly Disagree) Figure 2: The Reimagined, by country
Base: All respondents (N=25,444)     
Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021 
Brazil
India 
Malaysia
UAE
Spain
China
Singapore
Ireland
Italy
UK
US
Canada
Australia
France
Belgium
Denmark
Sweden
Finland
Germany
Netherlands
Norway
Japan
71%
71%
68%
65%
57%
57%
52%
51%
50%
46%
44%
44%
44%
42%
40%
40%
38%
37%
36%
35%
33%
26%8%
7%
5%
11%
12%
10%
9%
17%
15%
21%
26%
20%
22%
23%
21%
22%
26%
24%
28%
27%
31%
22%                                                             21%
                                                             22%
                                                             27%
                                                   24%
                                            31%
                                                 33%
                                         39%
                               33%
                               34%
                      34%
                 31%
                35%
              34%
          36%
        39%
         38%
      36%
    40%
 36%
38%
36%
52%
8
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersWhat motivates the Reimagined consumer?
While price and quality have long been—and remain—the dominant 
motivations in consumers’ decision-making, they have lessened in 
influence among Reimagined consumers. 
Among the Reimagined, 66% said they now 
expect brands to take more responsibility in 
motivating them to live by their values and to 
make them feel more relevant in the world, 
versus 16% of Traditional consumers.
We see this not just as a pandemic effect, but also as an inevitable 
long-term consequence of the shift to digital technologies 
informing and enabling purchases—accelerated by the pandemic. 
Consider how easily and quickly consumers can check prices on 
the internet and get a strong sense of the quality of an offering 
through recommendations and reviews. Multiple platforms such 
as Amazon and Google have built this process into the fabric of 
consumers’ lives. When the pandemic elevated digital shopping to 
daily necessities of life, the ability to immediately cross-reference 
price (comparison shop) and quality (ratings/reviews) impacted 
everyone and leveled most playing fields. As a result, these 
determinants have become easy-to-check table stakes—still crucial, 
but not necessarily differentiators. Other motivations, by contrast, 
now stack more powerfully.“I’ve realized the importance 
of friendships, being closer to 
family, really valuing the things 
that truly matter in life.”  
US consumer 
9
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers12%
Health & 
Safety
9%
Service &
Personal Care
14%
Health & 
Safety
12%
Service &
Personal Care
Bundle of the 
New MotivationsPrice &  
QualityBundle of the 
New MotivationsPrice &  
Quality
Base: Reimagined and Traditional Consumers (N=17,165)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021 Figure 3: Price and Quality versus Rising Motivations
Weighted importance of factors in consumers’ purchase decisions was determined through 
survey responses to questions about seven different value drivers for decision-making on 
brands in each of 14 industries. This is an aggregate global industry view.Among the Reimagined, our research 
reveals five distinct purchasing 
motivations oriented around 
the desire to feel better and have 
confidence in the products, services 
and companies they patronize. 
These are:  
Health and safety  
Service and personal care  
Ease and convenience  
Product origin  
Trust and reputationReimagined Consumers Traditional Consumers
10
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers 
“What the consumer wants from us is 
to make them feel good, and feeling 
good is not just about the product,  
it’s not just about giving them a great 
flight that’s on time. It’s about how they 
feel. And I increasingly think, as a CEO, 
my job is to change how people feel.”  
Scott Kirby, CEO, United Airlines
Ease & 
Convenience
Health 
& Safety
Trust & 
Reputation
Product
Origin
Service 
& Personal 
Care
Price
Quality
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers 11After more than a year of social distancing, constant handwashing and wearing 
masks everywhere, consumers are highly attuned to the health and safety of  
every experience. The fact is, people everywhere have become safety-obsessed.5 
Sixty-three percent of the Reimagined think it’s crucial that companies/brands 
actively promote healthy practices, versus 32% of the Traditional. The Reimagined 
indicate that this priority will not go away after the pandemic is over; they want 
to be confident that every business will strive to be part of a health-oriented 
ecosystem that can overlay their lives.6
Indeed, companies are increasingly evaluated by third parties on their consumer 
health and safety policies and initiatives. Ipsos, for example, a market research 
company based in Paris, started a Consumer Health & Safety Index that measures 
how effectively retailers are delivering on consumer needs around health and 
safety issues. At the time of this writing, the index ranked Whole Foods and 
Costco at the top for demonstrating near universal compliance with health  
and safety protocols.7
Across the 14 industries we covered in the scope of our consumer survey, we 
found that a majority of the Reimagined, and even a sizable portion of Traditional 
consumers, would either pay more for or switch to another brand if their health 
and safety needs were not addressed. For instance, for travel, retail, healthcare 
and consumer electronics retailers, more than 45% of the Reimagined would 
pay extra for health and safety-related experiences. Sixty-eight percent of the 
Reimagined would switch travel brands if they felt health and safety were lacking. Health and safety:  
Consumers are asking: Are you keeping me and  
my neighbors safe? What about your employees?
of the Reimagined think  
it’s crucial that companies/
brands actively promote  
healthy practices.63%
12
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersMore than half of the 
Reimagined would pay travel 
and hospitality companies 
extra for offerings and 
options focused on sanitary 
and safe environments—
versus 29% of the Traditional.
13 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAsda Stores 
British supermarket chain Asda Stores has rolled out a 
high-tech solution for cleaning shopping carts—they  
pass through a machine that sprays electrostatically-
charged mist of anti-microbial liquid on each one in  
15 seconds.8MG Motor India
Auto manufacturer MG Motor India partnered with 
Singapore-based Medklinn, a company focused 
on developing advanced air and surface sterilizing 
technologies, to develop an HVAC system-based way  
to deliver a cleaner, safer in-car experience.9
14
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers“After the test of the pandemic, 
it proved that health is the 
most important thing. Only 
with a healthy body can we 
take care of our family better 
and work harder.”  
Chinese consumer
“Health and safety should 
ALWAYS be important and to 
keep in mind for your health 
today and in the future.”  
US consumerAt a country level, our data revealed that consumers in 
certain countries had a higher-than-average bias toward 
health and safety motivators—including Japan, China, India, 
Singapore and the UAE.
Figures 4 & 5: Consumer views on company consideration of health and safety
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
I think it’s crucial that companies prioritize 
health considerations for consumers and 
employees in all of their operations.I think companies are just as responsible as 
governments for the health of societies.
    Reimagined Consumers            Traditional Consumers 
Base: Reimagined and Traditional Consumers (N=17,165)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021
15
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersSeventy-two percent of the Reimagined expect the companies 
they’re doing business with to understand how their needs and 
objectives changed during this time of disruption, and to address 
those new needs, versus 27% of the Traditional. Along with 
increased online shopping, consumers expect more interaction 
with customer service. They would like to see faster response 
times and more respect for and attention to their individual  
needs or concerns. 
More than half of the Reimagined say they 
would switch brands if a brand doesn’t 
create clear and easy options for contacting 
customer service or provide clear responses  
about service levels related to pandemic  
or economic/societal issues. Service and personal care:  
Do you remember me? Are you making my 
experience with your brand as personal as it 
can be? Are you there for me when I need you?
We found this to be true for automotive dealers, banks, consumer 
goods, consumer electronics providers, healthcare providers,  
fixed (broadband) service providers, property and casualty 
insurance, retailers and travel companies.
At a country level, we found that the Reimagined in Spain,  
the US, Canada, Australia, Ireland and Brazil put the strongest 
weight on service. 
“It is important for customer 
service now to be better than 
ever. We’re more sensitive.”  
Spanish consumer
16
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers“I expect greater consumer 
care after the pandemic. 
Brands realized how much 
they need their consumers.”  
Brazilian consumer
of the Reimagined expect companies 
they’re doing business with to understand 
how their needs and objectives change 
during times of disruption.72%
17
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersare ready to switch if 
they are provided clear 
responses about the 
service levels related to 
the pandemic, economic 
issues or societal issues.57%
Figure 6: Consumers who switched due to lagging customer service
Consumers who recently switched providers and say they 
could have been retained if customer service had more quickly 
adapted to the new requirements of the pandemic.
Base: Reimagined and Traditional Consumers (N=17,165)      
Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021
    Reimagined Consumers            Traditional Consumers 
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
18 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersL’Oreal
L’Oreal Haircolor Concierge has leveraged text and video 
chat with live experts and virtual try-on tools to enable 
customers to color their hair at home with confidence. 
The company launched this “24/7 hair color platform”  
in response to a 40% increase in hair color inquiries to 
their consumer care center during the past year. 11Best Buy
By offering customers free in-home consultations 
about which products are best for their individual 
circumstances and home environments, Best Buy 
has become a trusted advisor, enhancing its ability 
to compete with major online retailers. The service 
facilitated long-term customer relationships while 
also supporting a smoother sales process. As a result, 
it lured customers away from other online options 
and positioned Best Buy as a trustworthy, more 
personal brand.10
19
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAs the pandemic forced many transactions online and compelled 
companies to adjust how transactions are conducted in person, the 
common denominator was usefulness. But consumer expectations are not 
going to retreat to a previous state with regard to ease and convenience. 
Now, consumers seek “everywhere commerce,” where transactions need 
not start and end in the same place, or on the same medium. 
 
Insights from our focus groups revealed that, in store, consumers seek 
the same prices and deals they would get online, as well as contactless 
payment, “click and collect” options, speedy home delivery, longer  
return windows and easier returns, and improved self-check-out  
methods. They also seek more, and easily available, background 
information on the products in front of them, including product  
reviews and source information.  Ease and convenience:  
Are you meeting me where I am, in the digital 
world, the physical world, and through a blend 
of the two? And are you able to deliver what  
I need, when I need it, across all channels? 
are ready to switch to another provider 
if they provide virtual try-out tools  
and/or shopping advisory services  
via digital channels.49% 
“[I want] more time to spend  
on other things than shopping.”  
UK consumer
20
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersFor retailers, a substantial 57% of the Reimagined said they would 
switch retailers if they were not offered new, fast and flexible delivery 
options such as click-and-collect and curbside pickup. Notably, 
almost half (48%) of the Traditional agreed. In the healthcare industry, 
we found that the Reimagined also appreciate the convenience of 
virtual health appointments, with 51% saying they would change 
providers if online appointments were not offered instead of physical 
visits, when appropriate.
The Reimagined in Finland, Denmark and Norway prioritized ease 
and convenience factors more than in other countries. Online, consumers want the ease of 
purchasing on a device and picking up 
in-store. They expect better (virtual) 
services to help them “try on” or “test” 
products, better insight into product 
quality, more personalized, thorough, 
and faster service, and faster delivery.12
21
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers“I used to go shopping in the supermarket—and I 
couldn’t find many of my favorites for a long time. 
Now, through the online shopping platform, there 
are many varieties of goods with low prices and fast 
delivery, which bring a lot of convenience to life.”  
Chinese consumer  
of the Reimagined said they  
would switch retailers if they  
were not offered new, fast and 
flexible delivery options.57%
22 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersMercury Insurance
Mercury Insurance now offers homeowner 
insurance policyholders a DIY inspection tool 
using an advanced AI assistant. Homeowners 
inspect their own properties and can access 
guidance, as needed, for a contactless 
experience.14IKEA
IKEA planning studios uses small-format physical 
stores to engage and motivate people who are 
looking to furnish their kitchens, living rooms and 
bedrooms and would rather buy their furniture 
online and have it delivered. Retail experiences 
need not start and finish in the same place.13
23 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersOur focus groups confirmed consumers increasingly want to know 
what goes into a product, how it’s produced and how far it’s been 
transported. Bringing this information to bear on a purchase decision 
helps enable them to support sustainability and care for their 
communities. Seventy-six percent of the Reimagined are attracted 
to doing business with brands that source services and materials 
in highly ethical ways—versus 52% of the Traditional. We also found 
that 65% of the Reimagined are attracted to doing business with 
brands that are environment-friendly, provide credible “green” 
credentials for products/services, minimize harm to the environment 
and/or invest in sustainability—versus 29% of the Traditional. 
In consumer electronics, as many as 59% of the Reimagined said 
they would switch to another provider to get the most sustainable 
product, such as a refurbished device or one with lower power 
consumption.
We found that Reimagined Consumers in India, the UAE and China  
placed the greatest weight on these motivators.Product origin:  
What about the environment, and societal 
and corporate responsibility? Can you help 
me make sustainable choices? Can you  
help me support my local community?Ralph Lauren
Ralph Lauren launched a “revolutionary” new dyeing 
platform the company believes will lead to the world’s first 
scalable zero wastewater cotton dyeing system. This “Color 
on Demand” system consists of a variety of technologies 
designed to enable the recycling and reuse of all water from 
the dyeing process. Ralph Lauren aims to use it for more than 
80% of all solid cotton products by 2025.15
24
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers “I started to read 
products’ labels to know 
more about their origin. 
This is very important.”  
Brazilian consumerBringing sustainable products 
and services to the front is 
a motivator for 55% of the 
Reimagined consumers to 
switch to another provider.55%
25 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersThe Reimagined want to see that companies stood for something during the pandemic, 
that they are clear about how they want to contribute to society, and that they treat 
their employees well. Consumers want to avoid residual guilt about a purchase—any 
purchase—and accordingly, they are looking for signs that the company they are  
buying from has integrity and is aligned with their own values and (new) priorities. 
 
Across more than half of the industries we covered, a majority of the Reimagined  
said they would switch providers if the providers did not take visible actions to have  
a positive societal impact. Nearly half (46%) of the Reimagined say they would pay  
more to support a retail brand that takes these visible actions. In the travel and life 
insurance industries, “strong ethical values” were either the top or second strongest 
motivator or loyalty driver among Reimagined consumers.
The Reimagined in Singapore and China place the greatest weight on trust and 
reputation factors as purchasing motivators.Trust and reputation:  
Can I trust you to do the right thing for me and not just 
for your business? Can I trust you to be who you say 
you are and stand for the things you say you stand for?
“Pollution-free, organic and healthy raw materials 
are more important. The epidemic is worrying.”  
Chinese consumer
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers
26“Some brands are known for 
quality and they do more to help 
fight for good causes like Black 
Lives Matter and environmental 
sustainability.”  
US consumerof the Reimagined 
want their brands to 
source services and 
materials in highly 
ethical ways.76%
27
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers“Those who have known how to respond  
well to the crisis will have a buyer in me  
for their good work.”  
Spanish consumer
“I want to pick brands that take a stand 
and raise their values on their adverts  
and products.”  
UK consumer
Picnic
In the Netherlands, online supermarket Picnic 
has pledged to deliver sustainably—using 
100% electric cars, for example, or minimizing 
food waste or delivering groceries for an 
entire neighborhood at once—while fulfilling 
its promise to offer shoppers exactly the same 
groceries as in the supermarket, but for the 
lowest price.16
28
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersSwitch, stay and 
pay motivators 
by industry 
offer companies 
strategic direction
We examined the switch, stay and pay motivators 
of consumers across the 14 industries in our study, 
including both goods and service providers, and 
found differences that suggest an enormous white 
space opportunity in which to build on strengths 
and leverage new strategies.  
29
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers   Reimagined Consumers            Traditional Consumers Take retail, for example. Differences were considerable across many motivators. The Reimagined were far more 
willing than the Traditional to pay to see their expectations met by their current providers, as Figure 7 shows.
Base: Retailers Reimagined + Traditional Consumers (N=1,618)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021Retail motivatorsWill they switch?  
Readiness to switch to another provider if the option  
will no longer be available from your main providerWill they pay?  
Readiness to pay extra to maintain the option,  
if required by your main provider
Keeping a clean and healthy shopping environment in stores, 
for example, staff wearing appropriate protection equipment, 
organizing queues, dedicated shopping hours for specific 
customer groups
Bringing sustainable products and services to the front
Taking visible actions for a positive ssocietal impact, such as 
related to inclusion and diversity, environmental protection  
or protecting the health of the population
Offering new fast and flexible delivery options,  
such as click-and-collect and curbside pickup
Bringing locally produced products and services to the front  
to help support small businesses during the pandemic
Creating clear and easy options for contacting customer service 
and providing clear responses about the service levels related  
to the pandemic, economic issues or societal issues
Providing virtual try-out tools and/or shopping advisory services 
via digital channels
61%
55%
57%
57%
56%
57%
49%57%
46%
43%
47%
46%
45%
35%
47%
46%
46%
45%
44%
38%
35%21%
20%
22%
21%
24%
13%
12%Figure 7: 
30
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersIn banking we found a similar situation, with the weight of service and personal care experiences—
such as flexibility to temporarily pause loan repayments—among the most notable findings. 
Banking motivatorsWill they switch?  
Readiness to switch to another provider if the option  
will no longer be available from your main providerWill they pay?  
Readiness to pay extra to maintain the option,  
if required by your main provider
Providing flexibility to temporarily pause loan repayments or 
forgive late payment penalties for consumers experiencing 
economic hardship caused by the pandemic
Creating clear and easy options for contacting customer service 
and providing clear responses about the service levels related to 
the pandemic, economic issues or societal issues
Taking visible actions for a positive societal impact, such as 
related to inclusion and diversity,  environmental protection  
or protecting the health of the population
Promoting sustainable products, such as in investments
Keeping a clean and healthy environment in branch offices,  
such as staff wearing appropriate protection equipment, 
organizing queues
Offering online appointments for advisory services, and 
extended online self-service options
49%
50%
44%
44%
44%
46%33%
41%
33%
36%
36%
37%
36%
35%
34%
34%
34%
32%18%
17%
16%
13%
16%
17%Figure 8:
Base: Banking Reimagined + Traditional Consumers (N=1,079)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021
    Reimagined Consumers            Traditional Consumers 
31
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersof the Reimagined are attracted  
to doing business with brands that 
are environment-friendly, provide 
credible “green” credentials for 
products/services and invest  
in sustainability.65%
32 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersTrust and reputation stood out in consumer goods and services. The Reimagined are far more willing to 
pay extra and switch to other providers and brands that take visible action for a positive societal impact.  
Base: CG&S Reimagined + Traditional Consumers (N=1,251)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021Consumer goods  
and services motivatorsWill they switch?  
Readiness to switch to another provider if the option  
will no longer be available from your main providerWill they pay?  
Readiness to pay extra to maintain the option,  
if required by your main provider
Bringing locally produced products and services to the front to 
help support small businesses during the pandemic
Bringing sustainable products and services to the front
Taking visible actions for a positive societal impact, such as 
related to inclusion and diversity,  environmental protection  
or protecting the health of the population
Offering an enhanced mix of online and offline ordering  
and delivery options for added convenience and safety  
during the pandemic
Offering health & wellness advice, including guidance on  
healthy or clean products, or on products for consumers  
with special nutrition needs
Creating clear and easy options for contacting customer service 
and providing clear responses about the service levels related to 
the pandemic, economic issues or societal issues
Providing virtual try-out tools, online advisory services on 
product selection
54%
52%
56%
58%
50%
57%
48%46%
41%
40%
46%
37%
44%
35%
46%
43%
41%
41%
38%
36%
31%19%
16%
14%
14%
13%
11%
9%Figure 9:
   Reimagined Consumers            Traditional Consumers 
33
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersBase: Travel & Tourism Reimagined + Traditional Consumers (N=1,306)    Source: Accenture Global Consumer Pulse Research 2021In the travel industry, service and personal care (such as emergency response practices) stood out. Product 
origin, for example, by promoting low carbon-emission travel options, did as well. 
Travel and tourism motivatorsWill they switch?  
Readiness to switch to another provider if the option  
will no longer be available from your main providerWill they pay?  
Readiness to pay extra to maintain the option,  
if required by your main provider
Maintaining sanitary and safe environments in hotels, planes, 
trains and other travel environments, including staff wearing 
appropriate protective gear, organizing queues, dedicated 
activity hours, etc.
Providing flexibility to delay or refund travel or switch bookings 
without penalty or cost
Creating clear and easy options for contacting customer service 
and providing clear responses about the service levels related to 
the pandemic, economic issues or societal issues
Promoting sustainable products, such as low carbon-emission 
travel, hotels/resorts with the highest energy efficiency, lowest 
water use, etc.
Offering easy and fast access to special online health advisory 
alerts and services during travel
Taking visible actions for a positive societal impact,  
such inclusion and diversity, environmental protection  
or protecting the health of the population
68%
68%
63%
59%
59%
60%59%
65%
48%
42%
43%
44%
50%
49%
37%
42%
41%
39%29%
27%
17%
20%
21%
18%Figure 10:
   Reimagined Consumers            Traditional Consumers 
34
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersWhat this means for brands:  
Turning motivations   
into motivators
35 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersPAY
(likelihood 
to pay)NO
(likelihood 
not to pay)GO
(likelihood to switch)
STAY
(likelihood to stay)RETHINK RECALIBRATEREENGINEER REIMAGINEHow should companies respond? COVID-19 
accelerated the adoption of countless experiences 
and concessions that companies introduced 
temporarily but which, unpredictably, have 
translated into long-term expectations that 
consumers never knew they had. Companies need 
to assess the relative value of these experiences 
and concessions to make informed strategic 
choices that will drive efficiency and growth.
The “Stay/Go, Pay/No” graphic in Figure 11 offers 
companies a risk/reward approach to beginning the 
process of evaluating the implications of keeping,  
rolling back, growing or adapting their offerings. 
Companies have stretched to meet the needs of 
consumers over the course of the pandemic, at great 
and likely unsustainable cost.17 They will need to 
assess the permanence of the new experiences and 
concessions they’ve offered, as what has been learned 
by customers over the course of the pandemic may not 
easily be unlearned. Insights into consumers’ willingness 
to switch, stay or pay because of single or multiple 
offerings helps companies understand the risk and the 
rewards of each resolution scenario. Figure 11:  
Stay/Go, Pay/No: Evaluating offerings that motivate consumers to switch, stay or pay   
All industry-specific examples below are illustrative based on survey findings
Experiences consumers think worth 
switching to retain BUT NOT worth paying 
extra to retain
Consumer Goods & Services: Providing 
virtual try-out tools and online  advisory 
services for product selection  
Banking: Offering online appointments 
for advisory services and extended online 
service  options
Experiences consumers think not worth 
switching provider OR paying extra  
to retain
P&C Insurance: Using drones or satellite 
technology for inspections to enable faster 
claims processing  
Banking: Keeping a clean environment  in 
branch officesExperiences consumers think worth  
switching provider AND paying extra  
to retain
Travel: Providing flexibility to delay or refund 
travell or switch bookings  without penalty  
Consumer Goods & Services: Bringing locally 
produced products and services to the front  
to help small  businesses  
Banking: Pausing loan repayments or  
forgive late payment penalties due to  
consumer hardship
Experiences consumers think worth paying 
extra to retain BUT NOT worth switching 
provider to retain
Automotive: Providing new car delivery 
instead of picking up  
P&C Insurance: Promoting sustainable 
products
36
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersReengineer. Companies should retain and reengineer  
these offerings to make them financially sustainable or they risk  
losing customers. Expectations around these offerings have  
likely become the “new normal,” so brands need to reeingineer 
them into the realm of affordability to protect their existing 
customers and attract new ones.
Rethink. Companies should consider rolling back and 
potentially re-deploying these investments elsewhere  
because they seem to have limited perceived value, less 
differentiation and minimal risk if offloaded. These represent 
experiences and concessions that may be less meaningful  
in a post-pandemic world.  Reimagine.  Companies should invest in scaling and  
innovating these offerings as they create the opportunity  
to drive true differentiation. It is here companies will find  
the most white space to monetize, attract new consumers  
and create new value streams. 
Recalibrate. As existing consumers may be willing to  
pay more in this category, companies should consider creating  
a premium tier of services to unlock new revenue streams.  
Some of these may be more experimental offerings that 
consumers are willing to pay extra for but that do not have  
broad enough appeal to drive switching.
37
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersWe see an enormous white space opening up,  
in which brands can bundle motivators to carve out  
new identities and discover new, high-potential paths  
to market leadership. 
CEOs must become engaged in the effort, not only because delivering 
on these needs is becoming mandatory, but also because of the 
potential for differentiation. Brands must go all in—organization-wide—
on what they’re offering their customers.We believe sustainability is the new digital—
it will create the most powerful force of 
change in our generation, transforming how 
we live and work and driving new value and 
growth. That’s why we have put sustainability 
at the heart of our business—building 
our capabilities—and embedding it into 
everything we do. Integrating sustainability 
means meaningfully redefining how we 
think, create and measure its impact. 
As a result, we think differently and act 
boldly. From collaborating with our partners 
to help our clients make their business more 
sustainable to developing new ways to 
create value through revenue growth and 
measurable impact, we continue to raise 
the bar for what we can accomplish—and 
the speed at which we act. Together, we 
are driving positive change every day—and 
delivering true shared success.Leveraging the white 
space opportunity
There has been an acceleration away from price and quality as the 
sole, dominant arbiters of choice. Of course, they remain crucially 
important; but a wider set of motivations, taken in combination, 
have potential as greater influences and differentiators for at least 
half of all consumers—with many more consumers likely to follow 
suit. These motivations vary by industry and have a direct effect on 
loyalty, price elasticity and switching. 
38
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersTo drive growth, companies must reimagine their entire business through the lens of experience. 
This entails:
Investing continuously to understand your customers’ evolving mindsets. Never has research 
and the insights it provides been more important. As a full 50% of consumers have materially 
changed their decision-making motivations, whatever you used to know about your customers is 
out of date at best—and wrong at worst. If you haven’t yet become a listening organization, that 
is highly and visibly engaged with your customers every day, now is the time to do so. If you don’t 
know where to start, start with your employees. No one knows your brand better. These people have 
chosen to spend their lives helping to build your brand—and remember, they are consumers, too.
Reimagining the experiences the company delivers to meet rising motivations with speed, 
agility and innovation. Customers have never been more open to embracing new experiences 
and forming new habits. Now is the time to leapfrog traditional best practices and truly differentiate 
yourself in the industry.
Structuring the entire organization to create experiences that capture consumers’ evolving 
demands across all aspects of operations. Engage marketing, sales, innovation, R&D, customer 
service—everyone who is expected to deliver on these experiences must see and understand these 
new motivations.
Evolving the business model. As brands emerge from the pandemic, moving out of pilot mode 
might require a new business model with better pricing, different distribution channels or new 
revenue streams. Any of these paths will likely require companies to align technology, data and 
talent into one system. An evolved business model will allow brands to continuously improve 
experiences and give customers exactly what they desire without sacrificing profitable growth.
By embracing the business of experience in these ways, organizations can seize the opportunity, 
meeting the Reimagined and others where they are and building new loyalty and revenue streams.
39 Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAgneta Björnsjö  
Principal Director  
Accenture Interactive,  
Research Global Lead
With more than 20 years of 
experience in market and 
business research, Agneta’s 
role is to design and lead 
a variety of research 
initiatives that open up new 
perspectives and support 
provocative thought 
leadership. She is based 
in Stockholm.Kevin Quiring 
Managing Director  
Accenture Strategy,  
Customer Sales & Service  
North America Lead 
Kevin advises organizations  
across a variety of industries in 
the design and development  
of customer strategies and  
leads initiatives focused on  
driving profitable growth  
through customer acquisition,  
development and retention.  
He is based in Minneapolis.Mark Curtis 
Managing Director  
Accenture Interactive,  
Global Head of Innovation
A serial entrepreneur and 
innovator in media, digital, 
mobile and design for 30 
years, Mark’s role spans offer 
definition, marketing and 
business development, as 
well as public speaking and 
media commentary. He is 
based in London.Authors
Bill Theofilou 
Senior Managing Director  
Accenture Strategy, 
CEO & Enterprise Strategy  
Global Lead 
Bill focuses on helping CEOs 
become more competitive by 
addressing their company’s  
growth and cost challenges 
concurrently. Bill has more  
than 20 years of experience 
restructuring companies for 
profitable growth, developing 
new go-to-market models and 
growth strategies, and aligning 
organizational and cost structures 
to support strategy. He is based  
in Boston.
      
40
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAcknowledgements
Research Lead
Agneta Björnsjö
Research Team
Michael Malinoski 
Anna Marszalik 
Regina Maruca
Joanna Syczewska
Federica Margotti
Josh Bellin
Agata Dowbor
Taurai NyaruwataBaiju Shah  
Chief Strategy Officer,  
Accenture Interactive
Nevine El-Warraky  
Managing Director,  
Accenture InteractiveMarketing + Communications Leads
Mark Kiernan
Jennifer Glatt
Marketing + Communications Team
Sally Faust
Elisabeth Edvardsen
Stephanie Adamo
Offering Development Lead
Stephanie Anderson
41
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAbout the Research
Accenture conducted its 16th annual  
Global Consumer Pulse Research to gain  
an understanding of global consumers’ 
preferences, beliefs and behaviors. The  
online survey of 25,444 consumers age  
18+ in 22 countries was designed to identify  
how consumer expectations are evolving— 
and how companies can capitalize on that 
evolution to achieve new levels of growth and 
competitive agility. Fieldwork was conducted 
between December 2020 and February 2021.Using survey data to quantify the relationship between consumer loyalty 
and satisfaction, we developed and estimated an ordered logit econometric 
model using Maximum Likelihood method. The model estimates the 
probability of a consumer to stay with the current provider in the next  
12 months given their satisfaction with a product/service offering expressed 
by a wide set of features. The model accounts for consumer individual 
characteristics such as age, gender, marriage status, income, employment 
type, employment situation affected by COVID-19 outbreak, household 
spend, workplace type (e.g. working from home), place of living  
(big city, rural), country type (developed vs. developing) which may impact 
their purchasing behavior. We also considered the type of consumer  
(i.e. “Reimagined Consumers”) versus the others to understand the loyalty 
drivers of consumers who revised their personal purpose during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, which was 50% of all respondents.
To deepen the understanding of how “Reimagined Consumers” have 
changed and what’s important to them, Accenture ran five online focus 
groups in Brazil, China, Spain, the UK and the US in May 2021. Each session 
had 85 participants age 18+ who all screened as having totally revised their 
personal purpose and what’s important in life during the pandemic.
42
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumers1 Adrienne Matei, The Guardian, “Our Post-Pandemic Selves: Why the Virus is an Opportunity to Grow and Develop,” April 3, 2020.
2 All data from Accenture’s January 2021 Global Consumer Pulse Research Survey, unless otherwise indicated.
3 Mark Curtis, Jessica Long, Bill Theofilou, “A Brand. New. Purpose,” April 2020.
4 All quotes from Accenture’s May 2021 online focus groups with 425 consumers in Brazil, China, Spain, UK and US, unless otherwise indicated.
5 Euromonitor International, Top 10 Global Consumer Trends 2021 .
6 Brian Whipple, Mark Curtis, Martha Cotton & Bronwen van de Merwe, “COVID-19: 5 New Human Truths that Experiences Need to Address,” April 3, 2020.
7  Elen Alexov, “New Study from Ipsos finds that 61% of Consumers are Still Delaying Brick-and-Mortar Retail for Fear of Getting Sick,” June 3, 2020. 
8 “Asda Trials ‘Trolley Wash’ to Help Customers Shop Safely.” Asda Newsroom, Asda. Web. June 7, 2021.
9 “MG Motor India Explores Industry-Leading Cabin Sterilisation Technology for Its Cars to Battle COVID-19.” MG Motor India Media Center, MG Motor India, April 16, 2020.
10 Justin Bariso, Inc., “The Coronavirus Could Have Destroyed Best Buy. Then, Best Buy Fought Back,” May 31, 2020.
11 PR Newswire, “L’Oreal Paris Launches New At-Home Hair Color Service,” August 27, 2020.
12 Cathaleen Chen, Business of Fashion, “Estee Lauder Companies Partners with Uber on Next-Hour Delivery,” May 7, 2021.
13 Ingka, “IKEA set to come closer to the many people through different store formats,” February 7, 2020.
14 Business Wire, “Mercury Insurance Offers Contactless Home Inspections to Policyholders in New York and New Jersey Through Flyreel,” August 25, 2020.
15 “Ralph Lauren Targets Zero Wastewater Dyeing,” Ecotextile News, March 22, 2021.
16 Sarah Syed, Bloomberg, “Milkman Concept Revived By Dutch Online Supermarket Seeking Edge,” January 6, 2020.
17  Inti Pacheco, The Wall Street Journal, “How Much COVID-19 Cost Those Businesses That Stayed Open,” June 23, 2020.References
43
Life Reimagined:  Mapping the motivations that matter for today’s consumersAbout Accenture  
 
Accenture is a global professional services company with 
leading capabilities in digital, cloud and security. Combining 
unmatched experience and specialized skills across more 
than 40 industries, we offer Strategy and Consulting, 
Interactive, Technology and Operations services—all 
powered by the world’s largest network of Advanced 
Technology and Intelligent Operations centers. Our 537,000 
people deliver on the promise of technology and human 
ingenuity every day, serving clients in more than 120 
countries. We embrace the power of change to create value 
and shared success for our clients, people, shareholders, 
partners and communities.
Visit us at www.accenture.comAbout Accenture Research  
 
Accenture Research shapes trends and creates data driven 
insights about the most pressing issues global organizations 
face. Combining the power of innovative research techniques 
with a deep understanding of our clients’ industries, our team 
of 300 researchers and analysts spans 20 countries and 
publishes hundreds of reports, articles and points of view 
every year. Our thought-provoking research—supported by 
proprietary data and partnerships with leading organizations, 
such as MIT and Harvard—guides our innovations and allows 
us to transform theories and fresh ideas into real-world 
solutions for our clients. 
For more information, visit www.accenture.com/research
This content is provided for general information purposes and is not intended to be used in place of consultation with our professional advisors. 
Copyright © 2021. Accenture. 
All rights reserved. Accenture and its logo are registered trademarks of Accenture.