                                                                                                   Executive Summary                          
© 2009 Demand Metric Research Corporation  
 
 
Achieving Brand  Consensus  
  
 
Successful branding, or re -branding, requires that key stakeholders are invol ved in a 
democratic process to agree on what the new brand will be. However, working with 
every stakeholder throughout the process is simply impossible. Read this brief guide  
to learn how you can achieve consensus on your brand.  
 
Use Demand Metric’s downl oadable Branding Selection Tool  to help you provide 
choices for your stakeholders that are equally satisfactory for the brand champion.  
  
 
What are the Key Branding Drivers?  
 
 
 Mergers & Acquisitions  - combining two distinctly different brands is 
perhaps the most difficult of all re -branding exercises.  
 
 Entering New Markets  – when new businesses are formed, or when old 
business units are spun off, organizations typically create new brands.  
 
 Updating Corporate Image  - organizations that have been in business for 
over 20 years often have a requirement to get their brand up with the times.  
  
 
What Key Choi ces Need to Be Made?  
 
 
 Mission Statement  – your mission statement describes the fundamental 
reason you are in business. For example: to help our customers succeed etc.  
 
 Vision Statement  – this is how you envision your organization and would 
like others to view you. Typically, vision statements look to the future.  
 
 Corporate Values  – these are the core values that your organization 
believes in, i.e. Excellence, Continuous Improvement, and Community  etc. 
 
 Positioning Statement  – this aspect of your brand positions your 
product/service or company, correctly within the industry.  
 
 Corporate Tagline  – normally a very punchy 3 -6 word sentence(s) that 
drives home your core messages. Be careful not to ma ke this too generic.  
 
 Logo  – corporate logos are images that identify your organization.  
                                                                                                    Executive Summary                          
© 2009 Demand Metric Research Corporation  
 
  
Action Plan:  
 
 
1. Understand Business Strategy  – speak with senior management to get a 
clear picture of where your organization is headed. It is impossib le to develop 
a brand when there is no strategic direction.  
 
2. Build a Small Team  – branding exercises can be implemented much more 
efficiently if you have the right stakeholders engaged each step of the way. 
Build a cross -functional team of 3 -6 key ex ecutives that can represent each of 
your brand constituencies, including customers.  
 
3. Gather Feedback  – poll customers and employees to identify how you are 
currently perceived in the market, and compare this to how you’d like to be 
seen. Additionally , ask for suggestions related to your branding choices.  
 
4. Narrow Down Options  – take all the given ideas and further develop them 
until you have 3 -4 options for each brand category that would satisfy 
Marketing & senior management. Go back to your general audience with 
these options and vote for the winners.  
 
5. Make Branding Selections  - use Demand Metric’s downloadable Branding 
Selection Tool  to pro vide your stakeholders with 3 -4 clear options for 
branding decisions. Tally up the results and re -vote if necessary.  
 
6. Implement Branding Strategy  - now that you have your brand elements 
selected, develop, and implement your branding strategy. This co uld include: 
updating collateral & the corporate website, changing policies & procedures to 
accommodate your new identity, and communicating to customers.  
  
 
Bottom -Line:  
 
 
Effective branding requires input from all your key stakeholders. Work to understand 
your organizational roadmap, build a branding team, open the floor to suggestions, 
and achieve consensus on your brand.  
 
 