 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Adopting Consultative Selling  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for converting 
to a consultative selling approach.  
 
Read this brief 14 -page report to learn how to:  
 
 
 Identify Competitive Advantages & Differentiators  
 
 Determine Product Features, Advantages, & Benefits  
 
 Develop Key Account Plans  
 
 Standardize Business Communications  
 
 Promote a Consultative S ales Process  
 
 Improve the Listening Skills of your Staff  
 
 Effectively Handle Customer Objections  
 
 Skillfully Negotiate Favorable Terms  
 
 Teach Proven Closing Techniques  
 
 
Read this report to identify opportunities to further develop and 
maintain consultative selling in your organization.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Competitive Positioning        3  
 
Product Knowledge        4  
 
Key Accounts Planning        4  
 
Business Communications       5  
 
Consultative Sales Process       6  
 
Active Listening         7  
 
Objection Handling        8  
 
The Art of Negotiation        9  
 
Closing Techniques        13  
 
Conclusion          13 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Competitive Positioning    
 
 
 
 
How a prospect competitively positions your company is a critical factor 
when engaging in the buying/selling process. Fundamentally, positioning 
is about aligning your business with theirs, so that a clear synergy can 
be visualized by the prospect.  
  
When  there is a perfect fit between organizations, selling becomes much 
easier because the in the early stages of the sales cycle the prospect 
mentally puts your organization ahead of the competition, in principle. 
Therefore, it is essential that the prospect is comfortable with the 
salesperson, and correctly positions your company.  
  
Many organizations discover value by using a Competitive Analysis 
Tool to: evaluate in dustry competitors; understand competitive 
advantages and differentiation points; develop a competitive product 
positioning map and a competition matrix.  
  
To effectively position your company, determine the following:  
  
 
1. What are your genuine competitive advantages?  
 
2. How can we differentiate our products?  
  
  
Competitive positioning is all about gaining a competitive edge in your 
market. It goes beyond understanding your prospects’ needs and must 
incorporate knowledge of your competition to ensure your product is 
favorably differentiated among many competing options.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Key Account Planning  Product Knowledge   
 
   
 
 
While it’s true that deep knowledge of all products/services comes with 
time and effort, there are methods for quickly understanding the key 
features, advantages, and benefits of your solution.  
  
 
 Feature : these are components of your product/service that  
have been developed to deliver value to the customer. An 
example would be “practical tools” like this one.  
 
 Advantage : these are implicit benefits resulting from the 
features, but are not necessarily beneficial to all prospects. An 
example would be .saving time. by using a .practical tool. 
template. Note that this advantage is only a benefit when a 
prospect needs the par ticular tool shown.  
 
 Benefi t: a benefit is an advantage of a product/service that 
fulfills the explicit need of a prospect. For example, a restaurant 
offering a featured lunch that arrives in 10 minutes or less would 
be advantageous to some, but a real be nefit for those who need 
to be back to work in 30 minutes.  
  
Use our Feature, Advantage, Benefit Tool  to quickly map out the 
most salient points for your product/service offering.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Every organization has key accounts that are responsible for large 
amounts of revenue or have a large growth potential.  
  
Account planning allows you to work backwards from annual sales 
targets to determine which actions need to be taken to achieve your 
goals & objectives. Additionally, account plans provide measures that 
can be monitored and managed.  
  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Business Communications  Following are the components of an e ffective Key Account Plan :  
  
 
 Corporate Overview  - a brief description of this account  
 Hierarchy  - where does power lie in the organization?  
 Opportunity Size  - how much revenue can you attain?  
 Current State  - what does this account buy now?  
 Goal State of Account  - what is your vision for growth?  
 Account Objectives  - specific, measurable objectives.  
 Account Action Plan  - step-by-step action plan.  
  
 
Use a Key Account Planning Tool  to determine where your revenues 
will come from.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
There are many types of business communications such as 
introductions, appointment confirmations, meeting follow -ups to 
document agreed next steps, and order confirmations. Salespeople often 
rush to send their communications without spending a few minutes to 
ensure that their communication will have the maximum impact 
possible.  
  
A well -constructed business communication, such as an email or 
introduction letter, can be effectively described as a sleeping 
salesperson. Each communication should be strategica lly used to 
confirm what has been agreed and close the prospect on the next part 
of the sales process.  
  
Equally important, each communication should be structured to have an 
introduction and a call to action. It is recommended that standard email 
drafts be set up to ensure consistency of electronic business 
communications.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Consultative Selling Process   
 
 
 
 
All businesses need customers who are confident that they made the 
right decision to buy. In many cases, prospects feel that they bought 
under pressure, and invariably end up canceling their order.  
  
To mitigate this risk, salespeople need to work in part nership with their 
prospects to lead them to the right decision for their organization, 
regardless of whether or not that means a sale. The focus becomes the 
customer’s needs, and your ability to provide a solution for their needs.  
  
Following is a sales process guaranteed to win business:  
  
1. Introduction to Establish Rapport  
2. Provide Brief Value Proposition  
3. State the Agenda for the Call  
4. Probing Questions to Identify Implicit Needs  
5. Further Questions to Develop Explicit Needs  
6. Present Solution to Explicit Needs  
7. Handle any Objections  
8. Ensure Prospect is Sold in Principle  
9. Negotiate Terms to Mutual Agreement  
10. Get Commitment for the Sale  
  
Neil Rackham’s bestseller SPIN Selling  provides an excellent 
framework for developing consultative sales process in any organization. 
Based on research of over 35,000 sales calls, this methodology is bas ed 
on the most research ever conducted on the sales process.  
  
At its core, SPIN selling is all about converting implicit needs into explicit 
needs. Implicit needs are statements of problems, dissatisfactions, and 
difficulties. Explicit needs are specific  customer wants and desires.  
  
It is the satisfaction of explicit needs that leads to a successful sales 
call. The goal of SPIN selling is to convert surface -level implicit needs 
into deeply rooted explicit needs.  
  
To convert implicit needs into explicit needs, Rackham suggests using 
the SPIN framework, which is an acronym for:  
   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Active Listening Skills  Situation - questions designed to gather facts.  
  
Problem - questions to identify challenges  
 
Implication - exploring the impact of probl ems.  
 
Need-Payoff - discussing the value of a solution.  
  
Use a SPIN Selling Tool  to further develop appropriate questions for 
your organization.  
  
Additionall y, create a standardized Sales Proposal  and Sales 
Presentation template  that you can quickly modify for new 
opportunities.  
  
Once your funnel starts to fill up, use an Opportunity Pipeline Tool  to 
report expected revenues, and document where accounts are in the 
sales cycle.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In order to effectively use the SPIN Selling methodology, salespeople 
must further develop their active listening skills. Most salespeople are 
great talkers, but the exceptional star sellers tend to be even better 
listeners.  
  
Following is a comparison be tween strong and weak listeners:  
 
Strong Listeners  Weak Listeners  
Open Body Posture  Closed Body Posture  
Leans Forward  Leans Back  
Interrupts to Understand  Interrupts to Speak  
Maintains Eye Contact  Looks Around  
Nods & Acknowledges  No Interaction  
Sits Still and Relaxed  Fidgets and Acts Restless  
Restates and Paraphrases  Talks Over  
Takes Detailed Notes  Doesn’t Take Notes  
Asks Great Questions  Doesn’t Ask Questions  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
Objection Handling   
 
 
 
 
Although SPIN Selling prevents many objections that come up in the 
buying process, there will always be some concerns or questions that 
need to be answered before a prospect will be ready to move forward.  
  
Following is a simple 4 -step approach for effect ively handling objections 
and getting back to the sales process:  
  
 
1. Soften  - empathize and agree with the customer. Some 
examples include: “I understand.” or “I agree with you.” or 
“that’s a valid concern.”  
 
2. Confirm  - paraphrase their concern to demonstrate 
understanding. For example: “so what you are telling me is that 
you need.”  
 
3. Respond  - use an objection response to present a valid 
argument that can alleviate the customer’s concern.  
 
4. Close  - following your respo nse, a trial close can be used to 
bring the discussion back on track to the sales presentation. For 
example: “do you see how we can alleviate your concern? Great! 
Are you ready to move forward?”    
  
 
Use an Objection  Response Tool  to determine how your top 
salespeople overcome common objections.  
  
Following are some objection handling techniques:  
  
1. Feel, Felt, Found  - agree with the customer that many 
customers have “felt” that way in the past, what we have “found” 
is that by [insert response], our clients have “found” that.  
 
2. Yes, But.  - this is an empathy statement by agreeing with the 
objection followed by – “but have you ever thought about.”  
 
3. Restate & Qualify  - paraphrase the objection to establish 
whether the objection is REAL or not.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
The Art of Nego tiating  4. Convert to Question  - if you need some time to think about 
your response, one technique is to ask a question of  the prospect 
to buy some time.  
 
5. Isolate Objection  - ensure that all other objections have been 
covered, and then work to isolate the most difficult objection and 
close on that one.  
 
6. Boomerang  - make the objection the exact reason they SHOULD 
buy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“When selling you never get what you deserve, you get what you 
negotiate for.”  
   
Definition : Negotiation is a mutual exchange of concessions, which 
provides both buyer and seller with a profitable deal, or a win -win 
situation.  
  
  
How is Negotiating Different?  
  
Fundamentally, negotiation is different from all other methods of 
reaching an agreement, such as: persuasion, accommodation, 
compromise, and confrontation.  
  
Negotiation is based on the premise that both sides will win and  
commence a long -term business relationship.  
  
Following is a summary of other agreement methods:  
  
 Persuasion  - implies that one party knows best and will 
therefore impose his/her will on the other. It does not usually 
promote lasting relationship becau se it colors all future 
transactions with tension and distrust.  
 
 Accommodation  - this is a one -winner strategy, where the 
weaker party gives in.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 10 
 Compromise  - is a nobody -wins strategy as each side usually 
gives up something they didn’t want to. This method promotes 
suspicion.  
 
 Confrontation  - describes a situation where both sides initially 
refuse to budge. The result is that either one side surrenders or 
no deal is made.  
  
 
Golden Rules of Negotiating  
  
 Ensure Prospect is Sold in Principle  - never enter a 
negotiation if the prospect is not sold in principle. Otherwise, you 
will be in a position of disadvantage for your negotiation.  
 
 Remain Calm  - be calm,  cool, and collected as possible.  
 
 Remove Emotions  - top negotiators are cold/clinical.  
 
 Have a Plan  - prepare for your negotiation by understanding 
your best -case scenario, fallback position, and concessions you 
are willing to make.  
 
 Never Give Anythin g Away  - instead of just giving concessions 
away, make sure to always trade them and get something in 
return.  
  
  
Negotiating Strategy  
  
The sales negotiator must first decide on a strategy, based on:  
  
 The needs of the customer  
 The strengths of the selling company’s position  
 How much the selling company wants the order  
  
Preparation for a negotiation should include:  
  
 Analysis of previous history  
 Analysis of buying company’s needs & objectives  
 Defining the sales objectives  
 Planning the negotiation interview  
 Costing of what you can afford to give away  
 Estimating the value of concessions to the buyer  
   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 11 
Skilled negotiators do not start by making their best offer. Instead, they 
test the other side by various tactics. During th is exchange, each side 
takes an initial stance.  
  
During the subsequent bargaining, each side moves towards a prepared 
fallback position. The final agreement will normally depend on:  
  
 The relative skills of the negotiators  
 The strengths of the buying/selling companies  
 The intensity of each side’s needs  
  
When the buyer takes their initial stance, the sales negotiator should 
take their own initial stance at a point equidistant from the sales fallback 
position.  
  
  
Structur e of the Negotiation Interview  
  
The salesperson should seek to take control of the negotiation. If control 
cannot be assumed immediately, the salesperson should keep cool until 
the opportunity arises.  
  
Following is a suggested structure for a lengthy n egotiation.  
  
The salesperson should attempt to set the mood by:  
  
 Stating “why we are here.”  
 Stressing mutual objectives  
 Being confident that an agreement will be made  
 Maintaining eye contact  
 Avoiding dominant questions  
 Avoiding distractions  
 Letting the other party respond with their overview  
  
Background  
  
Discuss the history of the deal and let the other party respond with their 
perspective. Do not state issues in such a manner that the other party 
will react and start to argue.  
  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 12 
Defining Issues  
  
Agree on the items that are in scope for the negotiation. Do not discuss 
any points until all issues have been identified. If the other party 
surprises you with an unexpected issue, remain calm. Question, makes 
notes, but remain neutral at t his stage.  
  
Select Issues for Discussion  
  
Once all issues have been defined, create an agenda. The order of the 
agenda should be well prepared. The following considerations will 
provide a guide:  
  
 Start with a Bridge Issue  - consider starting with a m inor 
issue that can be easily agreed and promotes an atmosphere of 
partnership.  
 
 Make Concessions Early  - make concessions early and seek 
concessions on later, more important issues.  
 
 Work up to Key Issues  - prioritize your agenda such that you 
deal with all the minor issues in the early stages of the 
negotiation. This is a good method for avoiding a heated 
negotiation right from the beginning.  
  
Refining the Issues  
  
This is the process of discussion, of fense and defense, giving and 
receiving, persuading and bargaining.  
  
Fallback  
  
Each side approaches their fallback position. If the positions are 
identical, this will be a short, painless process. If not, more bargaining 
will be necessary.  
  
Settlemen t  
  
This is when an agreement has been reached in principle.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 13 
Closing Techniques  
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
Definition : closing is a natural conclusion to a well -presented sales 
argument.  
  
Most organizations feel that they need to have better “closers.” Although 
closing is an essential part of the sales process, research has 
demonstrated that effectively developing implicit needs to explicit needs 
exponentially increases close rates.  
  
Generally speaking, closing should be used to affirm that value has been 
shown. The classic line “always be closing” makes sense if you consider 
that effective salespeople trial close after each and every feature they 
present.  
  
In many cases, a successful sa les call will involve 5 -7 trial/final closes. 
 A trial close is a stepping -stone to the final close, and usually confirms 
that the prospect sees value in a particular aspect of the solution. For 
example, a trial close might be: “do you see how this part of  our product 
can save you time?”  
  
Following are some closing techniques:  
  
 Direct Close  - simply asking for the order.  
 Assumptive Close  - assuming prospect is ready to buy.  
 Choice Close  - providing two purchasing options.  
 Silent Close  - waiting for the prospect to respond.  
 Final Objection Close  - closing on final objection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The manner in which organizations buy and sell products has steadily 
evolved over the past 50 years. The old huckster approach of .boy have 
I got a deal for you. will simply no longer work for today’ s sophisticated, 
and informed, consumers.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 14 
Organizations looking to adapt to a modern consultative approach need 
to focus on fundamentals such as: rigorous competitive analysis to 
identify differentiators; formalized product training; account planning; 
standard business communications; adopting a c onsultative sales 
process such as SPIN Selling; improving listening skills; handling 
objections; tactfully negotiating; and strong closing techniques.  
 
Use the tools provided in this report to create a custom Sales Training 
Manual for your organization.  
 