                                       
                                                                                                Executive Summary  
© 2009 Demand Metric Research Corporation  
  
Advanced Project Management Techniques  
 
Once an organization undertakes the process of standardizing Project Management, 
the next step is to benchmark maturity levels in the 9 key project management 
competencies, and set goals for improving in each area.  
 
Use Demand Metric's downloadable  Project Management Maturity Assessment  to 
identify your strengths and weaknesses, and work to optimize your method ology.  
 
 
Project Management Competencies:  
 
• Scope Management  - business requirements are well defined; stakeholders stay 
engaged; Change Request Forms are used to approve scope changes; adjustments to 
delivery timelines are made to manage expectations.  
• Time Management  - scheduling and resource planning is performed; projects are 
systematically prioritized to ensure resource allocation; formal Project Schedules and 
Work Breakdown Structures are used consistently.  
• Cost Management  - cost estimates and plans a re tracked against a baseline, and 
integrated into project office system. Lesson learned are used to improve documented 
cost management processes.  
• Quality Management  - quality processes are well defined and documented, 
checkpoints are scheduled for qualit y assurance (QA), and Post -Project Evaluations are 
used to improve quality management proactively.  
• Human Resources Management  - formal project teams are assembled; processes 
exist to define how to plan/schedule projects; HR time/cost is measured; resource  
forecasting is used to schedule projects.  
• Integration Management  - cross-project integration is performed to drive 
efficiency; integration processes are measured and managed.  
• Communications Management  - Project Charters are used to document project 
comm unication plans; collaboration tools are used; communications processes and 
tools are consistently improved to increase effectiveness.  
• Risk Management  - risks are documented in project planning phase; metrics are 
used to inform risk management decisions; senior management is aware of key risks 
and stays involved to manage them.  
• Procurement Management  - contract management and build vs. buy decisions are 
made at organizational level; cost -savings are realized.  
 
                                        
                                                                                                Executive Summary  
© 2009 Demand Metric Research Corporation  
  
Action Plan:  
 
1. Assess your Project Managem ent Maturity  - start this initiative by downloading 
Demand Metric's Project Management Maturity Assessment  and determine your 
organizational strengt hs and weaknesses. Benchmark your maturity in each of the 9 
competency areas, and evaluate your overall score.  
2. Standardize Project Management  - read Demand Metric's Research Note, 
Standardizing Project Management, to develop a formal policy, methodology, and 
toolset that you can provide to your team.  
3. Train your Staff  - now that you understand what it takes to effectively manage 
multiple projects, train your staff and work to define repeatable processes for each of 
the 9 competency areas.  
4. Measure Progress  - next quarter, do another project management maturity 
assessment to demonstrate how your department is improving in this organizational 
competency.  
5. Help other Departments  - once you have perfected your project management 
procedure, speak with other exec utives to see if they could use some help with 
improving their processes. Provide tools & resources to get them started.  
 
Bottom -Line:  
 
Project Management is the lifeblood of every organization; embrace this process and work to 
make your department the l eader in project management maturity. At the very least, you will 
learn a skill set that is well received in any organization.  
 