Follow this simple step-by-step guide to develop a streamlined  
approach to agency selection, management, and evaluation.AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Playbook & Toolkit
Table of Contents
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Introduction 04Framework 03
Conclusion 26
About 27Plan 06
09 Research
12 Select
16 Communicate
19 Manage
22 Transitionstage
stage
stage
stage
stage
stage1
2
3
4
5
6AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Framework
Leverage the framework below to quickly empower  
your organization’s agency management strategy.
1PLAN
Agency Selection ToolAgency Compensation 
Model
Non-Compete  
Agreement Template
Non-Disclosure 
Agreement NDA
Advertising Agency  
RFP TemplateAgency Transition 
Model 
Agency Onboarding 
Checklist
Agency Performance 
ReviewProject Status 
Report Template
Creative Strategy 
Survey ToolAgency Transition 
Assets DatabaseAgency Transition 
Termination Letter
Agency Transition 
Creative Assignment Agency Transition 
Meeting AgendaAd Agency Request  
For InformationProject Charter 
Template
Marketing Strategy 
Scorecard
Marketing Budget 
Template
Consultant Evaluation 
Matrix
Agency Compensation 
Evaluation Checklist 
Agency Alignment 
Strategy Workbook
Agency Compensation 
Negotiation ChecklistAd Agency  
Agreement TemplateProject Management 
TemplateAgency Onboarding 
Model
Creative Brief 
TemplateAgency Compensation 
Audit Template
RESEARCH2 COMMUNICATE4 MANAGE5 SELECT3 TRANSITION6
Click the buttons below to access all related 
training, tools, templates, and other resources. 4
AGENCY MANAGEMENTPlan Research Select Communicate Manage Transition1 2 3 4 5 6
Introduction
How to Use This Consulting Playbook
This document consists of six stages, each with a description, steps, 
and action items. Action items include using our premium tools and 
templates. Our intention with this playbook is to guide you through 
the Agency Management Process by helping you:
Evaluate the performance of the agency that you have 
selectedSelect  the right agency for your business
Manage  the relationship between the two partiesWhat is an Advertising Agency ?
An advertising agency or advert agency is a service 
business dedicated to creating, planning, and handling 
advertising for its clients. Ad agencies come in all sizes 
and include everything from one - or two - person 
shops, small-to-medium-sized agencies and large 
independents.
Typical ad agency departments include,  
but are not limited to:
1. Creative (Copywriters, Art Directors, etc.)
2. Account Services (Account executives)
3. Media Buying (Modern agencies might have a 
media planning department integrated)
4. Production (ensures the creative gets produced) 5
AGENCY MANAGEMENTOutputs from This Playbook
Stage 1 - Plan
Stage 4 - CommunicateProject Charter, Project Goals & Objectives, Project 
Budget
Creative Strategy Survey, Creative Brief TemplateStage 2 - Research
Stage 5 - ManageAd Agency RFI, Non-Compete Agreement, Non Disclo-
sure Agreement, Agency RFP
Project Management Schedule, Agency Performance 
EvaluationStage 3 - Select
Stage 6 - TransitionAgency Selection Tool, Consultant Evaluation Matrix, Ad 
Agency Agreement
Agency Transition Model, Transition Termination Notice 
Letter TemplatePlan Research Select Communicate Manage Transition1 2 3 4 5 6
IntroductionPlanSTAGE 1
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
During Stage 1, you will work with your team to plan for the agency-selection process.
Key activities for this stage include:
STEP 1: Organize Your Resources 
STEP 2: Identify Goals & Objectives   
STEP 3: Set & Track Your Budget 7
AGENCY MANAGEMENTProject Overview
Project Description
Key Success Factors
StakeholdersObjectives
Programs, Initiatives and Actions
Key Performance Indicators & Metrics
Target Timeframe to Achieve ObjectivesOrganize Your Resources Identify Goals & ObjectivesSTEP 1 STEP 2
Action Item Action Item
Use the Project Charter Template to organize resources 
for the new agency selection project by establishing a clear 
project scope, decision rights, and executive sponsorship.Document goals, objectives, KPIs, and target timeframes 
related to the agency-selection project in the Marketing 
Strategy Scorecard.
This tool will help you to outline the following: This tool will help you identify and document the following:VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCE
Introduction 1
PlanResearch Select Communicate Manage Transition2 3 4 5 6 8
AGENCY MANAGEMENTMan Hours
Travel
Opportunity Costs of lengthy process (brand erosion, loss of 
market share, loss of project momentum, etc)Set & Track Your BudgetSTEP 3
Action Item
Include this project in your Marketing Budget Template and 
be sure to obtain approval from key stakeholders.
A few of the costs associated with your agency-selection project 
can include, but are not limited to:
VIEW RESOURCE
Introduction 1
PlanResearch Select Communicate Manage Transition2 3 4 5 6ResearchSTAGE 2
During Stage 2, you will gather information about potential agencies.
Key activities for this stage include:
STEP 1: Reviewing Agency Compensation Models 
STEP 2: Gather Background Information
STEP 3: Protect Your Business
STEP 4: Write a Request for Proposal
AGENCY MANAGEMENT 10
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
2
Research
Reviewing Agency Compensation ModelsSTEP 1
Action Item
Review the Agency Compensation Model to evaluate the 
different options available when it comes to compensating 
an agency partner.
Choosing a compensation model that is suitable for your chosen 
agency is an important part of the relationship between your orga-
nization and the agency team. Different compensation models 
produce varied nuances in the way that agencies and organizations 
communicate and measure results.
VIEW RESOURCESTEP 2
Gather Background Information
Action Item
Use the Ad Agency Request For Information Template to 
learn more about potential advertising agencies before inter-
viewing them.
RFIs allow agencies to provide background information on their 
firms and to highlight successes they have had with similar 
clients. The company presenting its profile can show example 
cases of different advertising projects that have worked well in 
the past. Additionally, advertising agencies can highlight specific 
details about the agency, providing information on the members 
of the proposed account team.
VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCEIntroduction Select Communicate Manage Transition3 4 5 6
Plan1 11
AGENCY MANAGEMENTSTEP 3
Protect Your Business
Action Item
Use the Non-Compete Agreement Template and the 
Non-Disclosure Agreement Template to protect yourself 
from unnecessary risk by ensuring that confidential and 
proprietary information can he shared openly when dealing 
with third parties.
VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCE
VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCESTEP 4
General Information
Statement of Work
Proposal Submission ProcedureWrite a Request for Proposal
Action Item
Use the general Ad Agency RFP Template to help you 
create a formal invitation to request agency proposals that 
meet your business requirements and criteria. 
For more specific applications, check out the RFPs for an Adver-
tising Agency , Branding Marketing Agency , Design Agency , 
Direct Marketing Agency , Full Service Marketing Agency , Internet 
and Digital Agency , Media Planning and Buying Agency , Promo-
tion Agency, and PR Marketing Agency .
The main sections of this document include:
VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCE
Agency Information
Estimated Budget & 
Resources Required
2
ResearchIntroduction Select Communicate Manage Transition3 4 5 6
Plan1SelectSTAGE 3
In Stage 3 you will define your requirements, evaluate agencies & consultants,  
and get an agreement in place.
The key activities in this Stage are:
STEP 1: Evaluate Agency Candidates 
STEP 2: Consider and Compare Consultants 
STEP 3: Determine the Best Compensation Model
STEP 4: Align Goals and Strategy with Compensation 
STEP 5: Sign an Agreement with an Agency
STEP 6: Review Negotiation Best Practices
AGENCY MANAGEMENT 13
AGENCY MANAGEMENTExperience
Skill Set & Approach
Creativity & Innovation
Methodology & Tools
Ability to Achieve Objectives  
Concept and Channels UsedRelevant Experience  
Skill Set
Professionalism
Methodology & Tools  
Personality & FitEvaluate Agency Candidates Consider and Compare ConsultantsSTEP 1 STEP 2
Action Item Action Item
Use the Agency Selection Tool to evaluate and compare 
different ad agencies by analyzing the options across a set 
criterion. Use the Consultant Evaluation Matrix to evaluate and 
compare different ad agencies by analyzing the options 
across a set criterion. 
Sections of the evaluation include: Sections of the evaluation include:
Select3
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCEIntroduction Plan Research Communicate Manage Transition1 2 4 5 6 14
AGENCY MANAGEMENTDetermine the Best Compensation Model Align Goals and Strategy with Compensation STEP 3 STEP 4
Action Item Action Item
Use the Agency Compensation Evaluation Tool to under-
stand which agency-compensation model is the strategically 
best approach for your organization’s needs.Use the Agency Alignment Strategy Workbook to ensure 
that your organizations goals are aligned with how the 
agency is compensated for their work.
Every organization is going to have different needs, and based on 
how they operate internally (including how they review their goals 
and results) will need a compensation model that is a win-win for 
both agency and organization. It is important in advance of any working relationship with an agency 
to clarify what your organization’s expectations are in terms of the 
goals you want to achieve, but also how the agency’s compensation 
aligns and interacts with those specific metrics.
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCE
Select3Introduction Plan Research Communicate Manage Transition1 2 4 5 6 15
AGENCY MANAGEMENTSign an Agreement with an Agency Review Negotiation Best PracticesSTEP 5 STEP 6
Action Item Action Item
Use the Ad Agency Agreement Template to put a formal 
agreement in place with an ad agency. It is important that 
you list each part of the agreement to help clarify the roles 
and responsibilities of the ad agency and your company.Leverage the Agency Compensation Negotiation Checklist  
to help your team while negotiating the compensation 
agreement with an agency partner.
This template allows you to clearly specify the services that an 
agency will be providing your company, in addition to the fees, 
terms of payment, duration, on-boarding approach, transition plan, 
and more. In this template you can also write the general conditions 
of the agreement, which will include your company’s responsibili-
ties. This template can be easily used in collaboration with the legal 
department of a company.During an agency contract negotiation, deciding on an equally fair 
compensation is often one of the most important line items to get 
right. Both parties need to feel that they are being treated fairly, and 
that the contract will result in a win-win.
VIEW RESOURCE
 VIEW RESOURCE
Select3Introduction Plan Research Communicate Manage Transition1 2 4 5 6CommunicateSTAGE 4
To this point, you have researched potential agencies and have selected the right agency for your 
business. Now, it’s time to operate with complete transparency. 
In this stage you will focus your efforts to:
STEP 1: Discover Agency Onboarding Best Practices
STEP 2: Execute an Agency Onboarding Process
STEP 3: Share a Creative Brief  
STEP 4: Start Your First Project
AGENCY MANAGEMENT 17
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Communicate4
Discover Agency Onboarding Best Practices Execute an Agency Onboarding ProcessSTEP 1 STEP 2
Action Item Action Item
Review the Agency Onboarding Model to understand the 
best practice process recommended for onboarding your 
new agency partner.Leverage the Agency Onboarding Checklist to ensure the 
onboarding process runs smoothly.
At the beginning of any agency relationship, it is important to 
provide visual assets and creative direction, including the creative 
and aesthetic guidelines for your brand as well as any strategic 
resources the agency can use on your behalf.To ensure the first stages of partnership between your organization 
and any newly appointed agency are hassle-free, we recommend 
that you keep an eye on what steps need to occur (from the orga-
nization’s perspective, and outside of any agency-provided list of 
action items).
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCEIntroduction Plan Research Select Manage Transition1 2 3 5 6 18
AGENCY MANAGEMENTDefinition
Audience
Competitors  Goals
Identity & BrandingCommunications
Aesthetic
Brand DichotomiesShare Your Strategic Direction Share a Creative BriefSTEP 3 STEP 4
Action Item Action Item
Use the Creative Strategy Survey Tool to provide your 
creative agency partner(s) with a detailed project plan that 
includes your strategic direction and ideas for creative devel-
opment that will coincide with your strategy.Use the Creative Brief Template to ensure that your creative 
agency or team understand the strategic objectives for your 
company, product, and/or program.
Sections of the survey include: Sections of the creative brief include Background, Corporate Facts, 
Overall Assignment, Tactical Objectives, Product and Service Facts 
& Benefits (Client Perspective), Market Overview & Competitive 
Situation, Customer Profile, Awareness Levels, Key Messaging & 
Corporate Positioning, Campaign Measurement, Campaign Execu-
tion, Proposed Timelines, Budget & Additional Resources.
VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCE
Communicate4Plan Research Select Manage Transition1 2 3 5 6
IntroductionManageSTAGE 5
Now that you have started your first project, you need to track the results of the program to deter-
mine success. We also recommend that you evaluate your agency every 6 months.
In this stage, you will:
STEP 1: Manage Individual Projects   
STEP 2: Create a High-Level Status Report
STEP 3: Evaluate Your Agency’s Performance
STEP 4: Evaluate the Agency’s Compensation 
AGENCY MANAGEMENT 20
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Manage5
Project Name
Start Date/End Date
Project Team
Time OffProject Summary
Project Vital Signs
Project Cost & ScheduleManage Individual Projects Create a High-Level Status ReportSTEP 1 STEP 2
Action Item Action Item
Use the Project Management Template to manage the project 
schedule when working with your agency. This tools lets you list 
individual tasks, assign ownership, and identify start/end dates. 
This template can be used to track project status.If you are working on multiple projects with your agency, use 
the Project Status Report Template to create a reporting 
tool that you can use to communicate project status with key 
stakeholders.
Start by indicating the following:  The project status report should highlight specific items that key 
stakeholders need to know about without getting into too much 
detail. 
The three broad areas this template covers are: 
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCEIntroduction Plan Research Select Communicate Transition1 2 3 4 6 21
AGENCY MANAGEMENTSTEP 3 STEP 4
Overview of Previous Period
Accomplishments, Obstacles, Strengths, and Opportunities  
Goals, Targets, and Action Items
Suggestions for Organizational Improvement
Competency Manager-Evaluation of Agency
Agency Development PlanEvaluate Your Agency’s Performance Evaluate the Agency’s Compensation 
Action Item Action Item
Use the Agency Performance Review to assist you with 
gathering measurable feedback regarding an agency’s past 
performance, attitude, and ability to do their job.Use the Agency Compensation Audit Template to help 
guide your organization’s review of the compensation 
model and approach used with an agency partner.
During an annual review, sections of the evaluation include: Agency compensation is an independent item for review beyond 
general performance and is recommended 6 months after the 
start of a working relationship to ensure the correct compensation 
model is being employed based on the results produced to date. An 
incorrect compensation model can cause problems in your agency 
relationship and reduce the results you could expect, so consistent 
review is recommended.
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCE
Manage5Introduction Plan Research Select Communicate Transition1 2 3 4 6TransitionSTAGE 6
Sometimes an agency relationship won’t work out, or you may want to consolidate multiple agen-
cies’ work into a single agency partner for ease of management. If your contract is properly set up in 
advance, this process should already be defined and understood, but it will still require execution. The 
following steps will help you execute a peaceful and productive transition from one agency to another.
In this stage, you will:
STEP 1: Review Agency Transitions Best Practices 
STEP 2: Send a Termination Notice
STEP 3: Acquire All Assets Before Departure
STEP 4: Organize a Transition Transfer Meeting
STEP 5: Transfer Creative Assignments
AGENCY MANAGEMENT 23
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Transition6
Review Agency Transitions Best Practices Send a Termination NoticeSTEP 1 STEP 2
Action Item Action Item
Review the Agency Transition Model to understand the best 
practices required to transition from one agency partner to 
another.Leverage the Agency Transition Termination Notice Letter 
Template to send a letter to your existing agency partner 
notifying them about the end of your relationship, and begin-
ning of the transition process.
Although there are many different ways any organization can decide 
to transition from one agency to another, there are industry best 
practices that are recommended to ensure a transition is successful, 
and avoid any unnecessary conflict.The transition between one agency and another often begins with a 
termination letter sent from your organization to the existing agency. 
This letter sets the wheels in motion for all of the steps required to 
begin the transfer of assets, information, and ownership of projects.
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCEIntroduction Plan Research Select Communicate Manage1 2 3 4 5 24
AGENCY MANAGEMENT
Acquire all Assets Before Departure Organize a Transition Transfer MeetingSTEP 3 STEP 4
Action Item Action Item
Use the Agency Transition Assets Acquisition Database to 
collect and track all of the assets you will need to have trans-
ferred over to your new agency partner.Use the Agency Transition Transfer Meeting Agenda 
Template to set up a successful transition meeting between 
your old and new agency partners. 
It is important that your organization takes an active role and respon-
sibility in ensuring that all of the required assets your new agency 
partner requires are handed over in a timely and consistent manner. 
We recommend to audit all required assets and track their transfer 
from start to end of the transition.Your existing agency will need to meet and work with your new 
agency partner to make this transition a successful one. This transfer 
meeting is an important first impression for the relationship between 
both agencies, and we recommend that you lead this meeting to 
make success certain.
VIEW RESOURCE VIEW RESOURCEVIEW RESOURCE
Transition6Introduction Plan Research Select Communicate Manage1 2 3 4 5 25
AGENCY MANAGEMENTTransfer Creative AssignmentsSTEP 5
Action Item
Use the Agency Transition Creative Assignment Transfer 
Plan Template to plan the handing over of creative work 
from one agency to another.
When your organization switches from one agency partner to 
another, there may be ongoing projects that you may need to ensure 
are properly transferred to the new agency. Creative information 
and assets will need to be shared in a timely manner to ensure a 
hassle-free transition.
VIEW RESOURCE
Transition6Introduction Plan Research Select Communicate Manage1 2 3 4 5Conclusion
At the end of any business process, it’s always a good idea to review it 
and identify areas for improvement.  
Demand Metric has the tools and expertise to help you with the 
following:
Set up an agency management process
Audit your existing agency management process
Assist with using any of the tools referenced in this playbook
Provide hands-on assistance to accelerate achieving your goals.
To learn more, contact Demand Metric: info@demandmetric.com
AGENCY MANAGEMENTAGENCY MANAGEMENTDemand Metric helps Marketing teams get stuff done with practical tools, 
training, and a simple, modern platform for managing work.
Our analysts identify best practices from fast-growing companies and 
build Playbooks & Toolkits, Guides & Reports, Training Courses, and Project 
Templates to help you optimize your processes, add structure to your depart-
ment, and get your team punching above their weight class.
Manage your work visually with our easy-to-use platform, built for small 
marketing teams by design. See what your team is working on at a glance 
so you can spend less time managing projects and more time knocking 
stuff off your list.
Through strategic partnerships with the AMA, ANA, and AIPMM, our 1,000+ 
time-saving tools & resources have become the industry standard. Don’t 
start from scratch! 
Sign up for a free trial at www.demandmetric.comAbout Demand Metric
LEARN MORE© Demand Metric Research Corporation.  
All Rights Reserved.
www. demandmetric.com
Follow us on Twitter
Like us on FacebookJoin Linkedin Group