Agile Marketing
We have your complete Agile solution. 
Talk to Demand Metric.HOW-TO GUIDE
If you're looking for an Agile 
platform, sign up for a free 
30-day trial , and collaborate with 
your team using Kanban boards 
and project calendars.
SIGN UP NOWTable of Contents
So, What Exactly  
Is Agile Marketing?4
Why Agile Marketing? 6
Agile Marketing Manifesto 13
Agile Marketing Results 10
Glossary of Terms 15
How Agile Marketing Works 16
Defining Your Team  
and Roles18
Creating a Backlog 19
Review Process 20
Getting Started with  
Agile Marketing24
Action Plan 29So, What Exactly Is  
Agile Marketing?
Agile Marketing is a powerful and proven tactical approach to improve the 
processes that empower your marketing team, encouraging constant and 
swift growth.
An Agile approach allows teams to be more capable to adapt to real-time 
marketing challenges or opportunities.
Not only does the Agile process improve a teams speed, but it encourages 
transparency and rewards adaptability, ultimately leading to happier and less 
stressed team members and more consistent results.
In an Agile Marketing process, the team discovers and then focuses their 
collective efforts on the projects that matter most; completing these 
together cooperatively.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE 4So, What Exactly Is Agile Marketing?5
Agile Marketing is based on the Agile approach to project management 
often used in software development to encourage programmers to focus 
on incremental progress over building bigger projects, that take longer to 
complete, and may be irrelevant or unnecessary after they are completed.
By focusing on projects incrementally, the results are available much quicker, 
allowing the teams to test and analyze the outcomes before investing more 
resources in that area.
This approach has been so successful helping teams get faster and more 
efficient that the Marketing world has begun implementing it on marketing 
related projects, with equally great results.
The goal with Agile Marketing 
is to continuously and 
incrementally improve  
over time, and consistently 
measure the impact completed 
projects provide.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEWhy Agile  
Marketing?
6
 ■ No Defined Strategy
 ■ Reactive vs. Proactive
 ■ Difficulty Getting Budget
 ■ Viewed as a Cost Center
 ■ Not Taken SeriouslyNegative Perception of Marketing
Perception of the 
Marketing Function:
Over 50% are not 
able to quantify 
contribution to 
revenue or are 
viewed as a  
“Cost Center” 
14%
Profit  
center
31%
Revenue  
contributors33%
Revenue  
neutral22%
Cost  
center
Only 14% of 
Marketing 
departments  
are viewed as a  
“Profit Center”AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEWhy Agile Marketing? ■ Transparency & Accountability
 ■ Meetings Aren’t Productive
 ■ Prioritization Issues
 ■ Inconsistent Execution
 ■ Undefined, Ad Hoc ProcessesProcess Issues
Only 27 % of Marketers are very 
happy with the way their team 
manages projects.
How happy are you with your marketing 
organization’s approach to managing projects?
7
27%
Very /  
Extremely Happy
73%Somewhat /  
Not At All HappyAGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEWhy Agile Marketing?8
 ■ No Visibility Across Projects
 ■ Hard-to-Use, Overly Complex
 ■ Time Consuming to Update
 ■ Out-of-Date, Messy Task Data
 ■ Using Multiple SpreadsheetsTechnology IssuesMarketers want flexible options 
for viewing their team’s tasks 
across all projects... but only a 
quarter of them have it.
% of marketers that want the ability to view and filter tasks 
across all projects in Board, Table, and/or Calendar views 57%
% of marketers that have  the ability to view and filter tasks across 
all projects in Board, Table, and/or Calendar views 25%
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEWhy Agile Marketing? ■ Lack of Knowledge & Skills
 ■ Feel Disorganized
 ■ Stressful Chaotic Environment
 ■ Unhappy, Frustration, Burnout
 ■ Staff Retention & TurnoverPeople Issues9
 AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEAgile Marketing Results10 AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE
Hybrid Approach 67%
Somewhat Agile 65%
Strict Agile 64%
Traditional 54%
Marketing teams using an agile approach are growing revenue.
Over two-thirds of marketers who have adopted an agile 
approach report revenue growth in the last fiscal year.
11 AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE
Marketers using an agile approach are the happiest.
Marketers who have adopted any form of Agile are more likely to report  
they are very or extremely happy with the way projects are managed.
Agile Marketing Results
Strict Agile 47%
Hybrid Approach 32%
Somewhat Agile 27%
Traditional 19%
87% of CMOs report improved  
productivity among their teams  
following a transition to Agile.
According to Gartner, Marketing teams  
who adopt agile techniques:
Build ownership and accountability for business  
goals across the marketing organization
Shift from a rigid organizational structure to collaborative,  
cross-functional project teams
Transition from a linear, hierarchical, sequential approach to projects  
to rapid delivery of work with frequent adjustments and re-calibrations
SOURCE : Gartner Top Insights for the C-Suite Report, page 31 – Free Download: https://gtnr.it/33LPDWh
Agile Marketing Manifesto13
During a conference on Agile Marketing, the attendees were asked to compile 
and vote on a manifesto that covers what Agile Marketing is all about.
The following list has become a popular manifesto for the Agile Marketing world.The Agile Marketing Manifesto
1. Validated learning over opinions and conventions
2. Customer focused collaboration over silos and hierarchy
3. Adaptive and iterative campaigns over Big-Bang campaigns 
4. The process of customer discovery over static prediction
5. Flexible vs. rigid planning
6. Responding to change over following a plan
7. Many small experiments over a few large bets
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEAgile Marketing Manifesto14
They also agreed on these fundamental Agile Marketing principles:
Continuous attention to marketing fundamentals and good 
design enhances agility.
Simplicity is essential.
Sustainable marketing requires you to keep a constant  
pace and pipeline.
Don’t be afraid to fail; just don’t fail the same way twice.
Build marketing programs around motivated individuals. Give them 
the environment and support they need, and trust them to get the 
job done.
Learning, through the  build-measure-learn feedback loop,   
is the primary measure of progress.
We welcome and plan for change. We believe that our ability to 
quickly respond to change is a source of competitive advantage.
Great marketing requires close alignment with the business  
people, sales and development.
Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and 
continuous delivery  of marketing that solves problems.
Deliver marketing programs frequently, from a couple of weeks 
to a couple of months, with a preference to the shorter timescale.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE15
Glossary of Terms
Before we review how Agile Marketing works, please 
review this glossary of terms to begin to become 
familiar with the terminology used when working 
with an Agile management process.
A list of features/tasks 
that the team will add  
to future sprints.Product BacklogA daily progress tracking 
chart for the duration of 
the sprint.Sprint Burn Down
A specific length of time 
in which a team commits 
to complete a project.Sprint
A prioritized list of 
responsibilities to be 
achieved during a sprint.Sprint Backlog
Point system describing 
the difficulty of a task, 
instead of using hours.Point Scale
Team meets about 
yesterdays work, todays 
plans and ‘blockers’.Standup or Scrum
What must be achieved to 
declare a task complete.Success Criteria
An estimated amount of 
effort a specific amount  
of work will take.Story Points
Description of desired 
outcome from  
stakeholders perspective.Task or User Story
The person responsible 
for sprint planning, 
reviews and meetingsScrum master
Something that is 
preventing the teams 
efficiency.Blocker
Team meeting where 
successes/lessons are 
shared from last sprint.Sprint Review
A highly adaptable 
productivity approach for 
visually planning as a team.KanbanAGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEHow Agile Marketing Works16
In Agile Marketing, teams use Sprints (which are short focused periods of 
defined work) to get things done. These Sprints are planned as a team, and 
consist of multiple tasks (also known as User Stories) which are required to 
be completed for the Sprint to be successful.
The entire team must work together to help each other achieve a successful 
end result for every Sprint. This means collaborating with other team 
members who may be focusing and ‘owning’ a specific task or user story, to 
help them achieve the results required. Failure of a Sprint is the entire teams 
responsibility.
Sprints are usually 1-4 weeks long, and anything that is too large of a 
project will get broken down into smaller more digestible chunks, over the 
course of several Sprints.
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEHow Agile Marketing Works17
After each Sprint, the team 
measures impact both good and 
bad and does a Sprint Review 
and Retrospective, to ensure 
mistakes are not repeated. 
Agile embraces failure as part 
of the learning process, and 
leverages these insights in  
the next Sprint.
24h
It starts with sprint planning, which takes tasks, or user stories, from the product 
backlog, and places them into the Sprint backlog.
Over the course of the Sprint, tasks are achieved which incrementally improves 
the project  (or in many cases a piece of software), and with daily Standup 
meetings to ensure collaboration.The concept of Sprints comes directly from a popular methodology known as 
SCRUM. The SCRUM process itself is continuous.  
Sprint Delivery of Work30 days
Sprint  
Backlog
Product  
BacklogThe Scrum Project 
Management MethodAGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEDefining Team and Roles18
Although Agile Marketing focuses on all roles, titles and seniority to be 
removed from the working environment, there is still a level of hierarchy 
required for proper organization.
Therefore, every Agile team must have several key individuals, all working 
together to achieve each Sprint. 
Depending on how many teams you have, or consecutive products 
(otherwise known as projects) are being focused on, it can be helpful to 
have a higher level individual that manages the entire Agile/Scrum process 
often known as the ‘Scrum Master’.Maintain backlog and represent 
stakeholder interests.
Self-managing 
groups of people  
who develop the 
product.Product Owners
Product Teams
Ultimately, there are two key distinctions to be made:So, What Exactly  
Is Agile Marketing?AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDECreating a Backlog19
The Agile Marketing process begins with defining all of the projects your team 
wants (or needs) to work on. This requires defining the work required and placing it 
in a Product Backlog, which represents all of the projects and tasks you plan on 
working on in the near future.
The goal of each Sprint is to take items from that Product Backlog, and then place 
them into the Sprint Backlog to be completed within the time defined for that 
specific Sprint, in short iterations.
Your team must develop a backlog of tasks (also known as User Stories) that 
describe the work in context to the stakeholders involved. A Story should be a small 
piece of work that can be written in context to the person doing the work itself.
Truth be told, if the person working on the task cannot answer why they are doing 
the task, or define what will make the task successful, they really shouldn’t be 
working on it at all.Example:
“As a [Company Name] [Your Role], I need a 
[Insert Marketing Need], so that I can [Insert 
Outcome].”
Becomes:
“As an ABC Corporation Content Marketer, 
I need a video-based landing page, so that I 
can ensure customers will engage and sign up 
to our June 30th webinar on ‘Product XYZ’.”AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE
User Stories
Running a Sprint20
Each Sprint can last from 1-4 weeks depending on what the Product Owner, 
or Scrum master decides. During that time each member of the team is 
assigned tasks (user stories) that they will complete.
They must focus on achieving these tasks within the time allotted, and must 
manage themselves to ensure they get the results required. These results 
are defined as specific success criteria for each task.
Although each team member has their own tasks to focus on, the team 
must also help others complete their tasks by collaborating throughout the 
process. An Agile Marketing team is always focused on a collaborative effort.
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEReview Process21
During each Sprint, it is vital to have regular Standup meetings. These are short 
meetings (usually daily) that last around 15 minutes where each team member 
answers three important questions:
1.  What did you do yesterday?
2.  What will you do today?
3.  Are there any impediments in your way?
The goal of each Standup is to help the team understand what everyone’s 
working on, and how they can help to get things done collaboratively.
It is very important that everyone who is working on the Sprint (especially the 
Product Owner and Scrum Master) to be present.
 Most Standup meetings actually take place with the team standing, so that 
everyone stays engaged and not get too comfortable.Standups
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEReview Process
22
After a Sprint is completed, everyone meets to share what was 
done. This is also an expo for what new work is to come next, and 
help everyone stay on the same page.
Once again the entire Scrum Team and stakeholders must be 
present. The Product Owner must identify what has (or has not) 
been done, and present a demo of current work completed , to be 
shown to the team.
 Any ideas or notes suggested, need to be recorded and added, 
or updated within the Product Backlog. The current state of the 
Product Backlog must also be discussed and understood for the 
next Sprint ahead.Sprint ReviewAGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEReview ProcessSimilar to the Sprint Review, the Sprint Retrospective must occur 
after the Sprint has been completed. This meeting is different in that 
it is a discussion amongst the team and not simply a presentation by 
the Product Owner.
At this meeting, the team discusses any ideas for future 
improvement, and acknowledges any team members who are 
worthy of recognition.
It is important that whenever criticism is brought up, that there is an 
idea for improvement (so the mistake will not be repeated).
Lastly, whenever an item is discussed the team should employ the 
‘Five Why’s’ technique to ensure that the root cause is discovered 
and understood.Sprint Retrospective23
To get started with Agile Marketing it is 
important that you have the buy-in from 
key stakeholders at your organization. 
Although the Agile process is a proven 
method for empowering your marketing 
team to become more efficient, it is an 
entirely new way of approaching project 
management to many people.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEStarting Small but Strong24
It can be difficult to change how your organization operates. That’s why it is 
important to start small and grow your program over time, to get full buy-in and 
acceptance from the organization and marketing team as a whole.
Often, the most successful approach, is for an individual to start using Agile 
on their own and prove it works. It’s a good idea to start with a small project 
that has a short timeline and is not critical (so you can try the process without 
becoming overwhelmed and abandoning the process as a result).
If you can find allies who also share your enthusiasm for Agile Marketing, 
another approach is to start with a low risk pilot project first.
No matter which scenario applies to you and your team, you should try to 
fully embrace the workflow from the start. That includes creating a backlog, 
managing your Sprints and having Standup meetings to tracking progress 
visually for the team (or yourself) to reference.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEPotential Obstacles25
One of the biggest challenges with using Agile Marketing is getting the 
momentum going where everyone feels comfortable with the process, and 
does not deviate from it. It is very important that everyone on the team follow 
the same set of rules equally.
One key problem occurs in that the team will need to focus on learning a new 
methodology and process (while they do the work itself within its rules).
It’s important not to overwhelm your team with too many new concepts at the 
same time, such as learning a piece of software (while learning Agile itself). 
Starting with a simple whiteboard, the entire team can share, is often the best 
way to start.
Often problems arise when people who aren’t following the rules interfere 
with those who are. For example, if team members are not present for reviews 
(when they should be), or non-core team members consume a meeting 
with discussions that are not relevant, it won’t take long before people stop 
believing in the Agile process.
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEPotential Obstacles26
Time spent in meetings should never be spent discussing generalities or 
going off on any tangents. The meetings should be short and focused with a 
specific agenda. For example, during a Daily Standup, no one should be sharing 
anything that is not a direct answer to the three questions asked:
1. What did you do yesterday? 
2. What will you do today?
3. Are there any impediments in your way?
In general, only team members with work assigned should ever be speaking at a 
meeting. Any topics outside of the three questions above should be addressed 
outside of a Standup meeting, and that goes for other Agile meetings as well 
(including Sprint Reviews and Sprint Retrospectives).
It is important that teams report 
directly to other team members 
about their progress instead of 
privately to a single member  
or the Scrum Master. 
It is a key component of Agile, that 
everyone is on the same page at 
all times, and that time used for 
communication is kept brief  
and focused.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEAgile Process Management27
Often within an Agile team (that is using the Scrum methodology), there is a 
leader called the Scrum Master. They ensure user stories are prioritized and 
that any items brought up during a retrospective meeting are documented.
They look out for obstacles in the way of the Sprint, and ensure everyone 
on the team is aware of the goal, and are in sync for the expectations for 
each Sprint.
Ultimately, the Scrum Master is the coach that ensures the team is working 
both independently and collaboratively, and that everyone is having a stress 
free experience.
One of the tools a Scrum Master can use to bring their team together is a 
Kanban board. Kanban is another widely used method for organizing an 
Agile teams activity.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEAgile Process Management28
Kanban is often implemented as a whiteboard in a visual location 
within the office. It uses columns with different contexts within them 
such as: Not Started, On Deck, In Progress, In Review and Done. 
Team members use sticky notes and place their tasks on the board 
for everyone to see.
As items are achieved they are placed in the ‘Done’ column. This 
method allows team members to understand where everyone’s 
tasks are currently, and how they can help each other to achieve the 
Sprint as a team.
It is important to state that Agile Marketing is more about focusing 
on the process itself, than any specific tool. As we shared, you can 
use a whiteboard to successfully implement an Agile process with 
your team using Kanban.
That said, using digital tools and resources can be a powerful way 
to organize the work ahead and ensure everything related to your 
Agile Marketing effort is on track.
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE
Kanban is based on the Japanese strategy of ‘Kaizen’, 
which encourages teams to achieve continuous 
improvement  incrementally, one step at a time.
USE KANBAN
TRY KANBAN
TOOL
LEARN ABOUT 
KANBAN
GET SOME STICKY NOTES
GET A WHITE-  BOARDAction Plan29
At Demand Metric, we believe that a shift to some form of agile is the future 
of marketing project management.
Agile represents change, and marketing leaders need to help the team first 
understand the need for the shift before true adoption can occur.
A shift to more agile forms of marketing project management requires 
training. The first level of training should cover the “why” question.
To get started, learn about our Agile Marketing Program.
STEP 1: Train your team on Agile to get 
buy-in and support for the change.
FIND OUT MOREAGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEAction Plan30
We have spent over a decade working with marketing teams of all shapes and sizes and 
realize that process is not a “one-size fits all” equation. 
The most successful organizations take a collaborative approach to process design – 
one that involves all members of the team.
While there’s a sense of urgency in starting the journey, marketers don’t have to make it 
alone. The right partners, vendors, and consultants can give marketing a head start on the 
journey and speed the team toward the destination.
Demand Metric has helped hundreds of organizations build and implement agile 
processes that help marketing teams get more done. 
Contact us to book an on-site or remote workshop.
STEP 2: Define a process for proactively 
prioritizing your team’s projects and tasks.
AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDEAction Plan31
The tool that marketing chooses must support the ability to view and filter all 
projects and tasks through all the agile-recommended views.
Demand Metric’s project and task management software is easy-to-use and 
was built for marketers by design.
You can “roll-up” your tasks to get visibility across all your projects on Board, 
Calendar, and List views. 
Collaborate with your team online, know who is working on what, and 
become insanely productive. 
If you don’t currently have this level of visibility into your projects and tasks, 
test drive Demand Metric today! 
STEP 3: Implement a modern  
project management tool.AGILE MARKETING HOW-TO GUIDE
TEST DRIVE NOW
RESEARCH + TOOLS + TRAINING + SOFTWARE
Demand Metric helps Marketers get stuff done… and done right the first time.
sign up for a free trial at    www.demandmetric.comOur model is simple.   
We do research to identify how top performing Marketers 
operate, and build Frameworks, Playbooks & Toolkits,  
Guides & Reports, Training Courses, and Pre-Built Projects to  
save you time, help you adopt best practices, and add 
“structure” to your department.  
Through strategic partnerships with the AMA, ANA, and AIPMM, 
our tools have become the industry standard for Marketers and 
Product Managers. Use our 1,000+ tools & resources to get your 
team punching above their weight class. 
Don’t start from scratch and  
reinvent the wheel!  
With Demand Metric you’ll know what to do, how to do it, have 
tools to get it done, and software to manage it all. Join 150,000+ 
members of our global community and get stuff done.Take a modern approach to  
managing work. 
Your team will love our agile project management software. It’s 
super easy-to-use and was designed specifically for the needs 
of Marketers. You can “roll-up” your tasks to get visibility across 
all your projects on Board, Calendar, and List views. Collaborate 
with your team online, know who is working on what, and 
become insanely productive.
