BlueprintAI for Content Marketing 2  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  3  Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for Content Marketers
5  A Quick Introduction to AI for Content Marketing  
 What Is AI? 5
 About Killer Robots and Out-of-Control Machines 6
 Machine Learning and the Core Types of AI 7
9  How to Find AI Use Cases for Content Marketing 
 Top AI Use Cases in Content Marketing 9
 Top Content Marketing Use Cases by Industry 10
 How Content Teams Can Scale AI 11
13  Top Companies Using AI for Content Marketing 
 Software company increases content output by 500% 13
 High-growth ecommerce startup saves 35 hours per month, per writer 13
 Intuit overhauls brand voice and inclusivity 14
15  Top AI Tools for Content Marketing 
 Writer 15
 ChatGPT  17
 Cohere 17
 Copy.ai 17
 DALL-E 2 18
 Descript 18
 GoCharlie 18
 Grammarly 18
 Jasper 19
 HyperWrite 19
 MarketMuse 19
 Persado 19
 Wordtune 20
 Writesonic 20
21  Why AI Is the Future of Content Marketing Table of Contents3  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Every content marketing team faces some version of the same problem: 
Content bottlenecks prevent you from hitting content and revenue targets. 
There are plenty of factors to blame for that. Do any of these sound familiar?
• Your team must do more with less due to scrutiny of budgets, headcount, and productivity.  
•  Your team doesn’t move fast enough to publish the type and volume of content your 
audience demands.  
• You have glaring content or messaging gaps in topic areas that your audience cares about.
These problems are not easy to solve on your own. And, left unresolved, they put your company 
and career at risk. 
That’s why smart content marketers are turning to artificial intelligence (AI). 
AI is not about robots taking over or machines running out of control. (That’s a fantasy from 
science fiction and movies.) Instead, AI is a very real, very powerful technology that is available 
right now. And you can use AI to scale your content marketing—without compromising on quality. 
Today, AI can:
1 C-suite Series: The 2021 CEO Study
2 The State of Marketing Budget and Strategy in 2022
3 Leadership Vision for 2021: Chief Marketing Officer
Why Artificial Intelligence Is  
a Must for Content Marketers
• Speed up content creation by generating content, outlines, summaries, and ideas.  
•  Make writers more productive by creating templates for 
reuse at scale.  
• Align brand, language, and style across content teams.  
•  Provide data-driven recommendations on what content 
works and what doesn’t.  
•  Predict which assets and formats will perform best before 
you launch.  
•  Identify exactly what content topics have the highest 
impact on audience and revenue.  
In the process, AI turns your human teams into superheroes. 
It makes them 10X more productive, agile, and adaptable. 
In fact, competing in content marketing will soon be 
impossible without AI. 
The future of content marketing is human + machine.The future  
of content 
marketing 
is human + 
machine.
4  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Content strategy. AI can now build smart content programs with unprecedented strategic 
insight and personalization. AI tools like MarketMuse predict performance before you create 
content. Tools like Persado   
hyper-personalize messages, so they resonate with different types of audiences.  
Content ideation. AI can now ideate at scale in seconds. Tools like ChatGPT provide content 
ideas, topics, and angles. Others, like DALL-E 2, produce variations of any image in any style, 
from scratch, for low cost.  
Content creation. AI can now create expert content at a near-human level of quality. Tools 
like Writer , Jasper , and Copy.ai write articles, headlines, ads, social posts, and more. They also 
outline and summarize content instantly. Tools like these have secured more than $1 billion in 
funding to disrupt content marketing as we know it.
1 C-suite Series: The 2021 CEO Study
2 The State of Marketing Budget and Strategy in 2022
3 Leadership Vision for 2021: Chief Marketing Officer
For proof, look at how AI is taking over major areas of expertise in content marketing—
specifically, content strategy, ideation, and generation.
These powerful AI tools are commercially available to anyone. And they’re usable by anyone, 
regardless of technical background. In fact, top brands are already using them to boost 
performance, productivity, and revenue.
If you’re not using AI today, you need to be. Otherwise, you risk becoming obsolete. 
Thankfully, you don’t need a degree in data science or machine learning to take advantage of AI. 
You just need to understand the following:
• What AI is and what it is capable of doing.
•  What AI use cases are available for content marketing, and how to find your brand’s specific 
use cases.
• What specific AI tools can create real business outcomes for you.
The rest of this guide shows you exactly how to do all three. In it, you’ll become completely up 
to speed on AI for content marketing. And you’ll become equipped to explore AI for your own 
company and career.Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for Content Marketers
If you’re not 
using AI 
today, you 
need to be. 
Otherwise, 
you risk 
becoming 
obsolete. 5  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
To grasp what’s possible with AI, you need to understand the technology. But don’t worry. You don’t 
need to get a Ph.D. in the subject to do that. All you need is a simple, useful definition of AI. That will 
allow you to see how it’s different—and much smarter—than the technology you use today.
Let’s dive in.
What Is AI?
If you ask 10 experts to define “AI,” you’ll get 10 different definitions given the complexity of the 
subject. Our favorite definition is simple. It comes from Demis Hassabis, Co-Founder and CEO of 
Google DeepMind, a major player in AI:
AI is “the science of making machines smart.”
By “being smart,” these machines, in turn, enhance human knowledge and capabilities. 
So, what does “being smart” actually mean?
We don’t even agree on a definition of intelligence in humans, so how can we determine one for 
machines? That’s a topic for a graduate seminar, not a practical blueprint on AI. Instead, what we  
mean by smart in regard to AI is simple:
AI is smart because it can determine its own pathways to achieving an overall goal.
To illustrate what we mean, let’s look at the traditional software you use today. That software can only 
do what you tell it to do. You give it rules and instructions. It follows those rules and executes those 
instructions to the letter. 
Let’s look at an example:
Say you are launching a new ebook campaign designed to attract and convert three core audiences for 
your business. Here’s what that typically looks like:
1.  You manually brainstorm, research, outline, write the asset, and generate images and 
designs to complete it.
2.  You manually construct a landing page to host the asset after brainstorming and choosing 
a compelling headline, and determining an interesting value proposition for the page.
3.  You manually promote the landing page across paid advertising, site CTAs, and social 
media to drive downloads, manually adjusting the language of each promotional method 
to appeal to your three different audiences.
Every step of the way, your traditional software makes this process more efficient. It helps you quickly 
publish and host the finished asset. It makes building a landing page easy and intuitive. And it makes it 
more efficient to schedule ads and social media posts in bulk.
This is helpful, no doubt. But, every step of the way, you’re in charge of giving the machine instructions 
and telling the machine what to do. And it follows them without deviation.
It’s like having an army of talented interns who follow your instructions literally. They don’t  
offer new ideas. They don’t innovate new approaches. They just follow commands.
A Quick Introduction to AI  
for Content Marketing
AI is “the 
science 
of making 
machines 
smart.”6  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
A Quick Introduction to AI for Content Marketing
AI is fundamentally different than traditional software.
Let’s stick with our ebook campaign as an example. Instead of just doing what we say faster than  
if we did it manually, AI-powered content marketing technology can do things like:
1.  Automatically generate outlines, copy, images, ads, and social shares from text prompts 
or from work your human content teams have produced.
2.  Automatically test different landing page headlines and formats dynamically in real-time 
for all three of your different audiences, then display only the highest-performing ones to 
drive more downloads.
3.  Automatically serve different variations of ads, CTAs, and social shares to different 
audiences based on their preferences, motivations, and needs, then adjust those 
campaigns based on performance.
Now, that’s impressive on its own. But here’s the real AI secret sauce:
AI learns each time it tries to achieve your goals.
Each time you promote your content, AI learns more about what copy and content your audiences like 
best. It learns more about what headlines work well. And it adjusts its approach to even better reflect 
an audience member’s behavior.
So, the next time you go to create a content campaign, your AI tool isn’t just following the 
playbook from the last one. It’s actually following a new and improved one.
That’s why AI is so powerful: It has the ability to unlock exponential performance gains over 
time the more you use it.
If traditional software is like having an army of interns, AI is like having an army of pros at the top 
of their game working independently for you 24/7.
Traditional software simply can’t compete. And neither can companies using it.
In all this talk of AI’s ability to learn 
and act on its own, you might worry 
about AI acting outside of your 
control. Given how powerful the 
technology is, it’s understandable to 
wonder about what you’ve seen in 
the movies.Don’t worry. There are no killer 
robots and out-of-control machines 
in the real world. While AI can act on 
its own to achieve a goal, you always 
control when it acts. It’s not able to 
go send emails on its own while you 
sleep or do other tasks it’s not built 
specifically to do.(Now, make no mistake: There are 
plenty of legitimate concerns about 
how AI may use data or choose to 
achieve goals.)
But, when you use AI, you’re just 
using much smarter software to 
achieve a very narrow goal. You’re 
not unleashing some superhuman 
intelligence.About Killer Robots and Out-of-Control MachinesAI is 
fundamentally 
different than 
traditional 
software.
AI learns each 
time it tries  
to achieve 
your goals.7  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
A Quick Introduction to AI for Content Marketing
Machine Learning and the Core Types of AI
We’ve established why AI is much different—and much better—than traditional technology.
Now, let’s define a few final ways of thinking about AI that are important to fully grasp the subject.
The term “artificial intelligence” is a category of technology, not a single tool. It’s a broad suite of 
tools that leverage smart machines in different ways.
These tools rely on “machine learning” to work their magic. 
Machine learning is the primary subset of artificial intelligence technology. It’s how AI tools 
achieve goals on their own and learn from their efforts.
There are a couple of steps to get a machine to be smart. First, humans have to train the machine. 
We show the machine data, then train it to recognize patterns in that data. Using those patterns, 
the machine learns how to achieve goals. Once fully trained, it can recognize those patterns and 
achieve those goals in the wild. It can also then train itself on what it learns rather than returning to 
its human teachers.
For instance, we could train the machine to recognize high-performing blog post headlines. Once 
it learns, customers like you then use the machine to write blog post headlines. It learns even 
more from each blog post you publish, improving its performance over time.
That’s all possible because of machine learning.
Now, you might be asking yourself:
What if the machine is trained on blog post headlines that have nothing to do with my business?
That can certainly happen. It doesn’t mean the machine can’t perform well. (Often, it can perform 
spectacularly.) But it does mean that an AI tool may not be specifically suited for your business’ needs.
(After all, subject lines and their effectiveness vary wildly between industries.)
That’s why custom training is so powerful. Custom training is when a machine learns from your data, 
not a generic dataset. AI tools like Writer can be trained on data from your specific business. They can 
learn how to write like you, in your specific tone and voice, not another brand’s.
Now, machine learning isn’t the only term you’ll hear in discussions of AI, like:
• Deep learning  • Reinforcement learning
• Neural networks  • Topic modeling
• Robotics   • And many, many more
These terms can be useful to learn. But you don’t need to know all the jargon to understand how and 
where to apply AI in your business.Machine 
learning is the 
primary subset 
of artificial 
intelligence 
technology. It’s 
how AI tools 
achieve goals 
on their own 
and learn from 
their efforts.8  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
A Quick Introduction to AI for Content Marketing
You only need to know that there are three core applications of AI: Language, Vision, and Prediction.
Language AI. This is the ability of machines to understand and generate written and spoken words. 
Language AI technologies and terms you may encounter include:
• Natural language generation. • Voice recognition.
• Natural language processing. • Text analysis and summarization.
• Sentiment analysis.   
An example of Language AI in your everyday life is Gmail’s Smart Compose feature. You type an 
email, and Gmail predicts how to complete your next sentence.
Vision AI. This is the ability of machines to analyze and understand data from still images and 
videos. In essence, vision AI seeks to automate tasks that the human visual system can naturally 
do. Vision AI technologies and terms you may encounter include:
• Computer vision.  • Video generation.
• Facial recognition. • Emotion detection.
• Image generation.
An example of Vision AI in your everyday life is the facial recognition that unlocks your iPhone. 
Vision AI determines if the face it is seeing is yours and, if it is, grants you access to the device.
Prediction AI. This is the ability of machines to predict future outcomes based on historical data. 
With machine learning, predictions continually evolve and improve based on new data. The better 
the data that goes in (the inputs), the better the predictions that come out (the outputs). Prediction AI 
technologies and terms you may encounter include:
• Personalization.  • Pattern recognition.
• Forecasting.  • Recommendation.
An example of Prediction AI in your everyday life is the alerts from the weather app on your phone. 
The AI predicts it will begin raining in 20 minutes in your location, then notifies you.
All three types of AI—Language, Vision, and Prediction—apply to content marketing.
•  Language AI can create/edit blog posts, ebooks, landing pages, ads, and social posts. You 
can also use it to generate and edit audio and video content.
•  Vision AI can generate original, eye-catching images for digital content. And it can 
automatically extract video clips from longer content and edit visuals.
•  Prediction AI can predict content performance before you publish. It can also forecast which 
topics you should be creating content around for maximum ROI.
There are literally hundreds of use cases for AI in content marketing. But they all fall under one or more 
of these three core applications.
Now, let’s find one or more use cases for your work and business.All three 
types of AI—
Language, 
Vision, and 
Prediction—
apply to 
content 
marketing.9  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Finding AI use cases doesn’t need to be rocket science. You don’t have to go from where you are today 
to having fully AI-powered and AI-infused content marketing. (Though that’s a worthy long-term goal.) 
All you have to do is figure out how AI can supercharge select tasks you do all the time (or wish you 
could do all the time).
So, how do you do that? Start by listing out all the tasks you do in any given day, week, month, or 
quarter. Go down the list and ask three questions about each task.
•  Is it data-driven? Are you using data to do the task? Alternatively, do you have data 
you should be using to do the task, but you’re not? Data is the lifeblood of AI systems. 
If your task is data-driven, AI can likely do it better and faster.  
•  Is it repetitive? Do you do the same thing over and over again to accomplish the task? 
Is there a process to accomplish the task that you can define steps for? AI excels at 
augmenting or automating tasks that have standardized, repeatable steps. You also 
don’t even need to automate an entire repetitive task with AI. You can look at making 
individual steps of the process better and faster using AI.  
•  Is it making a prediction? Almost everything we do as marketers is trying to predict an 
outcome or behavior. And making predictions is what AI does best.
You don’t have to answer “yes” to all three questions to have an AI use case. Answer “yes” to one 
or two questions, and the task is a likely use case for AI. Answer “yes” to all three questions, and it 
definitely is.
Top AI Use Cases in Content Marketing
To show you what’s possible, here are some of the top use cases that content marketers rely on AI 
for today:
• Develop intelligent content strategies and briefs.
•  Develop and maintain editorial policies, brand standards, style guides, and content  
governance guidelines.
• Discover insights into top-performing content and campaigns.
• Distribute content at scale across different owned, earned, and paid channels.
• Generate, edit, and remix images, video, and audio to produce professional-grade content.
•   Optimize website content for search engines.
•   Recommend highly targeted content to users in real-time.
•   Predict which content will perform best and generate ROI.
•   Repurpose content into different formats and styles.
•   Test different content formats, headlines, lengths, etc.
•   Transcribe presentations, podcasts, and webinars. 
•   Write and edit marketing copy, blog posts, website content, ebooks, whitepapers, case 
studies, and other collateral.
How to Find AI Use Cases  
for Content Marketing
All you have 
to do is figure 
out how AI can 
supercharge 
select tasks 
you do all the 
time.
10  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
How to Find AI Use Cases for Content Marketing
Top Content Marketing Use Cases by Industry
Another way to look at AI use cases in content marketing is to draw inspiration for use cases by industry.
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
•  Predict the intent behind search topics, so you can create more content on topics being 
searched by consumers ready to do a demo or make a purchase.
•  Streamline and automate podcast creation and production to differentiate your SaaS brand 
in your industry.
•  Predict which text, video, and imagery will lead to the highest number of conversions into 
product signups or app downloads.
•  Surface topics and keywords where you have a unique competitive advantage to outrank 
better-funded competitors. 
• Automatically outline and generate blog posts for your target audiences and verticals. 
Financial Services
•  Automatically outline, generate, and summarize long-form content assets, like ebooks and 
reports, to explain complex financial topics clearly to audiences.
•  Standardize content language and messaging to be more inclusive of audiences from all 
walks of financial life.
•  Personalize content and messaging to a user’s specific financial data or goals, making it 
highly relevant to audiences with different incomes, financial targets, or levels of interest in 
specific financial products.
• Generate outlines, scripts, and transcripts for hosted webinars or partner webinars.
• Scale content creation and improve writer productivity across teams and product lines.
Healthcare
•  Automatically generate content about common health conditions, symptoms, and medications.
•  Improve operational efficiency by refining time-consuming processes like claims processing, 
denials, and collections.
•  Deliver customized recommendations on health content based on a user’s content 
consumption habits.
•  Generate summaries, outlines, and simplifications of longer-form and more technical health content.
•  Automatically summarize and simplify language from medical studies.
•  Intelligently optimize existing healthcare content to rank higher in search.
•  Standardize the usage of medical terminology across teams and departments.
Ecommerce
•  Dynamically test landing page headlines, copy, and content to improve conversion rates.
•  Predict which ad content and images will lead to the highest conversion rates.
•  Automatically generate product descriptions.
•  Automatically generate different variations of product listings and images at scale to fit the 
standards of different content channels.
•  Intelligently recommend content and products based on consumer preferences and behaviors.
11  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
How to Find AI Use Cases for Content Marketing
How Content Teams Can Scale AI
Any content marketing team of any size can use AI across a wide variety of profitable use cases. 
Once you’ve successfully used AI across some use cases, you can turn your attention to scaling it. 
Here are some ways AI can help you scale content operations: 
•  Use custom training to train AI on your own content, tone, and style. That allows AI to create 
content, headlines, and summaries that sound like your brand and team.  
• Use AI to create and enforce extensive team-wide style guides. This automatically keeps 
content creators consistent without having to manage writers manually.  
• Use AI to create and enforce common language and messaging across different assets.  
•  Automatically create AI-powered content using snippets and templates. This allows you to 
reuse content that already exists.  
•  Use AI-powered insights to determine how teams are using current AI tools. Some tools can 
show you usage rates across teams. You can use that information to get more value out of your 
existing technology.  
•  Use AI to stay secure and compliant across use cases. Find AI platforms designed to follow all privacy 
and data laws in your industry.
Successfully scaling AI implementation depends on your team’s current content maturity level. 
Content maturity refers to your ability to execute content strategies.
More mature content organizations will get the most out of AI, plain and simple. As you pursue AI 
scaling, you need to gauge your content maturity level. 
To do that, Writer has a content maturity rating system detailing the five levels of content maturity. 
At each level, the system has recommendations on how to approach AI.
Level 1: Chaotic
Teams that have no formal content operations should focus on creating standardized content 
processes before bringing in AI tools.
Do:  
Dissect the content strategies of the companies in your space; develop a basic content strategy 
framework.
Don’t:  
Use AI to start spewing keyword volume plays that can hurt your domain and brand before you’ve 
even started.
Level 2: Piloting
Teams that are starting to develop a content strategy can use AI to speed up ideation and 
experimentation. Use AI tools to support writers to edit their own work, get help with top-of-funnel 
article outlines and first drafts, generate headlines, create FAQs for SERPs, and speed up landing 
page creation.
Do:   
Invest in hiring at least 1 strong writer who is AI savvy. Build out a style guide that clearly defines your 
brand voice, messaging, audience goals, differentiated POVs in the market, and your head terms.12  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  How to Find AI Use Cases for Content Marketing
Don’t:  
Neglect to staff your team with strategic, skilled writers or become overly reliant on AI — it can 
prevent you from getting to Level 3. 
 
Don’t try to scale without building out the basics of your style guide and messaging.
Level 3: Scaling
Teams who have experience with creating quality content can use AI to scale. Use AI tools to build 
out blog posts from human-created search-optimized outlines, repurpose content into shorter 
snippets for different channels, like social media, and create distribution support content like 
newsletters, social posts, and metadata.
Do:  
Invest in a business-grade AI platform; connect with and learn from other marketing teams who are 
scaling with AI; get AI into your growth/demand marketing teams.
Don’t: 
Reinvent the wheel: learn how to prompt AI effectively; learn how to grow SEO traffic with AI.
Level 4: Sustaining
Teams with a mature, scaled-up content operation can use AI tools to enhance their content strategy. 
Use AI to develop your own draft templates, train your own content models, find keywords, develop 
briefs, and analyze content performance.
Do:  
Use a platform like Writer to build a library of customized templates for first drafts and develop 
training data for your own AI models.
Don’t:  
Expect AI to do your research; the richer and more unique the stats and quotes you feed AI, the 
higher quality your output (and the better you’ll get TOFU content to rank).
Level 5: Thriving
Teams with mature and integrated content operations can use AI to enhance all areas of their 
content process. They can use AI to personalize content by identifying different customer cohorts to 
target with different types of content.
Do: 
Think about ways AI can help with content personalization.
Don’t: 
Brag about how efficient, successful, and happy your content team is; keep learning!
 13  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  You have a foundational understanding of AI. You have—or know how to find—use cases for AI. 
Now, let’s look at how real brands are using real AI technology to excel at content marketing.
Software company increases content output by 500%
iManage’s document management system helps you 
activate the knowledge inside your organization.
As an industry leader, the company was publishing 
a ton of content. But their small content team was 
underwater. They were swamped with a backlog of 
reviews and edits. It got so bad that they had to turn 
away authors who had valuable things to say to their 
audience.
The worst part? 
iManage knew their content was a hit with their audience based on the numbers. And they knew the 
audience wanted more. But they couldn’t provide it.
There was a big culprit to blame:
The content team spent a huge amount of time making the same types of edits time and time again. 
They had constant issues keeping writers consistent on language, style, messaging, and terminology.
That changed when the team turned to AI.
Using Writer, a leading generative AI platform, iManage vastly streamlined its content operations.
The company used Writer’s AI-powered style guides to transform how they worked. Instead of 
manual reviews, Writer automatically enforced style guidelines across all content creators. That 
meant iManage’s team no longer had to review pieces for consistency. Writers were now empowered 
to correct issues on their own. iManage was even able to customize Writer to learn their own 
specialized terminology. That tailored the system to their exact needs, not some generic style guide.
Here’s what happened next:
AI from Writer helped iManage remove these editing bottlenecks holding up publication. That freed 
up their writers to do what they do best: Create industry-leading content. As a result, the company’s 
small content team went from publishing 200 articles a year to 1,000. And they did it without 
significantly increasing headcount.
Top Companies Using  
AI for Content Marketing
14  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Top Companies Using AI for Content Marketing
High-growth ecommerce startup saves 35 hours per month, per writer
Adore Me is a women’s fashion ecommerce company that is in 
high-growth startup mode.
As a high-growth startup, time and resources are everything to 
Adore Me. Employees wear a lot of hats and work in a lot of 
different areas of the business. Every hour (and dollar) spent 
on any given task means a missed opportunity to make an 
impact elsewhere. And Adore Me was spending a lot of time on 
mundane but necessary types of content creation. 
Adore Me thrives by creating content like product descriptions, 
ads, and press releases. But, creating this content was a 
massive time-suck for their writers. Instead of coming up with the next big thing, they were 
bogged down creating core assets. That was a major disadvantage in a ruthlessly competitive 
and innovative industry.
AI came to the rescue. 
Using AI-powered features from Writer, Adore Me could generate content automatically. That 
included product descriptions, Google and Facebook ads, and press releases. Adore Me’s writers 
stopped spending hours crafting these assets. Instead, they started creating them in minutes by 
giving Writer bullet points as a guide. And the AI learned the company’s style, so tone and brand 
were consistent across assets and teams.
As a result, Adore Me saves each of its writers 35 hours per month on these types of content creation 
tasks. In other areas, they’re saving up to 50% of the time it takes to create content. Is there an 
impact on the company’s content creators? You bet. A hugely positive one. 
At every level, AI is freeing up content resources. Those resources are now redeployed to bigger and 
better campaigns with higher impact.
15  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Top Companies Using AI for Content Marketing
Intuit overhauls brand voice and inclusivity
Intuit is the $100 billion company behind the hit accounting 
software product QuickBooks. And, it had a problem.
It had just overhauled the brand voice of QuickBooks, one of 
its leading products. The brand voice was now more engaging, 
relevant, and differentiated. At the same time, the company made 
a public commitment to making its language more inclusive. 
Being more inclusive meant using language that resonated more 
with people of different backgrounds. It also meant avoiding 
terms and phrases that might carry racist historical baggage.
That wasn’t the problem. In fact, audiences and employees loved the new initiatives. 
The problem was making sure that writers followed the standards consistently. 
To solve the challenge, Intuit leaders adopted Writer’s generative AI platform. Writer’s AI showed 
writers exactly when language needed to change in their work. It then empowered them to change it. 
That included adjusting writing to read at a fifth- to eighth-grade reading level for clarity. It also 
included making writers aware of how to make language more inclusive. It even helped writers 
remove the passive voice from their work. 
This was all made possible due to custom training. The AI learned Intuit’s specific brand and 
inclusivity standards. Then, it deployed them across writers and teams.
Turns out, AI was a huge hit at Intuit. More than 300 people at Intuit ended up using Writer to follow 
brand guidelines. Staff also raved about how proud they were that the company had committed to 
inclusivity.
All in all, doing the right thing also turned out to be the smart thing to do.
All in all, doing the right thing also turned out to be the smart thing to do.
16  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Ready to try out AI for yourself? We’ve got you covered with 14 top-of-the-line AI tools for content 
marketing that you need to try today.
Writer
Writer is a generative AI platform that helps you create content at scale. It does that by accelerating 
your writing workflow, from ideation to drafting to distribution, using the power of AI. With Writer, 
you can use AI to: 
• Brainstorm content ideas.
• Generate first drafts in seconds.
• Automate brand, editorial, and style edits.
• Instantly produce content distribution.
• Repurpose content into different formats quickly.
• And much more.
Writer is built specifically for teams with enterprise-grade functionality, data, and security features. 
Writer’s core features are designed from the ground up to harness the power of AI:
•  Styleguide: Build an AI-powered style guide that enforces style and brand automatically 
and in real time.
•  Terms: Writer’s AI also manages and enforces the specific language choices that matter to 
your brand.
•  Snippets: With Writer, you can write something once, then use it endlessly on repeat to save time.
•  CoWrite: Writer CoWrite automatically generates content for headlines, press releases, blog 
posts, and more.
Top AI Tools for  
Content Marketing
17  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Top AI Tools for Content Marketing
Not to mention, Writer also offers the powerful ability to custom-train its AI on your specific content 
and data, so it produces outputs that sound exactly like your brand.
No other tool offers such a robust combination of AI capabilities specifically designed for teams.
Use cases for Writer include:
•  Content strategy: Automate and accelerate 
your content strategy by using Writer as a single 
source of AI-powered truth.
•  Marketing: Create high-quality, consistent 
content and messaging at scale.
•  Editorial: Create and enforce consistent editorial 
guidelines across assets, teams,  
and products.
•  Support: Empower agents to write better 
responses to customers.
•  Documentation: Write clear, consistent, and 
scannable documentation.
•  Learning and development: Build high-quality 
learning content.
•  Operations and IT: Roll out Writer’s AI 
capabilities across teams quickly with a fully 
compliant and secure platform
•  HR: Improve communication and encourage 
healthy communication across teams.
Writer offers two main licenses, Team (for 1-5 people) 
and Enterprise.
The best part? It’s absolutely free to try.
SIGN UP HERE18  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
19  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Top AI Tools for Content Marketing
AI can now assist you with a range of content marketing tasks, and the only limit is your imagination.
ChatGPT from OpenAI is an AI tool that responds to natural language prompts.
Just type in a question or command into ChatGPT, and it gives you a cohesive, complete answer.
You can tell it to do common content marketing tasks like:
•  Organize notes into outlines.
•  Write short blog posts based on bullet points.
•  Summarize transcripts and articles.
•  Reword or rewrite content.
•  Brainstorm content ideas and headlines. 
•  Populate editorial calendars.
•  And much, much more.
ChatGPT doesn’t replace content marketers. And you always need to verify its output. But, even so, it 
saves content marketers hours of time each day ideating and creating.
Cohere provides a suite of tools that use AI to help you build custom AI-powered content solutions for 
your business.
Using Cohere’s API, you can tap into large language models for a variety of use cases. That includes:
•  Harnessing the power of content and language classification using its Classify product.
•  Tapping into text generation capabilities with Cohere Generate.
•  Uncovering trends in text using the company’s Embed product.
If you need help creating content for blogs, social, or email, AI’s got your back. Copy.ai creates content 
in just a few clicks for a variety of content marketing use cases, including:
•  Blog content.
•  Sales copy.
•  Social media content.
•  Website copy.
•  And much, much more.
In the process, it helps you beat writer’s block, come up with new ideas, and get started writing faster.20  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
1 C-suite Series: The 2021 CEO Study
2 The State of Marketing Budget and Strategy in 2022
3 Leadership Vision for 2021: Chief Marketing Officer
Top AI Tools for Content Marketing
If you need eye-catching original art for your content, AI can help.  
 
DALL-E 2 automatically creates and edits images based on the text prompts you give it.  
 
First, describe the image you’d like DALL-E 2 to create. It can be almost anything you want, in any style.  
 
Then, DALL-E 2 generates several professional-grade images that match your prompt in seconds.
It’s that simple. It’s perfect for content marketers tired of combing through tired stock photos. Instead, 
why not generate stunning original art to go with each piece of your content?
All-in-one video and audio editing just became simple, thanks to AI.
Descript uses AI to put professional-grade video and audio production in your hands. The tool’s simple 
UI makes it easy for anyone to produce videos, audio clips, transcripts, and more.
It’s perfect (and affordable) for podcast, webinar, and course production. And you don’t need to hire 
pricy production firms to create multimedia content assets.  
Content repurposing is key to getting the most out of your content marketing. And AI can help you do 
it better, faster, and cheaper.
GoCharlie is an AI writing tool that can turn YouTube videos into blog outlines. Just drop in a URL 
for your YouTube video, and GoCharlie fetches a complete blog outline. You can then have the tool 
generate a full blog post based on that outline. (It generates content, too.)
Last, but not least, it can summarize content for you. 21  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
Top AI Tools for Content Marketing
AI doesn’t just create content for you. It can also make your existing content better.
Grammarly uses AI to automatically check your writing for typos and grammatical errors. But that’s 
just the beginning. Grammarly also shows you how to adjust tone to achieve specific effects on your 
audience. And, it’ll help you communicate with crystal clarity through writing recommendations. 
It’s like having a professional editor on-call 24/7.
Need to create blog posts fast? AI from Jasper can help.
Jasper is an AI content generation tool that can write blog posts and generate images in seconds.
First, tell Jasper what you want to write about. Then, provide it with a few bullet points to work off of. 
Click a button, and voila! Fresh content written by AI.
Writer’s block is the enemy of every content marketer. AI from HyperWrite can help you beat it.
After you’ve written a sentence in HyperWrite, it can complete your sentence or paragraph. From 
there, you can break through a block—or tell it to keep writing. No more staring at a blank page. No 
more banging your head against a wall trying to figure out what to write next.
 
If you’re creating content strategies without AI, you’re at a disadvantage.
MarketMuse is an AI platform that identifies your top content opportunities.
The platform uses AI to tell you which topics to target and how to rank for them. It even shows you 
what other pieces of content on Page 1 of SERPs missed, so you can outcompete them.
Not to mention, MarketMuse generates AI-powered content briefs. The briefs give your writers precise 
guidance on how to craft content that dominates.
The result? Incredible—and predictable—content performance.22  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
1 C-suite Series: The 2021 CEO Study
2 The State of Marketing Budget and Strategy in 2022
3 Leadership Vision for 2021: Chief Marketing Officer
Top AI Tools for Content Marketing
What if you could automatically tailor your messages to an individual user’s preferences?
AI platform Persado shows users the language that motivates them most to engage and act.
Say goodbye to one-size-fits-all messaging. Persado’s AI actually knows what type of language a user 
prefers. Then, it adjusts your content to make it maximally appealing to that individual. And it does it at 
scale across your entire audience.
The result is higher rates of content engagement and increased revenue.
Sometimes, you don’t need to just create content. You need to say it in the right—or a different—way. 
That’s where AI from Wordtune comes in.
Wordtune can rewrite and rephrase any piece of text you give it. It can also alter a piece of text to have 
a more formal or casual tone. It can even shorten or expand your text as needed. 
Want to write content like top brands do? Check out AI from Writesonic. 
Writesonic’s AI has been trained on the top-performing copy from major brands. That means it 
can generate blog posts, landing pages, and other types of content like the pros. It also features a 
ChatGPT-like interface to prompt the AI writer with voice or text.23  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  AI is the future of content marketing because it solves content marketing’s biggest 
challenge: removing content bottlenecks that cripple performance and revenue.
AI gives you the ability to 10X the impact of your content marketing team, no matter how 
big or small. That, in turn, makes it possible to actually scale your content marketing—an 
outcome impossible to achieve with traditional technology.
And it’s just the beginning. AI’s capabilities are rapidly improving, and its cost is dropping. 
Today, AI for content marketing is highly powerful, easy to use, and affordable across 
hundreds of use cases. In the coming months, it will only grow more so.
Businesses that invest in understanding AI, finding use cases, and testing tools will 
outcompete anyone doing things the old way.
So, what are you waiting for?
You have the understanding. You have the use cases. And you have the tools. 
Now, it’s time to get to work.
Why AI Is the Future  
of Content Marketing
AI is the future 
of content 
marketing 
because it 
solves content 
marketing’s 
biggest 
challenge.24  |  AI for Content Marketing Blueprint  
About Marketing AI Institute
Marketing AI Institute is an online education and event company that makes AI approachable and 
actionable to marketing leaders around the world. 
The Institute owns and operates Marketing AI Conference (MAICON), a global event that attracted 
300 marketing leaders from 12 countries in its inaugural year, and Piloting AI for Marketers, a 
course series that teaches marketers and business leaders how to drive productivity, creativity, and 
performance with AI.
Since its launch in 2016, Marketing AI Institute has educated tens of thousands of marketers on 
the present and future potential of artificial intelligence, and connected them with AI-powered 
technologies to drive marketing performance and transform their careers. 
Today, our weekly newsletter subscriber list includes marketing leaders from major brands such as 
Accenture, Adidas, Adobe, Disney, Ford, IBM, KPMG, LEGO, LinkedIn, MasterCard, Mayo Clinic, 
Microsoft, Nasdaq, Nvidia, Oracle, and Samsung. 
Marketing AI Institute’s founder and CEO is Paul Roetzer. Roetzer is founder and CEO of Marketing 
AI Institute, and founder of Ready North (formerly PR 20/20), HubSpot’s first partner agency. He is 
the author of Marketing Artificial Intelligence (Matt Holt Books, 2022), The Marketing Performance 
Blueprint (Wiley, 2014) and The Marketing Agency Blueprint (Wiley, 2012), and creator of the Marketing 
AI Conference (MAICON). 
About Writer
Writer is the leading generative AI platform built for the needs of companies and teams. Unlike other 
AI products, Writer’s training happens securely on a company’s own provided data and their style and 
brand guidelines. The result is content that’s consistent and on-brand, whether the initial text came 
from humans or from AI.
Writer is enterprise-grade with all of the security and data privacy features needed for organization-
wide rollouts. Writer is deployed widely at leading companies like UnitedHealthcare, Accenture, Intuit, 
UiPath, HubSpot, Spotify, Hilton, Uber, and Deloitte.