AI for B2B Marketers 
Blueprint
Sponsored By
© 2023, Marketing AI Institute, All Rights Reserved.
Published October 20232  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint3  Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for B2B Marketers
4  What Is AI, Really? 
 3 Core Types of AI  5
7  How to Find AI Use Cases in B2B Marketing 
8  Top AI Use Cases in B2B Marketing  
11  Top Companies Using AI for B2B Marketing 
 Software company runs 240 years of A/B tests in 12 months.   11
 Conversational AI platform sees 129% conversion lift in less than 90 days.   12
13  Top AI Tools for B2B Marketing
 Intellimize  13
 6sense  14
 AiAdvertising  14
 Amazon Web Services (AWS)  14
 Drift  14
 Jasper  14
 Lately  14
 MarketMuse  14 
 Persado  15 
 Rasa.io  15
 Writer  15
 Yext  15
16  Why B2B Marketing of the Future Depends on AI
 About Marketing AI Institute  18
 About Intellimize  18Table of Contents3  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
B2B marketers have a lot on their shoulders. They’re tasked with acquiring and nurturing 
customers over a long and complex buyer journey. 
There are more stakeholders, more touchpoints, and more data to juggle than ever before — not 
to mention an ever-growing number of channels and devices. And B2B marketers are expected 
to do it all while giving buyers a 1:1 consumer experience.  
In fact, according to Intellimize’s research, 90% of B2B buyers expect a B2C personalized 
experience when making a business purchase.
On top of this, they’re under increasing pressure to drive bottom-line growth for their 
organizations: HubSpot found that B2B marketers’ top priority in 2023 is to increase revenue  
and sales — replacing increase brand awareness from the previous year. 
Artificial intelligence can help. And by “help,” we mean: 
1. Increase productivity. AI software can complete tasks in seconds that might take 
humans hours to complete. From analyzing data, to debugging code, to building 
entire campaigns, AI can unlock efficiencies that make the impossible possible. AI 
can perform manual tasks at scale and free up team members to focus on uniquely 
strategic and creative elements. 
2. Decrease costs. Efficiency gains can also streamline marketing costs, which means you 
can do more, publish more, and deliver more value to your organization at a price that still 
fits within your marketing budget and drives down customer acquisition costs (CAC). 
3. Elevate performance. AI can analyze data sets more massive than humans are capable 
of alone, and is able to test, learn, and pivot at lightning speed. This means performance 
gains for you and your team.
While this all sounds great, the truth is that most organizations, business leaders, and marketers are 
entirely unprepared for the power and potential of AI. 
The good news is: You don’t need to become an overnight expert in data science or machine 
learning to understand and benefit from AI. You just need to understand:
•  What AI is and what it can do.
•  What AI use cases are available to B2B marketers today, and how to identify relevant use 
cases for your organization.
•  Which specific AI tools would most benefit your company.
We cover all three in this guide. You’ll see real-life examples of companies like yours succeeding with 
AI, gain the confidence to adopt AI in your marketing strategy, and turn the following pages into real 
business results.
Why Artificial Intelligence  
Is a Must for B2B Marketers
90%  
of B2B buyers 
expect a B2C 
personalized 
experience 
when making 
a business 
purchase.4  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintAI has been making waves in the media this past year. Sensationalist headlines about labor-stealing 
robots have reached a fever pitch, while “AI-powered companies” and “experts” have been popping 
up left and right. 
In all of this, it’s become hard for B2B marketers to distinguish the signal from the noise. So let’s take a 
step back. 
AI is a collection of technologies that make machines smart. And what does it mean for a machine to 
be smart? 
 
Traditional software requires strict rules and parameters to complete defined tasks. 
When we’re talking about AI and smarter machines, we’re typically talking about machine learning: a 
subset of AI that can recognize patterns, change course dynamically, and determine its own path to 
achieve a desired outcome. 
So, is AI going to take our jobs?
Not exactly. With today’s AI, humans must still remain in the loop in order to: 
1. Define the goal that the AI is trying to achieve.
2. Provide the initial training data. New AI models require massive amounts of data to 
understand the objective and possible solutions. Based on these past examples, machine 
learning predicts an output that meets the set goal or criteria.
3. Offer feedback on the AI’s outputs so it can improve over time.
4. Review the output in the context of your company’s goal, industry, audience, brand 
standards, etc., and then add in uniquely human perspectives, examples, and creativity. 
Despite lurid headlines and fear-mongering narratives, humans remain a critical piece in wielding AI 
strategically and responsibly. 
Let’s look at a practical example: Your CMO wants to improve the website’s conversion rate to capture 
more leads in Q2. So the marketing team outlines an experiment to A/B test. 
You wait for the copywriter to deliver new text for the headline, or for your graphic designer to pull 
together new images; and for the analytics team to make sure all of the correct tracking is set up. 
You launch the test — and wait for enough data to be collected. Once it is, you wait some more, for 
the analytics team to analyze the data and deliver the results. If you’re lucky, the results are conclusive 
enough to drive a decision.
Rinse and repeat for every single test of every single element.
… Now, let’s try this again using AI. 
Instead, the team uses an AI-powered personalization solution like Intellimize to run unlimited 
experiments across your site. Intellimize’s AI Copy Suggest instantly crafts headlines, copy, and CTAs. 
The technology shows unique page variations to website visitors. 
What Is AI, Really?  5  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Using proprietary AI trained on more than 10 billion web pages, it serves website visitors the version of your page 
with the highest probability of converting. 
As a result, you now run data-driven experiments 25x faster than traditional testing methods. You’re testing 
hypotheses, getting answers, and continuously iterating your web experience to optimize for conversions and sales. 
It’s not science fiction, and it’s not hype. It’s AI, and it’s here to stay.  
Just like programmatic advertising revolutionized digital ads, AI is reimagining what’s possible with conversion rate 
optimization (CRO), website personalization, 1:1 customer experiences, and more. 
Data is central to sophisticated digital strategies, but historically it’s taken time, and effort, to collect, analyze, and 
make decisions on that data. AI can unlock new insights, process huge amounts of data, and iterate more rapidly 
than humans can on their own. 
With the help of AI, your marketing team can: 
•  Produce assets at scale, maintaining quality while reaping massive efficiencies.
•  Make better decisions, using data-driven insights to supercharge your learnings. 
•  Iterate faster, and dynamically serve up the content and creative with the greatest likelihood of converting. 
•  Lower customer acquisition cost (CAC) through personalization by serving up the right message at the 
right time to increase conversions.
And the best part is, AI learns based on past performance — so you get better results each time. 
3 Core Types of AI
To be honest, there’s a lot of AI jargon and applications out there, but B2B marketers only need to pay attention to 
three core AI applications: Language, Vision, and Prediction.
Language 
The ability for machines to analyze, understand, and generate language. This includes the written and spoken word. 
Common terms that fall under Language AI include: 
 
•  Natural Language Generation (NLG)
•  Voice Recognition
•  Natural Language Processing (NLP)
•  Text Analysis and Summarization
•  Sentiment Analysis
An example of Language AI is an AI-powered chatbot. The machine can understand a website visitor’s message, 
answer questions, respond to requests, transfer the visitor to the correct employee, and even analyze the visitor’s tone.  What Is AI, Really?  6  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Vision 
The ability for machines to analyze and understand data in images and videos.  
Common terms that fall under Vision AI include: 
•  Object Recognition
•  Emotion Generation
•  Image Generation
•  Optical Character Recognition (OCR) 
•  Video Generation
Examples of Vision AI are object detection and image classification. A social media team might use these 
capabilities to monitor User Generated Content (UGC) for its products in action. Vision AI would make it 
possible to flag UGC (whether still images or videos) that contain one of the company’s products, and identify 
the product category and model in use.  
Prediction
The ability for machines to predict future outcomes based on data. 
Common terms that fall under Prediction AI include: 
•  Personalization
•  Pattern Recognition
•  Forecasting
•  Recommendation
An example of Prediction AI is surfacing personalized content recommendations to a website visitor based on their 
location or past purchasing behavior. What Is AI, Really?  7  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintTo summarize what we’ve covered so far: AI can help B2B marketers digest and analyze massive 
datasets, make better decisions based on their data, and generate assets at an unlimited scale and 
with unprecedented efficiency.
With so much potential, it can be hard to figure out where and how to utilize AI in your marketing strategy.
A good starting point to discover possible AI use cases in your organization is to ask: 
Is it data-driven? Are you already using data to do this task — or could you? Consider any tasks that 
rely on customer demographics, transaction history, browsing behavior, and other data points. Also 
consider your most robust and reliable sources of marketing and customer data. 
Is it repetitive? Is the task clearly defined, highly structured, and repeatable? For example, pulling 
a monthly report or summarizing blog posts for a weekly newsletter. AI is fantastic at completing 
mundane or routine tasks — freeing up your team to focus on more strategic, unstructured, and 
creative work. 
Is it making a prediction? Looking to improve the performance of an asset, channel, or campaign? 
Do you have substantial historical data to learn from? AI can crunch the numbers of seemingly 
massive data sets, so you can uncover patterns, unearth new insights, and better predict which 
elements of your marketing will perform best. 
If you can answer “yes” to any one of these questions, you’ve identified an opportunity to boost 
your organization’s productivity or performance with AI. If you’ve answered “yes” to all three, you’ve 
just found your first AI pilot project. 
How to Find AI Use Cases 
in B2B Marketing8  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintNow let’s look at some AI use cases for B2B marketing teams. 
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO) 
•  Easily test any element of your website (creative, color, copy, size, placement) to learn faster 
and improve customer experiences.
•  Set up and more precisely target different audience segments based on firmographic, technographic, 
first-party, or third-party data to dynamically serve the right content to each audience.
•  Easily tailor website messaging to deliver personalized customer experiences.
•  Show different website versions to each visitor to deliver the combination with the highest 
likelihood of converting. 
•  Execute sophisticated tests of site landing pages, headlines, images, offers, calls to action 
and more, and automatically apply the learnings to maximize conversion rates.
Account-Based Marketing (ABM) 
•  Predict the accounts that will buy based on your existing customers and help team members 
prioritize similar leads.
•  Generate digital assets at scale. Transform one core page into an ABM campaign by 
customizing it using AI, whether it’s 1:1, 1:few, or 1:many.
•  Create hyper-personalized assets including content, creative, format, number of touchpoints, 
etc. Base these campaigns on each company’s unique needs, pain points, internal 
stakeholders, past interactions with your brand, and more. 
•  Use predictive AI to determine the best messaging to pair with each organization’s internal 
decision-making processes, company ethos, business goals, and specific challenges. 
Analytics and Reporting
•  Track and report on the full customer lifecycle across different stakeholders, channels, and devices. 
•  Synthesize massive data sets for patterns and emerging trends.
•  Measure the full funnel impact to see which marketing channels are the highest converting. 
Use these learnings to inform future campaigns.
•  Scan social media for mentions of your company and products, allowing you to identify 
influencers, analyze brand sentiment, and gather insights about how your products, services, 
or messaging are being perceived.
•  Track and measure performance on all marketing activities in dashboards and interactive reports.
•  Discover insights on top-performing content and campaigns for each industry, product 
category, or business segment.
Top AI Use Cases in B2B Marketing9  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Top AI Use Cases in B2B Marketing
Content and Brand Compliance
•  Develop and maintain editorial policies, brand standards, style guides, and content governance 
guidelines, even across large organizations and many different teams.
•  Personalize product and content recommendations. Better match products to each prospect’s 
needs, to increase the conversion rate for initial purchases, as well as cross-sell and upsell 
opportunities to “land and expand” key accounts. 
•  Serve users individualized content recommendations that increase content consumption and 
brand engagement.
•  Surface relevant organizational information to employees while they work, like your products, 
internal initiatives, or industry jargon.
•  Dynamically serve the content that will most likely help a prospect take the desired next step 
toward a purchase, like downloading an implementation guide.
•  Automatically correct copy so it reflects the brand’s language, grammar, and formatting standards. 
•  Provide real-time guidance on brand tone, phrasing, and complexity.  
•  Generate, edit, and remix images, video, and audio to produce professional-grade content in 
different formats and styles.
•  Predict which content will perform best and generate ROI.
•  Test different content formats, headlines, lengths, etc.
•  Transcribe presentations, podcasts, and webinars.
Website Experience and Personalization
•  Create dynamic and personalized website experiences that help users find the product they’re 
looking for based on their job title, industry, or product lines they’ve purchased from in the past.
•  Automatically serve personalized website versions to anonymous and first-time visitors.
•  Better engage visitors with contextual greetings using AI-powered chatbots and personalized 
website content.
•  Create contextualized recommendations. Provide recommendations based on specific contextual 
factors, such as device type, location, time of day, etc.
•  Make product and content discovery intelligent. AI can analyze product metadata to serve up 
smarter search results and help customers find what they want faster.
•  Streamline customer service and support with AI-powered chatbots that can provide relevant 
answers immediately. Direct site visitors to relevant website resources or route them to the 
correct department.
•  Tailor ads, emails, push notifications, and more to individual user behavior, and mirror that 
experience on your website.
•  Maximize the value of your data by unlocking information trapped in product descriptions, 
reviews, or other unstructured text to generate more relevant recommendations.10  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Top AI Use Cases in B2B Marketing
Trade Show and Event Marketing
•  Use an AI chatbot on a tablet at your trade show booth to answer frequently asked questions 
and collect contact information. As a bonus, this frees up team members to have deeper, more 
personalized conversations with potential customers.
•  Rapidly create unique assets for each event your team attends. Better yet, create hyper-
personalized landing page experiences based on a booth visitor’s demographics, company 
characteristics, purchasing history, and past digital interactions. 
•  Analyze data collected from each event to uncover patterns and insights your team might not 
have noticed — such as traffic patterns around the booth, engagement with marketing materials, 
and conversion rates of different audience segments.
•  Rely on AI-powered algorithms to run sophisticated lead scoring and predict which booth 
attendees are most likely to become customers. By identifying high-quality leads, marketing 
teams can better prioritize their follow-up efforts.
•  Use predictive AI to forecast potential success based on data collected from previous events. 
This can help the marketing and sales teams optimize their approach for each event.
•  Create an interactive and engaging experience for booth visitors with a voice-powered AI 
assistant. It can interact with booth visitors, answer common questions, provide information 
about your product or service, and more. 
•  Leverage AI to automate and personalize the post-event nurturing campaigns. Score and 
prioritize leads, determine the optimal timing for follow-up, and tailor messaging based on 
interactions at the trade show.
Another way to unlock value from AI is to look for vertical-
specific technology or use cases. As AI technology proliferates, 
you’re bound to see more and more players in the market, 
building tools tailored to your specific needs. 
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) and Technology
•  Predict the intent behind search topics, so you can create more 
content on topics being searched by sales-ready buyers.  
•  Predict the messaging, creative, and timing most likely to convert 
a freemium user or upgrade accounts to a higher-paying tier.
•  Provide content recommendations to increase user adoption 
and retention.
•  Streamline podcast or video production to differentiate your 
SaaS brand in your industry.
•  Test which text, video, and imagery will lead to the highest 
number of product signups or app download conversions.
•  Discover topics and keywords where you have a unique 
competitive advantage to outrank better-resourced competitors. 
Manufacturing and Supply Chain
•  Create images and videos that show how complex systems and 
parts work.
•  Proactively recommend content, product, or parts based on 
personalized replacement or upgrade timelines.
•  Predict the accounts most likely to churn and flag them for 
extra nurturing and support.•  Identify cross-sell and upsell opportunities best suited for a 
particular buyer based on browsing history.
•  Speed up the RFP process with predictive text and generative 
writing programs.
•  Better predict project scope based on historical data.
•  Draft compelling sales content, sales presentations, and 
proposals personalized to each prospect’s challenges, goals, 
and decision-making style.
•  Allow website visitors to automatically set up meetings with 
the right person on your team and avoid the back-and-forth of 
scheduling with field teams.
Financial Services
•  Automatically outline, generate, and summarize long-form 
content assets, like whitepapers and reports, to explain 
complex financial topics clearly to audiences.
•  Standardize financial terminology and messaging to be more 
inclusive of audiences from all backgrounds.
•  Personalize content and messaging to a user’s specific financial 
data or goals, making it highly relevant to audiences with 
different incomes, financial targets, or lifestyles.Industry-Specific Use Cases11  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintThis all sounds great in theory, but what does AI adoption look like today? Here are just a couple 
stories of B2B organizations like yours that are winning big using AI.
Software company personalizes the web experience with 590,000 
versions of its homepage at the same time. 
Coupa Software Incorporated is a cloud-based Business Spend Management (BSM) platform that 
unifies processes across supply chain, procurement, and finance functions. Like many B2B companies, a 
“land and expand” approach to Account-Based Marketing (ABM) is a core pillar of its growth strategy. 
The Coupa marketing team was looking to elevate its digital strategy through more dynamic website 
optimization and more sophisticated ABM. With Intellimize, they found both.
The team identified four target verticals, then isolated these audiences using first- and third-party 
data, to ensure the right audience saw the right website variation. Then came 28 separate homepage 
experiences with industry-specific headings, logos, images, and more. 
With Intellimize, the team could test different copy and image variations within each vertical without 
writing a single line of code. What came next could only be possible with an AI-driven solution: Coupa 
tested 590,000 versions of its homepage at the same time, all while ensuring the experiences users 
saw were relevant to them.
And it turns out, delivering uniquely personalized experiences works: Coupa has seen a 32% lift in revenue 
from the homepage, with some of their best experiments realizing over 100% lift. Not to mention, they’ve 
completed the equivalent of 240 years of A/B testing in just one year working with Intellimize. 
For Coupa, this is just the beginning. The team has big plans to continue to refine and optimize their 
ABM programs. Plus, with a site redesign underway, it knows it has the right tech in its corner to test 
new ideas before pushing them out.
“ With the Intellimize team, we’ve been able to partner on strategy in 
the best way to build our audiences, which has really been the key to 
success with our ABM efforts. We love working with their team and the 
results we’ve achieved speak for themselves.” 
 - Ally Vandenherik, Conversion Rate Optimization Manager, Coupa Software Incorporated 
Top Companies Using  
AI for B2B Marketing12  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Top Companies Using AI for B2B Marketing
Conversational AI platform sees 129% conversion lift in less than 90 days.
Imagine running 30 million A/B tests in 90 days. 
Drift, an AI-powered conversational platform that integrates chat, email, and video, is no stranger to 
personalization. The company powers personalized experiences at scale, so when it came to its own 
website, it lets the data do the talking. 
Make no mistake: The marketing team had opinions on what their new site design should look like. 
(The top navigation bar was a particularly hot topic.) So they partnered with Intellimize and turned to 
testing to settle the debate. 
The team needed confirmation that the site’s all-new look, feel, and messaging would resonate with 
their target audience. And of course, it was critical to maximize engagement with website visitors and 
convert as many as possible into qualified sales leads.
Drift tested 19 different campaigns, with 121 variations. In particular, they focused on the main 
navigation bar, headlines on top pages, the sign-up form, and the site’s resource section.  
In total, the team used Intellimize to test more than 30 million unique page combinations. This large-
scale testing paid off: They experienced a 129% improvement in website conversions in less than 90 
days. That translated into more than $2.8 million in incremental revenue.
With Intellimize, Drift got data-backed answers to its top website personalization questions. It got 
assurance that its new site would convert. It got results.
Lesson learned: When you listen to your customers, everyone wins.  
“ Websites are never done; they’re a living organism. And the information 
we got made us very confident going into a website launch, which can 
ordinarily be a very anxiety-ridden process.” 
 - Justin Keller, VP Revenue Marketing, Drift13  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintIf you’re ready to take the next step, here are 12 AI companies you need to check out today.
Intellimize
Drive 1:1 Personalized Experiences at Every Touchpoint
Intellimize is an AI-driven experience optimization platform that enables companies to deliver uniquely 
personalized 1:1 website experiences to every unique visitor, maximizing revenue and reducing 
acquisition costs.
• Launch A/B tests in minutes and find a single winner with confidence.
• Target 1:1 audiences and personalize the first page visit for known and anonymous visitors.
• Dynamically optimize each visitor’s experience to convert faster.
“ AI has allowed me to push the team and be more creative and more daring. The AI 
technology is going to decide the right route and help us find what good looks like 
faster. Let’s find 10 great ideas and let the machine tell us what’s going to work.”
 - Chris Baszto, Head of Marketing, Industrious
Intellimize makes it easy for you and your team to work together to accomplish your aggressive 
optimization goals. Quickly make changes in the Visual Editor or code it on your own. AI Content 
Studio allows your team to create blog, ad, website, and social copy, and then bake those into your 
testing program.
Intellimize is: 
• Easy. Move, add, or update copy, font, imagery on any page instantly.
• Insightful. Understand what’s working and get recommendations on suggested copy for new tests.
• Flexible. Use Intellimize’s WYSIWYG Visual Editor or custom code experiences.
• Impactful. Measure the full funnel impact of your testing and personalization programs.
Top AI Tools for B2B Marketing
Sound good?
START HERE14  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Top AI Tools for B2B Marketing
6sense
6sense Revenue AI™ helps B2B organizations eliminate guesswork to proceed with confidence putting 
the power of AI, big data, and machine learning behind every member of the revenue team. Its 
platform uncovers anonymous buyers, understands their behavior, and directs you to engage the ones 
most likely to buy….with the right message at precisely the right time.
AiAdvertising
AiAdvertising is a cloud-based Artificial Intelligence-as-a-Service (AIaaS) advertising platform that 
allows marketers to easily plan, predict and execute hyper-personalized advertising campaigns with full 
transparency, while gaining the intelligence they need to prove advertising’s impact on the bottom line. 
This means powerful, high-impact ads that convert.
Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Amazon Personalize empowers you to quickly build and deploy an array of personalized 
recommendations and intelligently segment users at scale. It uses the same proven machine learning 
technology that Amazon.com has used for more than 20 years on its own website.
Amazon Personalize is an API AI service that allows you to host machine learning models for 
recommendations and user personalization. These models can be tailored to your individual needs, 
and the solution is designed to easily integrate personalized recommendations into your existing 
websites, applications, email marketing systems, and more.
Drift 
Drift increases lead generation and efficiently grows revenue by connecting with website visitors 
instantly to share content, answer questions, and book meetings 24/7/365.
Drift’s Conversation Cloud breaks down the silos across your team so you can deliver personalized 
experiences that turn into more quality pipeline, revenue, and happy customers.
Jasper
Jasper is an AI content generation tool that can write blog posts and generate images in seconds. 
First, tell Jasper what you want to write about. Then, provide it with a few bullet points to work off. 
Click a button, and voila! Fresh content written by AI.
Lately
Lately is a social selling platform that learns the voice of each individual employee and what will make 
each of their unique audiences click, like, comment or share. Then it takes all of your content and turns 
it into targeted, effective social media posts – increasing visibility and leads.
MarketMuse
MarketMuse is an AI platform that identifies your top content opportunities. The platform uses AI to 
tell you which topics to target and how to rank for them, and it even generates content briefs for those 
suggested topics. Plus, it can show you what other pieces of content on Page 1 of SERPs missed, so 
you can beat out your competitors.15  |  AI for B2B Marketers Blueprint
Top AI Tools for B2B Marketing
Persado
Persado allows you to automatically personalize each and every message to an individual user’s 
preferences. Its AI knows what type of language a user prefers, adjusting your content to make it 
maximally appealing to that individual. And it does it at scale across your entire audience.
Rasa.io
With rasa.io, you can send personalized smart newsletters that are tailored to each prospect’s individual 
content preferences. Using AI, rasa.io evaluates how each user engages with content in your email 
newsletter. Then it customizes future newsletters to deliver more of the content an individual prefers, 
making it more likely they’ll open and engage with your email.
Writer
Writer is an AI writing platform built for teams. Unlike other GPT-powered applications, Writer is trained 
on your data — your best-performing blog posts, landing pages, social media posts, as well as your 
brand style guide.
Yext
Yext helps organizations build digital experiences across any channel on its open and composable 
platform. The Yext Digital Experience Platform collects and organizes content to deliver AI-led 
experiences for any organization’s customers, employees, or partners. 16  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintAI has the power to simplify the complex buying processes of B2B organizations — giving marketers 
the ability to deliver 1:1 experiences that their buyers deserve. 
B2B marketers can use AI to drive growth, personalize and optimize customer experiences, produce 
content at scale, reduce customer acquisition costs (CAC), and increase marketing ROI.
In fact, many of your peers already are: Forrester recently found that two-thirds of B2B companies are 
already using AI in their marketing programs. 
But it’s still early. You have an opportunity to be the change agent and leader within your organization. 
To champion responsible, ethical, and strategic AI adoption in your marketing strategy and campaigns. 
To shape the future of your company — and your career. 
You’ve already taken a critical first step: by investing in and learning more about how AI can 
supercharge your marketing strategy.
Now it’s time to explore, test, and see what’s possible. There’s no time to waste. 
Why B2B Marketing of  
the Future Depends on AI17  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintLearn more at intellimize.com18  |  AI for B2B Marketers BlueprintAbout Marketing AI Institute
Marketing AI Institute is a media, event, and education company founded in 2016 that makes AI 
approachable and actionable for marketers and business leaders. The Institute owns and operates the 
Marketing Artificial Intelligence Conference (MAICON), AI for Writers Summit, AI for Agencies Summit  
and AI for B2B Marketers Summit, hosts The Marketing AI Show podcast, runs the AI Academy for 
Marketers featuring dozens of on-demand courses, and published Marketing Artificial Intelligence: AI, 
Marketing, and the Future of Business (Matt Holt Books, 2022). 
Learn more at www.marketingaiinstitute.com.  
About Intellimize
Intellimize is an experience optimization and personalization SaaS platform that uses AI to 
dynamically personalize website experiences across the entire buyer’s journey. ABM and Demand 
Generation Marketers gain a competitive edge when using Intellimize to drive efficient pipeline 
and revenue growth in a cookieless world. Leading marketing teams at Gong, Mercari, Okta, 
Dermalogica, Drift, Tubby Todd and more trust Intellimize to create, test and learn faster, drive 
revenue, and be more efficient.
Learn more at Intellimize.com.