The AI for Higher 
Education Blueprint: 
Preparing Universities  
for the Future
Published July 2023
Sponsored By
© 2023, Marketing AI Institute, All Rights Reserved.
2  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  3  AI in Higher Education: A Paradigm Shift
 What Is AI? 5
 Language, Vision, and Prediction    6
 The Capabilities and Limitations of AI Today    6
7   How AI Will Empower Administrators  
Strategic Planning, Budgeting and Financial Management 7 
Academic Program Oversight and Policy Making 8
 AI Detectors: The Next-Gen Plagiarism 8
 Student Affairs 9
10  How AI Will Empower College Marketing and Admissions Teams 
 Enrollment  10
 Admissions and Administration 10
 The Role of International Student Counselors and Recruiters 11
 How Are Real-World Higher Ed Marketers Using AI? 12
13  How AI Will Empower Educators 
 AI-Optimized Curriculum 13 
 AI-Assisted Assessments and Grading  13 
 AI-Driven Research Assistance 14 
 How Are Real-World Educators Using AI? 14 
15  How AI Will Empower Students
 Student Engagement 15
 Job Placement 16
  Engaging and Supporting Alumni 16
17  Implementing AI in Higher Education
 AI Challenges and Risks 17
 AI Ethics, Developing an AI Strategy, and Responsible AI Usage 19
20  8 AI Considerations for Higher Education
21  The Future of AI in Higher Education
 Table of Contents3  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
“Education as we know it will never be the same.”
Those words come from Josh Antonuccio, the Director of the School of Media Arts and Studies at 
Ohio University. 
We asked him—and more than a dozen other higher education leaders—to share with us how 
artificial intelligence was impacting their work.
Their responses inform the AI for Higher Education Blueprint you’re reading now.
Their perspectives are diverse. And not all agree that AI’s impact will be entirely positive in their 
classrooms and institutions. But, no matter their views on AI or use of the technology, they all 
agreed on one thing:
AI in higher education is here to stay—and every higher education leader must begin learning 
how to understand and harness the technology.
This goes way beyond ChatGPT. Powerful AI systems—of which ChatGPT is just one—are 
already fundamentally changing every aspect of the way we live, work, and learn.
For many, that’s an uncomfortable, or even terrifying, thought…
And understandably so. We are inundated with stories about the very real dangers of AI when 
the technology is thoughtlessly or maliciously applied. In higher education, leaders are losing 
sleep at night over many issues, many of which don’t have easy answers:
AI in Higher Education:  
A Paradigm Shift
•   Cheating. Will students simply use ChatGPT to undetectably cheat on every assignment? Will we have to 
throw out our standard lesson plans and assignments in response?
 
•  Factual accuracy. Even when using AI tools responsibly, how do we ensure that we’re getting accurate, useful 
information from them? How do we prevent these tools from actively generating misinformation?
 
•  Bias. How do we prevent AI outputs from producing and promoting harmful biases that contribute to systemic 
injustices and inequalities?
 
•  Impact on students. Will students simply substitute AI-generated answers for critical thinking and creativity? 
Are we doomed to a future generation of students who can’t produce original work?
 
•  Copyright and ownership. Who actually owns the outputs of AI tools? How do we generate AI outputs legally 
and responsibly?
 
•  Workplace readiness and rate of change. How do we keep up with the blazing fast rate of technological 
change? How do we adequately prepare students for the workforce?
 
•  The role of higher education. How do universities market their value when information becomes free, courses 
become irrelevant, and jobs change? Powerful 
AI systems 
are already 
fundamentally 
changing 
every aspect 
of the way we 
live, work, and 
learn. 4  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
It is enough to make any higher education leader’s head spin.
But don’t worry, you’re not alone…
Every leader in every organization in every industry is grappling with the same exact 
issues and questions surrounding AI. And it’s important for every higher education 
leader to do the same—because the students they serve will graduate into a job market 
being rapidly impacted by AI. 
(In fact, research from Goldman Sachs estimates AI could impact up to 300 million 
current full-time roles and create brand new roles that lead to an economic boom.)
That’s a lot to take in, but here’s the good news…
Plenty of higher education leaders are already starting to successfully and responsibly 
incorporate AI into their classrooms and institutions. As a result, they’re beginning to 
see the enormous potential of AI in higher education.
Because, make no mistake, despite the fear and uncertainty, the AI paradigm shift 
in higher education can create enormous opportunities for administrators, university 
marketing teams, educators, and students. Opportunities to:
•  Create better student outcomes.  AI can better personalize curriculum for 
students and predict their needs, leading to lower dropout rates, increased 
academic performance, improved mental health, and higher post-graduation 
hiring rates. 
•  Make educators more effective and efficient.  AI can serve as the ultimate 
teaching assistant and in-class tutor, helping unlock new teaching methods and 
freeing up the time that educators spend on tasks like grading and admin.
•  Make institutions more attractive and impactful.  AI can help institutions more 
effectively and efficiently attract new students, better attract a more diverse student population, and 
better engage with alumni, resulting in lower costs and better results.
Universities that embrace AI have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to empower students, educators, 
marketing teams and administrators to deliver unprecedented levels of personalization and performance in 
education. Those that don’t will struggle to adapt to coming disruptions and retain their relevance in an AI-
first world. 
This guide is a resource to help you do just that.AI in Higher Education: A Paradigm Shift
“ With a little 
effort (and 
willingness), we 
can do right by 
our students 
and the firms 
who rely on 
us to prepare 
their young 
professionals.” 
-  Mike Frechette, 
Assistant Professor 
of Marketing at 
Sacred Heart 
University5  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
What Is AI?
If you ask 10 experts to define “AI,” you’ll get 10 different definitions given the complexity of the 
subject. Our favorite is a simple one from DeepMind CEO and Co-Founder Demis Hassabis: “AI is 
the science of making machines smart.” 
By “being smart,” these machines, in turn, enhance human knowledge and capabilities. 
So, what does “being smart” actually mean?
AI is smart because it can determine its own pathways to achieving an overall goal.
When we talk about AI, we’re really talking about a collection of technologies, tools, and techniques 
that make machines smart. 
Combined, AI technologies are capable of ingesting massive amounts of structured and unstructured 
data, finding patterns within this data, and using it to generate outputs, make predictions, offer 
recommendations, and even take actions on behalf of the user. And, if you think about it, many of the 
tasks that higher education leaders do every day involve these exact capabilities:
•  University marketing teams predict which images and words are most likely to appeal to 
prospective students when creating advertising and communications collateral. 
•  Educators predict which examples and approaches are most likely to connect with students, 
illustrate the curriculum, and enhance learning. 
•  Administrators predict which language, anecdotes, and statistics are most likely to reassure 
parents, engage alumni, or inspire donors. 
 
These predictions may be founded on instinct, experience, educated guesses, and data. In many 
cases, AI can produce these types of predictions as well or better than humans, using immense 
amounts of data and compute.
Additionally, thanks to machine learning, a subset of AI, AI-powered technologies can often learn on 
their own and improve their performance over time based on new data. 
This is fundamentally different from how traditional (non-AI) technology operates. With AI, you can unlock 
superpowers previously inaccessible, thanks to a smart machine’s ability to get better at tasks over time.
The easiest way to wrap your head around what AI can do in higher education is to understand AI’s 
three primary applications: language, vision, and prediction.
“ AI is the 
science 
of making 
machines 
smart.”
-  Demis 
Hassabis, 
CEO and 
Co-Founder, 
DeepMindAI in Higher Education: A Paradigm Shift6  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
AI in Higher Education: A Paradigm Shift
Language, Vision, and Prediction  
As we wrote about in Marketing Artificial Intelligence: AI, Marketing, and the Future of Business, the primary 
applications of AI are language, vision, and prediction. 
•  Language: The ability to understand and produce the written or spoken word. ChatGPT has received 
widespread attention for its ability to generate human-like writing based on a prompt.  
•  Vision: The ability to detect, analyze, and create elements in image or video formats. For example, 
Midjourney uses natural language descriptions to produce images in any imaginable style, while 
QuantPlus deconstructs ad performance to the elemental level and provides educators the ability to 
pre-optimize ad creatives before they launch into market.
•  Prediction: The ability to predict outcomes based on historical data. AI companies like Persado  
can use past performance data to identify the language and messaging most likely to motivate 
prospective students to convert. 
We’ll cover more examples throughout this guide, but it’s important to keep these broad applications in mind 
as you begin to uncover use cases for your organization and in your career. 
The Capabilities and Limitations of AI Today
AI isn’t the stuff of science fiction anymore—but that doesn’t mean that it’s omnipotent and infallible. Those in 
higher education must consider AI adoption with eyes wide open to its capabilities and its limitations today. 
So, what can AI do? AI can:
•  AI cannot make independent decisions, 
enforce ethics, or have opinions. Its abilities 
are limited to the data on which it was trained.
•  AI cannot perform beyond what it is asked 
to do. Despite some speculation and 
misinformation, AI will not teach itself 
chemistry without being asked—but it can 
continue to execute a task indefinitely if not 
instructed otherwise.
•  AI should not run unassisted. It can, and does, 
commonly produce false information and misguided findings, and requires oversight and 
guidance from human counterparts to produce 
high-quality outcomes.
•  Today’s AI is narrow AI: Even the most 
advanced AI technologies are executing tasks 
within specific use cases. Artificial general 
intelligence (AGI)—or AI capable of fully 
replicating human intelligence, doesn’t exist 
yet. And even the leading minds in AI debate 
over what AGI will look like, and if or when it 
could ever be realized.
The fastest way to understand and reap the benefits of AI is to look at use cases within your 
organization. So let’s get away from the theoretical and into the practical: In the following 
sections, we explore how AI can benefit administrators, marketing teams, educators, and 
students across the educational lifecycle.  •  Pre-optimize advertising creative, using 
performance data down to the elemental level 
across any industry, enabling marketers to 
start campaigns with ads they know will work.
•  Produce written, audio, image, and video 
content at massive scale and exponentially 
faster than any human could do so.•  Detect patterns, such as the words and 
phrases corresponding to the highest-
converting alumni donation campaigns.
•  Analyze and synthesize information, like 
reviewing student course surveys and 
summarizing the topics students are 
struggling to grasp.
That said:7  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
Strategic Planning, Budgeting and Financial Management
In a world of widespread AI adoption, where will higher education fit in? When skills, knowledge, 
and careers are changing and iterating at the pace of technology, how can colleges and 
universities keep up? 
The answer, of course, is to evolve or to fade away. And so, these are the questions college 
administrators must address to ensure their institutions remain relevant and competitive in 
the years ahead. Consider, for example, a next-generation university: 
Such a transformation, however, would have institution-wide implications: on staffing and 
hiring, on course offering and admissions, on marketing and messaging, on vision and values. 
 
AI isn’t just the catalyst for this change, though. AI can also be an aide in this process, 
assisting administrators to make better strategic and budgeting decisions. For example, AI’s vast 
computing power can analyze data to: 
•   Identify and recommend proper enrollment numbers to inform acceptance rates and 
expected graduation rates.
•   Determine which programs and schools to invest or divest funds.
•   Optimize resources, everything from class sizes to on-campus electricity usage. 
•   Run complex financial modeling and enrollment forecasts for long-term strategic planning.
•   Better predict the student profiles most likely to attend your school, informing course 
offerings, faculty decisions, and recruiting budgets.
Armed with this information, administrators will be empowered to reimagine their institutions and 
align resources with their renewed vision. How AI Will Empower 
Administrators
•   Formerly a place where students would acquire specific knowledge or a fixed set 
of skills, now one that promises the development of the critical thinking, problem-
solving, and emotional intelligence necessary to succeed in an AI-first world. 
•   Once a brief stopover before undergraduates set out on a 40-year career, now a life-
long destination where professionals return again and again to upskill and reinvent 
themselves at each stage of their many jobs and career paths. 
•   Where academics once struggled to juggle course loads with research, they’re now revered 
as a hub of access to exports, mentors, cross-disciplinary collaboration, and networking.Administrators 
will be 
empowered to 
reimagine their 
institutions and 
align resources 
with their 
renewed vision.8  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
How AI Will Empower Administrators
Academic Program Oversight and Policy Making
Administrators are charged with presenting a top-down vision for their institutions. 
While this has always included decisions around technology purchases and policies, 
none have been as significant as AI. 
Each institution’s perspective on, adoption of, and policies around, AI will shape 
every aspect of the student and staff experience. 
•   Which degrees and courses will thrive? Which will be challenged, disrupted, or 
eliminated altogether? 
•   How well will the university’s programs and curriculum keep pace with job 
market needs and student expectations? 
•   Will students and faculty be allowed, or encouraged, to use AI? What 
guidelines will be put in place to dictate its use, define cheating, etc.? 
•   How much will AI skills and knowledge be weighted in hiring decisions—from 
faculty to admissions to operations? 
A May 2023 report released by the U.S. Department of Education underscores the 
urgency with which educators and administrators must develop policies around AI.
Make no mistake, your university’s stance on AI adoption will determine how 
attractive it is to prospective students and staff alike. 
 
Cheating. In education, it’s the lightning rod of 
every AI conversation. And educators’ concerns 
are warranted: In addition to all of AI’s other 
use cases, AI-assisted cheating is here, and 
likely here to stay. 
Courseology , a Google Chrome extension, 
purports to offer an undetectable way for 
students to find answers to homework 
assignments. Meanwhile, platforms like 
TurnItIn claim to detect AI in student writing 
(though after testing, The Washington Post 
has cautioned against its pattern of producing 
false positives).
The question is, can AI detectors keep pace 
with advancements in AI? Or more directly, can 
AI solve a problem created by AI? And what 
are the risks and trade-offs of doing so? For some educators, it’s a battle 
not worth fighting. Instead, their 
focus is on incorporating AI into 
the classroom and rethinking their assessments 
and assignments to better align with an AI-first 
world. 
“Some educators fear AI because they 
think it’s going to help students cheat on 
assignments or exams, replace their jobs, 
etc.,” said Sydney Chinchanachokchai, Ph.D., 
Associate Professor of Marketing, Akron 
University. “[But] many (including myself) see 
it as an opportunity and that we cannot avoid 
or ban AI in higher education. We just have 
to embrace the technology and redesign the 
assignment/the way we teach/the curriculum 
to reflect this change.”AI Detectors: The Next-Gen Plagiarism “ ...it is imperative 
to address AI in 
education now 
to realize key 
opportunities, 
prevent and 
mitigate emergent 
risks, and tackle 
unintended 
consequences.” 
-  Artificial Intelligence 
and the Future 
of Teaching and 
Learning: Insights and 
Recommendations, 
U.S. Department of 
Education, May 2023.9  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
Student Affairs
AI-led changes to careers and job markets will impact not just course offerings and curriculum 
requirements; they’ll upend students’ expectations around their education, career prospects,  
and futures. 
In 2022, PwC’s annual global workforce survey showed that nearly one-third of respondents fear 
that their job will be replaced by technology in the next three years. Thirty-nine percent worry 
about not getting sufficient training in digital and technology skills from their employer—and 
these concerns are even higher among younger respondents.
These anxieties are understandable. Perhaps more than any previous generation, college students 
are going to be confronted by existential questions like: 
• What purpose do I serve?
• What should I do with my life and my career? 
• How valuable are my skills? What are my contributions worth? 
• What happens if, and when, my job is disrupted or replaced?
This means the role of student counselors and career counselors may take on even greater 
significance on college campuses, as students navigate these new challenges.
Nearly one-
third of 
respondents 
fear that their 
job will be 
replaced by 
technology in 
the next three 
years. How AI Will Empower Administrators10  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
In the U.S. alone, roughly 20 million undergraduate students will attend colleges and universities each 
year—and many more will tour, apply, and decide where to pursue postsecondary education.
Marketing and admissions teams have the massive task of wielding budgets and resources to 
target, recruit, and select students for their incoming class. AI can enable them to perform these 
functions with greater precision, personalization, and productivity. 
Enrollment
AI can support college enrollment efforts by helping college marketing teams and international 
recruiters identify students most likely to choose their institution and nurture these prospective 
students with more targeted marketing campaigns. 
Predictive Analytics for Targeted Marketing
Digital marketing efforts have already enabled college marketing teams to more precisely pinpoint 
students that are a fit for their organization, based on demographic and geographic factors. For 
years, colleges have been using Big Data to track prospective students. AI-powered analytics tools 
can up their game even more.  
•  Intelligently segment students to personalize information based on interests, area of study, 
geography, or financial aid needs.
• Identify new cross-sections of student populations to recruit. 
• Hyper-target student populations based on complex criteria.
Personalized Communication and AI-Powered Recruitment
Once cohorts of prospective students have been identified, AI can improve targeting and personalization 
at every stage of the recruitment process. AI-powered marketing tools have the potential to: 
•  Identify the highest-performing creative elements, like images, color, and composition, in ad 
campaigns, marketing collateral, and communications. 
•  Personalize messaging to different students based on their profile, behaviors, and engagement. 
•  Tailor content to individual user preferences across different schools or majors.
•  Adjust messaging across channels to prompt students to engage and take action.
•  Make content recommendations to achieve specific goals, like increasing scholarship applicants. 
•  Alter user experiences for students, parents, alumni, and other key audiences.
•  Proactively recommend content based on graduation date and other milestones or behaviors.
Admissions and Administration
University admissions processes today often look something like this: 
•  Submission: Students submit applications online or on paper, and include personal 
information, academic transcripts, standardized test scores, essays, and personal statements.
•  Review: Admissions staff review applications and evaluate each student’s academic 
achievements, extracurricular activities, test scores, and other factors to determine whether 
they are a good fit for the school.
•  Selection: Based on the application review, admissions staff decide whether to admit the 
student, or place them on a waitlist.
•  Notification: Once a decision has been made, the university notifies students of their 
admission status through a letter, email, or online portal.
•  Enrollment: If the student is admitted, they will typically be required to submit  
additional paperwork to confirm their decision to attend the college.
How AI Will Empower College  
Marketing and Admissions Teams11  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  How AI Will Empower College Marketing and Admissions Teams
Throughout the process, the admissions staff may also conduct interviews or request additional information 
from applicants. Even with digital applications, the process can still be manual, complex, and time-
consuming for staff.
Now imagine an admissions process with AI technologies infused throughout: 
Automated application processing sends notifications and follow-up communications to students across 
channels, and requests and collects supplemental application information. AI-based assessment scores and 
sorts hundreds of applications in seconds, surfaces insights, recommends follow-up questions, and ranks 
waitlist candidates. Every step along the way, the process is better, faster, and smarter.
The Role of International Student Counselors and Recruiters
It’s common for higher education institutions 
to work with student counselors and recruiters 
abroad to attract international students to their 
colleges. These individuals support recruitment 
and admissions services for international 
students by building relationships with local 
high schools, colleges/universities, and study 
abroad advisors; advising on and implementing 
international marketing strategies; meeting 
in person with families to answer questions; 
reviewing international student applications; 
and more. 
But as AI empowers students and their parents 
to conduct more research on their own about 
international opportunities, how does the 
recruiter’s role evolve? 
AI can match students with overseas 
opportunities that meet their academic and 
course requirements, qualifications, location 
preferences, and price point, among a myriad 
of other factors—likely better than a local 
agent could. 
“ Show me the three top-ranking 
undergraduate Biology programs in the 
United States. Rank them by price, proximity 
to the city and safety rating of the city 
they are in. Based on the above, provide 
recommendations for where my 18-year-old 
son should study Biology.”  It can also streamline routine tasks like 
answering common inquiries, document 
chasing or deadline reminders. And offer multi-
lingual support and translation services, making 
the admissions process more accessible to 
global students. 
International recruitment agents need to 
understand and embrace these technologies 
to offer the level of personalization and speed 
needed to compete. But, as Corey Snow, the 
director of Education Industry Solutions for 
Salesforce was quoted as saying in the ICEF 
Monitor: “Technology only gets you so far. 
The best way to build meaningful and durable 
relationships is via one-to-one (one-to-few) 
real-time human interactions.” 
And it is here that the recruiter will thrive. By 
working with technology to automate the 
mundane and the repetitive, recruiters, in turn, 
can focus efforts on having the meaningful 
conversations that can really set a school apart 
from the rest and give families peace of mind 
that they made the correct choice.12  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  How AI Will Empower College Marketing and Admissions Teams
How Are Real-World Higher Ed Marketers Using AI?
TAFE Queensland is an Australian Government owned education institution with more than 125,000 
students across 50+ locations. As they kicked off a major international recruitment campaign, the school 
asked themselves a fundamental question: 
Would the domestic campaign that had worked so well locally, have the same effect internationally? 
Would the beautiful domestic images, that included many localized Australian situations, resonate with 
their potential students from Japan and South Korea?
 
But how could the marketing team be sure their domestic creative would attract prospective students 
from these countries? And, how could they know that what works for a Japanese student would work for a 
South Korean one? (After all, students in different geographies react differently to the same creative.)
 
The TAFE Queensland had experienced marketers with some well formed views about what they believed 
would work in these markets. However, at its core they were still using only their collective knowledge, 
advertising experience and intuition in the creative development process.
 
It’s a common problem. Higher education marketing teams often rely on intuition and guesswork to devise 
marketing campaigns - because, historically at least, there were no other resources that could deliver 
deeper insights without significant time and money investment.  Even with multiple creatives and A/B split 
testing, they often lack the data to point to why something does or doesn’t work.
 
TAFE Queensland was the same way. Until they turned to AI.
 
For their international recruitment campaign, TAFE Queensland turned 
to AI from QuantPlus to generate data-driven creative insights linked to 
performance metrics.
Unique to the ad industry, QuantPlus’ AI evaluates trillions of data points from 
campaigns around the world to determine what text and image elements 
work best with a specific audience before you launch your campaign. Using 
QuantPlus, TAFE Queensland was able to gain confidence its campaign 
would produce results before spending a dime to launch and test in-market.
With QuantPlus, the marketing team was able to understand what calls to 
action, keywords, phrase combinations, imagery, colors, and other creative 
elements resonated most with each different markets, then proactively build 
ads that matched what was already statistically proven to perform well.
TAFE Queensland was able to determine the precise differences in visual elements and ad copy that Japanese 
and South Korean markets tended to prefer. It turned out each audience had different color, image, and text 
preferences, which the team was able to incorporate into unique campaigns for each country.
The result?
 
Across both markets, TAFE Queensland attracted a 90% lift in unique visitors to the landing pages and a 
33% increase in ROI, when compared to previous campaigns. TAFE Queensland attributed this increase 
directly to the new creative informed by the QuantPlus insights. 
 
“We are not afraid to challenge traditional thinking. Particularly if the end result can lead to better outcomes 
for our students or TAFE,”   says Marty Lock, Manager International Student Engagement at TAFE Queensland.
Click to learn more about how AI from QuantPlus can help you.
GET STARTED13  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
It’s no secret that most educators feel overworked—fighting to keep up with grading, 
to adapt to new standards and new technologies, to give each student the personal 
attention and instruction they need.  
AI can help lighten the workload of teachers by automating tasks such as grading 
essays, providing feedback, and answering student questions. Better yet, it can unlock 
brand new ways of delivering content, engaging students, and assessing learning. 
AI-Optimized Curriculum
Curriculum building, lesson planning, and vertical alignment are all time-intensive 
requirements of any course. But AI’s ability to analyze, synthesize, research, and reorganize 
can increase productivity while producing more effective and engaging curriculum. 
AI tools can: 
•  Find statistics on sources to support key concepts.
•  Suggest examples and analogies to connect abstract concepts to real-world ideas.
•  Review course outlines for multiple professors, and flag redundancies and topic 
gaps for greater vertical alignment.
•  Provide alternative explanations to help illustrate key concepts, reinforce ideas, 
and help students learn. 
AI-First Learning Experiences and Enhancing Teaching Methods with AI
AI can also provide alternative methods of teaching content and create new 
opportunities for more engaging and interactive teaching. Educators are already 
testing out new prompts, assignments, and strategies to enhance their teaching with 
AI. For example, students can: 
•  Interview the AI acting as a particular viewpoint or historical figure to gain new 
insights and a “first person” perspective. 
•  Debate topics with the AI taking the opposing point of view.
•  Ask AI to identify and explain cognitive bias or logical fallacies in the student’s 
work, to improve writing, communication, and critical thinking skills.
•  Prompt AI to rewrite their work in different tones or styles to analyze their own 
writing and explore alternative angles. 
AI-Assisted Assessments and Grading 
Assessments are the default method of gauging students’ mastery of a subject, but they have 
understandably come under fire for the ways they might favor a particular learning style. Conversely, 
they could also unfairly punish students from a particular geographic or socioeconomic background, 
or degree of English fluency.
AI-generated assessments may be able to produce more objective diagnostic tests and flag the 
potential blindspots of existing assessments.
AI excels at following route processes, especially when given clear guidelines. AI-assisted grading, 
aided by a clear rubric, is another way in which AI can increase grading efficiency while reducing 
personal bias for particular students or styles.
How AI Will Empower Educators
“ AI is dramatically 
changing how I 
personally teach. 
I have dropped 
long essay 
assignments in 
my courses … In 
my courses, I am 
making it more 
experiential where 
we use AI to help 
with assignments 
in class.”
-  David Rice, Professor 
and Executive Director 
of the Future of 
Marketing Institute at 
the Schulich School 
of Business, York 
University 14  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
How AI Will Empower Educators
AI-Driven Research Assistance
For publishing scholars, AI can also be the ultimate research assistant: Finding sources, organizing 
information, and so much more.  
•   Find patterns, follow trends, and surface insights in massive datasets. 
•   Transcribe audio and video interviews.
•   Identify key concepts, common themes, and outlier opinions across primary or secondary sources. 
•   Search databases and academic journals for relevant research studies and organize findings in 
a meaningful way.
•   Run statistical analyses of data, and generate visualizations to help interpret the results.
•   Synthesize large amounts of information from various sources, and summarize complex ideas. 
•   Create outlines or summaries of research findings.
•   Manage citation and reference lists more easily and efficiently.
•   Organize sources and generate indexes.  
•   Write first drafts of research articles and report introductions. 
•   Fine-tune writing by identifying grammatical errors, suggesting alternative word choices, and 
providing feedback on writing clarity and readability.
How Are Real-World Educators Using AI? 
We asked college-level educators how they’re beginning to incorporate AI in their marketing, 
curriculum and classrooms. Here’s what they had to say:  
•   Introducing AI concepts and tools into existing courses. For example, requiring the use of AI 
tools in assignments to illustrate their capabilities.
•   Creating new courses specifically dedicated to AI and its applications. 
•   Leading discussions on the motivations, choices, and outcomes of using AI to encourage 
students to use AI tools appropriately.
•   Adding AI policies to course overviews, such as requiring students to disclose the use of AI 
when completing assignments.
•   Adding project-based learning activities that require the hands-on use of AI technologies, 
including relevant tools that employers will expect them to know.
•   Exploring AI’s abilities to provide learning experience personalization.
•   Increasing class participation and on-camera work to replace essays and other more traditional 
assignments.
•   Facilitating a holistic discussion of AI and its impact on students’ lives. Using AI-based 
activities in courses to explore its potential use cases, challenges, and opportunities.15  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
Students enter college with the hope that they’ll leave with the knowledge, skills, and 
network to exceed in their chosen careers. How well does your university rise to meet 
this challenge today? 
By incorporating AI into your institution, you can help students thrive from their first 
day on campus to crossing the stage on graduation day, and beyond. AI can aid 
students by improving classroom engagement, providing them with individualized 
support, and better connecting them to resources both on- and off-campus.
 
Student Engagement  
Effective pedagogical strategies are well-known and well-documented, but adoption 
of these principles remains inconsistent and uneven in education—largely due to 
resource constraints.
Empowered by AI, teachers will be able to provide more personal, more hands-on, 
more responsive, and more engaging instruction.  
Identifying Skill Gaps and AI-Based Learning Recommendations
Differentiated instruction adapts curriculum to students’ unique learning styles and 
background knowledge—an effective but time-intensive pedagogical strategy. AI tools 
can help teachers assess student knowledge more quickly and comprehensively than 
the educator could on their own.
•   Develop pre-tests and other assessments to evaluate students’ background 
knowledge at the start of term.
•   Analyze assessments and assignments, and identify weaknesses in skills or 
content areas. 
•   Provide early warnings of struggling students in need of greater intervention. 
•   Suggest alternative lesson plans, examples, or activities to reinforce hard-to-
grasp concepts.  
Colleges may be able to flag students who are struggling academically and in need of 
greater support and even identify students at risk of dropping out and provide them 
with earlier intervention services.
Personalized and Adaptive Learning Pathways
Active learning has been demonstrated to be more effective than the passive learning 
found in most lecture halls, but class sizes and student-teacher ratios often make this 
impossible, especially in entry-level courses. AI technologies can supplement this one-
to-many instruction to provide more tailored and responsive support. 
•   Offer self-paced courses that adapt the pace and difficulty of instruction to meet 
each student’s needs.
•   Administer adaptive quizzes, tests, and other assessments that match question 
difficulty to the student’s level of understanding.
•   Provide detailed feedback on assessments with personalized learning 
recommendations.
•   Source supplemental videos, articles, and practice exercises to strengthen 
student knowledge and understanding of key concepts.
How AI Will Empower Students
“ There needs to be 
more wide-scale 
acceptance and 
recognition that 
today/tomorrow’s 
students need 
to build their 
AI skill sets. 
Encouraging them 
to explore and 
experiment with 
using generative 
AI tools or 
interacting 
with other AI 
applications 
will enable the 
students to be 
at the cutting 
edge of digital 
transformation in 
their workplace.”
-  Andy Dahl, Associate 
Professor, Marketing, 
University of 
Wisconsin-Whitewater16  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
How AI Will Empower Students
AI Assistants and Tutors
AI assistants can reinforce student learning, practice skills, and provide one-on-one educational support 
at scale. Khan Academy has already begun a beta rollout of its AI-assisted tutor , a chatbot that can: 
•   Offer guidance, such as discussing how to approach a problem. 
•   Work collaboratively with students, offering assistance without providing answers outright.
•   Challenge blindspots in students’ thinking and problem-solving. 
•   Take an opposing view in a debate.
•   Explain why an answer is right or wrong.   
Job Placement
Preparing graduates for careers in a rapidly changing world is a tall order. Fortunately, AI tools and 
technologies can help. By aligning university offerings and career services with the needs of the job 
market, universities can ensure that graduates are well-prepared for the workforce.
•   AI-powered career counseling: Armed with robust data on the current job market and the 
skills and experience that employers are looking for, college career counselors can provide 
more effective career services, including resume reviews and job search assistance. 
•   Predictive analytics for job market trends: AI excels at data-driven tasks and with AI-
powered predictive analytics tools, college administrators can keep a pulse on job market 
trends, identify emerging careers, and adjust their program offerings accordingly. Predictive 
analytics can also identify the employers that are most likely to hire graduates with certain 
skill sets, degrees, and experience. This information can be used to better align recruitment 
efforts, resulting in higher employment rates for graduates. 
•   Track and analyze graduates’ employment outcomes: This information can be used to 
guide decision-making around issues such as program development and funding.
Engaging and Supporting Alumni
In the best cases, the university-alumna relationship is a life-long, mutually beneficial partnership. AI 
can make it easier to nurture personal connections with alumni, provide personalized support, foster 
loyalty, and solicit donations. 
•   AI-driven networking and mentorship: AI-powered mentorship platforms like Chronus 
already exist in the workforce, using algorithms to match mentors and mentees based on 
profile data. Similar personalization could provide robust “matchmaking” services to provide 
better-fit mentorship relationships, better engage alumni, and create a stronger and more 
robust alumni network. 
•   AI-driven fundraising and alumni support: A wide range of AI-assisted marketing, 
advertising, and communication technologies are coming on the market, many of which could 
be used for fundraising and donor relations. More precisely segment your alumni databases, 
send personalized fundraising requests, optimize creative elements to maximize conversions, 
and much, much more. 
•   Lifelong learning opportunities through AI: AI enables personalization at a scale far beyond 
what was previously possible. Not only can universities stay in touch with their alumni, but by 
providing them with hyper-targeted career resources and more tailored support, they can help 
graduates succeed in their career paths and build stronger relationships with alumni.17  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
AI adoption can seem daunting, particularly in large-scale organizations like colleges 
and universities. But change can start small: First, by understanding the challenges and 
considerations, and then by building a plan for responsible, intentional AI use.  
AI Challenges and Risks 
Haphazard use of AI tools can be irresponsible at best, and dangerous at worst. Let’s 
look at some of the top risks posed by AI, so higher ed professionals can leverage AI 
to maximize its potential and minimize its risks.
Unconscious Bias in Training Models 
AI is only as “smart” as the training model, or data set that was used as the foundation 
of the algorithm. A couple of notable real-world examples: 
 
•   An AI algorithm was developed to identify cancerous moles. The algorithm 
incorrectly began to associate rulers with skin cancer. Why? Because of the 
thousands of photos used to train the AI, the presence of a ruler was often 
associated with dermatological appointments and potentially cancerous moles.
•   In 2018, Amazon had to scrap an unintentionally discriminatory hiring algorithm. 
Because of a predominantly male workforce (and therefore, training data based 
largely on male employee resumes), the algorithm penalized resumes containing 
the names of women-only colleges, among other factors common among 
female candidates.  
Both are examples of how AI can reach flawed conclusions based on flawed training 
data, despite the best intentions of their creators. 
Now imagine AI-powered admissions software trained on a narrow set of well-crafted 
personal essays. Such a tool may unfairly reward the admissions essays of students of 
a particular race, gender, or socioeconomic background—exacerbating privilege and 
decreasing the diversity of accepted candidates.  
AI trained on biased data will produce biased results. Perhaps even more dangerous, outputs 
produced by software carry a suggestion of objectivity, which may allow biased feedback to go 
unchecked and unchallenged. And even then, training models are often a “black box,” making 
it difficult to reverse-engineer or root out unconscious bias in algorithms.  
Personal Data, Privacy, and Security Considerations
AI training models require substantial data, but few laws, regulations, or legal 
precedent exist to dictate what data can be used to train algorithms or how that 
data can be collected, stored, and analyzed. Within colleges and universities, this creates 
conflicts and vulnerabilities on several fronts, not limited to: 
•   AI that use copyrighted, or otherwise illegally obtained or unauthorized material in 
their training models.
•   Exposure of personal data or confidential information to publicly available AI programs. 
•   Vulnerability of AI-assisted software to cyber attacks or other security threats. 
Higher education leaders will need to involve other subject matter experts in the AI 
implementation process, including IT professionals and legal teams.
Implementing AI in 
Higher Education
“ There are issues of 
privacy, of validity 
and reliability, 
of inequities 
that are parts 
of both inputs 
and outputs, 
the potential 
replacement of 
human capital. 
All of these are 
concerns that 
humans will need 
to determine 
when and how to 
mitigate for the 
harms that are and 
will happen.”
-  Thor Wasbotten, 
Professor, Kent State 
University18  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
Implementing AI in Higher Education
Copyright and Ownership 
As of publishing, little legal precedent exists for AI-generated work. The U.S. Copyright 
Office recently clarified that human authorship (not generative AI) is essential for copyright 
approval. This space continues to evolve, but the outcomes will shape everything from 
professors’ use of generative AI in academic research papers to college’s policies around 
AI use for faculty, students, and staff.  
Factual Inaccuracy and Errors 
Generative AI occasionally produces outright inaccurate or false information, a 
phenomenon known as “hallucinating.” As of this writing, AI experts haven’t expressed 
confidence in their ability to understand why hallucination occurs, or their ability to stop 
it from happening. This means human oversight is essential to fact check and verify AI-
generated outputs. 
Workplace Readiness in an AI-First World
Put simply: In the future, every career is an AI-assisted career. (And the future is much 
closer than we think.) 
AI won’t just alter the way curriculum is taught. It will simultaneously reshape courses, 
content, and majors as universities work to prepare students for the careers awaiting 
them beyond graduation.  
From prompt engineering to prompt copiloting to the World of Bits—working 
alongside AI may soon be a requirement in many knowledge work jobs. 
In Robot-Proof: Higher Education in the Age of Artificial Intelligence, Joseph Aoun 
argues that these three literacies will be essential in a world where machines and 
humans are working more closely together: 
•  Data literacy: Ability to understand and work with data, including how data is 
collected, stored, and analyzed, as well as the ethical implications of data use.
•  Human literacy: Ability to understand and work with other people, including 
empathy, emotional intelligence, communication, and collaboration.
•  Technological literacy: Ability to understand and work with technology. This 
goes beyond technical skills like programming and includes comprehending the 
ways technology is impacting society, thinking critically about its applications 
and limitations, and understanding the implications of its use.
Rate of Change 
Perhaps the most dizzying aspect of AI adoption is simply the speed at which the 
space is changing. AI technology will continue to evolve at a compounding rate, with 
breakthroughs being made all the time. To keep up, higher education must develop 
flexible and adaptable curricula, integrating the latest developments in AI.
Even so, in a world of compounding change, how can educational standards and 
syllabi keep up? 
“The classroom will never be fast enough to implement from my perspective,” 
says Dan Farkas, Strategic Communication Lecturer at The Ohio State University. 
Instead, he sees extracurricular activities, like student-led marketing and PR firms, to 
supplement classroom instruction. 
Students need practical experience with AI tools and technologies to understand their 
applications, limitations, and abilities. These extracurricular opportunities for students 
to work with AI in real-world contexts, including clubs, internships, and capstone 
courses, can be beneficial by providing a testing ground for emerging technologies. “ Helping students 
learn to use AI 
effectively will be 
necessary for us 
as we prepare 
them for their 
future careers, 
and really their 
interaction with 
technology as a 
whole in their lives. 
The opportunity 
is to aggressively 
integrate AI 
into students’ 
experiences.”
-  Scott Titsworth, Dean, 
Scripps College of 
Communication, Ohio 
University
“ The changes are 
rapid and the 
speed of change 
is increasing. 
How do we best 
understand these 
changes and their 
implications? More 
importantly, how 
to teach to be the 
agent of change?” 
-  Madhavi Chakrabarty, 
Assistant Professor of 
Professional Practice, 
Rutgers Business School19  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
Implementing AI in Higher Education
AI Ethics, Developing an AI Strategy, and Responsible AI Usage
AI ethics in education will be the subject of books, lectures, and debate for years 
to come. To get started, below are five steps all organizations should prioritize to 
develop a proactive and responsible AI strategy. 
1.  Prioritize staff training and upskilling.  
Invest in your staff so they can prepare themselves for all the changes ahead. Offer 
introductory AI courses so faculty better understand AI’s uses, limitations, and 
vulnerabilities. Get curious: Educators are already creating use cases, sample prompts, 
and other best practices that can be adopted and adapted by professors. Choose 
small use cases to pilot before scaling AI within your organization.  
2. Create an internal AI Council. 
Universities must have a top-down vision for the responsible use of AI within the 
institution. An internal council is a good place to start, with stakeholders from across 
the organization charged with shepherding AI adoption and guidance.   
3. Develop responsible AI principles and generative AI policies. 
Begin to develop policies around AI that can guide students and staff. This may include: 
•  How AI-powered technologies are vetted and approved for organizational use. 
•  How university staff can use AI, including policies to protect sensitive data and 
proprietary information.
•  How professors can use AI in their research and academic work. 
•  How students can use AI in assignments, and sample AI policies for staff to use 
in syllabi. 
The Marketing AI Institute published a Responsible AI Manifesto for Marketing and 
Business under Creative Commons, which you can use as a starting point. Boston 
Consulting Group has also published extensive reports and articles on responsible 
AI principles.
4. Conduct an impact and exposure assessment for your institution. 
Initiate a comprehensive evaluation of how AI could impact your institution. Assess the tasks, roles, 
and responsibilities most likely to be disrupted by AI, along with the careers, courses, and areas of 
study most likely to be disrupted. This will provide actionable insights across technology, staffing, 
data use, course offerings, and more.   
5. Build an AI Roadmap for your university. 
Using what you’ve learned, outline an AI roadmap. Include short-term and long-term plans to adopt 
AI technologies and ways to respond to students’ use of AI. “ We call upon all 
constituents to 
adopt ‘humans 
in the loop’ as a 
key criterion for 
educational use 
of AI.”
-  Artificial Intelligence 
and the Future 
of Teaching and 
Learning: Insights and 
Recommendations,  
U.S. Department of 
Education, May 2023.20  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  As you evaluate AI in your own institution, here are some questions to consider: 
1.  Which tasks or processes are the most manual or repetitive? 
2.  Where could we benefit from increased productivity or efficiency? 
3.  Where would increased efficiencies allow us to cut costs? 
4.  In which areas of our organization are we struggling? Could AI help us optimize performance here? 
5.  What proprietary data do we have? How can we improve our data quality and protect our 
personal and proprietary data? 
6.  How will we address privacy and security concerns around AI?
7.  How will we prevent, detect, and address unconscious bias in our AI tools? 
8.  What is our university’s stance on the role of AI in education and learning? In the student experience? 
8 AI Considerations for 
Higher Education
21  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  In the 1970s, calculators were introduced to the classroom—a change that was met 
with backlash by many educators and parents. The technology, they argued, would 
remove the student’s ability to solve the problem themselves, prevent them from 
checking their work, and reduce their overall understanding of mathematics.  
(A similar thing occurred with the release of the graphing calculator in the late 1990s.) 
Fast-forward to today, and graphing calculators are on the school supply lists of most 
U.S. high schools. Students still learn math, but they do so in new ways. 
From typewriters to calculators, personal computers to search engines, educators have 
adapted to technological change. AI may follow a similar narrative. But with some 
notable differences: 
The pace is faster.
The power is greater. 
The potential is unprecedented. 
One thing is certain: Organizations that hesitate will be left behind. 
To transform higher education, leaders in academia must face AI head-on. The future 
of higher ed will be built collectively, by evaluating the impact of AI, weighing its 
value, creating a shared vision, and developing new approaches and processes. 
Together, building a new promise of higher education with AI at the center. 
“ It’s here. It’s a game changer. Get on board, and 
get over your fears. It’s the most exciting thing 
since the Internet, and it changes the rules of 
the game entirely. It allows new opportunities 
for my students to replace the old world order of 
marketing far more quickly.”
 - Ian Cross, Professor, Bentley University
The Future of AI in 
Higher Education
“ I think the ‘It will 
make students 
take short cuts’ 
and ‘It’s cheating’ 
fears are just over-
paranoia. Same 
was said about the 
use of calculators 
in class 35 years 
ago. It’s a tool, 
and we’ll all learn 
to adapt and use 
it as appropriate. 
No one today 
is complaining 
about calculators 
or spell check in 
word processing 
programs any 
more!” 
-  Jim Lecinski, Clinical 
Associate Professor 
of Marketing, Kellogg 
School of Management, 
Northwestern University22  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
23  |  AI for Higher Education Blueprint  
About Marketing AI Institute
Marketing AI Institute is a media, event, and education company founded in 2016 that makes AI 
approachable and actionable for marketers and business leaders. The Institute owns and operates 
the Marketing Artificial Intelligence Conference (MAICON), AI for Writers Summit and AI for Agencies 
Summit, hosts The Marketing AI Show podcast, runs the AI Academy for Marketers featuring dozens of 
on-demand courses, and published Marketing Artificial Intelligence: AI, Marketing, and the Future of 
Business (Matt Holt Books, 2022). Learn more at www.marketingaiinstitute.com.
About QuantPlus
QuantPlus is world-first in AI-driven data insights. Its reporting system breaks down advertising 
creative performance at an “elemental” level and has boosted campaign ROI by 300 percent. 
QuantPlus has analyzed more than 100 billion ads across 55 countries within the education industry 
to unlock the secrets of what creative elements in ads drive maximum enrollments. Ads can be 
pre-optimized using text, imagery, colors, and calls to action that are linked to known performance 
before a single impression has been served. Learn more at www.quantplus.io. 
Thank You to Our Contributors
A special thank you to the higher-education professionals who shared their insight on the topic:
Josh Antonuccio, Director, School of Media Arts & Studies, Ohio University
Paul Benedict, Director, Center for Entrepreneurship, Ohio University
Madhavi Chakrabarty, Assistant Professor of Professional Practice, Rutgers Business School
Sydney Chinchanachokchai, Ph.D., Associate Professor of Marketing, University of Akron
Ian Cross, Professor, Bentley University
Andy Dahl, Associate Professor, Marketing, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
Dan Farkas, Strategic Communication Lecturer, The Ohio State University
Mike Frechette, Assistant Professor of Marketing, Sacred Heart University
Edyta Gołąb-Andrzejak, Professor, Gdańsk University of Technology
Jim Lecinski, Clinical Associate Professor of Marketing, Kellogg School of Management, 
Northwestern University
David Rice, Professor and Executive Director of the Future of Marketing Institute, Schulich School of 
Business, York University.
Scott Titsworth, Dean, Scripps College of Communication, Ohio University
Thor Wasbotten, Professor, Kent State University