Growth, Marketing & Sales Practice
AI-powered 
marketing and sales 
reach new heights 
with generative AI
May 2023
by Richelle Deveau, Sonia Joseph Griffin, and Steve ReisArtificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) continue to push the boundaries of what is 
possible in marketing and sales. And now, with the ongoing step-change evolution of generative 
AI (gen AI), we’re seeing the use of open-source platforms penetrating to the sales frontlines, 
along with rising investment by sales-tech players in gen AI innovations. Given the accelerating 
complexity and speed of doing business in a digital-first world, these technologies are becoming 
essential tools. 
Inevitably, this will impact how you operate—and how you connect with and serve your 
customers. In fact, it’s probably already doing so. Forward-thinking C-suite leaders are 
considering how to adjust to this new landscape. Here, we outline the marketing and sales 
opportunities (and risks) in this dynamic field and suggest productive paths forward.AI technology has 
revolutionized marketing 
and sales; now, generative 
AI promises to disrupt the 
wayB2B and B2C players think 
about customer experience, 
productivity and growth.
Our research suggests that a fifth of current 
sales-team functions could be automated.
2 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI Omnichannel is table stakes
Across industries, engagement models are changing: 
today’s customers want everything, everywhere, 
and all the time. While they still desire an even mix of 
traditional, remote, and self-service channels (including 
face-to-face, inside sales, and e-commerce), we see 
continued growth in customer preference for online 
ordering and reordering. 
Winning companies—those increasing their market 
share by at least 10 percent annually—tend to utilize 
advanced sales technology; build hybrid sales teams 
and capabilities; tailor strategies for third-party and 
company-owned marketplaces; achieve e-commerce 
excellence across the entire funnel; and deliver hyper-
personalization (unique messages for individual 
decision makers based on their needs, profile, 
behaviors, and interactions—both past and predictive).
1 Nestor Maslej et al., “The AI Index 2023 annual report,” AI Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University, April 2023.
2 Cliff Saran, “Stanford University finds that AI is outpacing Moore’s Law,” Computer Weekly, December 12, 2019; Risto Miikkulainen, “Creative AI 
through evolutionary computation: Principles and examples,” SN Computer Science, 2(3): 163, March 23, 2001.Step changes are occurring in 
digitization and automation
AI technology is evolving at pace. It is becoming 
increasingly easy and less costly to implement, while 
offering ever-accelerating complexity and speed that 
far exceeds human capacity. Our research suggests 
that a fifth of current sales-team functions could be 
automated. In addition, new frontiers are opening with 
the rise of gen AI (see sidebar, “What is generative AI?”).
Furthermore, venture capital investment in AI has 
grown 13-fold over the last ten years.1  This has led to 
an explosion of “usable” data (data that can be used to 
formulate insights and suggest tangible actions) and 
accessible technology (such as increased computation 
power and open-source algorithms). Vast, and growing, 
amounts of data are now available for foundation-model 
training, and since 2012 there’s been a millionfold 
increase in computation capacity—doubling every three 
to four months.2 How AI is reshaping 
marketing and sales
AI is poised to disrupt marketing and sales in every sector. This is the result 
of shifts in consumer sentiment alongside rapid technological change.
What is generative AI?
Many of us are already familiar with online AI chatbots and image generators, using them to create 
convincing pictures and text at astonishing speed. This is the great power of generative AI, or gen AI: it 
utilizes algorithms to generate new content—writing, images, or audio—from training data. 
To do this, gen AI uses deep-learning models called foundation models (FMs). FMs are pre-trained 
on massive datasets and the algorithms they support are adaptable to a wide variety of downstream 
tasks, including content generation. Gen AI can be trained, for example, to predict the next word in 
a string of words and can generalize that ability to multiple text-generation tasks, such as writing 
articles, jokes, or code. 
In contrast, “traditional” AI is trained on a single task with human supervision, using data specific 
to that task; it can be fine-tuned to reach high precision, but must be retrained for each new use 
case. Thus gen AI represents an enormous step change in power, sophistication, and utility—and a 
fundamental shift in our relationship to artificial intelligence.Sidebar
3 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI For example, in CX, hyper-personalized content and offerings can be based on individual 
customer behavior, persona, and purchase history. Growth can be accelerated by leveraging AI 
to jumpstart top-line performance, giving sales teams the right analytics and customer insights 
to capture demand. Additionally, AI can boost sales effectiveness and performance by offloading 
and automating many mundane sales activities, freeing up capacity to spend more time with 
customers and prospective customers (while reducing cost to serve).
In all these actions, personalization is key. AI coupled with company-specific data and context 
has enabled consumer insights at the most granular level, allowing B2C lever personalization 
through targeted marketing and sales offerings. Winning B2B companies go beyond account-
based marketing and disproportionately use hyper-personalization in their outreach. What does gen AI mean for 
marketing and sales?
The rise of AI, and particularly gen AI, has potential for impact in three areas 
of marketing and sales: customer experience (CX), growth, and productivity. 
Dynamic audience targeting and segmentation 
Gen AI can combine and analyze large amounts of data—such as demographic information, existing 
customer data, and market trends—to identify additional audience segments. Its algorithms then 
enable businesses to create personalized outreach content, easily and at scale. 
Instead of spending time researching and creating audience segments, a marketer can leverage gen 
AI’s algorithms to identify segments with unique traits that may have been overlooked in existing 
customer data. Without knowing every detail about these segments, they can then ask a gen AI tool 
to draft automatically tailored content such as social media posts and landing pages. Once these have 
been refined and reviewed, the marketer and a sales leader can use gen AI to generate further content 
such as outreach templates for a matching sales campaign to reach prospects.
Embracing these techniques will require some openness to change. Organizations will require a 
comprehensive and aggregated dataset (such as an operational data lake that pulls in disparate 
sources) to train a gen AI model that can generate relevant audience segments and content. Once 
trained, the model can be operationalized within commercial systems to streamline workflows while 
being continuously refined by agile processes.
Lastly, the commercial organizational structure and operating model may need to be adjusted to 
ensure appropriate levels of risk oversight are in place and performance assessments align to the new 
ways of working. A gen AI sales  
use case
AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI 4This revolutionary approach is transforming 
the landscape of marketing and sales, driving 
greater effectiveness and customer engagement 
from the very start of the customer journey. —At the top of the funnel, gen AI 
surpasses traditional AI-driven 
lead identification and targeting 
that uses web scraping and simple 
prioritization. Gen AI’s advanced 
algorithms can leverage patterns 
in customer and market data 
to segment and target relevant 
audiences . With these capabilities, 
businesses can efficiently analyze 
and identify high-quality leads, 
leading to more effective, tailored 
lead-activation campaigns 
(see “A gen AI sales use case: 
Dynamic audience targeting and 
segmentation”).  
 
Additionally, gen AI can optimize 
marketing strategies through 
A/B testing of various elements 
such as page layouts, ad copy, 
and SEO strategies, leveraging 
predictive analytics and data-
driven recommendations to ensure 
maximum return on investment. 
These actions can continue through 
the customer journey, with gen 
AI automating lead-nurturing 
campaigns based on evolving 
customer patterns. —Within the sales motion, gen AI 
goes beyond initial sales-team 
engagement, providing continuous 
critical support throughout the entire 
sales process, from proposal to deal 
closure.  
 
With its ability to analyze customer 
behavior, preferences, and 
demographics, gen AI can generate 
personalized content and messaging. 
From the beginning, it can assist 
with hyper-personalized follow-
up emails at scale and contextual 
chatbot support . It can also act 
as a 24/7 virtual assistant for each 
team member, offering tailored 
recommendations, reminders, 
and feedback, resulting in higher 
engagement and conversion rates.  
 
As the deal progresses, gen AI can 
provide real-time negotiation 
guidance and predictive insights  
based on comprehensive analysis of 
historical transaction data, customer 
behavior, and competitive pricing.  
  —There are many gen AI use cases 
after the customer signs on the 
dotted line, including onboarding 
and retention. When a new customer 
joins, gen AI can provide a warm 
welcome with personalized 
training content , highlighting 
relevant best practices. A chatbot 
functionality can provide immediate 
answers to customer questions and 
enhance training materials for future 
customers.  
 
Gen AI can also offer sales 
leadership with real-time next-step 
recommendations and continuous 
churn modeling based on usage 
trends and customer behavior. 
Additionally, dynamic customer-
journey mapping can be utilized  to 
identify critical touchpoints and drive 
customer engagement.Bringing gen AI to life in the customer journey
There are many gen AI-specific use cases across the customer journey that can drive impact: 
5 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI Commercial leaders are optimistic—and reaping benefits
We asked a group of commercial leaders to provide their perspective on use cases and the role 
of gen AI in marketing and sales more broadly. Notably, we found cautious optimism across the 
board: respondents anticipated at least moderate impact from each use case we suggested. 
In particular, these players are most enthusiastic about use cases in the early stages of the 
customer journey lead identification, marketing optimization, and personalized outreach  
(Exhibit 1).
Exhibit 1
Estimated impact of use cases,¹ % respondents answering “signi/f_icant” or “very signi/f_icant”
1Senior executives in signi/f_icant global B2B and B2C sales and marketing organizations across a wide range of industries and company maturity levels were 
asked: Please share your estimated ROI / impact these tools would have if implemented in your organization.
Source: McKinsey analysisCommercial leaders are cautiously optimistic about gen AI use cases, 
anticipating moderate to signi/f_icant impact.
McKinsey & CompanyLead identi/f_ication
(real time, based on customer trends)
Marketing optimization
(A/B testing, SEO strategies)
Personalized outreach
(chatbots, virtual assistants)
Dynamic content
(websites, marketing collateral)
Up/cross-selling recs
(via usage patterns, support tickets)
Success analytics
(continuous churn modeling)
Marketing analytics
(dynamic audience targeting)
Dynamic customer-journey mapping
(identifying critical touchpoints)
Automated marketing work/f_lows
(nurturing campaigns)
Sales analytics
(predictive pricing, negotiation)
Sales coaching
(hyper-personalized training)60
55
53
50
50
45
45
45
35
30
25
6 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI These top three use cases are all focused on prospecting 
and lead generation, where we’re witnessing significant 
early momentum. This comes as no surprise, considering the 
vast amount of data on prospective customers available for 
analysis and the historical challenge of personalizing initial 
marketing outreach at scale.
Various players are already deploying gen AI use cases, 
but this is undoubtedly only scratching the surface. Our 
research found that 90 percent of commercial leaders 
expect to utilize gen AI solutions “often” over the next two 
years (Exhibit 2).
Almost never5
025
055
00
040
1020
1020
5020
6515Machine learning Gen AI
400
25Rarely Sometimes Often Almost always
Almost never Rarely Sometimes Often Almost alwaysWeb <year>
<Title>
Exhibit <x> of <x>
Extent to which commercial leaders feel their organizations are using machine learning / gen AI,¹
% of responses
Extent to which commercial leaders think their organizations should be using machine learning / 
gen AI,² % of responses
1Senior executives in signi/f_icant global B2B and B2C sales and marketing organizations across a wide range of industries and company maturity levels were 
asked: To what extent is your organization using ML / gen AI solutions?
2Q: How much do you think your organization should be using ML / gen AI solutions?
Source: McKinsey analysisCommercial leaders are already leveraging gen AI use cases—but most feel the 
technology is underutilized.
McKinsey & CompanyExhibit 2Our research found that
90 percent
of commercial leaders expect to utilize gen AI solutions “often” over 
the next two years.
7 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI Overall, the most effective companies are prioritizing and deploying advanced sales tech, 
building hybrid teams, and enabling hyper-personalization. And they’re maximizing their use of 
e-commerce and third-party marketplaces through analytics and AI. At successful companies, 
we’ve found: 
 —There is a clearly defined AI vision and strategy. 
 —More than 20 percent of digital budgets are invested in AI-related technologies. 
 — Teams of data scientists are employed to run algorithms to inform rapid pricing strategy and 
optimize marketing and sales.
 — Strategists are looking to the future and outlining simple gen AI use cases. 
Such trailblazers are already realizing the potential of gen AI to elevate their operations. 
Anticipating and mitigating risks in gen AI 
While the business case for artificial intelligence is compelling, the rate of change in AI 
technology is astonishingly fast—and not without risk. When commercial leaders were asked 
about the greatest barriers limiting their organization’s adoption of AI technologies, internal and 
external risk were at the top of the list. 
From IP infringement to data privacy and security, there are a number of issues that require 
thoughtful mitigation strategies and governance. The need for human oversight and 
accountability is clear, and may require the creation of new roles and capabilities to fully 
capitalize on opportunities ahead.Our research indicates that players 
that invest in AI are seeing a revenue 
uplift of 3 to 15 percent and a sales 
ROI uplift of 10 to 20 percent. 
88 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI The wa y forwar d: 
Six “ no r egr e ts” 
AI strat egies
T her e ar e six actions y ou can tak e in y our  compan y  t oda y  t o chart 
an AI tr ans f orma tion in sales and mark e ting.
5.
T rain y o ur sal es t eam on g en AI 
basics t o fuel exper imentation
Of er  w ork shops on gen AI fundamen tals 
t o giv e the t eam a be tt er  sense o f  po t en tial 
applica tions and the con /Cemdence t o begin 
e xperimen ting.1.
Conduct a g en AI audit of 
commer cial activities
E v alua t e mark e ting and sales t ech 
in fr as truct ur e and skill se ts; e xplor e 
ho w open-sour ce or  lo w-cos t t ech 
pla y er s could help y ou implemen t gen 
AI use cases.
4.
Launch a g en AI exper iment 
( or thr ee)
Pilo t tw o or  thr ee e x citing use cases in a 
tar ge t ed portion o f  the sales cy cle ( such as 
t op-o f - funnel). T r ack r esults and r e /Cemne f or  
br oader  implemen ta tion.2.
F orm a commer cial 
g en AI taskfor ce
Cr ea t e a cr oss - functional t eam (including , 
f or  e x ample, mark e ting , sales , pricing, and 
IT) t o e xplor e gen AI opport unities and 
pr essur e t es t applicability  o f  commer cial 
use cases.3 .
Identify l o w -hanging fruit in 
y o ur cust omer jo urne y
L ook f or  simple , high-impact , lo w-cos t, 
lo w-risk use cases ( such as aut oma ting 
pr ospecting outr each emails ) and put 
guar dr ails in place t o limit risk.
6 .
E sta blish g en AI guidelines for 
y o ur sal es t eam
P r ohibit input o f  sensitiv e cus t omer  da ta 
in t o gen AI t ools and se t a high bar  f or  
v erifying outputs, especially  wher e con t en t 
will be e xt ernally  f acing.
9 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AI In addition to immediate actions, leaders can start thinking strategically about how to invest in AI 
commercial excellence for the long term. It will be important to identify which use cases are table 
stakes, and which can help you differentiate your position in the market. Then prioritize based on 
impact and feasibility.
The AI landscape is evolving very quickly, and winners today may not be viable tomorrow. Small start-
ups are great innovators but may not be able to scale as needed or produce sales-focused use cases 
that meet your needs. Test and iterate with different players, but pursue partnerships strategically 
based on sales-related innovation, rate of innovation versus time to market, and ability to scale.
v v v
AI is changing at breakneck speed, and while it’s hard to predict the course of this revolutionary tech, 
it’s sure to play a key role in future marketing and sales. Leaders in the field are succeeding by turning 
to gen AI to maximize their operations, taking advantage of advances in personalization and internal 
sales excellence. How will your industry react?
Richelle Deveau is a partner in McKinsey’s Southern California office, and  Sonia Joseph Griffin is an associate partner 
in the Atlanta office, where Steve Reis  is a senior partner.
The authors wish to thank Michelle Court-Reuss, Will Godfrey, Russell Groves, Maxim Lampe, Siamak Sarvari, and Zach 
Stone for their contributions to this article.
10 AI-powered sales and marketing reach new heights with generative AIMcKinsey Growth, Marketing & Sales  
May 2023  
Copyright 2023 © McKinsey & Company  
Designed by Darby
www.mckinsey.com
 @McKinsey  
  @McKinsey