JOBS AND SKILLS
AI: 3 ways artificial intelligence is
changing the future of work
Aug 14, 2023
Listen to the article 8 min listen
Artificial intelligence (AI) has dominated the business agenda since chatbot ChatGPT
burst on to the scene in late 2022.
Generative AI is estimated to eventually automate millions of jobs, but its employment
benefits are harder to quantify.
Here are three ways that artificial intelligence will change the future of work, and why its
likely to augment rather than automate.
Since ChatGPT burst on to the scene in November 2022, generative artificial
intelligence (AI) has come to dominate the business agenda.
Boosts of a few percentage points in productivity are weighed against labour-
market disruptions, with Goldman Sachs estimating that generative AI will
eventually automate 300 million of today’s jobs.
Have you read?
The Future of Jobs Report 2023
The employment ben efits of generative AI are harder to quantify, but the Future of
Jobs report’s cohort of 800 global business leaders is well placed to shed light on
the future.Artificial intelligence (AI) will revolutionize the future of work.
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto
Mark Rayner
Insight Lead, Education, Skills and Learning, World Economic Forum
Here are three ways that AI will change the future of work:
1. AI will drive job creation
Businesses responding to our survey expect artificial intelligence to be a net job
creator in the coming five years. Nearly half (49%) of companies expect adopting
AI to create jobs, well ahead of the 23% of respondents who expect it to displace
jobs.
The ranks of AI-linked roles such as data scientists, big data specialists and
business intelligence analysts are expected to swell by 30 to 35%, with growth
nearer 45% in companies operating in China.
Employment gains are expected to be strongest in the automotive and aerospace
industry, where 73% of companies expect employment gains. The research, design
and business management services, information and technology services and
electronics sectors follow closely behind.
Have you read?
The future of jobs: 2 experts explain how technology is transforming ‘almost
every task’
The future of jobs in the age of AI, sustainability and deglobalization
Future of jobs 2023: These are the most in-demand skills now - and beyond
Though the outlook is sometimes mixed, only four of the 27 industries studied
expect net job losses. Workers in the oil and gas industry may be most exposed,
with 45% of companies expecting losses, 35% forecasting job creation and 20%
predicting no effect on employment.
The real estate, media, entertainment and sports and production of consumer
goods industries are the only other sectors to predict a negative outlook regarding
AI’s impact on employment.
A trickier question is who will benefit and who will be most at risk. A Chinese study
of the country’s manufacturing sector showed that artificial intelligence reduced
the demand for low-skilled labour across all regions and raised demand for high-
skilled labour in the east of the country.
But the picture may be shifting as AI masters increasingly complex tasks. In April,
researchers in the US found that highly-educated and highly-paid professions are
likely to be most exposed to generative AI.
2. Businesses will prioritize AI skills
AI and big data is the number one skills priority for companies with more than
50,000 employees. Beating out 25 other skill clusters spanning the range of hard
and soft skills needed in the workplace, the ability to boost business performance
using artificial intelligence is the number one focus of investment in skills training
for large companies responding to this year's Future of Jobs survey.
Across the full data sample, which spans small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
and large multinationals, AI and big data ranks behind only analytical and creative
thinking in skills strategies for the 2023 to 2027 period.
This is particularly striking as the C-suite executives responding to the survey only
ranked this skill cluster 16th in terms of its importance to workers today.
Exploiting artificial intelligence is a skill of the future.
Public-private cooperation on skills training will be key to making sure everyone is
swept along by the wave of increased productivity.
Initiatives such as TeachAI, a collaboration between the World Economic Forum,
Code.org and foremost leaders and experts on artificial intelligence, aims to
integrate AI and computer science skills in education to ensure that the next
generation of talent is prepared for the future of work.
Similarly, the Education 4.0 Alliance aims to surface promising examples of public-
private collaboration leveraging new technologies to develop future-ready skills.
At the same time UNESCO is offering thought leadership on the need for AI skills
in technical and vocational education and training – a crucial focus if the benefits
of AI are to be shared by all segments of the global labour market.
3. Tasks will be augmented, not automated
by AI
Despite technological strides forward, this year’s Future of Jobs report suggests
that bu sinesses are becoming more sceptical about the potential for artificial
intelligence to fully automate work tasks. Executives estimate that 34% of tasks
are already automated – just one percentage point ahead of the figure reported in
the Future of Jobs Report 2020.
Future expectations for automation are also being revised down, as markets climb
the human-machine landscape more slowly than previously anticipated.
Respondents to this year’s survey forecast that an additional 9% of operational
tasks will be automated in the next five years – a reduction of five percentage
points compared to expectations in 2020.
The difference is a growing consensus that artificial intelligence will augment
human performance rather than fully supplanting it. For example, a survey of AI
experts published in June last year showed that most managerial skills are likely
to be augmented rather than automated by AI.
Only information gathering and simple decision-making are likely to be fully
automated, and leadership and imagination skills will be largely unaffected by AI.
Impact of generative AI on the future of
work?
The next ed ition of the Jobs of Tomorrow report, in collaboration with Accenture,
will shed further light on which jobs will see the largest impacts from generative AI
– whether through automation, augmentation, or both. Watch this space – results
are due to be published at the Sustainable Development Impact Meetings in
September.
DISCOVER
How is the World Economic Forum ensuring the
responsible use of technology?
Show more
Some 75% of companies are set to have adopted AI technologies by 2027.
Meanwhile, 80% plan to accelerate automation during this period.
But the Future of Jobs Report 2023 suggests that humans won’t be left behind by
the AI revolution – an even greater fraction plan to invest in learning and training
on the job. After all, artificial intelligence skills are at the heart of the reskilling
revolution.
License and Republishing
World Economic Forum articles may be republished in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public License, and in accordance with our
Terms of Use.
The views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and not the World Economic Forum.
Stay up to date:
Jobs and Skills
Related topics:
Share:Follow
Jobs and Skills Artificial Intelligence
THE BIG PICTURE
Explore and monitor how Artificial Intelligence is affecting
economies, industries and global issues
CROWDSOURCE INNOVATION
Get involved with our crowdsourced digital platform to deliver
impact at scale
GLOBAL AGENDA
The Agenda Weekly
A weekly update of the most important issues
driving the global agenda
You can unsubscribe at any time using the link in our emails. For more details, review our privacy policy.
Subscribe today
More on Jobs and SkillsSEE ALL
4 layoff myths – and what one company did to ease a difficult transition
Johnny Wood
November 24, 2023
Is AI a friend or foe to workers? The answer depends on what we do today
Sander van't Noordende
November162023
Wh y creating a psychologically safe workplace is key to high performance in
uncertain times
Dustin Seale
November 9, 2023
The world’s best countries for remote working
Victoria Masterson
November 8, 2023
Wh at is the 'unexplained wage gap' and how can we close it?
Naoko Tochibayashi and Naoko Kutty
November 7, 2023
3 ways to avoid feeling lost in a new job
Eli Joseph
November 6, 2023
ABOUT US
Our Mission
Our Impact
Leadership and Governance
Our Partners
Sustainability
History
Careers
Contact Us
EVENTS
Events
Open Forum
MEDIA
Press
Subscribe to our press releases
Pictures
MORE FROM THE FORUM
Strategic Intelligence
UpLink
Global Shapers
Young Global Leaders
Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship
Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
New Champions
