See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/377336963
A Marketing Handbook A handy guide for
Students, Teachers and Industry Professionals
Book  · Januar y 2024
CITATIONS
0READS
124
1 author:
Shw eta Tewari
Day ananda Sag ar Univ ersity
7 PUBLICA TIONS    15 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Shw eta Tewari on 12 Januar y 2024.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file. A Marketing Handbook  
A handy guide for Students, Teachers and Industry Professionals    
 ©name2022  
 
All rights reserved  
 
All rights reserved by author. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted in any fo rm or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the author.  
 
Although every precaution has been taken to verify the accuracy of the information 
contained herein, the author and publisher ass ume no responsibility for any errors or 
omissions. No liability is assumed for damages that may result from the use of information 
contained within.  
First Published in Month 2022  
 
ISBN:  
 
Price: INR  299.00  
 
BLUEROSE PUBLISHERS  
www.BlueRo SEO NE.com  
info@bluer osepublishers.com  
+91 8882 898 898  
 
Cover Design:  
VV Rajan  
 
Typographic Design:  
Namrata Saini  
 
Distributed by:  BlueRose, Amazon, Flipkart  
    
 
Thank you all!  
 
There are many people who have contributed towards this book 
and we would like to offer our gratit ude towards them:  
 
Prof. Kumail Kirmani  
The students of Quriosity Club:  
(Dayananda Sagar University – School of Commerce and 
Management Studies)  
Our MBA Students:  
 Ritvika Pandey  
Praneetha Bekal  
Ashil Thomas  
Shreyas Raikar  
 
 
 
 
 
     1 Introduction  
“Master th e topic, the message, and the delivery.”  
-Steve Jobs, Co -Founder, Apple  
 
As we launch ourselves into 2022, we face the third year in which 
the pandemic has transformed our business reality. This reality has 
caused many an organization to tetter on the edge of oblivion. The 
acceleration of digital behaviour has only added to an already 
confusing arena. The true meaning of the acronym V -U-C-A 
(Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Uncertain) has begun to dawn in 
may.  
As the crisis refuses to go away, this is a year  for marketing and sales 
honchos to increase their commitment to accelerating 
transformation at an increased scale. With the widespread 
recognition of their impact on sales, outcomes, and growth, 
marketers have a new mandate to take centre stage in their s phere 
of work, connecting the dots across customer needs and data, 
business priorities, and the digital agenda to aggressively drive 
growth and create value. Marketing and sales operations are pivotal 
to the success or failure of organizations, more so now . Great 
changes are underway as technology empowers consumers, and 
social media has sparked new channels for informing, winning, and 
losing customers.  
Leadership would frown when marketing managers proposed 
marketing spending for branding, advertising and acquisition of 
customers. Marketing teams can drive business and move from a 
cost to a profit centre in the present context.  
Amidst the shift, there is an opportunity for marketing and sales 
personnel to indulge themselves in some creative heavy lifting. I n a 
VUCA world, complexity often throws up the opportunity. 
Marketing professionals need to be open to new ideas, seize the day 
and make substantive contributions to a growing business.  
The Deloitte Global Human Capital Trends, 2019, for leaders of 
the 21s t Century, indicates that new leaders, to be successful, need 
to combat a changing world - the influx of new technologies, 2 changing employee and customer expectations and an ability to keep 
pace with change. Markets can be lost and discovered at short noti ce. 
It is like the heady days of European exploration. A Europe 
emerging from the dark ages put its newfound energies into 
discovery and conquest and ruled the world for the next four 
centuries.  
The way brands speak to younger consumers, especially Gen Z, is 
taking centre stage and causing organizations to relook at their 
branding and advertising strategies. In many parts of the world,  a 
large number of that generation expects companies to take a stand 
on important social issues, and most say they are more willing to 
purchase products that they deem beneficial to society. But creating 
loyalty within Gen Z also requires authenticity; customers are 
watching if brands walk their talk. Just a few years ago, organizations 
drew competitive advantage from direct an d indirect networks, and 
now they need to build massive data networks. It is not about using 
data to drive operational efficiencies anymore but more about 
staying closely involved with the likes and dislikes of a customer.  
Maya Angelou, Civil Rights Activi st & Poet, says, I've learned that 
people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but 
people will never forget how you made them feel."  
Leading technology companies are using data graphs to personalize 
customer recommendations, update p roducts, optimize advertising, 
and more. The most successful examples —which include Amazon's 
purchase graph, Google's search graph, Facebook's social graph, 
Netflix's movie graph, Spotify's music graph, Airbnb's travel graph, 
Uber's mobility graph, and Lin kedIn's professional graph —leverage 
the ongoing collection of customer engagement data, coupled with 
proprietary algorithms, to outcompete rivals in every way, from 
product creation to user experience. Sales and marketing have 
moved beyond the physical to tracking a customer in a virtual world. 
It is a space that will continue to evolve as more individuals 
participate in sharing experiences on the internet. In the past, scope 
expansion was based on product -market extensions; now, it is driven 
by data graphs  and analytical competencies.  
What does this mean?  
This book on marketing and sales jargon and terms will aid almost 
anyone to get a grasp of change and critical drivers in the marketing 3 space and allow a keen observer to connect the dots, see patterns 
and make sound decisions.  
This book is essential to a broad spectrum of people, from college 
students to marketing professionals and even the celebrated 
homemaker.  
 
 
  4  
 
 
Glossary of Marketing  Terms  
In this section you will find all the marketing jargons w orth using 
them in your communications.  
 
 
  
5  
 
 
Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 
 
 
 
“Business need to go beyond the interest of their companies to the 
communities they serve.”  
—  Sir Ratan Tata   
6 0-9 Numbers  
301 redirect  
This is used for permanent  redirection  from  one web page  to 
another  web page."  
 
302 redirect  
Redirection  is the process  of navigating  visitors  from  one page  to 
another  on the website.  this is done  for temporary  situations  and 
permanent  redirections  use 301. 
 
404 error  
When  a visitor  navigates  on a web page  that does not exist,  this is 
the error  message  which  appears.  7 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 “Approach each customer with the idea of helping him or her 
solve a problem or achieve a goal, not of selling a product or 
service.”  
– Brian Tracy  
  
8 A 
AAA  
American  Academy  of Advertising.  An association  of educators,  
students,  and former  educators  in advertising.  
 
AAAA  
American  Association  of Advertising  Agencies.  An association  
whose  members  are ad agencies.  
 
ANA  
Association  of National  Advertisers.  An association  whose  
members  are advertisers,  i.e., companies  that advertise  their 
products  or services.  
 
Accordion  insert  
An ad inserted  in a magazine,  folded  with an accordion -style fold. 
 
Accumulation  
An audience -counting  method,  where  each person  expos ed to a 
specific  vehicle  is counted  once within  a certain  time period.  
 
Acetate  
Transparent  plastic  sheet  frequently  used for overlays  in ad layouts.  
 
Ad copy  
The printed  text or spoken  words  in an advertisement.  
 
Adjacencies  
Time  periods  immediately  befor e and after a television  program,  
normally  used as a commercial  break  between  programs.  
 
Adnorm  
A measure  of readership  averages  for print  publications  over a two-
year period,  used as a baseline  for comparing  specific  ads to an 
average.  
 
 
 9 Advance  premium  
A premium  provided  to a consumer,  on the condition  of some  later 
purchase.  
 
Advertiser  
The manufacturer,  service  company,  retailer,  or supplier  who 
advertises  their product  or service.  
A paid,  mediated,  form  of communication  from  an identifiable  
source,  designed  to persuade  the receiver  to take some  action,  now 
or in the future.  (This  definition  is based  on the following  study:  
Richards,  J. I., and Curran,  C. M. (2002).  Oracles  on 
"Advertising":  Searching  for a Definition.  Journal  of Advertising , 
Summer,  31(2), 63-77.) 
An organization  or person  who pays for the production,  execution,  
and placement  of an advertisement.  
 
Advertising  allowance  
Money  provided  by a manufacturer  to a distributor  for the purpose  
of advertising  a specific  product  or brand.  See, also, Cooperative  
advertising . 
 
Advertising  budget  
Money  set aside  by the advertiser  to pay for advertising.  There  are 
a variety  of methods  for determining  the most  desirable  size of an 
advertising  budget.  
 
Advertising  elasticity  
The relationship  between  a change in advertising  budget  and the 
resulting  change  in product  sales.  
 
Advertising  page  exposure  
A measure  of the opportunity  for readers  to see a particular  print  
advertisement,  whether  or not that actually  look at the ad. 
 
Advertising  plan  
An explicit  outline of what  goals  an advertising  campaign  should  
achieve,  how to accomplish  those  goals,  and how to determine  
whether  or not the campaign  was successful  in obtaining  those  
goals.  10 Advertising  research  
Research  conducted  to improve  the efficacy  of advertisi ng. It may 
focus  on a specific  ad or campaign,  or may be directed  at a more  
general  understanding  of how advertising  works  or how consumers  
use the information  in advertising.  It can entail  a variety  of research  
approaches,  including  psychological,  sociolo gical,  economic,  and 
other  perspectives.  
 
Advertising  specialty  
A product  imprinted  with,  or otherwise  carrying,  a logo or 
promotional  message.  Also called  a promotional  product.  
 
Advertorial  
An advertisement  that has the appearance  of a news  article  or 
editorial,  in a print  publication.  See Infomercial,  below.  
 
Advocacy  advertising  
Advertising  used to promote  a position  on a political,  controversial  
or other  social  issue.  
 
Affirmative  disclosure  
A disclosure  of information  in an advertisement,  required  by the 
Federal  Trade  Commission  or other  authority,  that may not be 
desired  by the advertiser.  This information  frequently  admits  to 
some  limitation  in the product  or the offer made  in the 
advertisement.  
 
Agate  line 
A measure  of newspaper  advertising  space,  one column  wide and 
1/14th  inch deep.  
 
Agency  commission  
The agency's  fee for designing  and placing  advertisements.  
Historically,  this was calculated  as 15 percent  of the amount  spent  
to purchase  space  or time in the various  media  used for the 
advertising.  In recent  years  the commission  has, in many  cases,  
become  negotiable,  and may even be based  on some  measure  of 
the campaign's  success.  
 
 11 AIDA  
Stands  for Attention,  Interest,  Desire,  and Action.  This is a 
historical  model  of how advertising  works,  by first getting  the 
consumer's  attention,  then their interest,  etc. 
 
Aided  recall  
A research  method  frequently  used to determine  what  consumers  
remember  about  an advertisement  they have  seen or heard.  
A measurement  technique  in which,  the respondent  is aided  with 
brands/  advertisements  as cues.  
 
Airbrush  
An artist's  technique  for creating  a smooth  gradation  of color.  It is 
often  used to cover  imperfections  in a photograph,  e.g., in a model's  
skin. 
 
 
Ala carte  services  
Rather  than provide  all advertising  services  for one price,  an 
agency  may provide  only the services  that a client  wishes  to 
purchase.  
 
Answer  print  
The final edited  version  (print)  of a television  commercial,  for 
approval  by the client.  It may still need  color  correction,  etc. 
 
Appeal  
The advertisement 's selling  message.  
 
Arbitron  
Television  and radio  rating  service  that publishes  regular  reports  
for selected  markets.  
 
Area  of dominant  influence  (ADI)  
A geographic  designation,  used by Arbitron,  that specifies  which  
counties  fall into a specific  televisi on market.  See, also, Designated  
Market  Area. 
 
Art proof  
The artwork  for an ad, to be submitted  for client  approval.  12 Artwork  
The visual  components  of an ad, not including  the typeset  text. 
 
Audience  
The number  of people  or households  exposed  to a vehicle,  without  
regard  to whether  they actually  saw or heard  the material  conveyed  
by that vehicle.  
The number  of people  or households  who are exposed  to a medium  
or a campaign.  
The total number  of people  who have the opportunity  to read an 
advertising  message.  
 
Audience  duplication  
The number  of people  who saw or heard  more  than one of the 
programs  or publications  in which  an ad was placed.  
 
Audilog  
A diary  kept by selected  audience  members  to record  which  
television  programs  they watched,  as a means  of rating  television  
shows.  Used  by A.C.  Nielsen.  
 
Audimeter  
An electronic  recording  device  used by A.C.  Nielsen  to track  when  
a television  set is in use, and to what  station  it is set. 
 
Audit  Bureau  of Circulations  (ABC)  
A company  that audits  the circulation  of print  publications,  to 
insure  that reported  circulation  figures  are accurate.  
 
Availability  
Advertising  time on radio  or television  that is available  for 
purchase,  at a specific  time.  
 
Average  Audience  (AA)  
The number  of homes  or persons  tuned  to a television  program  
during  an average  minute,  or the number  of persons  who viewed  
an average  issue of a print  publication.  
 
 13 Advertising  
Any form  of paid or public  service  presentation  and promotion  of 
ideas,  goods,  or services  by a sponsor.7  Though  "word  of mouth"  
adve rtising  (in which  consumers  tell one another  about  their 
experiences  with a product  or service)  is a well-known  
phenomenon,  advertising  usually  takes  the form  of mass  (as 
opposed  to interpersonal)  communication.  That  is, the advertiser  
buys space  or time to get a message  across  to a large  number  of 
people  whom  no one from  his or her organization  may know  or 
interact  with.  The defining  characteristic  of advertising  can be said 
to be its persuasive  nature.  It is not disinterested  dissemination  of 
information.  Rather,  it is designed  to convince  those  exposed  to it 
of the merits  of what  is being  sold. 
 
Advertising  Agency  Commission  
The percentage  of advertising  costs earned  by advertising  agencies  
for their services  to advertisers.  Standard  practice  has traditio nally  
set this commission  at 15 percent  of gross  media  expenditures  (time,  
talent,  facilities,  space,  etc.) and 
17.65  percent  of net advertising  production  expenses  for art work,  
photography,  typesetting,  engravings,  etc.2  These  "standard"  
figures  are, however,  often  subject  to negotiation.  
 
Aftermarket  
The market  which  is created  by the need  for new component  parts  
for a finished  product  already  in use. The sale of automobile  tires,  
batteries,  and air filters  is an example.  
 
Agent  
A person  or business  unit which  negotiates  purchases  or sales or 
both but which  does not take title to the goods  in which  it deals.  
Agents  commonly  receive  remuneration  in the form  of a 
commission  or fee. They  do not usually  represent  both buyer  and 
seller  in the same  transaction. 7 Agents  are similar  to brokers  except  
that agents  tend to have long term relationships  with their 
principals  whereas  brokers,  in general,  do not. 
 
All Commodity  Rate  
In transportation,  a rate applicable  regardless  of the nature  of the 
commodities
 shipped. 19 14 All Commodity  Volume  
One way in which  manufacturers  whose  products  are distributed  
through  supermarkets  and other  food stores  evaluate  the 
effectiveness  of their distribution  systems.  "Eighty  five percent  of 
ACV,"  for example,  means  that a product  is distributed  in stores  
which  represent  85 percent  of the sales volume  of all food store  
products  in an area.  It does not mean  that the product  is carried  by 
85 percent  of the stores  in an area.  
 
Arbitrage  
The buying  and selling  of the same  commodity,  security , or foreign  
exchange  at the same  time but in two or more  different  markets  to 
take advantage  of differences  in the prices  of the item in question  
in the markets.19  
 
 
Arbitron  
A market  research  service  owned  by SAMI/Burke,  Arbitron  
specializes  in measuring  local radio  and TV audiences  through  a 
paid,  diary  panel.  Audience  is estimated  in 15 minute  blocks  of 
time.15  
 
Auction  
Offering  an article  to the highest  of several  bidders.19  
 
Audits  
Audits  track  the movement  of products  to give manufacturers  the 
most  current  sales information  possible.  The two most  important  
are Nielsen  and SAMI.  Nielsen  monitors  retail  product  movement  
through  an audit  of beginning  and ending  inventory  plus 
purchases.  SAMI  is a middleman  audit,  monitoring  warehouse  
withdrawals  through  estimates  of shipments  from  warehouses  to 
retail  stores.15  
 
Audited  Circulation  - Circulation  that has been  verified,  usually  
by an independent  company.  The auditing  company  should  be 
nationally  or internationally  recognized , and the audit  period  must  
be as upto date as possible.  In India,  print  readership  is verified  by 
the ABC  (Audit  Bureau  of Circulation).  
 15 Average  Net Paid  Circulation  
Refers  to the number  of periodical  sold over a period  of time 
divided  by the number  of issues  published.  
 
ABC  (Audit  Bureau of Circulation)  
An organization  with publishers,  advertisers  and advertising  
agencies  as its members,  formed  for the purpose  of certifying  
circulation  figures  of its member  magazines  and newspapers,  which  
have  been  audited  by recognized  professional  accounting  firms.  
Reports  are released  once  in six months.  
 
Advertorial  
Paid for advertising  produced  in the editorial  style of the magazine  
or newspaper  in which  it appears  on the proviso  that it is clearly  
entitled  for “Advertisement”  or “Promotion”.  
 
AAAI  (Advertising  Agencies  Association  of India)  
The Advertising  Agencies  Association  of India  (AAAI)  is the 
official,  national  organization  of advertising  agencies.  It was 
formed  to promote  their interests  so that they continue  to make  an 
essential  and ever-increasing  contribution  to the nation.  One of its 
objectives  is to benefit  Indian  consumers  and to protect  their 
interests  by helping  ensure  that advertising  is honest  and in good  
taste.  
 
Accumulation  
A method  of counting  audiences  wherein  each person  expos ed to 
a vehicle  is counted  once,  in a given  time period  (also known  as 
cumulative  reach).  
 
Account  
A term  commonly  used within  the advertising  business  to refer to 
the corporate  entity  employing  an advertising  agency.  
 
Agency  of Record  (AOR)  
An advertising  agency  that coordinates  an advertiser's  promotion  
of several  products  handled  by more  than a single  agency.  
 
 
 16 Algorithm  
A defined  mathematical  process  that leads  to an assured  
development  of a desired  output  from  a given  input.  
 
ASCI  (Advertising  Standar d Council  of India)  
Advertising  Standards  Council  of India  (ASCI)  is a self-regulatory  
voluntary  organization  of the advertising  industry.  Its main  
objective  is to promote  responsible  advertising  thus enhancing  the 
public's  confidence  in Advertising.  
 
ASCI I (American  Standard  Code  for Information  
Interchange)  
This is the default  worldwide  standard  for the code numbers  used 
by computers  to represent  all the upper  and lower -case Latin  
letters,  numbers,  punctuation  etc. There  are 128 standard  ASCII  
codes  each of which  can be represented  by a 7 digit binary  number:  
0000000  through  1111111.  
 
Audience  Flow  
The movement  of the audience  between  programs  and stations.  By 
scheduling  programs  consecutively  that appeal  to similar  
audiences,  the networks  and local statio ns try to maintain  the same  
audience  across  time slots.  Awareness  raising  is often  the aim of a 
campaign  and is expressed  as a percentage  of the target  audience.  
There  are two types  of awareness:  spontaneous  or aided.  
 
AOTS  or Average  OTS  
Average  number  of times a consumer  is likely  to be exposed  to a 
message  in any medium  or media  (typically  expected  to be the level 
at which  campaigns  are effective).  
 
Awareness  
Penetration  of a product,  concept  or advertisement  into the 
conscious  mind.  Awareness -raising  is often  the aim of a campaign  
and is expressed  as a percentage  of the target  audience.  There  are 
two types  of awareness:  spontaneous  or aided.  
 
Accompaniment  
The objective  is to impart  field training  to the interviewer  so that 
they become  perfect  in underst anding  the sampling  methodology  17 involved  in the study,  administering  the questionnaire  and in 
recording  the responses.  
 
Ad Network  
Ad networks  (advertising  network,  banner  network,  online  ad 
network)  are advertising  companies  which  administer  ad sales,  
billing, serving  and collection  for web sites.  Ad networks  often  
aggregate  sites into specific  categories  or demographic  groups,  then 
sell ad inventory  to advertisers  either  to specific  sites within  the 
networks,  specific  categories  or demographics,  or via run of 
network  buys which  target  sites within  the network.  
 
ADSL  (Asymmetric  Digital  Subscriber  Line)  
ADSL  line is where  the upload  speed  is different  from  the 
download  speed.  Usually  the download  speed  is much  greater.  
 
App (Application)  
Short  for applicati on. Application  is a program  or a group  of 
programs  designed  for end users.  A killer  app, for example,  is an 
application  that surpasses  (i.e., kills) its competitors.  
 
Airport  Advertising  
A variety  of advertising  displays  are available  at airports,  ranging  
from  wall- mounted  dioramas  (backlit  wall posters)  to freestanding  
islands  or specially  built exhibits.  
 
Arterials  
Arterials  are major  connecting  roads  within  cities  or between  
towns.  
 
Audience  Delivery  
The size of an audience  exposed  to out of home  adver tising  usually  
measured  over one or more  weeks.  Audience  delivery  can be 
represented  using  several  expressions,  including:  a GRP  level,  
ratings  or gross  impressions.  
 
Alternative  Outdoor  Media  
Out-of-Home  media  that is used to create  customised  advertising  
programs,  generally  targeting  specific  consumer  audiences.  
Alternative  outdoor  media  includes,  but is not limited  to ambient  18 media  like: stadium/arena/speedway  signage,  airborne/airship  
displays,  marine  vessel  displays,  beach  panels,  ski resort  panels,  golf 
course  panels,  rest area panels,  bicycle  racks,  gas pumps,  parking  
meters  and postcards.  
 
Angled  
Out-of-Home  advertising  structures  are built for maximum  
visibility  to vehicles  approaching  them.  They  are classified  as 
angled  when  one end is set back more than 6' from  the other  end 
of the structure  as measured  along  the line of travel.  
 
Animation  
It involves  a special  treatment  such as moving  components,  flashing  
lights,  etc. used to gain added  attention  and awareness.  Animation  
is more  commonly  used on rotary,  permanent  or spectacular  type 
bulletins  (laws  permitting).  
Availability  (Avail)  
The available  media  space  for sale at any given  time.  It is common  
to all media.  
 
Angle  of the site to traffic  
Angle  of the site to traffic  refers  to the angle  at which  the face of 
the site is in comparison  to the flow of traffic  towards  the site. 
Average  Daily  Traffic  Count  
The outdoor  audience  is measured  by the number  of vehicles  
passing  a specific  site multiplied  by estimated  average  vehicle  
occupancy.  Traffic  counts  are available  from  State  Road  or 
Transport  Authorities  and estimates  of vehicle  occupancy  for 
different  types  of roads  are also available  from  the same  source.  All 
counts  provided  from  this information  should  be for one-way 
viewing.  Such  traffic  counts  do not include  pedestrian  audience  
which  may be significant  when  sites are within  a CBD  or at a retail  
shopping  location.  
 
Average  Viewer  
A respondent  who claims  to have watched  a TV programme,  the 
last instance  of 
viewing  being  within  the reference  period  excluding  the date of 
interview  i.e. yesterday  for a Daily  programme  and last seven  days 
for Weekly  programmes.  19 Average  Listener  
A respondent  who claims  to have  listened  to a radio  programme,  
the last instance  of listening  being  within  the reference  period  
excluding  the date of interview  i.e. yesterday  for Daily  programmes  
and last seven  days for Weekly  programmes.  
 
A/B  testing  
Is also called  split testing  where  one compares  2 versions  of ads or 
landing  pages  or webpages  or designs  to see which  performs  bette r. 
A method  in marketing  research  where  variables  in a control  
scenario  are changed  and the ensuing  alternate  strategies  tested,  in 
order  to improve  the effectiveness  of the final marketing  strategy  
Ab testing  (or split testing)  split testing  or ab testing  is an 
experimental  concept  which  involves  two variants.  These  variants  
are used for measuring  plus conductive  a comparative  market  
response  to each.one  can also measure  that traffic  or conversion  
rate for varied  web pages  which  have similar  content/inform ation  
as well as goal.  
Also referred  to as split testing,  is that the method  of examination  
2 version  of online  page,  email,  or different  promoting  plus and 
activity  the distinction  in performance.  Above  the fold the section  
that is visible  on the highest  half the net page.  
 
ABC  (Always  Be Closing)  
ABC  is about  strategizing.  It is connected  to the idea that all steps  
taken  by the representative  is attached  to the end goal of selling.  
A traditional marketing concept conveying the marketer should 
always be mo ving the customer to action.  
 
Accelerated  delivery  
Is meant  to deliver  adverts  to the audience  as quickly  as possible.  
 
Account  
Accounts  refer to a single  point  of information.  It holds  primary  as 
well as profile  background  information  of the client  or customer.it  
includes  information  like contact  information , preferred  bundle  of 
services , old transactions  and all details  relation  to the relationship  
between  the company  and customer.  
 
 20 Account  development  representative  (ADR ) 
A speciali st which  focuses  on attracting,  qualifying  and securing  
new leads  for higher  engagement , conversion  and nurturing  is 
called  an Account  Development  Representative  (ADR ). 
 
Account  executive  (AE) 
A sales specialist  who has a primary  responsibility  for more  than 
one customer  portf olio is called  an account  executive.  Their 
primary  responsibility  is to nurture  and focus  on company's  
relationship  with specific  accounts  and then paying  customers.  
 
Account -based  everything  (ABE ) 
Account -based  everything  (ABE ) or Account -Based Revenue  
(ABR) refers  to a coordinated  framework.  This customized  
framework  incorporates  100%  cooperation  of care and 
management  between  customers  plus key players  involved  in the 
process.  The entire  process  of lead generation  and after sales 
activities  across  multip le domains  like marketing,  sales,  finance,  
and product  development  are covered  under  this umbrella.  
 
Account -based  marketing  (ABM ) 
A strategic  framework  which  involves  qualified  individual  
prospects  or consumer  accounts  is known  as account -based  
marketing  (ABM ). This framework  is hyper  personalized  and very 
focused.  
 
Account -based  selling  (ABS ) 
Abs is mainly  for B2B selling  framework.  It means  account  based  
selling  or abs.it  refers  to treating  high value leads  or high value  
accounts  as cluster  of new market  in themselves.  Each  account  is a 
dedicated  resource  allocation  in themselves  with multi  point  
engagements.  
Accounts  payable  
Accounts  payable  means  an accounting  entry  which  denotes  a 
short  term  monetary  obligation.it  also includes  suppliers,  vendors , 
and other  service  providers.  
 
 
 
 21 Accounts  receivable  
The amount  of money  which  is yet to be received  from  customers  
is known  as accounts  receivable.  This is with reference  to an 
exchange  of product  or service.  
 
Accounts  structure  
A planned  sequence  of steps  involved  in setting  up a specific  
campaign  activity  
 
Actionable  
Insightful  and workable  actions  for specific  brands  
 
Actual  cost  per click  
Actual  cost per click:  it means  that the winner  of the bid does not 
pay the amount  they have bid upon,  but rather  the amount  bid by 
the second  highest  bidder.  
 
Actual  CPV  
Actual  cost per view, ACPV  is often  the amount  paid lesser  than 
the max.  CPV bid. 
 
Ad exchange  
Ad exchange,  just like stock  exchange  brings  together  buyers  and 
sellers  online  in an automated  manner  to buy ad inventory.  Real 
time auctioning  for ad spaces  on publisher's  websites  happen  in an 
ad exchange.  
 
Ad exten sions  
Any additional  information  along  with the ad content.  Eg: giving  
mobile  number  or website  link or app link or discount  coupons  with 
the ad 
 
Ad format  
Any form  of paid communication  which  includes  sponsored  
content,  in-mails,  text or display  ads 
 
Ad group  
Is a combination  of 2 or more  ads with similar  keywords  
 
  22 Ad impressions  
The no. of times  the ad is displayed  to a user. 
 
Ad scheduling  
Choos ing a specific  time and day of the week  to run your ads 
 
Ad server  
Is a technology  space  that allows  you to host your ads and give 
independent  reporting,  analytics  and verification  of your ads 
 
Ad stacking  
This is when  multiple  ads are served  within  the same placement.  
However , they are stacked  beneath  each other  so the advertiser’s  
message  is often  not viewable  
 
Ad unit  
An ad unit is one or more  Google  ads displayed  as a result  of one 
piece  of the Adsense  ad code 
Adrank  
Adrank  is the position  at which  the ad appears  in the search  engine  
results.  
 
AdRBT  
Ad ring back tone- it replaces  the ringing  tone with ad messages  on 
your mobile  device  via caller  tunes  
 
Ads 
Any kind of paid information  by a company  about  their product  or 
service  displayed  to the consumer  on digital  or non-digital  
platforms  
 
Advert  delivery  
Decides  the pace of showing  the ads to the target  audience.  
 
Advert  optimization  
Advert  optimization  is the act of choosing  what  the advertiser  
would  want  the advert  to do for them.  
 
Advert  scheduling  
Choosing  a specific  time and day of the week  to run your ads 23 Advertiser  bid rate  
It is the amount  the advertisers  are willing  to spend  on an advert  to 
achieve  the targeted  goal.  
 
Adverts  
It’s the new age lingo  for advertisement.  Also ads 
They  are the heart  and soul of the entire  marketing  exercise  which  
happens  on the platforms 
 
Adverts  bidding  
It is the way of Facebook  to channeli ze these  adverts  and deliver  
them  to relevant  users  
 
Adverts  placement  
It means  it means  that Facebook  can place  its ads on differ ent 
positions  on different  devices.  
 
Adverts  targeting  
After  making  the right  type of adverts  business  has to reach  out to 
the right  people,  it is critical  for success.  
 
Advocacy  
Consumer  experience  of satisfaction  or dissatisfaction  after 
purchase  they might spread  word  of mouth,  this is called  advocacy  
 
AdWords  
AdWords  is to create  and manage  one's  online  advertisements.  
 
AdWords  conversion  code  
Conversion  codes  is used for tracking  conversions  from  campaigns  
run through  Google  AdWords . 
 
Affiliates  
It’s a site where  highlights  the commercial  offers  made  by an 
affiliate  company.  
 
Affinity  audience  
It is a set of audiences  who are segregated  based  on their long term  
interest  types.  
 24 Affinity  score  
It is decided  upon  how often  the fan interacts  with the brand 's 
facebook  page.  
 
AIDA/ AIDCA  
It is a model  to win customer  it stands  for Awareness,  Interest,  
Desire, Commitment/ Conviction  and Action.  
A good rule of thumb to ensure your communications, selling or 
advertising plan motivates the consumer to act. Simila r to ABC.  
 
Amortization  
This refers  to debts  being  written  off on a fixed  schedule  or 
spreading  a write  - down  over time.  
 
Amplification  rates  
It shows  the number  of shares  or retweeted  
 
Analytics  
Analytics  is a branch  of technology  which  deals  with delvin g into 
data.it  derives  meaningful  patterns  and translates  them  into 
meaningful  insights  such as analyze s, forecasts  etc.it  is also intended  
to improve  business  decision  making.  
 
Anchor  store  
Anchor  store  is also called  as anchor  tenant  or key tenant,  ancho r 
store  is largest  store  in a mall are shopping  center.  
 
Anchor  text 
It is the hyperlink  text that can be either  internal  website  link or 
external  source.  
The hyperlinks  which  can be opened  by clicking  
 
Annual Recurring Revenue  (ARR)   
Refers  to the contrac ted value  which  is often  based  on revenue  
models  which  are subscription  based.  They are normalized  for one 
calend ar year.  
 
Apocalypse  
An event  which  leads  to destruction  
 25 App campaigns  
This is to be used when  one wants  to increase  their app downloads  
or encourage  people  to re-engage  with their app. 
 
App description  
Placing  a unique  value  proposition  and keywords  in the description  
of the app. 
 
App extensions  
It is a link provided  by the site by clicking  on the on the app 
extension  it directs  the user to download  the app. 
 
App installs  
This means  when  a user downloads  and an installs  takes  place  and 
the user successfully  opens  the app for the first time 
 
App keywords  
Are the keywords  to identify  to drive  potential  search  traffic.  
 
App title 
Meaning  the name  of your app 
 
App tracking  
After  the app is available  in app stores,  you can track  your app data 
on the number  of app downloads  and user profiles.  
 
Applause  rate  
Means  that number  of likes 
 
Applicant  tracking  system  (ATS)  
An applicant  tracking  system  or ats which  is a technical  
framework.it  looks  like a giant  excel  chart  which  is followed  to keep 
a track  of hiring.  
 
Application  program  interface  (API)  
API or application  programme  interface  
Is the contracted  value  which  is often  subscription -based.  The 
revenue s are normalized  for a single  calend ar year.  
 
 26 Apps  
An application  downloaded  by a user in his mobile  
 
AR 
It stand  for augmented  reality,  is a technology  of inserting  a virtual  
object,  text, image,  graphics,  audio  or video  on a real world  
situation.  
 
Artic le promotion  
It refers  to attracting  traffic  by submitting  SEO  optimized  articles  
to popular  article  submission  directories.  
 
Assisted  conversion  
It is the percentage  of users  who perform  an action  that is desried  
by the website  owner.  
 
Assisted  conversion  value  
Is the number  and value  of conversions  that the channel  assisted  
 
Assisted/last  click /1is the number  and value  of conversions  
that the channel  completed  
 
Auction  digital  
Is priced  based  on auction,  marketers  bid in auction  and price  is 
determined  based on bid as well as quality  score.  
 
Auction  insights  
It is use to see the information  about  other  bidders  who are 
participating  in the same  auction.  
 
Audience  analysis  
Audience  analysis  is a method  of gaining  a deeper  understanding  
on the existing  and potential  customers  of the particular  brand  to 
improvise  the marketing  strategy  
 
Audience  details  
Using audience  detail,  one is able to view their audience  
information.  
 
 27 Audience  insights  
Audience  insights  is a tool which  helps  the business  to learn  more  
about a certain  set of audience.  
 
Augmented  reality  
Is a technol ogy of embedding  or superimposing  a virtual  object, 
text, image,  graphics,  audio  or video  on a real-world  situation  or 
real world  environment.  
 
Authority  
Is a website  that is linked  to by many  websites  
 
Automatic  bid 
The automatic  bid id decided  by facebook  dynamically  on an 
auction  by auction  basis.  
 
Automatic  bidding  
It is a bidding  option  that enables  the platform  to auto-optimi ze 
bids for a campaign  that is selected  by the advertiser,  and budget 
on behalf  of the advertiser.  
 
Auxiliary  Websites /1Microsites  
Are auxiliary  websites,  which  are usually  about  a product  or a 
service  that provide  a separate  entity  for a brand.  
 
Average  CONTRACT  VALUE  (ACV)  
The average  contract  value  or acv is an averag e revenue  derived  from 
a single  customer.  This is limited  to a specific  period  of time.it  is called  
annual  contract  value  when  it is annualized  with average  purchase  
value  or APV , when  revenue  is not derived  based  on subscription.  
 
Average  order  value  
Can be formulated  by the sum of revenue  generated  divided  by a 
number  of orders.  
 
Average  Sale/Selling  Price  (ASP)  
Average  sales price  or selling  price  refers  to the average  price  of a 
specific  product  in specific  markets  or channels.  
 
 28 Awareness  
The consumer  is aware  of a brand,  has heard  of its name.  
 
Ad blocking  
The action  of exploitation  the package  to stop advertisement  from  
showing  on online  page.  
 
Ad space  
Is the realm  on the net page on that the advertisement  is placed.  
 
Adsense  
It’s a discourse  promoti on service  provided  by Google . when  you 
would  like to position  a commercial,  you will publish  it on various  
media  through  adsense  
 
Advertising  network  
It’s a corporation  which  will connect  advertisers  to websites  that 
need  to host advertisements.  
 
Affiliat e 
Affiliate  is usually  employed  in the retail  sector,  one company  
becomes  connected  with another  so as to sell its product  or services,  
earning  a commission  for doing  this. 
 
Affiliate  manager  
Someone  un agency  manages  the affiliate  publishers  on behalf  of 
associate  advertizer.  
 
Affiliate  promoting  
Affiliate  promoting  could  be a style of performance  based  mostly  
promoting  within  which  a business  rewards  one or a lot of affiliates  for 
every  traveler  or client  brought  by the affiliates  own marketing  efforts.  
 
Affiliate  merchandiser  
The advertiser  in associate  affiliate  promoting  relationship  and also 
the affiliate  merchant  is responsible  for implementing  a sales 
following  system  
 
 
 29 Affiliate  network  
An affiliate  network  could  be a cluster  of associated  firms  that 
generally  provide  compatible  or complementary  product  and can 
pass results  in one another.  
 
Affiliate  software  
A package  that, at a minimum,  provides  following  and reportage  
of commission -triggering  actions  from  affiliate  links.  
 
Alt text 
If a picture  cannot  be loaded , angular  position  text are displayed  
therein  portion.  
 
Animated  GIF 
A series  of graphic  pictures  in a very loop while  not sound  with a 
hard  and fast modified  frequency  that delivers  illustrative  
movement.  
Autoresponder  
A perform  of email  package  that facilitates  automatic  predefined  
reply  while  not user intervention.  
 
Absolute  advantage  
Production  of efficient  goods  or services  by individuals/  a set of 
group/  companies  /country  in lower  costs 
 
Adaptation  
The change  in something  that makes  it suitable  for a new purpose  
 
Advertising  
Marketing  a product  by having  public  attention  
 
Agent  
A person  who takes  money  and does the work  
 
Aggressive  exporter  
An organization  which  develops  marketing  strategies  for what  it 
intends  to do in international  markets 
 
Anthropology  
It is a study  of human  behavior  30 Area  organization  
Highly  marketing  oriented  organization  with stable  product  
 
Attitudes  and values  
It is a predisposition  towards  a person  or object  based  on more  
culture  values  that are the precursor  of behavior  
 
Algorithm  
It is a step by step process  with set of protocols  to follow  
 
Algorithm  update  
Any changes  made  to an algorithm  
 
Alexa  (Amazon  Alexa)  
It is an amazon  assistance  device  that any user can voice  command  
to do various  tasks 
Automation  
It is a task performed  by computer  repeated  by which  would  be 
normally  done  by human  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  31 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“Branding demands commitment: commitment to continual 
reinvention, striking chords with people to stir their emotions, and 
commitment to i magination. It is easy to be cynical about such 
things, much harder to be successful.”  
— Sir Richard Branson  
  
32 B 
Back  to Back  
Running  more  than one commercial,  with one following  
immediately  after another.  
 
Bait  Advertising  
Advertising  a product  at a very low price,  when  it is difficult  or even 
impossible  to obtain  the product  for the price  advertised.  
 
Barter  
Exchanging  merchandise,  or something  other  than money,  for 
advertising  time or space.  
A term used to indicate  that advertising  was paid for by the 
advertiser  using  goods  and services  rather  than cash.  
 
Ben Day  process  
A shading  or dot pattern  on a drawing.  
 
Billboard  
(1) An outdoor  sign or poster;  
(2) Sponsor  identification  at the beginning  or end of a television  
show.  
 
Billings  
Total  amount  charged  to clients , including  the agency  commission,  
media  costs,  production  costs,  etc. 
 
Bleed  
Allowing  a picture  or ad to extend  beyond  the normal  margin  of a 
printed  page,  to the edge of the page.  
 
Blow -in card  
An advertisement,  subscription  request,  or other  printed  card 
"blown"  into a print  publication  rather  than bound  into it. 
 
Bleed  Ad 
Refers  to an advertisement  that runs till the edge of the page and 
leaves  no margin.  33 Blueline  
A blue line drawn  on a mechanical  to indicate  where  a page will be 
cut. 
 
Body  copy  
The text of a print  ad, not including  the headline,  logo,  or subscript  
material.  
The main  copy,  other  than the headline,  which  appears  in a print  
advertisement.  
 
Boutique  
An agency  that provides  a limited  service,  such as one that does 
creative  work  but does not provide  media  planning,  research,  etc. 
Usually,  this refers  to a relatively  small  company.  
 
 
 
Brand  development  index  (BDI)  
A comparison  of the percent  of a brand's  sales in a market  to the 
percent  of the national  population  in that same  market.  
 
Brand  man ager  
Person  who has marketing  responsibilities  for a specific  brand.  
 
Brand  name  
Name  used to distinguish  one product  from  it's competitors.  It can 
apply  to a single  product,  an entire  product  line, or even a 
company.  
 
Bridge  
Transition  from  one scene  to another,  in a commercial  or program.  
 
Broadsheet  
Standard  size newspaper.  
 
Broadside  
A promotion  that is printed  on a single  large  sheet  of paper,  usually  
on only one side of the paper,  as opposed  to a tabloid  or other  off-
size newspaper.  
 34 Bulldog  edition  
An edition  of a print  publication  that is available  earlier  than other  
editions.  Usually,  this is the early  edition  of a large  circulation  
newspaper.  
 
Buried  position  
Placing  an ad between  other  ads in a print  publication,  so that 
readers  are less likely  to see it. 
 
Business -to-business  advertising  
Advertising  directed  to other  businesses,  rather  than to consumers.  
 
Bait  and Switch  
Bait advertising  is "an alluring  but insincere  offer to sell a product  
or service  which  the advertiser  in truth  does not intend  or want  to 
sell."  The practice  of placing  such advertising  and attempting  to 
"switch"  the consumer  once  in the store  to another  (more  
profitable)  product  through  disparagement  or various  other  tactics  
is illegal.24  
 
Bargain  Basement  
The lowest floor of a department  store  (often,  literally  the 
basement)  which  specializes  in merchandise  priced  lower  than in 
the store  as a whole.14  
 
Billings  (Advertising)  
The total charg es for space,  time,  production  and other  services  
provided  by the advertising  agency  to the client.2  
 
Brand  
A name,  term,  sign, symbol,  or design,  or a combination  of them  
which  is intended  to identify  the goods  or services  of a seller  and to 
differentiate  them  from  those  of competitors.7  
 
Break  Even  Analysis  
A technique  for determining  the volume of sales necessary  (at 
various  prices)  for the seller  to cover  costs or to break  even between  
revenue  and cost. Break  even analysis  is used to help set prices,  
estimate  profit  or loss potential,  and determine  costs  that should  be 
incurred.6  35 Broker   
See Agent.  
 
Burke  
Recently  merged  with SAMI,  Burke  is a major  supplier  of research  
and perhaps  the largest  custom  research  supplier.  Through  phone  
interviews,  personal  interviews,  mail surveys,  group  discussions,  
concept  tests and product  tests,  Burke  conducts  awareness,  
trial,/1and usage  studies  as well as advertising  research.15  
 
Business  Format  Franchising  (as distinguished  from  
product  or trademark  franchising)  
A type of franchise  relationship  where  the franchisor  provides  the 
franchisee  with the total system for doing  business.  Not only does 
the franchisee  receive  rights  to use the trademark  of the franchisor  
but also conducts  business  under  specific  guidelines  and standards  
covering  operations,  marketing,  and all other  aspects  of the 
business.  Some  well-known examples  of format  franchising  are fast 
food restaurants,  motels,  and car rentals.  Business  format  
franchising  accounted  for approximately  26% of franchise  sales in 
1985.  
 
Buying  Allowance  (Off Invoice  Allowance)  
A trade  promotion  consisting  of a short  term  offer of a stated  
reduction  in price  for a certain  quantity  of a product  purchased.21  
 
Buying  Center  
The decision  making  unit involved  in a specific  organizational  
buying  decision.  (See DMU.)  
 
Buying  Group  (also  Buying  Office  or Resident  Buying  
Offic e) 
An organization  representing  a group  of non-competing  stores  
formed  primarily  for buying  merchandise.  The group  may be 
independent,  store  owned,  or may own the stores.14  
 
Banking  
Banking  is the free commercial  time available  to a sponsor  for 
taking  spots on another  program  (normally  in the same  station/  
category).  36 Back  Checks  
Planned  and unplanned  checks  conducted  by MRUC  and its 
representatives  to maintain  hygiene  and recommended  
improvements.  
 
Base  
The survey  universe,  sub-universe  or primary  target  group on 
which  an analysis  is based  – e.g. Males  25+ Years.  
 
Blockbuster  
A program  on TV that far exceeds  average  ratings,  especially  
recently  released  movies.  
 
Brand  Development  Index  
This refers  to the ratio  of the percentage  of a brand's  sale in a 
market  to the target  population  percentage  in the same  market.  
BDI =/1% of brand's  total sales in a given  market  
/1--------------------------------------------------  
/1% of total population  in a given  market  
 
Burst/  Flighting  
Scheduling  period  characterized  by the concentrated  advertising  in 
a short  period  of time,  usually  followed  by a period  of no activity.  
 
Brand  Recall  
Brand  Recall  is the extent  to which  a brand  name  is recalled  as a 
member  of a brand,  product  or service  class.  
 
Business -to-Business  Advertisin g (B2B)  
Advertising  directed  at corporate  decision -makers  and 
professionals  rather  than at consumers.  
 
Booster  Sampling  
Booster  sampling  refers  to a situation  when  the first stage  of 
contacting  / listing  has not yielded  or is not likely  to yield  sufficient  
number  of successful  interviews  as desired  by research.  The 
objective  of booster  sampling  is to reduce  field time and increase  
chances  of successful  interviews.  We can do these  interviews  
anywhere  based  on the target  definition  given  by the research.  
 37 Briefing  
Briefing  is a detailed  explanation  of all the questions  in a 
questionnaire.  The briefing  is done  to make  the interviewers  
understand  each and every  aspect  of the project  viz., the type of 
project,  the objective  of the study,  target  respondent,  sampli ng 
methodology  involved  in the study,  type of questionnaire,  
administering  the questionnaire  and responding  of responses.  
 
Blog  (weB  LOG)  
A blog is basically  a journal  that is available  on the web. The 
activity  of updating  a blog is "blogging"  and someone  who keeps  a 
blog is a "blogger."  Blogs  are typically  updated  daily  using  software  
that allows  people  with little or no technical  background  to update  
and maintain  the blog.  
 
Bluetooth  
A technology  that allows  voice  and data connections  between  a 
wide range  of mobile  and stationary  devices  through  short -range  
digital  two-way radio.  For instance,  it specifies  how mobile  phones,  
Wireless  Information  Devices  (WIDs),  computers  and PDAs  
interconnect  with each other,  with computers,  and with office  or 
home  phones.  
 
Blogosphere  or Blogsphere  
The current  state of all information  available  on blogs  and/or  the 
sub-culture  of those  who create  and use blogs  
 
Bug 
The problem  with computer  software  or hardware  that causes  it to 
malfunction  or crash.  
 
Backlight  Units  (Backl it) 
Advertising  structures  which  house  illumination  in a box to throw  
light through  translucent  advertising  printed  on vinyl  for a higher  
visibility  and extended  night  viewing.  
 
Back -to-Back  Sign  
An off-premise  sign consisting  of two displays,  facing  orien ted in 
the opposite  directions  with not more  than two faces  per sign 
facing.  38 Break  Position  
A broadcast  commercial  aired  between  two programs.  
 
Broadcast  Spectrum  
An entire  range  of frequencies  used for radio  and television  
transmission.  
 
Banners  
Banners  can be stretched  out on exterior  or interior  walls  or hung  
from  ceilings.  This product  is also a great  advertisement  at a 
bargain  price.  
Beach  Advertising  
Advertising  panels  affixed  to lifeguard  towers  or other  structures  
located  at or near a beach.  
Billboa rd, aka Hoarding  
A large  signboard  used for displaying  advertisements.  It comes  in 
many  sizes and structures.  A hoarding  may be constructed  on top 
of a building  or on steel structure.  A hoarding  may carry  single  or 
multiple  (rare)  ads. Hoardings  are furthe r classified  as: Hoarding,  
Unipole,  Gantry,  Public  Utility  etc. 
 
Blocked  Panel  
An Out of Home  advertising  structure  whose  view has been  
obstructed  on a more  or less permanent  basis.  
 
Bulletin  Structures  
A type of outdoor  advertising  meant  for longterm  use and works  
best where  traffic  is heavy  and visibility  is good.  They  carry  printed  
or painted  messages,  are created  in sections,  and are brought  to the 
site where  they are assembled  and hung  on the billboard  structure.  
 
Bus Panel  
Advertising  panels  attached  to the exterior  or interior  of a public  
bus. 
 
Bus Shelter  Displays  
Posters  positioned  as an integral  part of a free standing  covered  
structure  at a bus stop. 
 
 39 Bus Shelter  Panel  (Transit  Shelter  Panel)  
A standard  backlit  advertising  panel  that is an integr al component  
in free-standing  structures  located  at bus stops.  
 
B2B  
This acronym  is used when  two businesses  or organizations  are 
getting  into relationship  building  or engagement  
 
B2C  
B2C is is used fro business  to consumer  model  of selling,  
relationship  building  or engagement.  
 
B2C2B 
B2c2b  is used for business -to-consumer -to-business.  this is adopted  
for selling , relationship  building  or engagement.  
 
Back  order  
Backorder  means  a specific  quantity  of an item is temporarily  out 
of stock  and could  not be filled by the requested  date and time by 
the supplier.  
 
Backlink  checker  
Search  engine  use backlinks  as an indicator  of the site. 
 
Backlinks  
Backlinks  is a process  of getting  hyperlinks  not owned  by a brand,  
from  external  pages  that are to link to a webpage  of their website.  
 
Bandwidth  
Bandwidth  refers  to the capacity  to deal with a specific  situation.  
 
Bant  framework  
Bant  is an acronym  used by sales representative.  This is majorly  
used to determine  if prospects  have  the apt budget , authority , need  
and timeline  in parity  with their purchasing  power.  
 
Bar code  
Bar code is a machine -readable  code it help you to track  inventory  
doing  in and out of the store.  Barcodes/  QR Codes is is a method  
of off-device  advertising  40 Baseline  
A baseline  is the minimum  level or starting point  for further  
measurements  which  can be a base for analysis , forecasting  and 
performance  improvement  formulation.  
 
Basho  email  
Basho  email  is a sequence  for customer  engagement.it  aims at 
multiplying  likelihood  and positive  response  from  prospects . 
 
Behavior  analysis  
It is the process  of collecting,  analyzing  and reporting  aggregate  
data about  which  pages  a website  visitor  visits  and in what  order.  
 
Behavior  targeting  
Which  includes  online  behavior , digital  activit ies, device,  operating  
system  used, etc., for targeting.  
 
Bid adjustments  
Advertisers  can adjust  their bid based  on device,  location,  and 
timing.  
 
Bidding  wars  
A situation  in which  two or more  parties  repeatedly  outbid  each 
other  as they compete  to purchase  something  
 
Big box store  
Big box store  its name  pretty  says its in a square  or rectangular  
shaped  building  and its part of major  retail  chain.  
 
Big data  
The big data refers  to massive  data set to analyze  customer  
behaviors,  demographics,  social  information  and more.  
 
Bio 
Bio is an acrony m of biography  
 
Black  Hat SEO  
Spamdexing,  search  engine  poisoning,  web spam  are some  
commonly  known  names  of black  hat SEO  
 41 Blog  comment  spam  
The spammer  to get backlinks  writes  a certain  script  which  targets  
few specific  websites.  
 
Blog  posts  
Blogs  are informed  websites  displayed  in a reverse  chronological  
order.  
 
Bofu /1button 
Also known as Bottom -Of-The-Funnel  refers  to the last stage  in a 
buying  process  where  leads  are about  to get converted  to 
customers.  
 
Bonus  
A bonus  is an additional  compensation  which is awarded  on top of 
a standard  fees for outstanding  performance  or achieving  targets  in 
business/organizations.  
 
Boost  posts /1 
A boosted  post is a post to your page's  timeline  that you can apply  
money  to in order  to boost  it to an audience  of your choos ing. 
 
Bot activity  
This is when  robots  carry  out similar  actions  by masking  ip address  
through  advanced  algorithms.  
 
Bots  
An autonomous  program  on the internet  or anther  network  that 
can interact  with system  or users.  
 
Bounce  rate  
Bounce  rate is the percen tage of single -page  visits.  
The attribute  that represents  proportion  of tourists  un agency  
enters  and leave  while  not viewing  alternative  pages  within  the 
same  web site. 
 
Brand  
It is the identification  of your product/service's  logo,  trademark,  
name,  symbo l, etc, based  on a mix of various  attributes  that can be 42 tangible  or intangible,  that can be put together  to create  value  for 
both the organization  as well as the customers.  
 
Brand  ambassador  
A CEO , celebrity,  paid affiliate,  even loyal  customers  who 
repre sents  the essence  of a brand  out in the market  spreading  the 
brands  message,  mission,  attributes,  etc can be a brand  
ambassador.  
 
Brand  archetype(s)  
They  are specific  brand  categories,  that share  a common  
recognizable  traits,  behaviors,  attitudes,  etc. Identifying  these  
archetypes  can help us better  target  the specific  audience.  
 
Brand  architecture  
The relation  and interaction  between  a company's  individual  
brands,  based  on the functions  of each (brand  name,  brand  image,  
brand  identity,  etc.).  Helps  in bran d differentiation  and 
management.  
 
Brand  assets  
These  are various  elements  such as the fonts,  colors,  animations,  
etc, that come  together  to give a unique  and distinctive  appearance  
of the brand.  Helps  in developing  a brand  identity.  
 
Brand  attributes  
They  are the basic  characteristics  or features  or qualities  that make  
a brand  stand  unique  and favored  in the minds  of the customers.  
 
Brand  audit  
They  are inspections  into a brand  to uncover  its performance,  
insights,  position,  etc in order  to identify  its strength,  weaknesses  
and opportunities,  to develop  more  effective  initiatives.  
 
Brand  awareness  
This is one of the primary  goal in marketing  where  the brand  is 
developed  to a position  where  your audience  is able to identify  your 
brand  in a crowded  market.  
Brand awareness /1the extent  to which  consumers  are familiar  with 
the quantities  or image  of a particular  brand  of goods  or services.  43 Brand  discovery  
It is a deeper  examination  of a brand  to better  understand  the 
brands  strengths  and weaknesses,  and to know  what  the customers  
value  most  that the brand  offers  and why. 
 
Brand  equity  
The financial  and non-financial  asset value  of a brand,  gathered  
from  all relevant  stakeholders,  that is leading  to the demand  of the 
brand  in the market.  
 
Brand  experience  
This talks about  the experiences  or interactions  by a stakeholder,  
involving  the brand.  A good  brand  experience  is key to build  a 
strong  brand.  
 
Brand  extension  
This talks about  the brand  entering  into new markets,  on demand,  
or by creating  demand.  
 
Brand  gap 
This should  be avoided.  Bridging  the gap between  the 
organization's  business  and creative  strategies  will help improve  the 
brand  identity  and customer  connections.  
 
Brand  guidelines  
It talks about  the code under  which  the brand  operates.  It is more  
like a rulebook  containing  the basic  principles  of the brands  
mission,  vision,  attributes,  etc. 
 
Brand  harmonization  
Ensuring  consistency  in all products  in a particular  brand  range  
like name,  identity,  positioning,  etc to bridge  the gap between  what  
is promised  by the brand  and what  the customers  expect.  
Brand  health  
The process  and controls  implemented  to protect  advertsers  from  
having  their ads appear  alongside  content  that could  damage  their 
brand  and reputation.  
 
  44 Brand  hierarchy  
It is the order/arrangement  according  to importance  of individual  
brands  based  on size, performance,  financial  value,  puplic  
recognition,  etc, from  that of its sub brands.  
 
Brand  identity  
This includes  all those  elements  such as brand  name,  logo,  tagline,  
messages,  etc, that contribut es to creating  a good  position  and 
appeal  in the customers  minds.  
 
Brand  image  
This depends  on how much  we as a brand  satisfy  the customers’  
expectations.  Creating  a good  brand  image  helps  in creating  a 
strong  brand.  It is the customers  take from  your bran d. 
 
Brand  management  
A continuous  process  of analyzing  and execution  of activities  and 
techniques  to maximize  the overall  value  of the brand  over time.  
 
Brand  map  
A visual  manifestation,  providing  an overall  view of all the inner -
workings  of a brand,  inclu ding the purpose,  employee  roles,  
pricing,  etc. 
 
Brand  mark  
Part of the brand  that cannot  be expressed  in words  or spoken.  
They  can be symbols,  images,  etc. Example:  brand  marks  of nike,  
puma,  etc. 
 
Brand  mnemonic  
A mnemonic  is a learning  technique  that aids memory.  
 
Brand  name  
Part of the brand  that can be expressed  in words  or spoken.  
Example:  brand  names  like dettol,  tide, etc. 
Brand  personality  
The unique  traits  that are manifested  to customers  through  various  
forms  of communications,  and even through  packaging  and 
advertising,  in order  to drive  differentiation  and customer  
connection.  45 Brand  positioning  
In order  to create  an unique  impression  in the customers  minds,  a 
distinctive  space  is selected  after careful  evaluation,  which  the 
brand  would  occupy  in its competitive  environment.  
 
Brand  preference  
The act of the customer  where  he/she  chooses  one brand  over the 
other.  
Brand  safety  referring to channels  and practices  meant  to help 
advertisers  avoid  any placement  or context  that could  potentially  
harm  the advertiser's  brand  or reputation.  
 
Brand  story  
A brand  story  is a cohesive  narrative  that encompasses  the facts 
and feelings  that are created  by your brand  [or business,  if you 
prefer]  
 
Brand  strategy  
Basically,  a long-term plan,  that guides  a businesses ’ brand  
development  in all its stages.  
Brand  strategy  brand  strategy  is a long-term planning  technique  
that is utilized  to develop  the brand  image  or even the business  
keeping  the objectives  of long-term in mind  
 
Brand  valuation  
It is an estimation  of all the financial  values  of a brand/company,  
taking  into account  all its tangible  and intengible  assets.  It is mainly  
used for brand  strategy.  
 
Brand  value  
It talks about  the true qualitative  features/attributes  that the brand  
offers,  through  its quality,  messa ge, purpose  and promises,  which  
guides  its various  decisions.  
 
Branding  
A perfect  mixture  of all techniques/attributes  in order  to make  the 
product/service  exactly  the way that it satisfies  the customers ’ 
needs,  compared  to its competition.  
  46 Branding  agenc y 
They  perform  strategic  brand  building  and management,  and 
perfectly  positions  it in the market  as well as in the minds  of the 
customers,  rather  than persuading  them  through  talks and offers.  
 
Breadcrumbs  
A breadcrumb  is a list of internal  links in a hierarchical  form  that 
allows  users  to quickly  navigate  back to a previous  node  or section  
in any website.  
 
Brick  and click  
Brick  and click this term is used for retailers  that integrate  their e-
commerce  site and there  traditional  brick -and-mortar  stores.  
 
Broad keywords  
A keyword  option  that allows  your ad to show  when  someone  
searches  for that keyword,  variation  of it, as well as other  related  
topics.  
 
Broad  match  modifier  
Is a set of keywords  with '+' or '-' symbol.  
 
Broad -to-narrow  
Meaning  start with broad  keyword  and then add modifier  and 
phrase  match  and exact  keyword.  
 
Broadband  connections  
Broadband  is the transmission  of wide bandwidth  data over a high 
speed  internet  connection.  
 
Browser  
A computer  program  with graphical  user interface  for dispalying  
and navigating  between  web pages.  
 
Browser  data  
Refers to data collected  on a user's  browser  about  their browsing  
activities . 
 
  47 Browser  toolbar  
Toolbars  are add-ons that enhance  the functionality  of web 
browsers.  
 
Bulk  
Bulk refers  to distributing  or buying  a large  quantities  of raw 
materials  such as coal iron and grains.  
 
Bumper  ads 
Bumper  ads are lightweight,  non-skippable  video  ads up to 6 
seconds  long 
 
Bundled  pricing  
Bundled  pricing  is a strategy  were  companies  make  bundle  
together  a package  of goods  and services  to sell at a lower  price.  
 
Business  development  representative  
A business  development  representative  is someon e who specializes  
in sales.  his/her job requirement  is to focus  on finding  new 
prospects , establishin g sustainable  relationships  and refreshing  
pipeline  of sales.  
 
Business  Intelligence  (BI)  
Refers  to primarily  interpreting  data to come  upto informed  
solutions.  
 
Buyer  
A buyer  is someone  who is an individual  who purchases  a product  
or subscribes  to a service  of a specific  organization.  
 
Buyer personas  
Is a fictional  representation  of your ideal  client  or target  audience.  
 
Buying  cycle  
Is the process  a customer  goes through  when  purchasing  a product  
or service  
 
Buying  intent  
Buyer  intent  is about  analyzing  the likelihood  of a consumer  buying  
a product  or service.  This inference  can be made  from  online  48 browsing , consumption,  document  downloads  and event  
participation  or responses.  
 
Buying  model  
These  are mainly  four different  pricing  models  for display  ads. 
 
Buying  signal  
A buying  signa  is more of a clue from  the buyer  regarding  his/her  
positivi ty towards  purchase.for  example , signing  a contract.  
 
B2B  
The framework  that accom modates  exchange  of product,  services  
or info among  business  parties.  
 
B2C  
The framework  that accommodates  businesses  to sell a product  or 
services  on to shoppers  with none  intervention  of middlemen.  
 
Bandwidth  
The volume  of data which  will be transmitted  among  a hard and 
fast quantity  of time (measured  in KBPS/MBPS ). 
 
Banner  ad 
A style of advertising  in a very rectangular  graphic  show  of an 
internet  site or web pages  usually  in type of image.  
 
Banner  blindness  
A internet  users  behavior  in search  of data by ignoring  present  
banner  ads tho' they're  helpful  from  time to time in hunt.  
 
Banner  exchange  
An net advertising  network  that accommodates  swapping  of 
banner  ads among  its members  for credits , and awards  credit  on 
every  click.  
 
Barter  
The trade  framework  within  which  merchandise  and services  
directly  changed  in sort of dealings  amoung  the parties.  
 
 49 Beyond  the banner  
Online  advertising  not involving  normal  gif and jpeg banner  ads. 
 
Blog  
A blog or a web journal  wherever  a personal  or a gaggle  furnishes  
there  activities,  thoughts,  experiences  in written  account  order.  
 
Burstable  information  
Measure  a feature  from  service  suppli er to extend  network  
bandwidth  dynamically  to accommodate  serious  network  traffic.  
 
Button  ad 
A graphical  advertising  unit, smaller  than a banner  ad. 
 
Buzzword  
A stylish  word  or a phrase  that's  well-liked  for a fundamental  
quantity  that won’t to impress  a personal  or a gaggle.  
 
Balance  of payments  
Calculation  of all economic  transactions  that happen  between  one 
country  and other  country  
 
Barter  exchange  
Of products  between  people  without  money  
 
Basis  trading  
The difference  to New York future,  either  on or off 
 
Bill of lading  receipt  
Given  by shipping  company  for shipping  the goods.  
 
Bills  of exchange  
It is an unconditional  order  in writing , addressed  by one person  to 
another  person  to pay on demand  at a fixed  or determined  future  
data.  
 
Broker  
A person  who plays a vital role in between  a buyer  and seller  in a 
commodities  or services  with a view to achieving  a sale or benefits.  
 50 Brussels  nomenclature  
Grouping  articles  aimed  at conventional,  'mainly  according  to their 
material  composition  into a simplified  classification  system  for 
traffic  administrations  
 
Budget  
An amount  of money  kept aside  for total expenditure  
Bot 
It is a automated  program  which  revisits  the websites  
 
Bread  crumbs  
The navigation  that is made  by which  the user searches  in a website  
 
Black  hat 
Unethical  digital  marketers  that break  search  engine  guidelines  
 
  51 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
You can be a business that lets the product do the talking, and 
thinks about giving back. A conscious business. I think India needs 
that. India needs a lot of  big businesses, which are conscious about 
what is happening around them.  
— Nithin Kamath, Founder and CEO, Zerodha  
  
52 C 
CBBB  
Council  of Better  Business  Bureaus.  A national  organization  of 
local  business  bureaus.  
 
Camera -ready  art 
Artwork  that is in sufficien tly finished  form  to be photographed  for 
printing.  
 
Caption  
(1) An advertisement's  headline;  
(2) The text accompanying  an illustration  or photograph.  
 
Car card  
A poster  placed  in buses,  subways,  etc. Also called  a Bus card.  
Card  rate  
Media  rates  published  by a broadcast  station  or print  publication  
on a "rate  card."  This is typically  the highest  rate charged  by a 
vehicle.  
 
Category  development  index  (CDI)  
A comparison  of the percent  of sales of a product  category  in a 
market,  to the percent  of population  in that market. 
 
Cease -and-desist  order  
An order  by the Federal  Trade  Commission  requiring  an advertiser  
to stop running  a deceptive  or unfair  advertisement,  campaign,  or 
claim.  
 
Chain  break  
A pause  for station  identification,  and commercials,  during  a 
network  telecast. 
 
Channels  of distribution  
The routes  used by a company  to distribute  its products,  e.g., 
through  wholesalers,  retailers,  mail order,  etc. 
 
  53 Chrome  
A color  photographic  transparency.  
 
Classified  advertising  
Print  advertising  that is limited  to certain  classes  of goods  and 
services,  and usually  limited  in size and content.  
 
Claymation  
An animation  method  that uses clay figurines.  
 
Clearance  
The process  by which  a vehicle  reviews  an advertisement  for legal,  
ethical,  and taste standards,  before  accepting  the ad for 
publication.  
 
Client  
The ad agency's  term  for the advertisers  it represents.  
An organization  that employs  an advertising  agency  to create  
advertisements.  
 
Closing  date  
The day final copy  and other  materials  must  be at the vehicle  in 
order  to appea r in a specific  issue or time slot. 
 
Coated  stock  
Paper  with a slick and smooth  finish.  
 
Coincidental  survey  
A survey  of viewers  or listeners  of broadcast  programming,  
conducted  during  the program.  
 
Cold  type  
Refers  to most  modern  typesetting  methods,  such as 
phototypesetting,  because  they do not involve  pouring  hot molten  
metal  into molds  for different  type fonts.  
 
Collateral  materials  
Sales  brochures,  catalogs,  spec sheets,  etc., generally  delivered  to 
consumers  (or dealers)  by a sales person  rather  than by mass  media.  54 These  materials  are considered  "collateral"  to the sales message  
delivered  by the sales person.  
 
Collectibles  
A type of premium  that consumers  may desire  to have  as a part of 
a greater  collection  of similar  goods.  
 
Color  proof  
An early  full-color  print  of a finished  advertisement,  used to 
evaluate  the ad's final appearance.  
 
Color  separation  
A full-color  ad normally  is generated  through  printing  of four 
separate  colors:  yellow,  cyan,  magenta,  and black.  The color  
separation  consists  of four separate  screens;  one for each of those  
four colors.  
 
Column  inch  
A common  unit of measure  by newspapers,  whereby  ad space  is 
purchased  by the width,  in columns,  and the depth,  in inches.  For 
example,  an ad that is three  standard  columns  wide and 5 inches  
tall (or deep)  would  be 15 column  inches.  
 
Combination  rate  
A special  media  pricing  arrangement  that involves  purchasing  
space  or time on more  than one vehicle,  in a package  deal.  This is 
frequently  offered  where  different  vehicles  share  a common  owner.  
 
Commercial  advertising  
Advertising  that involves  commercial  interests  rather  than 
advocating  a social  or political  cause.  
 
Communication  process  
A description  or explanation  of the chain -of-events  involved  in 
communicating  information  from  one party  to anoth er. 
 
Comparative  advertising  
An advertising  appeal  that consists  of explicitly  comparing  one 
product  brand  to a competitive  brand.  55 Competition -oriented  pricing  
A pricing  strategy  that is based  upon  what  the competition  does.  
 
Competitive  parity  
A method  of determining  an advertising  budget,  designed  to 
maintain  the current  "share  of voice."  
 
Comprehensive  layout  
A rough  layout  of an ad designed  for presentation  only,  but so 
detailed  as to appear  very much  like the finished  ad will look.  
 
Consent  order  
Also called  a consent  decree,  this is a Federal  Trade  Commission  
order,  by which  an advertiser  agrees  to make  changes  in an 
advertisement  or campaign,  without  the need  for a legal hearing.  
 
Consumer  advertising  
Advertising  directed  at a person  who will actuall y use the product  
for their own benefit,  rather  than to a business  or dealer.  
 
Consumer  behavior  
Study  of how people  behave  when  obtaining,  using,  and disposing  
of products  (and services).  
Consumer  jury  test 
A method  of testing  advertisements  that involves  asking  consumers  
to compare,  rank,  and otherwise  evaluate  the ads. 
 
Consumer  stimulants  
Promotional  efforts  designed  to stimulate  short -term  purchasing  
behavior.  Coupons,  premiums,  and samples  are examples  of 
consumer  stimulants.  
 
Consumerism  
(1) Advocating  the rights  of consumers,  as against  the efforts  of 
advertisers,  
(2) The emphasis  of advertising  and marketing  efforts  toward  
creating  consumers.  56 These  two definitions  are almost  opposite  in meaning,  but the 
former  is commonly  used today,  while  the latter  was common  prior  
to the 1970s.  
 
Container  premium  
Special  product  packaging,  where  the package  itself acts as a 
premium  of value  to the consumer.  
 
Continuous  advertising  
Scheduling  advertisements  to appear  regularly,  even during  times  
when  consumers  are not likely to purchase  the product  or service,  
so that consumers  are constantly  reminded  of the brand.  
 
Continuous  tone  art 
Where  a photograph  or other  art depicts  smooth  gradations  from  
one level of gray to another.  
 
Controlled  (qualified)  circulation  
Publication s, generally  business -oriented,  that are delivered  only to 
readers  who have  some  special  qualifications.  Generally,  
publications  are free to the qualified  recipients.  
 
Cooperative  (Co-Op) program  
A system  by which  ad costs are divided  between  two or more  
parties.  Usually,  such programs  are offered  by manufacturers  to 
their wholesalers  or retailers,  as a means  of encouraging  those  
parties  to advertise  the product.  
 
Cooperative  advertising  
Same  as Cooperative  program , above.  
 
Copy  
All spoken  words  or written  text in an advertisement.  
The advertising  displayed  on an outdoor  unit. The quality  of the 
ad's creative  design  can impact  the number  of people  who notice  
it. 
 
Copy  platform  
See Creative  Strategy , below.  57 Copy  testing  
Research  to determine  an ad's effectiv eness,  based  on consumer  
responses  to the ad. 
 
Corporate  advertising  campaign  
A campaign  that promotes  a corporation,  rather  than a product  or 
service  sold by that corporation.  
 
Corrective  advertising  
Advertisements  or messages  within  advertisements,  that the 
Federal  Trade  Commission  orders  a company  to run, for the 
purpose  of correcting  consumers'  mistaken  impressions  created  by 
prior  advertising.  
 
Cost  efficiency  
For a media  schedule,  refers  to the relative  balance  of effectively  
meeting  reach  and frequen cy goals  at the lowest  price.  
The value  of an advertising  schedule  in relation  to its cost. Usually  
expressed  as the cost of reaching  one thousand  people  in the target  
market,  and allows  the cost efficiency  of a range  of titles or 
programs  to be compared.  
 
Cost  per inquiry  
The cost of getting  one person  to inquire  about  your product  or 
service.  This is a standard  used in direct  response  advertising.  
 
Cost  per rating  point  (CPP)  
The cost, per 1 percent  of a specified  audience,  of buying  
advertising  space  in a given  media  vehicle.  
 
Cost  per thousand  (CPM)  
The cost, per 1000  people  reached,  of buying  advertising  space  in 
a given  media  vehicle.  
 
Counter  advertising  
Advertising  that takes  a position  contrary  to an advertising  message  
that preceded  it. Such  advert ising may be used to take an opposing  
position  on a controversial  topic,  or to counter  an impression  that 
might  be made  by another  party's  advertising.  
 58 Coverage  
A measure  of a media  vehicle's  reach,  within  a specific  geographic  
area.  
The percentage  of families or individuals  in a market  who are 
reached  by outdoor  advertising.  
 
Creative  strategy  
An outline  of what  message  should  be conveyed,  to whom,  and 
with what  tone.  This provides  the guiding  principles  for 
copywriters  and art directors  who are assigned  to develop  the 
advertisement.  Within  the context  of that assignment,  any ad that 
is then created  should  conform  to that strategy.  The written  
statement  of creative  strategy  is sometimes  called  a "copy  
platform."  
 
Creatives  
The art directors  and copywriters  in an ad agency.  
Crop  
To eliminate  or cut off specific  portions  of a photograph  or 
illustration.  
 
Crop  marks  
Marks  to indicate  which  portions  a photograph  or illustration  are 
to be used,  and which  are to be eliminated.  
 
Cumes  (Or Cumulative)  
An abbreviati on for net cumulative  audience.  Refers  to the number  
of unduplicated  people  or homes  in a broadcast  program's  
audience  within  a specified  time period.  This term  is used by A.C.  
Nielsen.  It also is used by many  advertising  practitioners  to refer to 
the undu plicated  audience  of a print  vehicle,  or an entire  media  
schedule.  
 
Cumulative  audience  
See Cumes , above.  
 
Cut 
An antiquated  term  that refers  to a photograph  or illustration.  
 
 59 Cutting  
A film editing  technique  that creates  a quick  transition  from  one 
scene  to another.  
 
C.B.D.  
Abbreviation  for "cash  before  delivery."  The payment  of cash for a 
purchase  before  the purchase  is actually  delivered.  
 
C.I.F.  
Abbreviation  for "cost,  insurance,  and freight."  These  three  letters  
signify  that the items  for which  they stand have  been  included  in 
the price  quoted.19  
 
C.O.D.  
Abbreviation  for "cash  on delivery."  The payment  of cash for a 
purchase  at the time of its delivery.  
 
Cable  Television  
A system  for delivering  television  programming  which  relies  upon  
a cable  to connec t the television  set to a central  antenna  rather  than 
upon  the transmission  of signals  through  the air directly  to a 
residence.  Because  cable  television  does not use the air waves  as 
does the traditional  transmission  system,  it is less subject  to federal  
regulation.  The basis for federal  regulation  traditionally  rested  
upon  public  ownership  of the air waves.  
 
Cannibalization  
Takes  place  when  a new product  gains  a portion  of its sales at the 
expense  of an existing  product  sold by the same  company.  
 
Captive  Distributor  
A distributor  owned  by a manufacturer.  The captive  distributor  
provides  a channel  of distribution  for products  the parent  company  
sells and may also carry  related  items  made  by other  
manufacturers.  
 
Car Card  
A poster  type of advertisement  design ed for mounting  inside  public  
transportation  vehicles,  usually  11 inches  high by 28 inches  wide.2  
 60 Carriage  Trade  
The wealthy  class of patrons.14  
 
Cash  Cow  
One of four categories  of business  lines or products  in a portfolio  
theory  of product  management.  (The other  three  are stars,  
"problem  children,"  and dogs.)  A cash cow is a product  judged  to 
be in the mature  or decline  stage  of its life cycle,  requiring  little 
investment  and produced  at a low cost, to be "milked"  for high 
profits  in order  to fund fast growing  stars or to invest  in stars and 
more  questionable  "problem  children."9a  
 
Catalogue  Retailers  
These  merchants  sell a variety  of high margin,  branded  goods,  at 
low prices  and they rely on catalogues  both in their stores  and 
mailed  to customers  to infor m the consumer  of their product  
offering.  The orders  which  customers  place  are filled  from  a 
backroom  warehouse  which  is designed  as a low cost facility.  The 
lower  prices  of catalogue  retailers  are made  possible  by lower  rents  
for the out of the way locati ons which  they use, by providing  
minimal  service,  and by featuring  products  which  are not fashion  
intensive.  
 
Caveat  Emptor  
A Latin  phrase  meaning  "Let the buyer  beware."  The phrase  
describes  a philosophy  that it is and/or  should  be the responsibility  
of the purchaser  to assure  himself  or herself  of the value  of a seller's  
wares  rather  than relying  on the seller's  word.14  
 
Chain  Discount  
A series  of discounts  taken  on a base lessened  successively  by the 
amount  of the preceding  discount.  For example,  $100  discounted  
by 40 plus 10 plus 2 equals  $52.92,  and the total amount  of the 
discount  is 47.08  percent  ($100 /140% =$60;  $60/110% = $54; 
$54/12% = 
$52.92;  $100 /1$52.92  = 47.08).19  
 
Chain  Store  
A group  of retail  stores  of essentially  the same  type,  centrally  owned 
and with some  degree  of centralized  control  of operation.7  61 Channel  Captain  or Commander  
An organization  in a channel  of distribution  that assumes  
leadership  for firms  from  which  it buys and/or  to which  it sells by 
absorbing  risk on their behalf  and generally  engaging  in actions  
designed  to benefit  its suppliers  and customers  as well as itself.11  
An example  of a channel  commander's  role would  be J.C. Penney's  
relationship  with some  of its apparel  suppliers.  Penney's  volume  
and importance  relative  to these suppliers  are such that it can 
establish  the specifications  of their product,  conduct  inspection  
programs  at the factory,  and determine  the margin  structure.  
 
Channel  of Distribution  
The structure  of intercompany  organization  units  and extra  
company  agen ts and dealers,  wholesale  and retail,  through  which  
a product  or service  is marketed.7  
Circular  
Printed  advertising  matter,  usually  from  one to twenty  four pages,  
widely  used in sales promotion.2  
 
Clayton  Act 
A federal  statute  passed  in 1914  which  strength ened  antitrust  
legislation  by restricting  such practices  as price  discrimination,  
exclusive  dealing,  tying  contracts,  and interlocking  directorates.5  
 
Closed  Circuit  
A telecast  fed to receivers  by cable  rather  than broadcast  by air. 
Reception  is controlled , limited,  and not available  to the public  at 
large.  
 
Clutter  
The incidence  of numerous,  short  commercials,  particularly  on 
television,  increasing  the potential  level of confusion  on the part of 
the intended  recipients  of advertising.11  
 
Commodity  
A produc t category  or a product  that is not distinguished  in the 
minds  of potential  customers  from  similar  products  produced  by 
competitors.11  
 
 62 Commodity  Exchange  
An organization  usually  owned  by the member  traders,  which  
provides  facilities  for bringing  together  buyers  and sellers  of 
specified  commodities,  or their agents,  for promoting  trades  in 
these  commodities.7  
 
Comparative  Advertising  
Advertising  that makes  specific  brand  comparison  using  actual  
product  names.18  
 
Concentration  Ratio  
The percentage  of total output  of an industry  manufactured  by a 
certain  number  of firms.  Thus,  if the four firm concentration  ratio 
in industry  X is 40 percent,  four firms  produce  40 percent  of the 
output  in that industry.  
 
Consignment  Sales  
Sales  not completed  until products  placed with a retailer  by a 
supplier  are sold to the consumer.  Payment  for goods  placed  on 
consignment  is not due until such goods  are resold.11  
 
Consumer  Behavior  
The acts of individuals  directly  involved  in obtaining  and using  
economic  goods  and services,  including  the decision  processes  that 
precede  and determine  these  acts.3  
 
Consumers'  Cooperative  
A retail  business  owned  and operated  by ultimate  consumers  to 
purchase  and distribute  goods  and services  primarily  to the 
membership.7  
 
Consumer  Credit  
Funds  borrowed  or financial  obligations  incurred  for periods  of 
time of generally  three  years  or less.6  
 
Consumer  Goods  Goods  destined  for use by ultimate  consumers  
or households  and in such form  that they can be used without  
commercial  processing.7  
 
Consumer  Panel  See Diary  Panel.  63 Consumer  Promotions  
Techniques  designed  to attract  the ultimate  consumer  or end user 
to a specific  product.21  
 
Consumerism  
A social  movement  seeking  to increase  the rights  and powers  of 
consumers  and responsibilities  of sellers.  
 
Contest s and Sweepstakes  
These  are important  consumer  promotion  devices.  They  differ  in 
that in a contest  participants  compete  for prizes  on the basis  of their 
skill in fulfilling  a certain  requirement,  usually  analytical  or 
creative.  In sweepstakes,  participants  merely  submit  their names  to 
have  them  included  in a drawing  of prizewinners.21  
 
Contracting  Out 
The decision  by a firm to have  goods  or components  of a good  
which  it assembles  and/or  sells manufactured  by another  
company.  
 
Contribution  
The monetary  (or percentage)  difference  between  revenues  
realized  and the variable  costs incurred  in the production  and 
distribution  of one or more  units  of a product.11  
 
Convenience  Goods  
Consumer  goods  which  are usually  purchased  frequently,  
immediately,  and with a minimu m of comparison.  The articles  are 
usually  of small  unit value  and are bought  in small  quantities  at any 
one time.  Examples  include  tobacco  products,  chewing  gum,  and 
newspapers.7  
 
Convenience  Store  
Smaller  grocery  stores  with limited  numbers  of items  usual ly at 
relatively  high prices,  which  are open  long hours.  These  stores  
specialize  in fill in type items  such as bread,  milk,  and soft drinks  
and usually  do not carry  fresh  meat  or fresh  produce.14  
 
  64 Cooperative  
An establishment  owned  by an association  of customers  of the 
establishment.  In general,  the distinguishing  features  of a 
cooperative  are patronage  dividends  based  on the volume  of 
expenditures  by the members  and a limitation  of one vote per 
member  regardless  of the amount  of stock  owned.14  
 
Co-Operative  Advertising  
Local  or regional  advertising,  the cost of which  is shared  by a 
national  advertiser  (manufacturer)  and a retailer  and/or  
wholesaler.2  
 
Copy  
In the advertising  world,  copy  usually  refers  to the text, written  or 
spoken,  accompanying  an advertise ment.  
 
Copy  Testing  
Preliminary  trials  of different  copy  advertising  appeals  or selling  
ideas  to determine  their effectiveness.2  
 
Cost  of Goods  Sold  The total amount  of all costs  related  to the 
acquisition  and preparation  of goods  for sale.25  
 
Cost  per Thousand  (often  abbreviated  "CPM")  
The cost of advertising  for each 1,000  homes  reached  in TV or 
radio  or for each 1,000  circulation  of a publication.  
 
Coupon  
A certificate  which,  when  presented  for redemption  at a retail  store,  
entitles  the bearer  to a stated savings  on the purchase  of a specific  
product.21  
 
Credit  
A loan extended,  often  for the purpose  of facilitating  the acquisition  
of goods  and services  in advance  of the payment  for them.  
 
Cumulative  Audience  (or "Cume")  
The net unduplicated  audience  delivered  by a specific  program  in 
a particular  time slot over a measured  period  of time,  usually  one 
to four weeks.2  65 CC (Column  Centimeter)  
This is a unit of measurement  in a publication  by which  an 
advertising  space  is sold, measuring  1 cm deep  by 1 column  wide 
(normally  4.5cms).  Generally,  there  are 8 columns  of 4.5cms  each 
on any page of a newspaper.  The formula  used is: Column  
Centimeter  = Number  of Columns  * Height  in Centimeters  
 
Composition  
The percentage  of a publication's  readers  who fall into a given 
target  group:  for example,  66% of “The  Times”  readers  are in top 
senior  management.  It is also called  Profile.  
 
Cumulative  Readership  
The net reach  achieved  by a number  of insertions  of an 
advertisement  in a single  title or schedule.  This is the number  of 
people  who have  at least one opportunity  to see (OTS)  an 
advertisement.  It is important  because  additional  insertions  in some  
titles will improve  coverage  more  than additional  insertions  in 
others.  
 
Campaign  
Series  of related  advertising  communications,  scheduled  for a given  
period  of time and related  by verbal  and/  or visual  themes  and 
common  objectives.  
 
CDI  (Category  Development  Index)  
The percentage  of total sales of a product  related  to the population  
percentage  in a market.  
% of category's  total sales in a given  market  CDI =  
-----------------------------------------------------  
% of total population  in a given  market  
 
CDGR  or Compounded  Daily  Growth  Rate  
CDGR  is calculated  using  census  details  from  two consecutive  
releases.  In IRS, we have used Census 1991  and 2001  to calculate  
the CDGR  for various  projections  using  the formula  detailed  
below:  
Y = X (1+ R/100)  n 
Where,  Y = the population  corresponding  to Census  2001  X = the 
population  corresponding  to Census  1991  66 n = the number  of days/  years  in between  census  1991  and census  
2001  and R = is the CDGR.  
 
Commercial  
An audio  or video  advertising  announcement,  usually  presented  on 
television,  radio  or in a movie  theater.  
 
Copywriter  
A person  responsible  for writing  advertising  copy  and generating  
creativ e concepts,  often  in collaboration  with an art director  or 
creative  director.  
 
Cluster  Analysis  
Cluster  Analysis  is the name  given  to a diverse  collection  of 
techniques  that can be used to classify  objects  (e.g. individuals,  
quadrates,  species  etc). 
The classification  has the effect  of reducing  the dimensionality  of a 
data table  by reducing  the number  of cases.  The objects  in the 
cluster  do not necessarily  have  all the characteristics  that define  the 
cluster,  but they do have more  in common  within  that group  than 
any of the other  clusters.  
 
Clutter  
An excessive  number  of commercials  or other  non-program  
elements,  which  appear  right  one after the other.  
Situation  where  more  than one advertisement  is present  in a single  
panel  or more  than one panels  are present in close  
proximity. /1When  an advertisement  is surrounded  by other  ads, 
thereby  forcing  it to compete  for the viewer's  or listener's  attention.  
 
Confidence  Level  
The probability  that the statisticians  associate  with an interval  
estimate  of a population  parameter  indicating  how confident  they 
are that the interval  estimate  will include  the population  
parameter.  
E.g. in IRS 90% confidence  limits  of + / - 15% RE indicate  a 90% 
probability  that the true figure  falls within  1.5%  above  or below  the 
value  stated. 
 
 67 Continuity  
A method  of scheduling  advertising  so that audiences  have an 
opportunity  to see the ads at regular  intervals.  
Scheduling  advertisements  to appear  at regular  intervals  over a 
period  of time.  
 
CPA  (Cost -Per-Action)  
Metric  for assessing  advert ising expenditure  determined  by 
dividing  the total cost for a certain  advertisement  by how many  
people  actually  responded  (e.g., purchase  activity,  phone  inquiries,  
website  traffic,  etc.) within  a specified  time after the promotion  was 
delivered.  
 
CPT  (Cos t Per Thousand)  
CPT  is a figure  used in comparing  or evaluating  the cost efficiency  
of media  vehicles.  
(CPT  is the cost to deliver  to 1000  people  and is calculated  by 
dividing  the cost by the audience  delivery  and multiplying  the 
quotient  by 1000.)  
The formula  is as follows:  
CPT  = (Media  Cost/  Impressions)  * 1000  
 
Coverage  Area  
The specific  geography  where  a media  vehicle  has its coverage.  In 
broadcast,  coverage  usually  describes  the area to which  the station's  
signal  extends.  In print,  coverage  usually  means the circulation  
area.  
 
Cumulative  Reach  (Cume)  
The number  or proportion  of different  people  reached  at least 
once,  by a certain  number  of issues  of a given  publication  or a 
program  on TV or Radio  slots.  
 
Call  Backs  
Two or more  attempts  made  to contact  a respondent  at an eligible  
address  or telephone  number  after failing  to contact  him or her at 
the first attempt.  Especially  important  for achieving  representative  
samples  of people  who are difficult  to interview  because  of their 
lifestyles  (e.g. SEC  A1+).  
 68 Casualty  
Sometimes  a respondent  cannot  be interviewed  for various  reasons,  
for instance,  the house  is locked,  he refuses  to be interviewed,  or he 
is not available  even after a certain  number  of attempts  (normally  
three  attempts  are made  to contact  a respo ndent)  etc. In such cases  
the interview  is said to have  become  a casualty.  
 
Causal  Research  
A type of research  carried  out to ascertain  the cause  & effect  
relationship  between  two or more  phenomena.  
 
Contact  Sheet  
The record  of contacts  made  by an interv iewer  on each day in a 
particular  starting  point  is kept in the contact  sheet.  This involves  
recording  of the status  of a particular  contact  i.e. whether  the listed  
questionnaire  is administered  or whether  the contact  is a casualty.  
 
CWE  (Chief  Wage  Earner ) 
The member  of a household  who contributes  the most  towards  
household  expenditure  (not necessarily  the one who earns  the 
maximum).  
 
CAPI  (Computer -Aided  Personal  Interviewing)  
CAPI  relates  to personal  interviews.  Rather  than entering  
responses  on paper,  an interviewer  would  key in responses  from  
their respondent  or interviewee  directly  into a purpose -built 
computer  program  on a small  device.  CAPI  applications  provide  
full control  of the flow of questions  (skips  and filters),  eliminating  
inconsistencies  on the spot,  out-of-range,  blank  and null responses,  
as well as data entry  errors,  reducing  costs by eliminating  paper  
forms  and data entry,  and immediate  data retrieval.  
 
CATI  (Computer -Aided  Telephone  Interviewing)  
Responses  are keyed  directly  into a comput er and administration  
of the interview  is managed  by a specifically  designed  programme.  
The programme  checks  for invalid  responses  and it will not accept  
responses  outside  prescribed  limits,  hence  subsequent  editing  and 
keying  in of data is avoided.  
 
 69 CAWI  (Computer -Aided  Web  Interviewing)  
Respondents  complete  a website  (or HTML)  survey  and some  
computer  software  presents  each question  only after the previous  
question  has been  completed.  Subsequent  questions  can be tailored  
to previous  question  answers,  enab ling sophisticated  routing  plans  
to be used in these  surveys.  
 
CASI  (Computer  Aided  Self-Interview)  
Computer  Aided  Self-Interview  (CASI)  is an interview  method  
wherein  the interviewee  communicates  directly  with a computer  
instead  of the interviewer.  
 
CLT  (Centrally  Located  Test)  or In-hall test 
In CLTs,  the respondents  satisfying  certain  conditions  are brought  
to a central  place  for the purpose  of interviewing  them  before  
and/or  after certain  events  like testing  food or drink,  viewing  an ad 
film or an ad, exposing  them  to a concepts,  etc. 
 
Cluster  Head  Household  Selection  
Within  a town/village,  households  are selected  randomly  from  the 
voter's  list. For the IRS, cluster  sampling  method  is used for 
household  selection.  In this method,  around  each randomly  
selected  household,  a predetermined  number  of households  are 
contacted  and interviewed.  
 
Convenience  Selection  
This applies  to studies  where  the interviews  need  to be done  at 
street  corners,  shops,  petrol  stations,  etc. Obviously,  such a 
sampling  plan aims at reducing  the field time by avoiding  house  to 
house  contacts.  
 
CAN  (Campus  Area  Network)  
The computers  are within  a limited  geographic  area,  such as a 
campus  or military  base.  
 
CDMA  (Code  Division  Multiple  Access)  
A protocol  for wireless  data and voice  communication,  CDMA  is 
widely  used in cell phone  networks,  but also in many  other  data 
communication  systems.  CDMA  uses a technique  called  “Spread  
spectrum”  whereby  the data being  transmitted  is spread  across  70 multiple  radio  frequencies,  making  more  efficient  use of available  
radio  spectrum.  
 
CPC  (Cost -Per-Click)  
Unique  to internet  advertising,  this is the fee paid to the web 
publisher  each time a visitor  clicks  on an internet  ad. 
 
Click -Through  Rates  
The number  of times  a web page  ad is clicked  on as a percent age 
of the number  of times  the web page  ad is displayed.  
 
Cookie  
A cookie  is a piece  of information  sent to a browser  by a Web  
Server.  The browser  then returns  that information  to the Web  
server.  This is how some  Web  pages  “remember”  your previous  
visits.  Cookies  might  contain  information  such as login  or 
registration  information,  online  shopping  cart information,  user 
preference,  etc. 
 
CPL  (Cost  Per Lead)  
Similar  to CPA  (cost per action),  the CPL ad pricing  model  pays 
web publishers  for every  banner  click that results  in a lead or 
inquiry  for the advertiser.  In other  words,  advertisers  pay 
publishers  only when  a visitor  not only click the ad and visit the 
advertiser's  site, but also performs  a desired  action  on that site (such  
as request  information  via an online  form).  
 
Cyber  Crime  
Cyber -crime  encompasses  any criminal  act dealing  with computers  
and networks  (called  hacking).  Additionally,  cyber -crime  also 
includes  traditional  crimes  conducted  through  the Internet.  For 
example;  hate crimes,  telemarketing  and Internet  fraud,  identity  
theft,  and credit  card account  thefts  are considered  to be cyber -
crimes  when  the illegal  activities  are committed  through  the use of 
a computer  and the Internet.  
 
Cyberspace  
The word  Cyberspace  is used to describe  the whole  range  of 
information  resources  available  through  computer  networks.  
 71 Cantilevers  
A projecting  beam  or member  supported  at only one end. 
 
Campus  Kiosks  
Free-standing  displays  located  on college  campuses  that often  
incorporate  a campus  directory.  
 
Circulation  
Circulation  (potential  viewers)  is the foundation  for determining  
the advertising  value  of outdoor  sites. Outdoor  circulation  is based  
on traffic  volume.  There  are three  types  of people  in this volume:  
occupants  of cars, pedestrians  and mass  transit  passenger s. 
Generally,  outdoor  circulation  figures  will only reflect  people  in 
vehicles.  Occupancy  rates vary by State,  by type of location  and 
time of day. 
Of a print  publication,  the average  number  of copies  distributed.  
For outdoor  advertising  this refers  to the total number  of people  
who have an opportunity  to observe  a billboard  or poster.  This 
term  sometimes  is used for broadcast,  as well, but the term  
"audience"  is used more  frequently.  
The number  of copies  sold or distributed  by a publication  (usually  
in a specified  geographical  area)  and certified  by an audit  firm.  
 
Charting  
The process  of selecting  and scheduling  individual  unit locations  to 
maximize  Out of Home  advertising  objectives.  
 
Contract  Period  
The period  for which  the outdoor  media  is sold. It is typically  sold 
for 30-day period.  
 
Cross -Read  
An advertising  display  which  is visible  across  traffic  lanes  on the 
opposite  side of the roadway.  
 
CPM  (Cost  Per Thousand)  
The cost of reaching  one thousand  potential  viewers  of an outdoor  
advertising  display.  It is calculated  by dividing  the monthly  cost by 
the monthly  circulation  in thousands.  
 72 C & S Household  
If a household  is an owner  of TV and if any of the C & S channels  
are tuned  in that household,  then the household  is defined  as a C 
& S household.  
 
Chann el Surfing  
Switching  between  channels  rapidly  without  settling  on any 
particular  channel  is called  Channel  Surfing.  
 
CPM  (Cost  Per Mil or Cost  Per Thousand)  
Estimate  of how much  it costs an advertiser  to reach  1,000  listeners  
Carrying  cost  
Carrying  cost is also known  as holding  cost it is primarily  made  up 
of the cost associated  with the inventory  investment  and storage  
cost. 
 
Cashwrap  
Cash  wrap  is the part of a store  where  customers  purchase  items  in 
a retail  store  cash wrap  also call a check  out in retail  store.  
 
Challenger  sales  model  
A challenger  sales model s a framework  of sales which  disruptive  
approach  is taken  in order  to sell solutions.  The consumers  are 
pushed  beyond  comfort  zones  to adopt  or embrace  new ideas  for 
their organization.  
 
Champion/chal lenger  test 
To determine  the best engagement  strategy , a challenger  or champion  
test is adopted.  Champion  represents  current  production  or service  
paradigms  whereas  challenger  is different  ways of doing  things.  
 
Channel  partner  
A channel  partner  is someone  which  offers  services  or products  via 
a co-branding  agreement  in most  cases.  
 
Channel  sales  
Sales  refers  to deploying  salesforce  in different  groups  by focusing  
on different  distribution  channels  such as dealers,  
Retail  individuals , direct  marketeers  etc. 
 73 Chargeback  
Chargeback  is a return  of money  to a payer  for some  transaction  
which  made  through  credit  card.  
 
Churn  
Churn  refers  to the percentage  of customers  who cancel  or leave  a 
particular  service  / product  within  a specified  period  of time.  
 
Click  and collect  
Click  and collect  is facility  where  customer  can buy or order  goods  
from  website  or online  and pick it up in local branch.  
 
Click -through  rate  (CTR)  
CTR  or click through  rate is an expression  in percentages.it  refers  
to the number  of clicks  on a specific  link, most  commonly  a digital  
advertisement,  divided  by the number  of times  the page  containing  
the link is shown.  
 
Client  
A client  is an entity  which  pays another  entity  for products  or 
services  rendered.  They  are also called  customers.  
 
Clientelin g 
Clienteling  is an activity of retailers  to build  long term relationship  
with the customers  one of the most  popular  ways  to do this is to 
collect  and track  the customers.  
 
Closed  lost 
If the prospect  does not convert  into buyer  and the deal closes,  it is 
called  a closed  lost opportunity.  
 
Closed  opportunities  
Closed  opportunity  is a general  term  which  encompasses  closed  -
won or closed  -lost opportunities.  
 
Closed  won  
The status  of an opportunity  where  the deal is closed  with the 
prospector  or customer  is called  closed  won.  
 
 74 Co-branding  
With  the main  objective  to combine  brand  values  in the mind  of 
the customers,  2 or more  brand  names  are used together  in support  
of a new product,  so as to increase  brand  equity  and target  specific  
markets.  
 
Cold  call 
An attempt to engage  a specific  prospect  through  a personal  visit 
or call is known  as a cold call. The caller  does not have  any prior  
knowledge  about  the person  to whom  is making  a call. 
 
Cold  email  
Cold  emails  are created  to engage  prospects  who have zero prior 
knowledge  about  a product  or service.  They  also do not have any 
knowledge  about  the person/salesperson  sending  this e-mail.  
 
Commission  
Commission  is referred  to as the amount  of money  an individual  
earns  for reaching  a specific  volume  of sales or for executing  a 
specific  business  transaction.  An amount  of money  paid to someone  
in exchange  for a service  /product.  
 
Compensation  
Compensation  is the amount  of payment  and employee  benefits  a 
specific  person  receives  for rendering  their services.  This covers  
basic salary,  allowances,  commissions,  bonuses,  health  insurance,  
pension  plans,  paid leaves,  stock  options,  and other  benefits.  
 
Complex  sale 
Complex  sales is something  that is common  n b2b marketing  and 
involves  multiple  decision  making  stakeholders,  customer  service  
or purchase  agreements  and more  longer  sales cycle.  
 
Compounded  annual  growth  rate  (CAGR)  
CAGR  or compounded  annual  growth  rate reflects  growth  over 
different  time periods.  
 
Connect  
(As in, “when’s  a good  time to connect?) /1Connect  refers  to 
associating  or relating  with something  specific  75 Consumer  packaged  goods  
Consumer  packaged  goods  are products  that are in form  that is 
ready  for sale to the consumer  like packaged  foods  and beverages.  
 
Contactless  payment  
Contactless  payment  is secured  paym ent method  using  debit  or 
credit  card,  smartcard  this allows  customer  to purchase  without  
touching  the payment  terminal.  
 
Content  
Content  refers  to the material  or document  released  in multiple  
formats  such as texts, audios  and videos.it  is created  to inform, 
engage  customers  and influence  selected  or specific  audience.  
 
Content  analysis  
Content  analysis  is nothing  but knowing  the patterns  of behavior , 
engagement  with the content  on a digital  content  platform.  It may 
be in the form  of blocks  or comments  or even documents  both 
audio  or text along  with social  conversations  or discussions  to 
answer  a specific  problem  
 
Content  management  system  (CMS)  
A content managem ent system  or CMS  is a software  or 
programme  which  is used to manage  digital  content.it  is used to 
create , modify  and keep a track  of content  which  is being  digitally  
distributed.  
 
Convenience  product  
Convenience  product  are consumer  product  that are routinely  
purchased  by customer  like sugar,  milk,  soap.  
 
Conversion  
The process  of changing  a target  customer  into a paying  customer  
is known  as conversion.it  is a point  where  the customer  performs  a 
specific  action  which is favorable  to the marketeer  or seller.  
 
Cost  of goods  sold  
Cost of goods  sold is an accounting  term  used to describe  the total 
value  or cost of product  sold during  a given  time period  this appears  76 on profit  and loss statement  and is used to calculating  inventory  
turnover.  
 
Cost  of goods  sold  (COGS)  
The cost of goods  sold or COGS  is the instrumental  cost of 
producing  a good.  
 
Cost  per click  (CPC)  
Cost per click or CPC  is a promotional  advertisement  metric.  This 
is fee based  which depends  on the number  of people  who click ads. 
This is commonly  used in Google  or facebook  ads. 
 
Cost  per impression  (CPI)  
CPI or cost per impression  is an advertisement  metrics.  With this, 
advertisers  pay a bidding  fee which  is based  on the numb er of visits  
their ads are exposed  to. This is a common  buzzword  in facebook  
ads or Google  AdWords.  
 
Covenant  
Covenant  is a written  price  which states  few activities  which might  
be carried  out or might  not be carried  out. Limiting  covenants  also 
include  non-disclosure  agreements  or non-compete  agreements.  
 
Cross  merchandising  
Cross  merchandising  refers  to displaying  products  from  different  
categories  this helps  add on sales to a business.  
 
Cross -selling  
Cross  selling  in b2b is both when  a customer  purchases  a product  
and in instead  offered  a second  product  which  is discounted.this  
can be based  on a reward  system  too. 
 
Customer  
A customer  is an individual  or an organizati on who enters  into an 
exchange  system  of goods  or servces  which  is being  offered  by a 
business.  
 
 
 
 77 Customer  acquisition  
The process  of acquiring  new customers  from  any channel  with the 
help of marketing  is known  as customer  acquisition  Value /1the 
cost relate d to deed  a replacement  client.  
 
Customer  acquisition  cost  (CAC ) 
Customer  acquisition  cost or CAC  is the amount  of money  spent  
on acquiring  a client  or customer.  
 
Customer  behavior s 
The behavior al pattern  of the customer  how the customer  useless  
the websi te which  product  does he spend  more  time on which  page 
is more  attractive  all these  are known  as customer  behavior  
 
Customer  facing  display  
Customer  facing  display  is screen  were  customer  view their order,  
discount  while  checkout  from  store.  
 
Customer  insight 
The process  of having  the detailed  information  regarding  a 
particular  customer  about  his interest,  demography,  geography  
along  with customer  behavior al patterns  is known  as customer  
insight  
 
Customer  relationship  management  
Customer  relationship  manage ment  is strategies  and technologies  
that companies  used to manage  and analyze  the customer  
interaction  and data throughout  customer  lifecycle  
 
Customer  relationship  management  (CRM)  
Customer  relationship  management  or CRM  is a system  of 
practices  and assoc iated  technologies  which  are used to record , 
practise , associate  and analyze  data for improving  customer  
experience.  
 
Customer  retention  
Customer  retention  is a method  in which  a customer  is pursued  
and is made  sure he retains  with the same  business  
 
 78 Custo mer  success  
Customer  success  is a state which  has proactive  mindsets.it  is 
adopted  by b2b companies  to optimize  with customers , drive  
profits  and increase  predictability.  
 
Customer -oriented  
Keeping  customer  as the key centre  of all promotional  or 
organizat ional  activities  is referr ed to as custom er oriented.  
 
Cutting -edge  
The latest  or the most  optimal  / advantageous  element  of a product  
or a service.  
 
CSS 
Cascading  designs  sheets  could  be a artificial  language  use in data 
formatting  the document  content . There  square  measure  3 forms  
of CSS inline  CSS internal  CSS and external  CSS. 
 
Caching  
An internet  technique  that stores  resources  or knowledge  and serve  
back  quickly  upon  future  request.  
 
Call  to action  (CTA)  
The part of a promoting  message  that tries to steer someone  to 
perform  a desired  action.  
 
CCDN  (Content  Delivery  System)  
A network  of servers  geographically  distributed  that accom modate 
quickest  path dynamically  to deliver  sites and knowledge  to user.  
 
Click -through  
The method  of clicking  through  a web packaging  to the advertisers ’ 
destination.  
 
Click -through  rate  (CTR)  
The attribute  that represents  quantitative  relation  of users  un 
agency  click on specific  ad v/s users  un agency  read the ad. 
 
 
 79 Comment  spam  
Irrelevant  comments  denote  to a diary  for the only real purpose  of 
dropping  a link to the spammers  web site. 
 
Contextual  advertising  
A quite  advertisements  that ar supported  content  of an internet  
page.  
 
Conversion  rate  
The proportion  of tourists  un agency  take a desired  action.  
 
Cookie /1information  
Hold on to a users ’ laptop  by an internet  website  thus preferences  
ar remembered  on future  request.  
 
Cost  per action  (CPA)  
A valuation  model  in promoting  wherever  value  as calculated  on 
qualifying  action.  
 
Cost  per click  (CPC)  
The on-line advertising  model  that bills advertisers  supported  
variety  of click by users.  
 
Cost  per lead  (CPL)  
The on-line advertising  model  that bills advertisers  supported  
variety  of lead generated.  
 
CPM  
Cost per thousand  impressions.  
 
C.I.F  
It is a contract  of sale where  the buyer  is under  an obligation  to pay 
against  the shipping  documents  irrespective  of the arrival  of the 
goods.  
 
Cluster  analysis  
Comparing  a similar  set of statistics  within  a country  with another  
for the purpose  of estimating  potential  demand.  
 
 80 Comparative  advanta ge 
Comparing  of one country  with another  under  total specialization  
 
Comparative  analysis  
Comparing  of similar  set of statistics  within  a categorywhich  can 
be directly  substituted  one for the other  in fulfillig  the same  needs  
 
Competition  
Completion  of products,  organization  or individual  tasks for 
fulfilling  the needs.  
 
Competitive  strategy  
Adoption  of a target  market  and marketing  mix stance  in the 
market  place  
 
Cooperative  
The gain of commerc ial and non-commerc ial advantage  in buying , 
selling  or process ing goods  and services  within  an individual  or 
organization . 
 
Countertrade  
It is an agreement  between  customer  and seller , for some  of the 
customer  products  in return  
 
Culture  characteristic  
Behavior s which  are manifest  and shared  by members  of a society  
 
Currency  swaps  
It is a method  of gain access  to foreign  capital  at a favorable  rate 
with a compromising  agreement  
 
Click -through -rate  
Ratio  of how many  times  a ad was clicked  
 
Cro- conversion  rate  optimization  
A group  of digital  marketers  that aims to impr ove the conversion  
rate of web pages,  thus making  the pages  more  profitable.  
 
Confidential  
Something  which  shouldn't  be revealed  or expressed  81 Cause Marketing  
If you can find a cause that is important to both your business 
and your customers – this marketi ng strategy could be 
extremely beneficial. Looking to benefit the cause may serve 
as an emotional driver which encourages your prospects to 
buy from you over and above your competitors.  
 
Community Marketing  
By engaging an audience of existing customers i n an active 
dialogue, and speaking to the needs and wants of this 
particular customer group without the direct intent of selling 
to them, you can promote greater loyalty and higher levels of 
engagement. This can also be an effective strategy for 
generating  word of mouth referrals.  
 
Content Marketing  
Often confused with the more specific task of copywriting, 
Content Marketing involves the consideration of content 
strategy and planning elements as well as curation of the actual 
content itself. This is the opp ortunity to write and publish 
content to educate potential customers about your products 
and services and sway them towards purchasing your product 
or service over and above that of competitors. This can be an 
effective means of influencing them without us ing direct 
selling methods.  
 
Contextual Marketing  
Contextual Marketing is an online marketing model in which 
an advertiser or marketer will create content specifically for 
each target customer and serve it to them based on terms they 
search for or their re cent browsing behavior. Analytics are 
crucial for this strategy, as they give the marketer the insight 
into their target market, whereby more accurate assumptions 
can be made regarding a person’s wants and needs – based on 
their search behaviors.  
  82 Glossar y of Marketing Terms  
 
 
“People don’t buy what you do, they buy why you do it.”  
– Simon Sinek, Author and Marketing Consultant  
 
  
83 D 
Dailies  
Also called  rushes , this refers  to unedited  film. These  are called  
Dailies  because  the film typically  is viewed  from  a single  day's  
shooting,  even if the final commercial  or program  will take many  
days or weeks  of shooting.  
 
DAGMAR  
This refers  to a process  of establishing  goals  for an ad campaign  
such that it is possible  to determine  whether  or not the goals  have  
been  met. It stands  for Defining  Advertising  Goals  for Measured  
Advertising  Results.  
 
Day -after  recall  test 
A research  method  that tests consumers'  memories  the day after 
they have  seen an ad, to assess  the ad's effectiveness.  
 
Daypart  
Broadcast  media  divide  the day into several  standard  time periods,  
each of which  is called  a "daypart."  Cost of purchasing  advertising  
time on a vehicle  varies  by the daypart  selected.  
 
Decay  constant  
An estimate  of the decline  in product  sales if advertising  were  
discontinued.  
 
Deceptive  advertising  
FTC  definition:  A representation,  omission,  act or practice  that is 
likely  to mislead  consumers  acting  reasonably  under  the 
circumstances.  To be regulated,  however,  a deceptive  claim  must  
also be material.  See Materiality , below.  
 
Demogr aphic  segmentation  
Dividing  consumers  into groups  based  on selected  demographics,  
so that different  groups  can be treated  differently.  For example,  two 
advertisements  might  be developed,  one for adults  and one for 
teenagers,  because  the two groups  are expected to be attracted  to 
different  types  of advertising  appeal.  See Demographics , below.  84 Demographics  
Basic  objective  descriptive  classifications  of consumers,  such as 
their age, sex, income,  education,  size of household,  ownership  of 
home,  etc. This does not include  classification  by subjective  
attitudes  or opinions  of consumers.  See Psychographics , below.  
Population  statistics  with regard  to Socio -Economic  factors  like 
SEC,  age, income,  gender,  occupation,  education  etc. Normally  
used by planners  to define  target  audience.  
 
Depth  interview  
A method  of research,  whereby  a trained  interviewer  meets  with 
consumers  individually  and asks a series  of questions  designed  to 
detect  attitudes  and thoughts  that might  be missed  when  using  
other  methods.  
 
Designated  mar ket area  (DMA)  
A geographic  designation,  used by A.C.  Nielsen,  that specifies  
which  counties  fall into a specific  television  market.  See also, Area 
of dominant  influence . 
 
Direct  house  
An advertising  specialties  company  that manufactures  and then 
sells its goods  directly  with its own sales force,  rather  than through  
retailers.  
 
Direct  mail  
Marketing  communications  delivered  directly  to a prospective  
purchaser  via the U.S. Postal  Service  or a private  delivery  
company.  
 
Direct  marketing  
Sending  a promotional  message  directly  to consumers,  rather  than 
via a mass  medium.  Includes  methods  such as Direct  Mail and 
Telemarketing.  
 
Direct  premium  
A premium  provided  to the consumer  at the same  time as the 
purchase.  
 85 Direct  response  
Promotions  that permit  or request  consumers  to directly  respond  
to the advertiser,  by mail,  telephone,  e-mail,  or some  other  means  
of communication.  Some  practitioners  use this as a synonym  for 
Direct  Marketing.  
 
Directory  advertising  
Advertising  that appears  in a directory  (telephone  direct ory, 
tourism  brochure,  etc.). This frequently  connotes  advertising  that 
consumers  intentionally  seek.  
 
Direct traffic  
Traffic that comes directly to your website, which means the 
user types your website URL directly into their browser and 
does not come fro m a referral link; blog, social media, or 
third -party websites.  
 
Display  advertisement  
(1) In print  media,  any advertisement  other  than a classified  ad. 
(2) An ad that stands  alone,  such as window  sign. 
 
Dissolve  
Fading  from  one scene  to another  in a film or television  production.  
 
Distributor  
A company  or person  that distributes  a manufacturer's  goods  to 
retailers.  The terms  "wholesaler"  and "jobber"  are sometimes  used 
to describe  distributors.  
 
Door -opener  
A product  or advertising  specialty  given  by a sales person to 
consumers  to induce  them  to listen  to a sales pitch.  
 
Double  truck  
A two-page spread  in a print  publication,  where  the ad runs across  
the middle  gutter.  
 
 
 86 Drive  time  
Used  in radio,  this refers  to morning  and afternoon  times  when  
consumers  are driving  to and from  work.  See Daypart , above.  
Morning  and evening  hours  when  many  radio  listeners  drive  to and 
from  work.  Drive  times  are generally  from  7am - 12noon  and 5pm 
- 10pm.  
 
Dummy  
A copy  (e.g., xerographic  duplicate)  of an ad, or even blank  sheets  
of pape r, provided  to a printer  or artist  as an example  of the size, 
color,  or other  aspect  of the ad to be produced.  
 
Duplicated  audience  
That  portion  of an audience  that is reached  by more  than one 
media  vehicle.  
 
DMP  
Abbreviation  for "Decision  Making  Process,"  which  is the process  
by which  a decision  making  unit arrives  at the decision  to make  a 
purchase.  
 
DMU  
Abbreviation  for "Decision  Making  Unit."  DMU  can refer to a 
single  individual.  More  commonly,  however,  it refers  to a group  of 
individuals  linked  by a common  organizational  bond  but separated  
by functional  specialization,  trying  to reach  a joint decision  on a 
purchase.  Individuals  tend to take on certain  roles in the buying  
process,  such as initiator,  gatekeeper,  influencer,  decider,  
purchaser,  and user,  descriptive  of their purchase  involvement  and 
predictive  of their behavior.  
 
Dating  
The practice  of giving  credit  beyond  a stated  period  by forward  
dating  of an invoice.  For example,  a buyer  technically  obliged  to 
pay for a purchase  within  30 days may be given a postdated  invoice  
bearing  a date perhaps  a month  later than the actual  date of 
purchase.  In effect,  the buyer  now has 60 days in which  to make  
payment.  Dating  is often  used to encourage  orders  for seasonal  
goods  well in advance  of need.1  
 87 Dealer  
A firm that buys and resells  merchandise  at either  retail  or 
wholesale.  
 
Dealer  Loader  
A premium  presented  to retailers  for the purchase  of certain  
quantities  of merchandise.  Its purpose  is to gain new distribution  
or to move  an unusually  large  quantity  of goods from  the 
manufacturer  to the retailer  and subsequently  to the consumer.21  
 
Deciders  
Those  individuals  actually  making  the decision  concerning  
whether  a contemplated  purchase  should  be made.4  (See DMU.)  
 
Demographic  Segmentation  
Market  segmentation  on the basis  of age, sex, family  size, family  
life cycle  (e.g.,  young,  single;  young,  married;  young,  married,  
youngest  child  under  six; etc.),  income,  occupation,  education,  
religion,  race,  nationality,  and/or  social  class.13  
 
Department  Store  
A large  retail ing business  which  carries  a wide assortment  of 
shopping  and specialty  goods,  usually  in the medium  to high price  
range.  Its products  are "departmentalized"  or segmented  by 
categories  within  the store.  Each  department  has a discrete  store  
space  allocated  to it, a cash register  to record  sales,  and salespersons  
to assist  customers.  There  are two types  of department  stores:  
"traditional"  and "departmentalized  specialty."  The major  
difference  is that the former  carry  a full line of merchandise,  
including  consu mer durables  such as furniture  and home  
appliances.  The latter  tend not to carry  such items  but rather  to 
focus  their efforts  on apparel.  
 
Department  Store  Ownership  Group  
An aggregation  of centrally  owned  stores  in which  each store  
continues  to be merchan dised  and operated  primarily  as an 
individual  concern  with central  guidance  rather  than central  
management  or direction.14  
 
 88 Diary  Panel  
A survey  technique  in which  an individual  or a family  keeps  a 
record  of Listening  or viewing  behavior  or of product  purchasing  
activities.2  
 
Diffusion  
The process  through  which  a new product  or service  moves  from  
its introduction  to a wider  acceptance  in its potential  market.  
 
Direct  Selling  
The process  whereby  a firm responsible  for production  sells to the 
user,  ultimate  consumer,  or retailer  without  intervening  
middlemen.7  
 
Discount  Store  
A departmentalized  retail  establishment  utilizing  many  self service  
techniques  to sell hard goods,  health  and beauty  aids, apparel  and 
other  soft goods,  and other  general  merchandise.  These stores  
operate  at low margins,  have  a minimum  annual  volume  of $1 
million  and are 10,000  square  feet or over in size.10  
 
Discretionary  Income  
Funds  remaining  after necessities  are paid for out of disposable  
income.18  
 
Disposable  Income  
Personal  income  remaining  after the deduction  of income  taxes  
and compulsory  payments,  such as social  security.7  
 
Distributor  
A firm (or an individual)  selling  manufactured  products  either  to 
retail  outlets  (dealers)  or direct  to consumers.  In common  parlance  
distributors  are often  thought  of as having  closer  and more  long-
term  relationships  with the manufacturers  from  which  they buy 
than are wholesalers.  
 
Dog  
One of four categories  of business  lines or products  in a portfolio  
theory  of product  management.  (The  other  three  are cash cows,  
stars,  and "problem  children.")  Dogs  are low share  products  in slow 89 growth  markets.  The chances  of such products  becoming  major  
cash generators  are not good,  and they are thus often  thought  of as 
cash traps  because  of the investment  needed  to maintain  their 
market  position.9a  
 
Drawing  Account  
An account  from  which  an employee  is permitted  to draw  
commissions  against  future  sales.  Deficits  are accumulated  and 
subtracted  from  earned  commissions  in later periods  when  there  is 
an excess  over the drawing  account  limit.14  
 
Drop  Shippers  (Desk  Jobbers)  
Wholesalers  who do not handle  or store  the goods  they sell. They  
take customer  orders  and then arrange  for manufacturers  to ship 
directly  to the buyers.  Their  role is similar  to that of manufacturers'  
agents  except  that they take title to the merchandise  they handle  
and assume  the corresponding  risks.6  
 
Dry Goods  
A broad  term applied  to textiles.  It is generally  used to include  piece  
goods,  narrow  yard goods,  and the textile  items  of women's  
accessorie s and men's  furnishings.14  
 
Dumping  
The sale of goods  abroad  at prices  well below  those  charged  in the 
country  of origin  in order  to gain the advantages  of scale  economies  
or the learning  curve  for the producer  and/or  in order  to make  it 
difficult  if not impossible  for foreign  firms  to compete  in the market  
in question.  
Its selling  of goods  in lower  price  to other  countries  at less than 
actual  production  unit price  
 
Durable  Goods  
Goods  expected  to last longer  than three  years  such as appliances,  
furniture,  and automobiles.1  
 
Double  Spread  (DS)  Page  
A single  advertisement  carried  across  two facing  pages  of a 
publication.  
 90 Duplication  of Readership  (between  publications)  
The proportion  of average  issue readers  of one publication  who are 
also average  issue readers of another  publication.  (The  base for 
duplication  is average  issue readership  and not claimed/  total 
readership).  
 
Display  Advertising  
Print  advertising  that is intended  to attract  attention  and 
communicate  easily  through  the use of space,  illustration s, layout,  
headline  and so on. 
 
Drip  Strategy  
Advertising  messages  are delivered  to consumers  in drips  over an 
extended  period.  
 
DAR  (Day  after  Recall)  
The most  common  method  used to test advertisements  or for 
tracking  consumer  behavior.  Visuals  or question naires  are 
administered  approximately  24 hours  after the preliminary  
exposure  of what  is being  ascertained.  
For example ; if an advertisement  is being  tested  for recall,  then one 
day after the advertisement  was exposed  on Print  or TV, the same  
is shown  to respondents,  and detailed  questions  are asked  for 
checking  out the “extent”  of recall.  
 
Denotation  
A description  of a media  text indicating  its common  sense,  obvious  
meaning  
 
Direct  Marketing  
Marketing  via leaflets,  brochures,  letters,  catalogs,  or print  ads 
mailed  or distributed  directly  to current  and potential  consumers.  
The direct  marketing  industry  has grown  enormously  as a result  of 
increasingly  specialized  mailing  lists. 
 
Descriptive  Research  
The objective  of descriptive  research  is to describe  a phen omenon,  
usually  market  characteristics  or functions.  IRS is a Descriptive  
Research.  
 91 DM (Decision  Maker)  
The decision  maker  is the member  of the household  who takes  
purchase  decisions  for expensive  products  in the household  e.g. 
durables  like Refrigerator,  Television  etc. 
 
Download  
Transferring  data (usually  a file) from  another  computer  to the 
computer  you are using.  It is the opposite  of upload.  
 
Daily  Impressions  
The estimated  number  of people  passing  through  an outdoor  
location  on an average  day. 
 
DOO H Media ( Digital  Out Of Home  Media ) 
It is a form  of out-of-home  advertising  in which  content  and 
messages  are displayed  on an electronic  screen,  or digital  sign. It 
can be changed  without  modification  to the physical  sign, typically  
with the goal of delive ring targeted  messages  to specific  locations  at 
specific  times.  Digital  signs  may be scrolling  message  boards,  LCD  
or plasma  display  panels,  electronic  billboards,  projection  screens,  
or other  emerging  display  types  like Organic  LED  screens  (OLEDs)  
that can be controlled  electronically  using  a computer  or other  
device,  allowing  individuals  or groups  to remotely  change  and 
control  their content  (usually  via the Internet).  
 
DEC  (Daily  Estimated  Circulation)  
The number  of people  who will see your billboard  per day. It is also 
referred  to as Daily  Impressions  because  of the estimated  number  
of persons  passing  an outdoor  location  on an average  day. 
 
Direction  (Facing)  
The direction  an Out of Home  panel  faces.  
 
Day  - Part  
Part of the day recognized  to identify  the time period  of radio  
listening  or TV viewing.  
 
Digital  Cable  
Digital  cable  offers  viewers  more  channels,  it is a service  provided  
by many  cable  operators.  Contrary  to what  many  consumers  92 believe,  digital  cable  is not the same  thing  as HDTV  or DTV;  
rather,  digital  cable  simply  offers  cable  subscribers  the option  of 
paying  for more  services.  
 
DTH  (Direct  to Home)  
Direct  to Home  is a satellite  transmission  that delivers  a signal  
directly  to a home  via an earth  station  or a receiver  dish.  
 
Drop -in Ad 
A local commercial  inserted  into a national  program,  or, more  
generally,  an advertising  message  inserted  into a larger  
advertisement,  as for a local dealer  or retailer,  or a phrase,  such as 
a public  service  slogan,  or symbol;  also called  a hitch -hike ad. 
Dark  
When  a lead or prospect  becomes  unresponsive,  it is called  as 
dark.they  might  get unresponsive  to calls, emails , invitations  and 
other  engagement  points.  
 
Data  
A unique  set of quantitative  or qualitative  facts whihc  can serve  as 
a reference  for computations , analysis , predictions  and planned  
reasonings  is called  data.  
 
Data  into information  marketing  
Analytics  not just analyze s the data but gives  us very important  
useful  insights  of information  which  could  be used for the decision  
making  of the marketing  sector  but or the business  itself 
 
Daily  sales  outstanding  (DSO)  
DSO  or daily  sales outstanding  is the amount  of time after 
acquiring  a client  before  actually  getting  paid for the 
services/product.  
 
De-dupe  (de-duplicate)  
De-dupe  or de--duplicate  is a streamlined  process  of eliminating  
duplicate  data in the form  of accounts,  contact  details  or other  
information.  
 
 
 93 Dead  stock  
Dead  stock  is known  as dead  inventory,  the unsold  stock  which  are 
laying  in your warehouse  or in your store  for a long time.  
 
Deal  
A deal which is entered  by two parties  
 
Deal  closing  (or closing  a deal)  
Deal  closing  or closing  a deal is a process  of giving  a stop to the 
sales transaction  and completing  it when  the prospect  agrees  to 
purchase  the product  or sign up for a service.  
 
Decision  maker  
A decision  maker  is the one who possesses  required  expertise  and 
authority  in concluding  purchase  decisions.  
Demand  forecast  
Demand  forecast  is a method  of predictive  analytics  of product  or 
services  that retailers  understand  how much  stock  to have in hand 
at given  time.  
 
Demand  generation  
Demand  generation  is a marketing  process.  This aims to build  
higher  brand  awareness.  This is often  used by organizations  to 
facilitate  promotional  offerings  or feature  sets. Organizations  reach  
new market  and generate  consumer  loyalty  through  demand  
generation.  
 
Descriptor  
A general  term added  to a non-descriptive  brand  name,  where  the 
general  term describes  the service  that is central  to what  the brand  
is offering.  Example:  Tata "motors",  Malabar  "gold",  Muthoot  
"finance ", etc. 
 
Dialer  
A dialer  is a software  or application  which  helps  in automating  the 
phone  call making  process.it  reduces  time lag of making  calls.  
 
Differentiation  
The processes  of making  our product  unique  in the eyes of the 
customers,  compared  to that of our competitors.  94 Digital  analytics  
Analyzing  the digital  big data from  various  online  sources  made  me 
the website  the apps or even social  media  platforms  is known  as 
digital  analytics  
 
Digital  channels  
Digital  channels  a path for communications  through  digital  signals.  
It in walls  on email  video  content  social  media  mobile  marketing  
 
Digital  influence  
The ability  to influence  or create  an impact  or even change  or 
manipulate  the opinions  or the behavior  that lead to certain  set of 
desirable  outcomes  online  is known  as digital  influence  
 
Digital  landscape  
A digital  landscape  is nothing  but all the features  that are involved  
on the digital  platforms  for making  the best use of data and 
information  with the help of feature  tools data sources  or media  
consumptio n devices  
 
Digital  media  
Data  in the form  of images  videos  or content  which  is put up 
digitally  or online  and is encrypted  to a computer  understandable  
language  
 
Direct  mail  
Direct  mail is a communication  where  newsletters , catalogs  and 
brochures  are sent out to consumers  via postal  services  which  is 
physically  delivered.  
 
Direct  sales  
Direct  sales is the process  of selling  a good  or service  in a specific  
location  rather  than linked  retail  sources  or offices.  The seller  
engages  personally  with a prospect  in a physical  or face to face 
environment  like a home  or cafe. 
 
Discount  
A discount  refers  to promotional  reduction  of the cost of products  
or services  and is commonly  deployed  in the marketing  or sales 
procedure.  95 Discovery  
All the first call to a potential  customer  is known  as discovery  call 
or a qualifying  call. This is basically  done  to understand  if they are 
a good  fit and henceforth  sellers  can start building  rapport  or set 
tone of the relationship  to gain better  insights  of the customer's  
challenge.  
 
Disruption  disturbance  
Or intrusions  which  occur  in an event,  activity  or process.  Positive  
disruptions  in a specific  process  occur  to bring  technological  
innovations.  
 
Distribution  center  
Distribution  center  is a warehouse  or specialized  building  where  
stock are stored  and distributed  to retailer  or directly  to consumer.  
 
Doing  business  as (DBA)  
Doing  business  as or dba is a simplified  rebranding  which  means  
the name  under  which  businesses  operate.  This differs  from  its 
legal, registered  name.  
 
Double  trigger 
Double  trigger  is basically  a clause  which accelerates  vesting  when  
an employee  is let go without  a due cause  in acquisition.  
 
Drag  along  rights  
Drag  along  rights  refer to a simple  majority  of investors  who are to 
effect  a legal change  or a sale. 
 
Draw  on sales  commission  
Draw  on sales commission  refers  to a form  of compensation  which  
9is designed  for sales professionals.it  is released  in advance  against  
expected  earnings.it  is also called  “draw  against  commission”  or 
simply  “draw.”  
 
Drip  campaign  
A drip campaign  refers  to automated  responses  to emails  which  are 
sent after a certain  time lag. 
 
 96 Driving  more  traffic  
Driving  more  traffic  to the website  or the social  media  handle  is 
very important  for a marketing  department  to boost  the product  
sales or service sales and this can be only possible  with the 
utilization  of analytical  tools to understand  where  the customers  
are and how and what  interest  them  to attract  them  to our 
platforms  
 
Drop  shipping  
Drop  shipping  is a method  were  the retailer  doesn't  keep the 
product  in stock  instead  they purchase  product  from  third  party  
and it is shipped  directly  to consumer.  
 
Data  studio  
An on-line tool that aid user to convert  knowledge  into informative  
reports  and dashboards.  
 
Data  transfer  
A secured  exchange  {of knowle dge|  of information}  or files 
between  systems,  organizations  or businesses . 
 
Dedicated  informatics  
An IP address  dedicated  to one web site. 
 
Deep  linking  
Linking  to an internet  page  apart  from  a sites home  page.  
 
Description  tag 
A part of markup  language  code that highlights  intent  or 
description  of website.  
 
Disintermediation  
The elimination  of intermediaries  within  the provide  chain,  
conjointly  noted  as surgical  operation  the middlemen.  
 
Domain  name  
Is a simple sort of high level identification  for a specific webpage  in 
alternative  words  name  of the positioning.  
 
 97 Doorway  domain  
The domain  that created  in a very thanks  to manipulate  
programme  indexes  to order  itself in search  results.  
 
Doorway  page  
The website  that created  in a very thanks  to manipulate  
programme  indexes  to order  itself in search  results.  
 
Decentralized  plans  
The difference  in product/market  conditions  with a system  
planning  
 
Demand  pattern  analysis  
The analysis  of a particular  growth  of a industry  which  is popular  
Devaluation  
It is a proces s of reducing  the values  of a currency  while  comparing  
with other  countries  
 
Diffusion  theory  
It is a way of organizing  for adoption  of innovation  with the help 
of social  phenome non, characterized  by a normal  distance  
 
Distribution  channel  
It is a channel  where  goods  and services  are marketed  by giving  
time and place  to users  
 
Duty  customer  
Duty  based  on an imported  goods  either  on an ad valorem,  or 
specification  amount  per unit 
 
Dark  web  
This is a part of internet  which  is not indexed  by Google  search  
engine and it is generally  found  in encrypted  service  
 
Display  network  
It’s a network  of websites  and application  that shows  the ad displays  
in next website  
 
 
 98 Dofollow  
The phase  denotes  the hyperlink  absent  of no follow.  Defaults  
hyperlink  is dofollow  
 
Diversit y Marketing  
This strategy focuses on developing a customised marketing plan 
by analysing different customer segments based on cultural 
differences including tastes, expectations, beliefs, world views, and 
specific needs.  
 
Drip Marketing  
Drip Marketing is a  communication strategy that sends, or “drips,” 
a pre -written set of messages to customers or prospects over time. 
Common channels  for Drip Marketing include direct mail, and 
radio and TV advertising – where the full message is 
communicated over the course  of the ad break.  
  99 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 
“Build it, and they will come” only works in the movies. Social 
Media is a “build it, nurture it, engage them and they may come 
and stay.”  
– Seth Godin, Author & Marketing Expert  
  
100 E 
Earned  rate  
A discounted  media rate, based  on volume  or frequency  of media  
placement.  
 
Electric  spectacular  
Outdoor  signs  or billboards  composed  largely  of lighting  or other  
electrical  components.  
 
EM 
Unit of type measurement,  based  on the "M" character.  
 
End -user  
The person  who actually  uses a product,  whether  or not they are 
the one who purchased  the product.  
 
Envelope  stuffer  
A direct  mail advertisement  included  with another  mailed  message  
(such  as a bill). 
 
Equal  time  
A Federal  Communications  Commission  requirement  that when  a 
broadcaster  allows  a political  candidate  broadcast  a message,  
opposing  candidates  must  be offered  equal  broadcast  time.  
 
Eighty -twenty  rule  
A rule-of-thumb  that, for the typical  product  category,  eighty  
percent  of the products  sold will be consumed  by twenty percent  of 
the customers.  
 
Eccentricity  
Eccentricity  is measured  as the angle  between  the edge of the road 
to the nearest  corner  of the hoarding.  It is measured  in terms  of 
degrees.  
 
 
 
 101 Effective  Circulation  
Estimate  of the audience  that has an opportunit y to see an outdoor  
poster  i.e. occupants  of west bound  vehicles  for an east-facing  
poster.  
 
End  Panel  
The advertising  structure  which  is closest  to the approaching  line 
of traffic  when  more  than one structure  is built in the same  facing.  
 
Eye-Level  Advert ising  
Advertis ements  posted  at eye level so that the consumers  glance  
falls at them  by default  without  having  to crane  their necks.  
 
EPG  (Electronic  Program  Guide)  
An interactive  list of upcoming  TV programming  that can be 
transmitted  along  with a DTV  program. 
 
Eye tracking  
A research  method  that determines  what  part of an advertisement  
consumers  look at, by tracking  the pattern  of their eye movements.  
 
E.O.M.,  R.O.G.  
Abbreviation  for "End  of Month,  Receipt  of Goods."  This is a form  
of dating  which  indicate s that the net credit  period  applies  as 
though  the shipment  were  made  at the end of the month.  It also 
indicates  that the cash discount  period  begins  upon  receipt  of the 
goods  by the purchaser.14  
 
80 20 Rule  
The common  observation  that 20% of products  or customers  often  
account  for 80% of sales.  The term  is also used to express  the view 
that 20% of the effort  on a project  often  produces  80% of the 
results.  
 
Elasticity  of Demand  
The relative  responsiveness  of sales revenue  to particular  changes  
in price.  Whe n total revenue  falls as prices  fall or when  revenue  
rises as prices  rise, the demand  for the product  is said to be 
relatively  price  inelastic.  When  revenue  rises as prices  fall or when  
revenue  falls as prices  rise, demand  is said to be relatively  elastic. 6 102 Envelope  (or Statement)  Stuffer  
An advertising  leaflet,  folder,  or circular  placed  in an envelope  
along  with its primary  contents,  usually  an invoice  or statement.2  
 
Evoked  Set 
The range  of brands  of some  product  group  that is looked  upon  as 
true altern atives  by the consumer.3  
 
Exclusive  Distribution  
Selling  through  only one wholesaler  and/or  retailer  in a particular  
trading  area.18  
 
Experiment  
A scientific  method  of investigation  that is used in marketing  
research  in an attempt  to establish  cause  and effect relationships.  
Typically,  an experimenter  manipulates  or controls  one or more  
independent  variables  and observes  the effect  on a dependent  
variable.  For example,  a marketer  might  manipulate  advertising  
messages  (that is, run a different  message  in equivalent  markets)  to 
determine  the effects  of the advertising  messages  on sales.  In such 
an experiment,  the advertising  messages  are the independent  
variables,  and sales is the dependent  variable.  
 
Effective  Frequency  
The minimum  level of exposure  to an advertisement  that is likely  
to produce  a positive  change  in awareness,  attitude,  or purchasing  
behavior . 
 
Effective  Reach  
The reach  of a medium  or media  schedule  at a predetermined  level 
of frequency  (as opposed  to total reach).  Usually  computed  at 1+, 
3+, 5+ level of AOTS.  (E.g. 45% reach  at 3+ AOTS)  
 
Exposure  
The introduction  of an advertisement  to the target  audience.  It is 
generally  expressed  as opportunity  to see (OTS).  
Consumers  who have  seen (or heard)  a media  vehicle,  whether  or 
not they paid attentio n to it. 
 
 103 Education  
The word  'education'  refers  to the level of education  the respondent  
has received.  
 
Exploratory  Research  
The primary  objective  of exploratory  research  is to provide  insights  
into, and an understanding  of, the problem  at hand.  Explorator y 
research  is used when  the problem  needs  to be defined  more  
precisely.  
 
Email  (Electronic  Mail)  
Messages,  usually  text, sent from  one person  to another  via 
computer.  E-mail can also be sent automatically  to a large  number  
of addresses.  
 
Encryption  
A means of making  data unreadable  to everyone  except  the 
recipient  of a message.  Encryption  is often  used to make  the 
transmission  of credit  card numbers  secure  for those  who are 
shopping  on the Internet.  
 
Eyeballs  
A viewing  audience  for a WWW  (World  Wide  Web)  site. 
 
Exclusive  Cume  
The number  of persons  who tune only to one station  during  a day 
part.  
 
E-commerce  
E-commerce  is a field platform  or environment.  Here all 
transactions  take place  online.  
 
E-tailing  
E-tailing  short  for electronic  retailing,  is a sale of goods  and services  
through  the internet.  
 
Earned  social  metrics  
Earned  social  metrics is when  communicational  programmes  are 
developed  and designed  to make  conversations  happen  outside  the 104 owned  social  channels  that are basically  earned  and not pitched  by 
the owner  
 
EBITDA  earnings  
Before  interest  taxes,  depreciation  and amortization  or EBITDA . 
Tt is the accounting  standard  that large  companies  use. 
 
Email  marketing  
Marketing  to the right  customer  with the email  strategy  and 
sending  them  email  appropriate  on this seasons  or interest  or offers  
is very much  effective  on the sales part of the business.  This email  
strategy  could  be effectively  done  using  analytical  tools and by 
categorizing /1the interest  of the customer  in different  groups  and 
further  is enhan ced by emailing  them  rightfully.  
The promotion  of merchandise  or services  via email.  
 
Employee  engagement  
Employee  engagement  is the process  fo keeping  employees  
committed  to organizatiosn  and reflects  how much  are they 
invested  in improving  the organizati ons image  or profitability.  
 
End  of day (EOD)  
Eod is also known  as close  of business  or COB.  It ideally  means  the 
close  of working  hours  of the day. 
 
Endorsed  brand  
A sub-brand,  or a minor  brand  that is supported  by a major  brand.  
Example:  nestle  kit kat. 
 
Engagement  analysis  
Engagement  analysis  is about  measuring  how interactive  is the 
audience  on the online  platforms  as well as improving  the results  
with the help of online  marketing  to improve  your brand  reach  
 
Enrichment  
Enrichment  refers  to the process  of upgrading  a product  or 
service.it  induces  the target  benef iciary  to have a better  experience  
by deriving  deeper  meanings,  connections  or attachments  to the 
product,  service or function.  
 105 Enterprise  
An enterprise  is a large  organization  which  is composed  of multiple  
levels , locations  or departments.  they need  multi -layer  software  
systems  and also are supportive  of large  corporation  environments.  
 
Enterprise  resource  planning  (ERP)  
Enterprise  resource  planning  or ERP  is a software.it  seeks  to 
centralize  purchasing,  shipping  and inventory  for the process  of 
product  planning,  fulfillment,  HR and more.  
 
Entrepreneur  in residence  (EIR)  
Entrepreneur  in residence  or EIR is when  venture  capital  firms  hire 
successfully  exited  founder  to deal with flow or diligence.  
 
EOM  
EOM  is an acronym  for end of month.  
 
EOQ  
EOQ is an acronym  for end of quarter.  
 
EOY  
EOY  is an acronym  for end of year.  
 
Equity  
Equity  is referred  to common  stock,  preferred  share  or any other  
forms  of security which  represents  the ownership  interest  in an 
organization.  
 
Ethical  positioning  index  (EPI)  
It is a scale  that measures  the ethical  positioning  of a brand,  based  
on identity,  image,  values,  etc. 
 
Everyday  low pricing  
Everyday  low pricing  is strategy  where  the product  are sold in a 
lower  price  or discounted  price  to the consumer.  
 
ECPM  
Effective  value  per thousand  impressions.  
 
 106 Email  spam  
Unwanted  email.  
 
Exclusivity  contract  
Term  within  which  one party  grants  another  party  sole rights  with 
respect  to a body  part business  operate.  
 
Ezine  
An electr onic magazine,  whether  or not delivered  via an internet  
website  or associate  email  newssheet.  
 
Ethnocentrism  
It is a home  country  orientation  with export  surplus  production  
 
Exchange  rate  
The ratio of exchange  of currency  from  one person  to another  
 
Email  automation  
It is a software  that sends  /receives  mail automatically  based  on 
preferred  triggers  
 
Export  credit  guarantee  fund  
It is a facility  given  by the government  treasury  and to make  sure 
about  the development  costs of exports  
 
Export  processing  zone  
It is a zone which  is designed  or created  within  the country  for an 
objective  of enjoying  tax privileges  or other  status  where  products  
and services  bought  for redesigning  
 
Exporting  
Supplying  of goods  from  home  country  to another  country  
 
Expropriation  
A process  where  an owner  of particular  place  has to surrender  his 
property  to the government  for political  use 
 
Epic  
Things  which  are beautiful  or unique  
 107 Explosive  
An object  or a thing  which  might  burst  or explode  
 
Entrances  
A tracking metric on Google Ana lytics for the total number of 
website visitors who entered on a specific page.  
Exit percentage  
A tracking metric on Google Analytics for the percentage of 
people who exit your website through a particular page. It is 
different from the bounce rate because  the exit rate calculates 
those who may have entered on any website page but excited 
on that particular page. There is no statistic to share here, but 
instead a tip. Exit percentage can be a good indicator of where 
website visitors drop off your site, so t rack and analyze your 
pages with the highest exit rates to optimize.  
 
Evangelism Marketing  
Get your advocacy bowl overflowing with fanatical customers 
who become promoters of your brand or product, simply 
because they love it and the experiences, they are having with 
it. They will want to represent the brand as if it was part of 
their own identity.  
If you achieve this outcome, it will be because:  
• You have a genuinely fantastic product or service  
• You have created a fantastic brand and story to go 
with it  
• You are a fantastic marketer who has managed to 
bring it to the correct market and proven its benefits 
and value.   108 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 
The consumer should have blind faith in your brand. The 
customer should know, ‘This brand will never cheat me. T his 
brand is for me. I own it.’  
— Dr RS Sodhi, Managing Director, GCMMF Ltd (AMUL)  
  
109 F 
FCC  
Federal  Communications  Commission.  The federal  agency  
responsible  for regulating  broadcast  and electronic  
communications.  
 
FTC  
Federal  Trade  Commission.  The federal  agency primarily  
responsible  for regulating  national  advertising.  
 
Facings  
Refers  to the number  of billboards  used for an advertisement.  
 
Factory  pack  
A premium  attached  to a product,  in or on the packaging.  
 
Fixed  Position  
A guaranteed  time for a radio  or TV ad that will not be preempted.  
 
Fairness  Doctrine  
Until  the mid-1980s,  a Federal  Communications  Commission  
policy  that required  broadcasters  to provide  time for opposing  
viewpoints  any time they broadcast  an opinion  supporting  one side 
of a controversial  issue.  
 
Family  brand  
A brand  name  that is used for more  than one product,  i.e., a family  
of products.  
 
Fixed -sum -per-unit  method  
A method  of determining  an advertising  budget,  which  is based  
directly  on the number  of units  sold. 
 
Flat rate  
A media  rate that allows  for no discounts.  
 
 
 110 Flighting  
A media  schedule  that involves  more  advertising  at certain  times  
and less advertising  during  other  time periods.  
 
FMCG or Fast Moving Consumer Goods  
Fast-moving consumer goods are products that sell quickly at 
relative ly low cost. These goods are also called consumer packaged 
goods. FMCGs have a short shelf life because of high consumer 
demand (e.g., soft drinks and confections) or because they are 
perishable (e.g., meat, dairy products, and baked goods).  
From a marketi ng standpoint, consumer goods can be grouped into 
four categories: convenience, shopping, specialty, and unsought 
goods.  
 
Focus  group  interview  
A research  method  that brings  together  a small  group  of consumers  
to discuss  the product  or advertising,  unde r the guidance  of a 
trained  interviewer.  
 
Font  
A typeface  style,  such as Helvetica,  Times  Roman,  etc., in a single  
size. A single  font includes  all 26 letters,  along  with punctuation,  
numbers,  and other  characters.  
 
Four  As 
See AAAA,  above.  
 
Four  Ps 
Stands  for Product,  Price,  Place  (i.e., distribution),  and Promotion.  
This is also known  as the Marketing  Mix, see below.  
 
Four -color  process  
A printing  process  that combines  differing  amounts  of each of four 
colors  (red, yellow,  blue & black)  to provide  a full-color  print.  
 
Franchised  position  
An ad position  in a periodic  publication  (e.g.,  back cover)  to which  
an advertiser  is given  a permanent  or long-term right  of use. 
 
 111 Free -standing  insert  (FSI)  
An advertisement  or group  of ads inserted  - but not bound  - in a 
print  publication,  on pages  that contain  only the ads and are 
separate  from  any editorial  or entertainment  matter.  
 
Frequency  
(1) Number  of times  an average  person  or home  is exposed  to a 
media  vehicle  (or group  of vehicles),  within  a given  time 
period.  
(2) The position  of a television  or radio  station's  broadcast  signal  
within  the electromagnetic  spectrum.  
(3) The periodicity  of a publication  is referred  to as frequency  for 
e.g. Daily,  Weekly,  Monthly  etc. 
(4) The average  number  of times  an individual  notices  an out of 
home  advertising  message  during  a defined  period  of time.  
Frequency  in outdoor  advertising  is typically  measured  over a 
four week  period,  but can be reported  for any campaign  
length.  
 
Fringe  time  
A time period  directly  preceding  and directly  following  prim e time,  
on television.  
 
Fulfillment  house  
A coupon  clearing  house.  A company  that receives  coupons  and 
manages  their accounting,  verification  and redemption.  
 
Full position  
An ad that is surrounded  by reading  matter  in a newspaper,  making  
it more  likely  consumers  will read the ad. This is a highly  desirable  
location  for an ad. 
 
Full-service  agency  
An agency  that handles  all aspects  of the advertising  process,  
including  planning,  design,  production,  and placement.  Today,  
full-service  generally  suggests  that the agency  also handles  other  
aspects  of marketing  communication,  such as public  relations,  sales 
promotion,  and direct  marketing.  
 112 F.O.B.  
Abbreviation  for "Free  on Board."  Any agreed  upon  destination  to 
which  transportation  charges  are paid by the vendor  and at which  
title passes  to the purchaser.14  
 
Factoring  
The practice  by which  a company  sells its accounts  receivable  at a 
discount  to a financial  institution  which  then collects  them.  
 
Fair  Trade  Laws  
Laws  permitting  resale  price  maintenance.  There  were  at one time 
a number  of such laws on the state level,  but they were  determined  
to be unconstitutional  in 1975.  Resale  price  maintenance  is 
therefore  illegal  in the United  States.  (See resale  price  
maintenance. ) 
 
Family  (or Umbrella)  Brand  
The use of a single brand  name  for several  products.18  Kellogg,  for 
example,  uses its corporate  name  with all its cereals,  such as 
Kellogg's  Corn  Flakes,  Kellogg's  Rice Krispies,  etc. Procter  & 
Gamble,  by contrast,  does not use its corporate  name  to 
accompany  its brands.  Thus Crest  Toothpaste  is not called  Procter  
& Gamble  Toothpaste  or Procter  & Gamble  Crest.  
 
Fashion  
The mode  of dress,  etiquette,  furniture,  style of speech,  etc. in 
general,  the taste of a particular  segment  of consumers  at a 
particular  time.  
 
Federal  Trad e Commission  (FTC)  
Created  by Congress  in 1914,  the Federal  Trade  Commission  is an 
independent  regulatory  agency  designed  to police  "unfair  
competition"  and various  corporate  practices  held to harm  not only 
competitors  but consumers  as well. The commission 's area of 
interest  extends  to pricing  and advertising  practices  and their 
impact  on industry  concentration.  
 
Flight  
Part of an advertising  campaign  that is divided  into segments,  with 
lapses  of time between  segments.2  113 Floor  Planning  
The financing  of display stocks  for auto and appliance  retailers  by 
manufacturers  or financial  institutions.18  
 
Focus  Group  
A group  of 8 to 12 consumers  who meet  a marketer's  specifications  
in terms  of usage  of or interest  in a particular  product  category.  
The group  is brought  together  with a moderator  to discuss  
products,  promotions,  advertising,  or other  marketing  ideas.23  
 
Football  Item  
Merchandise  used by retailers  to attract  customers  through  
frequent  price  changes.  
 
Franchising  
The granting  of supporting  services  by a supplier  to a reseller  in 
return  for the sale of products  or services  or a specified  fee. Such  
supporting  services  have  included  the use of a trademark  or brand,  
merchandising  assistance,  advice  on location,  financing,  and limits  
on the number  of directly  competing  outlets.11  
 
Free  Goods  Deal  
An offer of a certain  amount  of a product  to wholesalers  or retailers  
at no cost to them  but dependent  on the purchase  of a stated  
amount  of the same  or another  product.21  
 
Frequency  
The average  number  of times  an accum ulated  audience  has been  
exposed  to or has had the opportunity  for exposure  to the same  
advertising  message  within  a measured  period.19  
 
Full Line  Forcing  
This is a type of tying  arrangement  in which  the seller  demands  
that the buyer  purchase  an entire  line as the price  of purchasing  
one particularly  desired  item in it. Full line forcing  and other  tying  
agreements  which  do not involve  patents,  copyrights,  or franchises  
are normally  illegal  unless  the tying  product  is neither  unique  nor 
attar ctive enough  to restrain  competition  in the tied market.24  
 
 114 Functional  Discount  
A discount  allowed  a middleman  from  the list price  to cover  the 
middleman's  margin  (i.e., his or her costs plus his or her profit).  
 
Folder  Test  
A research  technique  to assess  people's  respons es to print  
advertisements.  A selection  of advertisements  placed  in a folder  is 
given  to respondents  and reactions  are analyze d. 
 
Family  Structure  
 Nuclear  Family  without  elders  refers  to a single  married  
couple /1with or without  children.  
 Nuclear  family  with elders  refers  to a household  
consisting  of a nuclear  family  with elder  relatives  (e.g. one 
parent,  widowed  uncles/aunts,  and unmarried  elder  brothers/  
sisters).  
 Joint  Family  refers  to a household  where  more  than one 
married  couple  are staying  together  and sharing  the same  
kitchen.  
 Siblings  living  together  refer to a household  where  there  
are unmarried  brothers/  sisters  living  together.  
 
Field  Supervisor  
The person  who is responsible  for selecting,  hiring  and training  
interviewers.  He or she is also responsible  for the data collection  
phase  of the survey  and following  the agreed  instructions.  
 
Finger  
An internet  software  tool for locating  people  on other  internet  sites.  
Finger  is also sometimes  used to give access  to non-personal  
information,  but the most  common  use is to see if a person  has an 
account  at a particular  internet  site. Many  sites do not allow  
incoming  Finger  requests,  but many  do. 
 
FAQ  (Frequently  Asked  Questions)  
FAQs  are documents  that list and answer  the most  common  
questions  on a particul ar subject.  There  are hundreds  of FAQs  on 
diverse  subjects.  FAQs  are usually  written  by people  who are tired 
of answering  the same  question  over and over.  115 Face  
The surface  area on an outdoor  unit where  an advertising  copy  is 
displayed.  A structure  may have more  than one face. 
 
Facing  
The cardinal  direction  that an outdoor  unit faces.  E.g, a north  
facing  bulletin  is viewed  by vehicles  travelling  south.  
 
Flyover/Bridge  panels  
Panels  on the sides of a flyover  or bridge.  
 
FOB  (Foot -Over  Bridge)  
Panels  on bridg es used by pedestrians  to cross  over,  usually  at 
railway  stations  or busy road junctions.  
 
FM or FM Radio  
It is a radio  wave  broadcast  technology  that conveys  sound  – voice  
and music  – using  a carrier  wave  which  varies  its frequency  during  
transmission,  producing  high quality  audio  clarity  and tone.  
 
Fair  market  value  (FMV)  
A fair market  value  or FMV  is a price  which  interests  a buyer  and 
is difficult  to compute.it  is used to value  organizations.  
 
Fast  fashion  
Fast fashion  is clothing  that moves  from  the catwalk  or fashion  
shows  to stores  quickly,  and it highly  profitable  and exploitative  
business.  
 
FIFO  
First in first out is an accounting  method  that assumes  the first units  
of stock  purchased  are the first ones that are sold. 
 
Firmographic  
Firmographic  refers to a set of descriptive  attributes  which  is used 
to classify  firms  into relevant  market  segments.  
 
Fiscal  year  116 A fiscal  year is a financial  accounting  period  of one year and is used 
by governments  for taxation,  budget , planning , strategy  
formulation  and performance  assessment  along  with other  utilities.  
 
Flash  sale 
Flash  sale are sales that are available  for limited  time with a huge  
discount.  
 
Fly wheel  
A fly wheel  refers  to the method  of conceptualizing  the sales 
process.  Here customers  are perceived  as an output  and 
demonstrate  awareness,  delight  and engagement  which  can 
happen  at any step of the sales process.  
 
Forecasting  
Forecasting  is referred  to the prediction  or calculation  of trends  or 
events  which  are likely  to occur  in the future.  These are based on 
qualitative,  quantitative  and historical  data as well as emergent  
factors.  
 
Fortune  500 
Fortune  500 is a list which  features  USA 's largest  500 companies.  
This is based  on revenue  and is compiled  plus published  by the 
fortune  magazine.  
 
Forward  reve nue 
Forward  revenue  is referred  to as recurring  revenue  which  is 
projected  for the next 12 months.  
 
Freemium  
A combination  of the words  "free"  and "premium",  when  
brands/companies  provide  premium  services  free of cost and 
would  upgrade  the same  for a longe r duration  for a price.  
A net business  model,  whereby  basic  services  are provided  freed  
from  charge  whereas  additional  advanced  options  are charged.  
 
Future  insights  
Analytical  tools helps  us to give a future  insights  with the help of 
the background  data what we have currently  and helps  us to 117 expand  or introduce  a new product  with relevant  information  
which  are accurate  almost  90% of the time 
 
Facebook  advertising  
Paid messages  that business  entities  place  on facebook  so that it 
targets  a particular  demogra phic. Facebook  ads can be as specific  
or as broad  as you want  it to be. 
 
Facebook  profile  
Facebook  profile  is an individual’s  account  that we can use for 
sharing  of an info, picture  or videos  with our friends  list. 
 
Facebook  business  page  
Facebook  page  represents  and showcases  the business  and its 
services.  It provides  all kind of information  related  to the business  
to the people  who are interested  in that particular  brand  and 
business.  
 
Facebook  ads manager  
It’s a tool which  allows  you to create  and manag e facebook  ads. 
You can always  view it and edit it to make  your campaign  better  to 
attract  more  of the customers.  
 
Form  fill 
It is a software  programme  which  save your details  and fill them  
automatically  on your behalf  in a UI. Password  manager , web 
browse r are few of main  examples  of form  fillers.  
 
Facebook  
A social  networking  website  set at facebook.com.  
 
Favicon  
A distinctive  graphic  identification  for a specific  website  to endorse  
as a whole.  
 
First -mover  advantage  
The capability  of a firm to be a highe r off than its fellow  
competitors  as a results  of being  initial  to promote  in a very new 
product.  
 118 Flash  multimedia  
Technology  developed  by macromedia  to permit  abundant  
interactivity  to suit in a very comparatively  little file size. 
 
Forum  
The on-line platform  that may be wont  to exchange  the ideas  and 
views  on explicit  issue.  
 
Frames  
A structure  that enables  for the dividing  of an internet  page into 2 
or additional  freelance  components.  
 
Frequency  cap 
It’s a term in advertising  meaning  limiting  the quanti ty of times  a 
particular  guests  is shown  a specific  packaging.  
 
Featured  snippet:  
A summarized  price  of data that is parallel  by Google  from  website  
and takes  directly  search  results  
 
First  page:  
It is the first page  of site ranks  on Google  search  results  
 
Featured  snippet  
A summarized  price  of data that is parallel  by Google  from  website  
and takes  directly  
Search  results  
 
Facebook  ads manager  
A tool for creating  Facebook  ads and managing  and tracking  there  
performance  on facebook  related  applications  
 
F.A. S 
A seller  who takes  the responsibility  to supply  goods  without  
demanding  for any charges  
 
F.O.B  
Free on Board  (FOB)  is a shipment  term used to indicate  whether  
the seller  or the buyer  is liable  for goods  that are damaged  or 119 destroyed  during  shipping.  "FOB  shipping  point"  or "FOB  origin"  
means  the buyer  is at risk once the seller  ships  the product.  
 
Foreign exchange   
Having  industrial  relationship  across  the national  bound aries 
which  deals  with foreign  currency  market  
 
Forward  rates  
It is a mechanism  wher e they undertake  all the barriers  in exchange  
rate therefore  can be covered  update  quote  for future  exchange  
 
Future  accepting  
The delivery  on registered  date with the agreed  price  
 
Followers  
On social media sites, someone who opts in to receive your upda tes. 
The most followed brand on Instagram is Nike with 96.9 million 
followers.  
 
Field Marketing  
Field Marketing is a direct marketing technique, involving face -to-
face contact with prospective customers at a particular and relevant 
place where they can be easily approached and engaged with.  
 
Freebie Marketing  
This is a great strategy for giving your customer a taste for what 
they are likely to want more of. As a marketing strategy, you can 
promote free giveaways or sell your products and services at low 
rates to boost the sales of other related products or services.  
 
Free Sample Marketing  
Unlike Freebie Marketing, this is not dependent on complementary 
marketing, but rather consists of giving away a free sample of the 
product to influence the consumer to mak e the purchase.  
  120 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 
"If you can't explain it to a 6 -year old, you don't know it yourself."  
— Albert Einstein  
G 
Galley  proof  
A typeset  copy of an ad or editorial  material,  before  it is made  into 
pages  for final production.  
 
Galv anometer  test 
A research  method  that measures  physiological  changes  in 
consumers  when  asked  a question  or shown  some  stimulus  material  
(such  as an ad). 
 
Gantry  
A framework of steel bars raised at two ends of a road to bridge 
over or around a road to direct  the traffic. (Part of the structure is 
used to advertise).  
 
121 Gatefold  
Double  or triple -size pages,  generally  in magazines,  that fold out 
into a large  advertisement.  
 
Guaranteed  circulation  
A media  rate that comes  with a guarantee  that the publication  will 
achieve  a certain  circulation.  
 
Generic  brand  
Products  not associated  with a private  or national  brand  name.  
 
Gravure  
A printing  process  that uses an etched  printing  cylinder.  
 
Green  advertising  
Advertising  that promotes  a product  or service's  ability  to help or, 
more  likely,  not hurt the environment.  
 
Grid  card  
A broadcast  media  rate card that lists rates  on a grid, according  to 
the time periods  that might  be selected  for the ad. 
 
Gross  audience  
The audiences  of all vehicles  or media  in a campaign,  combine d. 
Some  or much  of the gross  audience  may actually  represent  
duplicated  audience.  
 
Gross  impressions  
Total  number  of unduplicated  people  or households  represented  
by a given  media  schedule.  
Usually  expressed  in absolutes.  Expressed  as Number  of people  
reached multiplied  by Number  of times  reached.  
GI= Reach  in 000s X AOTS  
Gross  Impressions  refer to the total number  of impression  
opportunities  registered  against  the target  audience  in a showing  
 
 
 
 122 Gross  rating  points  (GRPs)  
Reach  times  average  frequency.  This is a measure  of the 
advertising  weight  delivered  by a vehicle  or vehicles  within  a given  
time period.  
 
Gutter  
The inside  margins  of two pages  that face each other  in a print  
publication.  
The crease  (or white  space)  between  two opposite  pages  of a 
newspa per or magazine.  
 
Gatekeepers  
Those  individuals,  such as purchasing  agents,  whose  responsibility  
it is to be knowledgeable  concerning  the range  of vendor  offerings  
that may be useful  in satisfying  needs  or solving  problems.  They  
largely  determine  which  vendors are granted  the opportunity  to get 
in touch  with the decision  makers  involved  in making  a purchase.4  
(See DMU.)  
 
General  Merchandise  Chain  
A phrase  often  used to describe  Sears,  Ward's,  and Penney's  large,  
nation -wide chains  selling  a wide variety  of consumer  goods.  
 
Generic  Products  
Products  which  have,  no brand  other  than the identification  of 
their contents.18  
 
Geographic  Segmentation  
Segmentation  of a market  on the basis  of region,  county  size, city 
or Standard  Metropolitan  Statistical  Area  (SMSA)  size, population  
density,  and/or  climate.13  
 
Gestalt  (in advertising)  
The phenomenon  of perceiving  the whole  of an advertisement  to 
have  greater  impact  or effectiveness  than merely  the sum of its 
parts.2  
 
Gondola  
A type of self-service  counter  with tiers of shelves  back -to-back 
which  is free standing  between  aisles  of a retail  store.14  123 Gross  Margin  
Sales  revenue  minus  the cost of goods  sold. 
 
Gross  Rating  Points  (GRPs)  
The measure  by which  a TV time buyer  or advertiser  evaluates  
his/her  impact  or clout  against one or more  segments  of the total 
market.  It is arrived  at by multiplying  reach  times  frequency,  i.e., 
the total number  of persons  exposed  to an advertisement  times  the 
average  number  of exposures  per person.26  
 
Guarantee  See Warranty.  
 
Gross  Coverage  
Another  name  for Gross  Reach  or Gross  Penetration.  
 
Genre  
A category  of media  texts characterized  by a particular  style,  form  
or content.  
 
Gross  Reach  
Sum  total of all exposures  to the ads in a schedule.  Or the sum total 
of the opportunities  to see inserti ons in each publication.  This is a 
duplicated  number.  
 
Ghost  Site 
A website  that remains  live but is no longer  updated  or maintained  
or only done  so very infrequently.  Unlike  a site that is no longer  
available  and results  in a 404 error  message  when  the user tries to 
access  it, ghost  sites can be accessed  even though  they have not 
been  updated.  
 
Geo -Demographic  Mapping  
The method  of identifying  specific  audience  segments  on a map,  as 
they relate  to out of home  locations,  both geographically  and 
demographica lly. 
 
Glow  Sign  
Illuminated  shop front  sign, typically  backlit.  These  are normally  
made  of acrylic  or polycarbonates  with vinyl  graphics.  
 124 GRP  (Gross  Rating  Point)  
GRP's  represent  the number  of impression  opportunities  delivered  
by a media  schedule  (withou t regard  to audience  duplication)  
expressed  as a percent  of the population  of a specific  market.  Reach  
x Frequency  = GRP.  
 
Ground  Bulletin  
A painted  bulletin  built on the ground  as opposed  to one built on a 
rooftop  or a wall. 
 
GPS  Device  
The Global  Positio ning System  (GPS)  is a satellite  based  navigation  
system  made  up of a network  of 24 satellites  placed  into orbit  by 
the US Department  of Defense.  GPS satellite  circle  the earth  twice  
a day in a very precise  orbit  and transmit  signal  information  to 
earth.  GPS receivers  take this information  and use triangulation  to 
calculate  the user's  exact  location.  
 
GRPs  (Gross  Rating  Points)  
The sum of all ratings  (%) for all programs  in a schedule.  
 
Game -changer  
An innovative  or newly  introduced  factor  which  causes  positive 
changes  or results  
 
Gatekeeper  
Gatekeepers  are people  who have  control  access with a desired  
attribute  such as a premium  feature  in case of a software  service,  or 
the ability  to make  purchase  decisions  in case of a corporate  
executive.  They are people  like executive  secretary  etc. 
 
General  manager  
General  managers  are executives  who have  iterative  levels  of 
importance  along  with responsibilities.  Their responsibilities  and 
deliverables  depend  on the corporate  structure  
 
Generic  brand  
A brand  that lacks  differentiation  in its market  positioning  and 
usually  serve  as a substitute  product  at a low cost. 
 125 Global  business  unit  (GBU)  
A. Gbu or global  business  unit is a component  of a multinational  
corporation  or mnc.it  focuses  on specific  functions  and vertica ls 
while  operating  on a global  scale.  
 
Go-to-market  (GTM)  strategy  
A go to market  strategy  is a plan of set of ations  which  serves  like a 
roadmap.  It is formulatd  by the company  with an objective  to 
optimize  sales and marketing  resources  in order  to establ ish a new 
product  or service.  They do this to achieve  competitive  advantage  
through  advertising,  distribution,  pricing  and smm  or social  media  
management.  
 
Granular  
Granular  originally  means  particle  sized.  However,  in terms  of 
marketing  it relates  to the marketing  plans.  This relates  to data level 
plans  of marketing  which  further  gets sub-divided  into channels  
such as sub-campaign,  creative,  keyword,  user etc. 
 
Green  retailing  
Green  retailing  is an environmentally  friendly  business  practice  this 
concept  is largely  used in restaurant,  cafe's , hotel.  
 
Gross  margin  
Gross  margin  is the total sales minus  cost of goods  sold or cogs.  
 
Groundbreaking  
Pioneering  efforts  
 
Google  
Google  is owned  by parent  compa ny alphabet  and founded  in 
1998 . The company  behind  search  engine  which  controls  search  
engine  
 
Google + 
It was used for personal  and business  pages  with featured  info 
which  is no longer  functioning  as social  media  platforms  
 
 
 126 Google  analytics  
It is a web analytic  service  that provides  us with basic  and statistic al 
analytical  tool for search  engine  
 
Google  AdWords  
It’s an online  ad platform  which  allows  any ads to reach  all the 
customers  through  search  and display  networks  
 
Google  chrome  security  
Warnings  Google  made  its security  stronger  by taking  steps  that 
enco urages  hypertext  transfer  protocol  secure  certificates  for 
websites , so if any user visit websites  without  https  are now shown  
with a warning  message  
 
Google  free update  
It is algorithm  update  that targets  black -hat tactics . it includes  an 
overload  on ads, low-value  content  
 
Google  home  
A device  from  Google  for consumers  that connects  to their home  
network  and can perform  
A variety  of tasks through  voice  commands.  
 
Google  maps  
Application  that guides  you with any location  and navigates  to your 
destination.  
 
Google  my business  
It is a free tool that allows  you to take charge  of the way your 
business  appears  on Google  search  and maps  
 
Google  partner  agency  
To be a part of Google  partner  agency  you should  have  AdWords 
certified  employee  affiliated  to the compan y profile  and perform  
the other  related  tasks  for maintaining  and growing  the customer  
base 
 
Google  hummingbird  
Hummingbird  is the code name  given  to a particular  algorithm  
that is changed  in Google  search  127 General  agreement  on tariffs  and trade  (GATT)  
A framework  which  focuses  on giving  the set of rules and 
regulations  which  has to be followed  in order  to have  liberali zing 
trade  with the member  countries  
 
Geocentrism  
An induction  of world  strategic  market  
 
Global  environment  
Recording  the uncontrolled  facto rs which  a marketer  has to 
account  in order  to balance  the global  operation  
Global  evaluation  
It is a process  of 4 stages  in organizational  development  focusing  
from  domestic  that is first stage  to the 4th stage  which  is global  
strategic  marketing  and then re organizing  the market  
opportunities  
 
Global  marketing  
Marketing  with the global  worldwide  and having  the perspective  to 
meet  the global  objectives  
 
Global  products   
Or services  organi zed for the global  marketing  segments  
 
Gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  
The marginal  value  of products  and services  produced  by a country  
in one economic  year 
 
Gross  national  product  (GNP)  
The marginal  accounts  of product  and services  of the country  
which  has output  value  of one economic  year 
 
Google  instant  
A feature  by Google  for search  engine  that shows  the search  results  
as the keyword  question  that is being  typed  
 
Guerilla  marketing  
An unconventional  marketing  intended  to get maximum  outputs  
from  minimum  resources.  
 128 Guest  blogging  
Writing  a web log post to be printed  on another blog as a short  live 
feature  by an author  
 
Geo -Marketing  
Geo-Marketing involves incorporating geographical intelligence 
within a marketing campaign. The chances of a geo -marketing 
campaign failing are significantly reduced due to it being based on 
facts and statistics.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  129 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“If you’re not failing now and again, it’s a sign you’re not doing 
anything innovative.”  
— Woody Allen  
  
130 H 
Halftone  
A method  of reproducing  a black  and white  photograph  or 
illustration,  by representing  various  shades  of gray as a series  of 
black  and white  dots.  
 
Hierarchy -of-effects  theory  
A series  of steps  by which  consumers  receive  and use information  
in reaching  decisions  about  what  actions  they will take (e.g.,  
whether  or not to buy a product).  
 
Holding  power  
The ability  to keep an audience  throughout  a broadcast,  rather  
than having  them  change  channels.  It is represented  as a percent  
of the total audience.  
 
Holdover  audience  
The percent  of a program's  audience  that watched  or listened  to 
the immediately  preceding  program  on the same  station.  Also 
called  Inherited  audience  (see below).  
 
Hologram  
A three -dimensional  photograph  or illustration,  created  with an 
optical  process  that uses lasers.  
 
Horizontal  discount  
A discount  on a media  purchase  resulting  from  a promise  to 
advertise  over an extended  period  of time.  
 
Horizontal  publications  
Business  publications  designed  to appeal  to people  of similar  
interests  or responsibilities  in a variety  of companies  or industries.  
 
Host/Hostess  gift 
A gift to a consumer  who sponsors  a sales demonstration  party  or 
meeting.  
 
 131 Hot composition  
A method  of typesetting  that uses molten  metal  to form  the letters  
for a typeface.  See Cold  type,  above.  
 
House  agency  
An advertising  agency  owned  and operated  by an advertiser,  which  
handles  the advertiser's  account.  
 
House  organ  
A publication  owned  and operated  by an advertiser,  and used to 
promote  the advertiser's  products  or services.  
 
Households  using  television  (HUT)  
The number  of households  in a given  market  watching television  
at a certain  time.  This term is used by 
A.C.  Nielsen.  
 
HBA  
An abbreviation  for the "health  and beauty  aid" product  
category.14  
 
Hard  Goods  
This term  is sometimes  used synonymously  with "durable  goods,"  
i.e., consumer  goods  expected  to last longer  then three  years.  It also 
sometimes  refers  specifically  to consumer  durables  made  
principally  from  metal  such as most  electrical  appliances,  
automobiles,  cutlery,  and tools.1  
 
Horizontal  Integration  
The expansion  of a company  through  the acquisitio n of other  
companies  engaged  in the same  stage  of production  of the same  
product.  An example  would  be the acquisition  of one chain  of 
apparel  retailers  by another.1  
 
House  Agency  
An advertising  agency  offering  full or limited  service  capabilities  
owned  wholly or in part by an advertiser  who typically  is the 
agency's  only or most  important  client.2  
 
 132 Hiatus  
A period  during  a campaign  when  an advertiser's  schedule  is 
suspended  for a time,  after which  it resumes.  
 
HH (Household)  
A private  household  consists  of either  one person  living  alone  or a 
group  of persons  who are related  by blood,  marriage  or adoption,  
commonly  staying  together  and sharing  food from  the same  
kitchen.  (Two  or more  friends/  colleagues  living  together  in a 
house  will not be considered  a hous ehold.  Servants  and paying  
guests  or Hostels  will not be included  in households.)  
 
HS (Household  Size)  
The total number  of members  in the household  staying  and sharing  
food from  a common  kitchen  is known  as the household  size. It 
includes  children  of all ages by excludes  servants  and guests.  
 
Housewife  
The person  in the household  who takes  decisions  with regard  to 
purchase  o household  commodities  normally  listed  in the provision  
list. 
 Need  not always  decide  on the brands.  
 Need  not always  physically  go the shop to buy these  products;  
the housewife  may only be suggesting  the requirements  while  
someone  else implements  it. 
 Housewife  may be a male  or female.  
 
HTTP  (HyperText  Transfer  Protocol)  
The protocol  for moving  hypertext  files across  the internet.  
 
Hyperte xt 
Generally,  any text that contains  links to other  documents  – words  
or phrases  in the document  that can be chosen  by a reader  and 
which  cause  another  document  to be retrieved  and displayed.  
 
HAN  (Home -Area  Network)  
A network  contained  within  a user's  home that connects  a person's  
digital  devices.  
 133 #Hashtag  
The # symbol,  called  a hashtag,  is used to mark  keywords  or topics  
in a Tweet.  It was created  organically  by Twitter  users  as a way to 
categorize  messages.  
 
Hit 
As used in reference  to the World  Wide  Web. Hit means  a single  
request  from  a web browser  for a single  item from  a web server;  
thus in order  for a web browser  to display  a page that contains  three  
graphics,  four hits would  occur  at the server:  1 for the HTML  page,  
and one for each of the 3 graphi cs. 
 
Home  Page  (or Homepage)  
Originally,  it is the web page  that your browser  is set to use when  
it starts  up. The more  common  meaning  refers  to the main  web 
page  for a business,  organization , person  or simply  the main  page  
out of a collection  of web pages . 
 
HSIA  (High  Speed  Internet  Access)  
Broadband  internet  coverage  with speeds  in excess  of 256 
Kilobytes  Per Second  (KBPS).  
 
HTML  (HyperText  Markup  Languages)  
The coding  language  used to create  Hypertext  documents  for use 
on the World  Wide  Web.  
 
Head -On 
A poster panel  or painted  bulletin  located  so that it directly  faces  
approaching  traffic.  
 
HDTV  
High  Definition  TV. The highest  quality  digital  television,  
generally  widescreen  16:9.  It consists  of either  1080  interlaced  or 
720 progressively  scanned  lines of resolution  and includes  the 
ability  to transmit  digital  surround  sound.  Note  that HDTV  and 
DTV  is not the same  thing  — HDTV  is one format  of DTV  
 
Hidden  gem  
Hidden  gems  refers  to something  that is unique  
 134 High  speed  retail  
High  speed  retail  practice  speeds  up the customers  shopping  
experience,  it entails  prompt  and fast delivery  of goods  and services  
to customers.  
 
Hoax  
A deliberately  fabricated  falsehood  
 
Holistic  
This reflects  interconnectivity  and is characterized  by belief  only 
with reference  to a whole.  
 
Horizontal  
Horizontal  means  a specific  offering  or opportunity  in the market.  
 
Hyperlink  
A word  or a button  within a file on your computer  which  can help 
you to go to other  document  or image.  
HARO  (help  a reporter  out) 
It is an online  service  for journal ists to obtain  directly  from  the 
public.  
 
Hashtag  
It is a symbol  '#'/1used in social  media  as a way for tagging  content  
for users  and find something  related  information  
 
Header  
It is the top portion  of a webpage  that contains  logo, menu  etc 
 
Header  code  
On any websites  a certain  code is placed  in universal  header  section  
so that it can be accessible  across  all pages  of the website  at any 
time.  
 
Header  tags  (H1,  H2, H3, etc.) 
Header  tags are used in hypertext  markup  language  for 
categorizing  text headings  on a web page.  
 
H1 
It is used to display  important  titles on any web pages  only once 135 H2 
Used  to display  major  subtopics  of a web page 
 
H3 
Any subtopics  can be added  beneath  h2 
 
Heatmap  
It is a software  that gives  a graphical  representation  of how users  
interact on your sites like where  you click, how you scroll  
 
HTML  
It stands  for hypertext  markup  language.  It is a set of codes  that 
tells a web browser  how to display  a webpage  and each code is 
known  as tag 
 
HTTP  
It stands  for hypertext  transfer  protocol. /1It is a protocol  that is 
used by the world  wide web to define  how the data is formatted  
and transmitted  in response  to a command.  
 
HTTPS  
It stands  for hypertext  transfer  protocol  secure.  It iss a secured  
version  of http, where  it is used to define  how data is formatted  and 
transmitted  across  the web. 
 
Hedging  
A mechanism  which  prevents  from  risk and barriers  of decline  in 
market  with commodity  or avoids  risks which  can affect  the market  
in future  
 
High  context  culture  
A conversation  which  doesn’t  gives  much  of importance  on verbal  
or non-verbal  communication  
 
Heatmap  
A graphical  illustration  of knowledge  wherever  variable  degrees  of 
one metric  are shown  exploitation  colors  
 
Hit request  
Of a file from  a web server  136 House  ad 
Self-promotional  ad of an organizat ion that runs on their own 
site/network  to use unsold  inventory  
 
HTML  banner  
A banner  ad exploitation  of markup  language  parts,  usually  as well 
as interactive  forms  rather  than (or additionally  to) normal  
graphical  parts  
 
HTML  email  
Email  that's  formatted  exploitation  to machine -readable  text 
nomenclature,  as critical  plain  text email  
 
Hybrid  model  
It’s a combination  of 2 or more  of on-line selling  payment  models  
Impression  it is a single  instance  of a web ad being  displayed  
 
Horizontal Marketing  
Horizonta l Marketing is the collaboration and sharing of resources 
between a business and another company that operates in a related 
niche to market a product or service.  
 
H2H (Human to Human) Marketing  
H2H Marketing focuses on engaging with prospects, to build and  
nurture relationships rather than purely focusing on conversions. 
The need to make customers feel important features greatly in 
order for them to truly consider you as a contender for their 
purchase and later, loyalty.  
 
  137 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 “Failure is simply the opportunity to begin again, this time more 
intelligently.”  
— Henry Ford  
  
138 I 
ID 
Station  identification  during  a commercial  break  in a television  or 
radio  program.  
 
Image  advertising  
Promoting  the image,  or general  perception,  of a product  or 
service,  rather  than promoting  its functional  attributes.  Commonly  
used for differentiating  brands  of parity  products  (e.g., "This  is a 
woman's  cigarette"). .  
 
Illiterate  
A person  who cannot  “read  by self and understand”  any language  
is classified  as an illiterate  
 
Imprinted  product  
A promotional  product,  this is a product  with a company  logo or 
advertising  message  printed  on it. 
 
In-pack  premium  
A premium  included  in the packaging  of another  product  (e.g.,  buy 
a can of shaving  cream  and get a free razor in the same  package).  
The term  Package  enclosure  is also used.  
 
Incentive  catalog  company  
A company  that creates  an incentive  program  for sales people,  and 
provides  them  with a catalog  from  which  they can select  their prize  
or premium.  
 
Independent  cont ractor  
A person  who is hired  by a company,  but works  for himself/herself.  
The company  is a client,  rather  than an employer.  
 
Independent  station  
A broadcast  station  that is not affiliated  with a national  network  of 
stations.  
 
 139 Industrial  advertising  
A form  of business -to-business  advertising  (see above),  this is 
advertising  aimed  at manufacturers.  This advertising  typically  
promotes  parts,  equipment,  and raw materials  used in the 
manufacturing  process.  
 
Inherited  audience  
Same  as Holdover  audience,  above.  
 
Inquiries  
Consumer  response  to a company's  advertising  or other  
promotional  activities,  such as coupons.  Used  for measuring  the 
effectiveness  of some  promotions.  
 
Insert  
An advertisement,  collection  of advertisements,  or other  
promotional  matter  published  by an advertiser  or group  of 
advertisers,  to be inserted  in a magazine  or newspaper.  It may be 
bound  into the publication,  or be inserted  without  binding.  See 
Free-standing  insert,  above.  
 
Iframe  
It is an html structure , which  allows  another  html document  to be 
inserted  into that page . It is often  used to insert  content  from  
another  source .  
 
Impression  share  
The actual  percentage  of impression  that a advertisment  received  
in compared  to the total number  of impression  it was eligible  for. 
 
Inbound  marketing  
A technique  of marketing  that engages  with audience  and take 
them  to useful  content  "organically".  
 
Index  
An index  can be described  as a guide,  list or sign or a number  used 
to measure  change . In market  index  it is a metric  that tracks  the 
performance  of your goods/  stocks.  
 
 140 IP address  
Internet  protocol  address  it is a unique  address  that can be identify  
any device  on internet  and helps  to tell the location  of the user.  
 
Insertion  
Refers  to an ad in a print  publication.  
This refers  to an advertisement  in a print  medium.  
 
Insertion  order  
An agency  or advertiser's  authorization  for a publisher  to run a 
specific  ad in a specific  print  publication  on a certain  date at a 
specified  price.  
 
Institutional  advertising  
Advertising  to promote  an institution  or organiza tion, rather  than 
a product  or service,  in order  to create  public  support  and goodwill.  
 
Intaglio  
A form  of printing  that results  in a raised  or engraved  print  surface.  
 
Integrated  Marketing  Communication  (IMC)  
A management  concept  that is designed  to make  all aspects  of 
marketing  communication  (e.g., advertising,  sales promotion,  
public  relations,  and direct  marketing)  work  together  as a unified  
force,  rather  than permitting  each to work  in isolation.  
 
Intensive  distribution  
Distributing  a product  through  a wide variety  of outlets.  
 
International  advertising  
Advertising  a product  or service  in a country  other  than where  it 
originates.  
 
Island  display  
An in-store  product  display  situated  away  from  competing  
products,  typically  in the middle  or at the end of an aisle.  
 
Island  position  141 A print  ad that is completely  surrounded  by editorial  material,  or a 
broadcast  ad surrounded  by program  content,  with no adjoining  
advertisements  to compete  for audience  attention.  
 
Implementation  
The effective  execution  of market ing strategy  at the functional  (e.g., 
sales force  management),  programmatic  (e.g.,  product  
management),  and policy  levels  of the firm.  Implementation  
involves  the organization,  interaction,  allocation,  and control  
necessary  to carry  out strategic  plans  efficiently  and effectively.  
 
Impulse  Purchase  
A purchase  decision  made  on the spur of the moment,  without  
prior  planning.  
 
In Stock  Program  
The maintenance  by a vendor  of an inventory  of finished  goods  
which  a purchaser  can buy and receive  delivery  on virtua lly 
immediately.  
 
Industrial  Goods  
Goods  intended  to be sold for use in producing  other  goods  rather  
than to the ultimate  consumer.  
 
Industrial  Marketing  
Marketing  goods  to companies  (or the government  or nonprofit  
groups)  rather  than to individual  consu mers  
 
Information  Resources,  Inc. 
A market  research  firm which  has developed  Behavior  Scan,  a 
service  in which  all stores  in a market  are provided  with scanning  
equipment,  and data are collected  at the household  level.  
 
Initiators  
Those  individuals  who start the purchase  process  in motion  
through  their recognition  that a company  problem  can be solved  
or avoided  through  purchasing  a product  or service.4  (See DMU.)  
 
 
 142 Installment  Credit  
Consumer  credit  which  is repaid  in periodic  installments  over a 
period  of time.6  
 
Intensive  Distribution  
The sale of a product  through  a large  percentage  of the available  
wholesale  or retail  units  in a defined  market  area.11  
 
Inventory  
Unsold  goods,  or elements  of unsold  goods.  Finished  goods  
inventory  are products  ready  for sale, such as, for example,  canned  
goods  awaiting  shipment  from  a factory  to a supermarket.  Work  in 
process  inventory  are products  in the process  of production,  such 
as, for example,  an automobile  engine  prior  to the final assembly  
of the vehicle.  Raw  material  inventory  are commodities  which  are 
still in the condition  in which  they were  acquired  from  a supplier  
and which  have not yet entered  the production  process.  Crude  oil 
stored  at a refinery  would  be an example.  
 
Invoice  
A business  form  showing  the items  shipped  and charges  levied  by 
the seller  at the time of the shipment  to the buyer.19  
 
Irregulars  
Merchandise  containing  some  flaw such as poor fit or poor 
workmanship.  
 
Impacts  
Estimate  of the number  of actual  exposures  to advertisements.  
 
Incremental  Reach  
Incremental  Reach  is the positive  change  in the reach  number,  
resulting  from  the addition  of an insertion  in a publication  or the 
addition  of a publication.  
 
INS (Indian  Newspapers  Society)  
Indian  Newspaper  Society  was founded  in 1939  with an objective  
of acting  as a central  organization  in Press,  and to collect  all 
information  of interests  to it members.  Other  important  function  
of this body  is to promote  co-operation  amongst  its members.  143 IRS (Indian  Readership  Survey)  
IRS is the largest  continuous  readers hip research  study  in the world  
with an annual  sample  size exceeding  2.5 lakh respondents.  In 
addition  to readership  of newspapers  and magazines  IRS also 
measures  other  media  consumption  namely,  television  viewing,  
radio  listening,  cinema  attendance  and internet  usage.  IRS collects  
a comprehensive  range  of demographic  information  and provides  
extensive  coverage  of consumer  and product  categories,  including  
cars, household  appliances,  household  durables,  household  care 
and personal  care products,  food and beverages  etc…  IRS also 
provides  in-depth  understanding  of media  behavior  through  its 
expanded  media  measures  such as time spent  using  different  media  
and frequency  of media  usage).  
 
Impression  
An impression  is the number  of times  your ads were  shown  across  
various  media,  i.e., TV, Radio,  Internet  advertising,  etc. 
It is a term used to quantify  the number  of views  or engagement  on 
your advertis ement/content.  
 
Interviewer  
The person  who is administering  the interview.  
 
ISD (IRS  Sampling  District)  
The IRS Sampli ng District  is a cluster  of 'geographically  
contiguous  districts'  within  a SCR  (Socio -Cultural  Region).  This 
ISD demarcation  allows  micro  level analyze s of IRS data.  
 
IAMAI  (Internet  And Mobile  Association  of India)  
The Internet  & Mobile  Association  of India (IAMAI)  is a not-for-
profit  industry  body  registered  under  the Societies  Act, 1896.  Its 
mandate  is to expand  and enhance  the online  and mobile  value  
added  services  sectors.  The association  also addresses  the issues,  
concerns  and challenges  of the Intern et and Mobile  economy  and 
takes  a leading  role in its development.  
 
Instagram  
A social networking platform geared around sharing images 
and short videos. U.S. marketers spend 31% of their 
Instagram ad budget on Stories and the rest 69% for newsfeed.  144 Inte rnet  
The vast collection  of inter-connected  computer  networks.  The 
Internet  connects  tens of thousands  of independent  networks  into 
a vast global  internet  and is probably  the largest  Wide  Area  
Network  in the world.  
 
Intranet  
A private  computer  network  within an organization . 
 
IP Number  (Internet  Protocol  Number)  
It is sometimes  called  a dotted  quad.  A unique  number  consisting  
of four parts  separated  by dots,  e.g.; 165.113.245.2  Every  machine  
that is on the Internet  has a unique  IP number  - if a machine  does 
not have  an IP number,  it is not really  on the Internet.  Many  
machines  (especially  servers)  also have  one or more  Domain  Names  
that are easier  for people  to remember.  
 
ISDN  (Integrated  Services  Digital  Network)  
It is a very high-speed  telephone  & internet  connectivity  facility.  It 
can provide  speeds  of roughly  128000  bits-per-second  over regular  
phone  lines.  In practice  most  people  will be limited  to 56,000  or 
64,000  bits-per-second.  
Illuminated  Unit  
An outdoor  unit equipped  with lighting  that provides  night time 
illumination  of an advertising  message,  usually  from  dusk until 
midnight.  The EOIs  for an illuminated  unit are calculated  using  an 
18 or 24 hour  viewing  period.  
 
Illegal  Sign  
A sign that was erected  or maintained  in violation  of the State  law, 
these are Rules  and Regulations,  or local law or ordinance.  
 
Illuminated  
Outdoor  structure  with internal  or external  electrical  equipment  
installed  to expose  the advertiser's  message  to night -time 
circulation.  
 
Impact  
The degree  of success  of a campaign  measur ed by the combined  
value  of coverage  and repetition.  It is determined  by the number  145 of people  exposed  to the ad multiplied  by the average  number  of 
times  exposed  during  a predefined  period.  
 
Impressions  
This is a term  used by media  to describe  and quantify  the number  
of individuals  who have an "opportunity"  to see an advertisement  
in a given  amount  of time.  
 
Indoor  Advertising  
Indoor  advertising  panels  located  in heavy  pedestrian  traffic  areas,  
such as public  restrooms  and nightclubs.  
 
In-Store  Display  
Indo or Advertising  panels  located  in stores  and other  retail  venues  
with heavy  pedestrian  traffic.  
IOAA  (Indian  Outdoor  Advertising  Association)  
Indian  Outdoor  Advertising  Association  (IOAA)  is a 'not-for-profit'  
company  with limited  liability.  
Its main  object ive is to promote,  protect  and advance  the 
professional  and rightful  interests  of the Outdoor  Advertising  
Media  organization s, related  people,  and companies  and of the 
medium  itself.  
 
IOS (Indian  Outdoor  Survey)  
Indian  Outdoor  Survey  (IOS)  is the only media  planning  and 
buying  tool for outdoor  medium  in India.  It is the first syndicated  
study  on the outdoor  medium  that resolves  some  of the key 
concerns  of advertisers,  media  agencies  and the media  owners  in 
India.  
 
IBF (Indian  Broadcasting  Foundation)  
Indian  Broadcasting  Foundation  (IBF)  was established  in 1999.  
One of its objectives  are to promote,  aid, help,  encourage,  develop  
protect  and secure  the interests  of the Indian  television  industry  and 
other  related  entities,  and to disseminate  knowledge,  regardin g the 
latest  developments  in the television  industry,  amongst  its 
members.  
 
  146 Infomercial  
A long (more  than two minutes)  commercial  providing  extensive  
product/service  description  and sales information.  
An audio  or video  segment  that combines  advertising  with 
information,  sold as a commercial  and available  on some  cable  
networks  and other  broadcast  media.  
A commercial  that is very similar  in appearance  to a news  program,  
talk show,  or other  non-advertising  program  content.  The 
broadcast  equivalent  of an Advert orial (see above).  
 
In-house  
Referring  to a division  or unit that is part of or within  an 
organization , but is differentiated  from  an outside  agency.  
 
Ideal  customer  profile  (ICP)  
An ideal  customer  profile  is a type of class which  possess  all the 
desirable  attributes  which  increases  the possibility  of a purchase.  
These  attributes  include  qualities  like location,  age, gender,  
financial  capacity,  lifestyle  etc. They  are the perfect  types  of client.  
 
Inbound  
Inbound  refers  to interest  that comes  in. For exampl e, press  
enquiries,  contact  form  responses  and much  more.  
 
Inbound  sales  
Inbound  sales is a process  or transaction  plus method  which 
happens  when  a customer  is directly  approaching,  engaging  or is 
loyal  to your brand.  This is done by focusing  on needs  and leading  
them  to solutions  strategically.  
 
Independent  software  vendor  (ISV)  
ISV or an independent  software  vendor  is an organization  which  
specializes  in selling  softwares  by manufacturing.  these  softwares  
are designed  for niche  or mass  markets.  
 
Infrast ructure  as a service  (IAAS)  
Infrastructure  as a service  (IAAS)  is a type of cloud  computing  
which  provides  digital  computing  resources  on the internet.it  is a 
part of 3 types  of cloud  service  - software  as a service  (SAAS),  and 147 platform  as a service  (PAAS) . Examples  of IAAS  are backend  
functions  like amazon  web services  (AWS),  Zapier,  Docker,  etc. 
 
Initial  public  offering  (IPO)  
IPO initial  public  offering  is the sale of stocks  which  are issued  by 
the private  company  to public  for the first time.  
 
Inmail  mes sages  
Inmail  messages  are a feature  of Linked In which  is a professional  
networking  platform.  These  are introductory  emails  which  are sent 
to LinkedIn  members  you are not connected  with.  
 
Innovative  
Creative  thinking  and introduction  of fresh  ideas  which  can be an 
enhanced  version  of current  /existing  concepts  
 
Inside  sales  rep 
Inside  sales representatives  are sales people  who conduct  maximum  
ales which  are processed  remotely  via phone  or online.  
 
IVR systems  
IVR systems  is interactive  voice  recordings  which  are nowadays  
utilized  in custom er support.  
 
Ideology  
Organization  of a single  individual  
 
Income  elasticity  measurements  
An explanation  which  shows  the relationship  between  the demands  
and supply  of goods  and services  
 
Income  per capita  
The balance  sheet  of overall  goods  and services  output  by the 
country  and divided  with the total number  of people  in a country  
 
Inflation  
A situation  where  the demand  of specific  goods  or services  increases  
but the supply  decreases  
 
 148 Information  system  
Set of data conveyed  accordingly  so as to understand  the content  
which  helps  in proper  business  decision  making  
 
Interactive  plans  
A planning  system  which  sets the policies  rules and regulations  
from  the higher  authority  which  gives  the idea to handle  local 
conditions  
 
Interna tional  monetary  fund  
The funds  provided  by the world  wide membership  on a short  term  
for a country  to balance  the economic  uncertainty  in the country  
 
International  product  life cycle  
It is a model  which  shows  the up bringing  or evolving  of a company  
which  crosses  the national  borders  
 
International  products  
Receiving  goods  except  from  the home  country  / getting  products  
from  international  outsources  
 
Inbound  link 
A link from  a website  outside  of your site 
 
Inbound  marketing  
A marketing  model  whose  sales performance  depends  on the 
initiative  of its customer -based  to search  out and buy a product  
 
Incentivized  traffic /1visitors  
Who  have received  some  form  of compensation  for visiting  a site. 
 
Interactive  agency  
An agency  giving  a combination  of net design/dev elopment,  net 
advertising/marketing,  or e-business/ecommerce  consulting  
 
Interstitial  
An advertisement  that loads  between  two content  pages  
 
Invisible  web  
The portion  of the online  not indexed  by search  engines  149 Imagine  
Thinking  or creating  an image  of something  or someone  
 
Influencer Marketing  
Influencer Marketing is the concept of using a well -known person 
or celebrity who has a degree of influence over a certain audience 
– to market a product or service. Digital presence is becoming more 
and more importa nt and the predicted impact of an influencer on 
a campaign could be gauged by their number of social media 
followers! By establishing a relationship with an influencer, it’s 
possible to leverage their positioning and grow your brand quickly.  
 
Integrated Ma rketing  
Integrated Marketing as a strategy, is about trying to create a 
seamless experience for a consumer, no matter which channel they 
are choosing to engage with your brand. In other words, your 
brand needs to look and feel the same across every medium whilst 
representing the same core values.  
 
ISP 
An ISP stands for Internet Service Provider. It is a company that 
provides access to the internet. There are around 2,000 ISP 
businesses (IBISWorld).  
 
 
  150 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
The best way to go ahe ad in business is to create a value 
proposition that is unbeatable, and not to say that someone needs 
to be able to help me for me to do that.  
— Dr Pawan Goenka, Former Managing Director, Mahindra & 
Mahindra  
  
151 J 
Jingle  
A short  song,  usually  mentioning  a brand or product  benefit,  used 
in a commercial.  
A programming  element  such as an anthem  or musical  song 
produced  by professional  studio  singers  for commercials  or radio  
station  promotional  announcements.  
 
Jumble  display  
A mixture  of products  or brands  on a single display,  such as a 
clearance  table.  
 
Jobber  
A term  with specialized  meanings  in various  industries  but which  
is generally  synonymous  with wholesaler.7  
 
Joint  Venture  
An arrangement  in which  one company  shares  the risks,  posts,  and 
management  of a specific business  project  with another.19,5  A 
joint venture  differs  from  a partnership  in that it is not necessarily  
conceived  of as an ongoing  relationship.1  
 
Judgmental  selection  
Where  the starting  points  are selected  judgmentally  which  will have 
respondent s as required  in the study.  
 
JavaScript  
A scripting  language  that allows  lines of Java code  to be inserted  
into HTML  scripts.  
According to Mozilla, Javascript is “a cross -platform, object -
oriented scripting language.” Javascript is used by over 90 
percent of websites (W3Techs).  
 
JPEG  (Joint  Photographic  Experts  Group)  
JPEG  is most  commonly  used as a format  for image  or picture  files. 
JPEG  format  is preferred  to the GIF because  of flexib ility options.  
 
 152 Java  
First released  by sun microsystem  in 1995  java is one of the mostly  
used language  and computing  platform . It is used as a server  side 
long for most  backend  development  projects.  
 
Javascript  (JS) 
It is an object  oriented  computer  programming  language . It is 
commonly used to create  interactive  effects  within  client  side and 
server  side. 
A scripting  language  developed  by Netscape  that is used to create  
interactive  web sites 
 
Joint  ventures  
An enterprise  where  there  are more  than one owner  having  equal  
amount  of ratio in a business  
 
Jingle Marketing  
A jingle is  a short, catchy song or tune most commonly used 
in TV and radio advertising, which contains one or more 
hooks that explicitly promote the product or service being 
advertised.  
  153 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
"The aim of marketing is to know and understand the customer so 
well the product or service fits him and sells itself."  
— Peter F. Drucker  
  
154 K 
Keeper  
A premium  used to induce  a consumer  to take some  action,  such 
as completing  a survey  or trying  a product.  
 
Kerning  
Spacing  between  the letters  of a word.  
 
Keystone  Markup  
Doubling  the cost to arrive  at a price.  Thus  a men's  clothing  store  
which  purchases  a suit at $125  and retails  it for $250  is "keystoning"  
it.14 
 
Knockoff  
The exact  or similar  reproduction  of another  firm's  
merchandise.14  
 
Kish  Grid  Selection  
It is a technique  used to randomly  select  an individual  from  a 
household  for the purpose  of administering  the “individual”  section  
of the questionnaire.  This technique  enables  proper  representation  
of the universe  in a random  sample  survey.  
 
Kiosk  
A small  panel  available  on lampposts  or dividers  on roads.  
 
Key accounts  
Key accounts  in business  organizations  are whale  spenders  or very 
important  customers  which  are prioritized  due to their spends.  
They  are those  clients  who have  the potential  to cause  loss or profit  
of an organization.  
 
Key performance  indicators  (KPI)  
KPI or key performance  indicators  are relevant  and measurable  
values  which  indicate  whether  an organization  or individual  has 
succeeded  in achieving  the target  or a desired  level of performance . 
 
 
 155 Keyboard  analysis  
Analyzing  the keywords  or a phrase  for the purpose  of search  
engine  optimi zation,  to make  the website  appear  first in the organic  
section  of the search  engine  and also the paid ads section  is known  
as keyword  analysis  
 
Keystone  pricing  
Keystone  pricing  is a method  of selling  merchandise  for double  its 
markup  price  to make  a reasonable  profit.  
 
Kickers  
Kickers  are bonuses  in the monetary  form.  They are referred  to as 
extra  commissions  which  are offered  to motivate  sales professionals  
to exceed  targets  in a particular  market  segment.  
 
Keyword  
A particular  word  or phrase  which  you type on a search  engine  and 
that derives  you to your desired  result  is keyword.  
 
Keyword  phrase  
A group  of two or more  words  typed  on a search  engine  for getting  
most  relevant  result  is known  as keyword  phrase  
 
Keyword  density  
The percentage  of times  your keyword/phrase  appears  on a page 
is compare  to the total number  of words  on the page . It is often  
used to check  the relevancy  of keyword  or phrase  to the web page 
result.  
 
Keyword  stuffing  
When  keyword s are often  repeated  multiple  time in order  to 
improve  page's  ranking  in search  is refer as keyword  stuffing .  
 
Knowledge  graph  
A knowledge  graph  is organi zed as a graph . It is also a knowledge  
representation  and reasoning  that uses graph  structure  data model.  
 
Knowledge  panel  
These  are the information  boxes  that appear  on Google  page that 
are in knowledge  graph.  156 Keyword  
A word  that is used in a performing  a search  with a concept  of great  
significance.  
Giving  the result before  typing  the spellin g of a particular  word  
 
Keyword  density  
A proportion  of indexable  text words  
Refers  to how often  the keyword  appears  on a web page  in regards  
with the total words  on the web page 
 
Keyword  marketing  
Putting  your message  in front  of people  who searches  using  
particular  keywords  and key phrases  
 
Keyword  research  
The seek for keywords  related  to your web site, and the analysis  of 
which  ones yield  to the outcome  in return  on investment  
 
Keyword  stuffing  
Its the excessive,  unnatural  use of keywords  on any web pages /1for 
computer  program  improvement  functions  or any other  purposes.  
It’s the practice  of inserting  a larger  number  of key words  into web 
page  content  
 
Keywords  tag 
Meta  tag is used to help in defining  the primary  keywords  of a web 
page  
 
Keyword  phrase  
Giving  2 or more  words  to find the appropriate  or any specific  
information  
 
Knowledge  graph  
It represents  a collection  of interlinked  descriptions  of entitles , 
objects , events  or concepts  
 
Knowledge  panel  
A graph  you see while  searching  about  famous  personality , things  
etc. 
 157 Keyword Marketing  
Keywords are the words used individually or as part of a 
‘keyphrase’ to describe your products and services in the digital 
medium, as part of your SEO strategy. They are also essential in 
search marketing and PPC (Pay Per Click) planning and execution.  
 
  158 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
"Marketing is too important to be left to the marketing 
department."  
—  David Packard  
  
159 L 
Lanham  Act 
Federal  trademark  law. 
 
Layout  
A drawing  that indicates  the relative  positions  of the elements  (e.g.,  
headline,  photo,  logo,  body  copy,  etc.) of an ad. 
 
Leading  
The space  between  lines of type.  
 
Leave -behind  
A premium  left with prospective  customers  by a sales person,  to 
remind  them  of the product  or service  being  sold. 
 
 
Letterpress  
A printing  method  that stamps  ink onto paper,  using  raised  
lettering.  
 
Lifestyle  segmentation  
Separating  consumers  into groups,  based  on their hobbies,  
interests,  and other  aspects  of their lifestyles.  
 
Linage  
Refers  to the size of an ad, based  on the number  of lines of type 
taken  up by the ad. 
 
Line  conversion  
A high-contrast  reproduction  of an illustration,  where  all shading  
is reduced  to either  black  or white.  
 
List broker  
An agent  who sells lists of sales prospects.  
 
Lithography  
A printing method  in which  the printing  and non-printing  areas  
exist on the same  plane,  as opposed  to a bi-leveled  reproduction.  160 Local  advertising  
(1) Advertising  to a local  merchant  or business  as opposed  to 
regional  or national  advertising.  
(2) Advertising  placed  at rates available  to local merchants.  
 
Local  rate  
An advertising  rate charged  to a local advertiser , typically  a retailer,  
by local media  and publications,  as distinguished  from  a national  
rate that is charged  to a national  advertiser,  typically  a 
manufactur er. 
 
Logotype  (logo)  
A brand  name,  publication  title, or the like, presented  in a special  
lettering  style or typeface  and used in the manner  of a trademark.  
 
 
Loss  leader  
A retail  item advertised  at an invitingly  low price  in order  to attract  
customers  for the purchase  of other,  more  profitable  merchandise.  
 
Lottery  
A scheme  in which  making  a required  purchase  gives  a person  a 
chance  to win a prize  which  is awarded  at random,  usually  through  
an electronic  drawing.  Lotteries  may not be used as promotion  
devices under  U.S. laws.  
 
Loyalty  index  
Frequency  of listenership  of a particular  broadcast  station.  
 
Landed  Cost  
The total cost of imported  merchandise  including  price  paid,  
transportation,  and crating  but prior  to customs  duties.14  
 
Lay Away  
A method  of deferred payment  in which  merchandise  is held by the 
store  for the customer  until it is completely  paid for.14  
 
 
 161 Lease  
A contract  for the possession  of land,  buildings,  machinery,  patents,  
or some  other  item of value  in return  for periodic  payment  of a 
certain  sum of money.19  
 
Letter  of Credit  
A letter  authorizing  the extension  of credit  or the advance  of money  
to the bearer,  who is usually  named  in the letter.  The credit  or 
advance  is charged  to the person  issuing  the letter.19  
An easy pattern  for international  payment  where  the buyer  guides  
his home  country  bank  to create  a credit  with the sellers  of home  
country  bank  where  the document  are sent and the payment  is 
received  accordingly  
 
Licensing  
The sale of the right  to use some  process,  trademark,  patent,  or 
other item for a fee or royalty.  
 
Line  Extension  
A new product  which  is a variation  on a product  already  offered.  
This new product  is introduced  in order  to exploit  the equity  
already  built up in other  product(s)  in the line and/or  as a 
competitive  reactio n to the strategies  of other  firms  in a market.  
 
List Price  
The price  shown  on the sales list of the seller.  It is used as the basis  
from  which  discounts  may be computed  for various  classes  of 
buyers.  
 
Local  Advertising  
Advertising  appearing  in one or more  specific  localities  as 
distinguished  from  regional  or national  advertising.  
 
Locker  Stock  
The shipment  by a manufacturer  or wholesaler  of extra  inventory  
which  is held in a store's  central  warehouse  unopened.  As soon as 
the buyer  needs  any item held in locker stock,  payment  becomes  
due to the vendor  for the entire  shipment.  
 
 162 Loss  Leader  
Merchandise  sold at a loss to attract  customers.  
 
Last  Issue  Readership  
Estimated  number  of people  who claimed  to have read or looked  
at any issue of a publication  during  its Last Issue  Period.  It is almost  
always  synonymous  with Average  Issue  Readership.  
 
Lifestyle  
An expression  used in advertising  research  to describe  a population  
in terms  of its members'  work  and free time,  what  they eat, drink,  
wear,  read,  prefer  to watch on TV, their attitudes  etc. 
 
Likes  
Basically, it is a thumbs up on Facebook. McDonald's 
Facebook page has 80 million likes.  
 
Load  Factor  
The average  number  of person  riding  in each vehicle.  A numerical  
factor  reflecting  average  number  of passengers  in a car which  is 
applied  to vehicle  counts  at advertising  structure  locations,  that 
translate  vehicle  counts  into potential  audience  counts.  
 
Languages  – Can  Read  
All the languages  that a person  can read as well as understand.  
 
Listing  Questionnaire  
It is a very short  questionnaire  where  the basic  details  are (mostly  
demographic)  recorded  for screening  respondents  into categories.  
It is usually  administered  to a larger  sample  size than the 
detailed/main  questionnaire.  The listing  questionnaire  helps  us to 
identify the target  respondent  for the project.  
 
Leased  Line  
Refers  to line such as telephone  line or fiber-optic  cable  that is 
rented  for an exclusive  use by an organization . This allows  faster  
data transfer.  
 
 
 163 Link  
A highlighted  word  or picture  within  a hype rtext document  that 
when  clicked  bring  you to another  place  within  the document  or to 
another  document  altogether.  
A link is an URL  that when  clicked  populates  a set of information  
that could  be showed  in social  media.  
 
Login  
The act of connecting  to a computer  system  by giving  credentials,  
usually  with “username”  and “password.”  
 
Landing  Page  
A landing  page  is the advertiser's  web page to which  a user is 
directed  after clicking  an ad. For affiliate,  CPL and CPA  sales,  it is 
important  that the landing  page  is one which  entices  users  to 
immediately  purchase  a product  or service,  rather  than simply  the 
home  page of the advertising  site. 
 
Lead  
A lead indicates  a potential  customer  who has expressed  interest  in 
a product  or service,  generally  by means  of reques ting additional  
information  or following  through  on an online  registration.  Some  
affiliate  programs  pay on a CPL,  or Cost Per Lead,  basis.  
 
Latitude  
The distance  in degrees  north  and south  from  the equator.  These  
lines run laterally  (horizontally)  around  the globe  and parallel  to 
the equator.  One minute  of latitude  equals  one nautical  mile.  
 
Longitude  
The distance  in degrees  east and west from  the prime  meridian  
established  in Greenwich,  England.  These  lines run vertically  
around  the globe  and connect  the poles. 
 
Lead  
A lead refers  to a potential  customer  which  exhibits  interest  in 
service  or product.  
 
 
 164 Lead  generation  
Lead  generation  means  generating  potential  customers  through  
methods  such as content marketing,  advertising , referrals  and 
sponsors  through  yellow pages  etc. Lead  generation  is also done  
through  blogging , cold calling , affiliate  marketing , 
recommendations  etc. Lead  generation  is nothing  but generating  a 
individual  or a customer  who is potential  enough  to take our 
product  or service.  Tools  genera te leads  by analyzing  which  group  
of customers  can be potential  for the sale of goods  or service  
 
Lead  nurturing  
Lead  nurturing  is the proce ss of developing  long term relationship  
with customers  by utilizing  different  marketing  techniques  and 
developing  a preference  through  products  or services.  
 
Lead  qualification  
Lead  qualification  is the process  of understanding  whether  a 
potential  customer  has the qualities  such as purchasing  ability,  
higher  brand  loyalty  etc. 
 
Lead  scoring  
Lead  scoring  means  assigning  a relative  value  to each leads  with 
the aim of ranking  leads  for engagement  priority.  
 
Learnings  
Key takeaways  from  a specific  activity  
 
Leverage  
Leverage  refers  to the optimal  or maxi mum usage  of a particular  
input  
 
Lifetime  value  (LTV)  
LTV  or life time value of customers  is the total value  from  the 
business  perspective  in terms  of revenue  before  churns.  
 
LIFO  
Last in first out is a principle  were  recently  produced  items  are sold 
first. 
 
 165 Linked In 
Linked In is a social  platform  which  is designed  mainly  for 
professional  networking.  It is a social media platform exclusively 
designed for business professionals. It helps you to share work 
related posts and keep other professionals in contact.  
 
LinkedIn advertising  
Linked in ads typically yield high quality leads and offer larger 
niche targeting option making them an ideal solution for most 
entities.  
 
Logo  
An important  graphic  mark  that is used to identify  a 
brand/company.  The logo must  be unique  to create  awareness  
among  customers.  
 
Loss  aversion  
Loss aversion  refers to the psychological  effect  where  people  feel 
negatively  about  losing  a sum of money  than they do (positively)  
from  gaining  the same  amount.  
 
Low -hanging  fruit  or Lowest Hanging Fruit  
Low hanging  fruits  are prospective  customers  who require  the lest 
effort to get converted  into customers.  
 
Lucrative  
Something  that produces  a great  deal of revenue  or profit  
 
Landing  page  
Landing  page  is a web page  where  you immediately  land on after 
clicking  an URL  from  an email  /ad or any digital  location .  
 
LSI (latent  semantic  indexing)  
LSI is a method  of analyzing  a set of documents  in order  to discover  
statistical  co-occurrence  of words  that appear  together  which  then 
give insight  into the topics  of those  words  and documents.  
 
 
 
 166 Lead  
Lead  in marketing  term inology  refers to contact  with a potential  
customer . The primary  goal of any company  is to generate  as many  
leads  as possible .  
 
Link  profile  
When  a lot of makeup  of links direct  to your site that is called  a link 
profile . 
 
Link  network  
Link network  are groups  of sites that are connected . They  are 
owned  by a single  or multiple  people.  
 
Lookalike  audience  
It is a way of making  your ads reachable  to new customers  who can 
be likely  interested  in your ads because  they share  similar  feature  
to your existing  customers.  
 
Long  tail keyword:  
Keywords  that consists  of three  to five words . These  keywords  are 
more  specific  than generic  terms  they allows  you to target  niche  
demographics.  
 
Levy  
A tax given  by a public  authority  in order  to have specific  objectives  
 
Licensing  
Having  an authority  for a particular  organization  to maintain  co-
operation  with the foreign  operations  which  also gives  authority  for 
the firm to use foreign  prod uction , materials,  trademark  
 
Local  products  
Products  and services  having  only 1 market  
 
Low  context  culture  
Focuses  on the verbal  and written  communication  instead  of 
implied  communication  format  
 
 
 167 Lead  magnet  
A specific  deliverable  that is offered  to prospects  in return  for 
contact  information,  typically  to join an email  list 
 
Like  gate  
A barrier  requirin g a user to "like"  a known  page before  they'll  
access  the bound  that are contents  from  that brand  on facebook  
 
Link  building  
The process  of increasing  the number  of inbound  links to a website  
in a way that will increase  search  engine  rankings  
 
Link  checker /1tool 
That  is/1used to check  for broken  hyperlinks  
 
Link  popularity  
The percentage  of the amount  of quantity  and quality  in sites that 
link to your web site 
 
Link  text 
The text that contains  in a hyperlink  
 
Linkbait  
A piece  of content  that is created  as the first purpose  of attracting  
arriving/inbound  links 
Log file 
File that records  any activities  on an online  server  
 
Long  domain  name  
Domain  names  that are/1longer  than the original  26 characters,  
up to a theoretical  limit of 67 characters  
 
Loyalty Marketi ng 
Loyalty Marketing is marketing that concentrates on retaining 
customers through offering various incentives. A core objective is 
to ensure customers stay true to your brand  and value your offering 
over and above the competition.  
  168 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“What helps people, helps business.”  
—  Leo Burnett  
  
169 M 
Macromarketing  
A type of marketing  in which  a company  adapts  itself to 
uncontrollable  factors  within  the industry.  
 
Mail -in premium  
A premium  obtained  by mailing  in a suitable  response  to the 
manufacturer  or distributor,  with or without  money.  
 
Mail -order  advertising  
Advertising  which  supplies  paperwork  for the purpose  of soliciting  
a purchase  made  through  the mail.  
 
Make  good  
(1) To present  a commercial  announcement  after it’s scheduled  
time because  of an error.  
(2) To rerun  a commercial  announcement  because  of technical  
difficulties  the previous  time it was run. 
(3) To rerun  a print  advertisement  due to similar  circumstances.  
 
Marginal  analysis  
Technique  of setting  the advertising  budget  by assuming  the point 
at which  an additional  dollar  spent  on advertising  equals  additional  
profit.  
 
Market  profile  
A summary  of the characteristics  of a market,  including  
information  of typical  purchasers  and competitors,  and often  
general  information  on the economy  and retailing patterns  of an 
area.  
 
Market  segmentation  
To divide  a market  by a strategy  directed  at gaining  a major  
portion  of sales to a subgroup  in a category,  rather  than a more  
limited  share  of purchases  by all category  users.  
 
 
 170 Market  share  
The percentage  of a product  category's  sales,  in terms  of dollars  or 
units,  obtained  by a brand,  line, or company.  
 
Marketing  firm  
A business  that affects  the distribution  and sales of goods  and 
services  from  producer  to consumer;  including  products  or service  
development,  pricing,  packaging,  advertising,  merchandising,  and 
distribution.  
 
Marketing  mix 
The levels  and interplay  of the elements  of a product's  or service's  
marketing  efforts,  including  product  features,  pricing,  packaging,  
advertising,  merchandising,  distributio n, and marketing  budget;  
especially  as these  elements  affect  sales results.  
 
Marketing  research  
The systematic  gathering,  recording,  analyzing,  and use of data 
relating  to the transfer  and sale of goods  and services  from  producer  
to consumer.  
 
Master  tape 
An edited  audio  tape or video  tape to be recorded  on quantity  
prints  or dubs.  
 
Materiality  
The FTC  theoretically  will not regulate  a deceptive  advertisement  
unless  the deceptive  claim  is also material.  This means,  in simple  
terms,  that the claim  must  be important  to consumers,  rather  than 
trivial.  The FTC  requires  that the deception  be likely  to affect  
consumers'  "choice  of, or conduct  regarding,  a product."  
 
Matte  shot  
A camera  shot made  with a matte  or mask  in part of the frame  to 
allow  another  shot to be printed  in the opaque  area.  
 
Mechanical  (paste -up) 
A finished  layout  that is photographed  for offset  printing.  
 171 Media  buying  service  
Agency  that specializes  in the services  of media  buying.  
 
Media  concentration  theory  
Technique  of scheduling  media  that involves  buying  space  in one 
medium  only and developing  strength  through  concentration.  
 
Media  dominance  theory  
Technique  of scheduling  media  that involves  buying  a large  
amount  of space  in one medium,  and shifting  to another  medium  
after achieving  optim um coverage  and frequency.  
 
Media  plan  
A plan designed  to select  the proper  demographics  for an 
advertising  campaign  through  proper  media  selection.  
 
Media  strategy  
A plan of action  by an advertiser  for bringing  advertising  messages  
to the attention  of consumers  through  the use of appropriate  
media.  
 
Medium  (plural,  Media)  
A vehicle  or group  of vehicles  used to convey  information,  news,  
entertainment,  and advertising  messages  to an audience.  These  
include  television,  cable  television,  magazines,  radio,  billboards,  
etc. 
 
Merchandising  the advertising  
The promoting  of a firm’s advertising  abilities  to distributors.  
 
Metropolitan  Statistical  Area  (MSA)  
An urban  area with a population  of at least 50,000  that is 
designated  by the Office  of Management  and Budget  for statistical  
reporting  purposes  and used in audience  measurement  studies.  
This is generally  synonymous  with the former  term Standard  
Metropolitan  Statistical  Area.  
 
Micromarketing  
The activities  a firm practices  in order  to react  controllably  to 
external  forces,  e.g., setting  objectives  and selecting  target  markets.  172 Milline  rate  
Used  to determine  the cost effectiveness  of advertising  in a 
newspaper;  reached  by multiplying  the cost per agate  line by one 
million,  then dividing  by the circulation.  Also referred to as Milline.  
 
Motivation  research  
Used  to investigate  the psychological  reasons  why individuals  buy 
specific  types  of merchandise,  or why they respond  to specific  
advertising  appeals,  to determine  the base of brand  choices  and 
product  preferences.  
 
Mail Order  Chains  
See General  Merchandise  Chains.  
 
Manifest  
A shipping  form  used by carriers  for consolidation  purposes,  listing  
all pertinent  information  such as consignor,  consignee,  commodity  
classification,  number  and weight  of packages,  and (sometimes)  
cost. 
 
Manufacturers'  Agent  
An individual,  generally  operating  on an extended  contractual  
basis,  who often  sells within  an exclusive  territory,  handles  
noncompeting  but related  lines of goods,  and often  possesses  
limited  authority  with regard  to prices  and terms  of sale. He or she 
is sometimes  authorized  to sell a specific  portion  of his or her 
principal's  output.  This term and "manufacturers'  representative"  
are often  used interchangeably.7,5  
 
Manufacturers'  Representative   
See Manufacturers'  Agent.  
 
Marg in 
The difference  between  the selling  price  and the acquisition  cost 
(manufacturing  cost in the case of a manufacturer  and purchase  
cost in the case of a wholesaler  or retailer)  of a unit of product.  
 
 
 
 173 Markdown  
A reduction  in the originally  established  price of a product,  
typically  in a retail  outlet.  The reduction  percentage  is determined  
by dividing  the amount  of the reduction  by the original  price.  
 
Markdown  Money  
Money  a manufacturer  pays to a retailer  to enable  the latter  to put 
slow selling  or obsolete  merchandise  on sale without  absorbing  the 
loss itself.  
 
Market  Niche  
A protected  segment  of a market.  The nature  of the protection  can 
vary.  Thus  a group  of buyers  may be particularly  sensitive  to price,  
to quality,  to appeals  through  advertising,  etc. Servicing  that group  
through  the development  of a special  competence  can enhance  the 
competitive  strength  of the seller.  
 
Market  Penetration  
The percentage  of a target  market  which  is purchasing  a company's  
product  or service.  
 
Market  Share  
The ratio of a company's  sales to total industry  sales in a particular  
market.  Market  share  can be measured  in dollars  or units.  
 
Marketing  
The process  of planning  and executing  the conception,  pricing,  
promotion,  and distribution  of ideas,  goods,  and services  to create  
exchanges  that satisfy  individual  and organizational  objectives.17a  
 
Marketing  Management  
The planning,  direction,  and control  of the entire  marketing  
function,  specifically  the formulation  and execution  of marketing  
objectives,  policies,  programs,  and strategy. Responsibilities  
include  product  development,  organization  and staffing  to carry  
out plans,  supervision  of marketing  operations,  and control  of 
marketing  performance.  
 
 
 174 Marketing  Mix 
Usually  refers  to the four pillars  of marketing  management:  
product  policy,  promotion  (advertising  and personal  selling),  
pricing,  and channels  of distribution.  For the sake of alliteration,  
distribution  is often  referred  to as "place."  Thus  the "Four  Ps." 
 
Marketing  Research  
A systematic  investigation  conducted  to establ ish facts or to solve  
problems  relating  to the marketing  of goods  or services.11  
 
Markup  
The percentage  by which  a seller  increases  the selling  price  of goods  
over the price  he or she paid for them.  Conventionally,  markup  is 
computed  as a percentage  of sales price  rather  than cost. Thus  an 
item which  a retailer  purchases  for $10 and sells for $15 has a 33 
1/3 percent  ($5/$15)  markup.  
 
Mass  Merchandise  Chains  
This often  used phrase  has no generally  agreed  upon  meaning.  
Sometimes  it is used specifically  to refer to Sears,  Ward's  and 
Penney's.  At other  times  it is used to refer to such national  or 
regional  retail  outlets  as K mart  and Caldor,  which  are generally  
thought  of as selling  at price  points  below  Sears,  Ward's  and 
Penney's.  Yet another  use of the term  has it including  large  
discount  drug chains.  
 
Matrix  Organization  
In the marketing  context,  this phrase  usually  refers  to the 
assignment  of responsibilities  in such a way that one group  of 
managers  (including  those  for sales,  advertising,  marketing  
researc h, etc.) is responsible  for insuring  the contribution  of 
specialized,  differentiated,  functionally  oriented  expertise  to the 
marketing  effort,  while  another  (composed  of product  or brand  
managers)  is responsible  for integrating  the functional  inputs  to 
provide effective  marketing  programs  for products,  brands,  or 
product  lines.  
 
 
 
 175 Mean  
This statistic  is the arithmetic  average  of all observations  in a 
sample.  It is calculated  by summing  the values  of all observations  
and dividing  by the number  of observations.  
 
Median  
This statistic  is the observation  which  is exactly  in the middle  of a 
sample.15  Thus,  in a sample  consisting  of the values  1, 5, 7, 8, 9, 
11, and 13, the median  is 8. 
 
Merchandise  Allowance  
A short  term,  contractual  agreement  through  which  a 
manuf acturer  compensates  wholesalers  or retailers  for "features"  
(i.e., advertising  or in store  displays  of his or her products).  Proof  of 
performance,  such as an advertising  tear sheet,  is an essential  
component  of the merchandise  allowance.21  
 
Merchandising  
The planning  and supervision  involved  in marketing  merchandise  
at the places,  times,  and prices  and in the quantities  which  will best 
serve  to realize  the marketing  objectives  of the business.  The term 
is most  often  heard  in the retail,  especially  soft good s, trade.7  
 
Merchant  
A business  unit that buys,  takes  title to, and resells  merchandise.7  
 
Mode  
This statistic  is the most  frequent  observation  in a sample.15  Thus,  
in a sample  consisting  of the observations  1, 1, 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9, the 
mode  is 1. 
 
Model  
A set of inputs  (often  called  parameters  of the model),  an explicit  
system  or set of relationships  for combining  and manipulating  those  
inputs,  and the definition  of the outputs  which  will be used to 
summarize  what  happens  when  a specific  set of values  for the inputs  
is subjected  to the relationship  of the model.12  
 
 
 176 Motivation  Research  
A group  of techniques  developed  by behavioral  scientists  which  
marketing  researchers  use to study  consumer  behavior.7  These  
techniques  attempt  to identify  the underlying  purch ase motives  of 
consumers.  
 
Multlvariate  Analysis  
A collection  of procedures  for analyzing  the association  between  
the values  of two or more  variables  in a data set. For example,  let 
us assume  that a researcher  undertakes  to interview  five people  in 
order  to evaluate  the effectiveness  of an advertisement.  He or she 
might  ask those  people  how often  each saw the advertisement,  what  
they remembered  about  it, and whether  they felt it to be persuasive.  
In this case,  the variables  are frequency,  recall,  and persua siveness.  
The data set is the fifteen  measurements,  i.e., five people  times  
three  answers  per person.  Examples  of multivariate  analysis  
include  multiple  regression,  discriminate  analysis,  factor  analysis,  
and cluster  analysis.  
 
Masthead  
This refers  to the section  of the publication,  which  denotes  the 
name  of the publication,  usually  the top section  of the front  page.  
Media  
Refers  to any mass  communication  vehicle  used to convey  an 
advertising  message  such as newspapers,  magazines,  radio,  
television,  cinema  or outdoor  signs.  
 
Media  Literacy  
The process  of understanding  and using  the mass  media  in an 
assertive  and non- passive  way. This includes  an informed  and 
critical  understanding  about  the nature  of media,  the techniques  
used by them  and the impact  of these techniques.  
 
Media  Mix 
The selection  of media  to be used for advertising  the client's  
product,  best suited  to reach  the desired  target  audience  in the 
selected  market,  and for showcasing  the creative  message.  
 
 
 177 Media  Reach  
The size of the audience  exposed  to an advertisement  through  a 
particular  medium  (usually  expressed  as a proportion  of the target  
universe)  is referred  to as media  reach.  It is normally  defined  as 
follows  for each medium:  
 TV = Those  who watch  TV at least once  a week  
 Press  = The average  issue readers  
 Radio  = Those  who listen  to the radio  at least once  a week  
Cinema  = Those  who visit a cinema  at least once a month  
 
Medium  
Any media  class used to convey  an advertising  message  to the 
public,  such as newspapers,  magazines,  direct  mail,  interne t, radio,  
TV and outdoor  is referred  to as a medium.  
 
Mock -Calls  
Mock -calls are a classroom  training  to make  interviewer  ready  to 
face the actual  field situation.  It aims at making  the interviewers  
thorough  in administering  the questionnaire  properly,  perfect in 
recording  responses  and skilled  in handling  different  types  of 
respondents.  
 
MHI  (Monthly  Household  Income)  
The total monthly  income  of a family  is the sum of the incomes  of 
all members  of the family.  
In addition  to the main  source  of income,  the following  are also 
included:  
Income  from  properties,  rent, interest,  dividends,  etc. 
 Regular  contribution  received  by the family  from  members  of 
the household  who are not members  of the family  (paying  
guest/s  sharing  the same  house  and kitchen).  
 Contributio n towards  household  expenses  received  by the 
head  of the household  from  members  of the household  other  
than/1members  of the family  of the head  of the household.  
 Contributions  received  from  family  members  who are living  at 
other  places.  
 Income  from  livestoc k. 
 178 Mother  Tongue  
Mother  tongue  is the language  in which  a person's  mother  
communicates  with him/her  during  his/her  childhood.  If the 
person's  parents  have  different  mother  tongues,  the mother's  
mother  tongue  is considered.  
 
MRSI  (Market  Research  Society  of India)  
Market  Research  Society  of India  (MRSI)  is a unique  non-profit  
autonomous  market  research  body  formed  by a large  fraternity  of 
research  suppliers  and users  spread  across  India.  
One of its objectives  are to promote,  protect,  improve,  market  
researc h in all its branches,  and to promote  the art and science  of 
marketing  research  for diffusion  of knowledge  acquired  by such 
research  to advertisers,  publishers  and public,  and like minded  
institutions.  
 
Maillist  (or Mailing  List)  
A (usually  automated)  system that allows  people  to send e-mail to 
one address,  where  upon  their message  is copied  and sent to all of 
the other  subscribers  to the maillist.  In this way, people  who have  
many  different  kinds  of e-mail access  can participate  in discussions  
together.  
 
MAN (Metropolitan -Area  Network)  
A data network  designed  for a town  or city. 
 
MMA  (Mobile  Marketing  Association)  
The Mobile  Marketing  Association  (MMA)  is the premier  global  
non-profit  trade  association  representing  all players  in the mobile  
marketing  value  chain.  The MMA's  primary  focus  is to establish  
mobile  as an indispensable  part of the marketing  mix. The MMA  
works  to promote,  educate,  measure,  guide  and protect  the mobile  
marketing  industry  worldwide.  
 
Modem  (MOdulator,  DEModulator)  
A device  that connec ts a computer  to a phone  line in order  to 
enable  access  to the internet  or other  remote  computers.  
 
 
 179 Mall  Displays  
Backlit  advertising  structures  located  at strategic  points  in shopping  
malls;  usually  two or three -sided.  
 
Mobile  billboard  
A truck  equipped  with one or more  poster  panel  units.  The truck  
can either  be parked  at specified  venues  or driven  around  
designated  localities.  
Media  Buying  Service  
Specialists  in planning  and buying  out of home  media  and 
monitoring  field operations  for advertisers  and agencies.  
 
Major  stoppage  point  
A traffic  signal,  curve,  bend,  speed  breaker  etc. in the road that 
makes  traffic  stop or slow down,  near the site. 
 
Machine  learning  
Machine  learning  is one of the aspects  of artificial  intelligence  
which  a computer  possesses.  The computer  learns  things  by itself 
without  being  programmed  to do so. 
 
Mark -up 
Mark  up refers  to the amount  added  to the original  cost price  which  
caters  to overheads  and profits.  
 
Markdown/markup  
Markdown  is a reduction  of original  retail  price  of goods  to increase  
sale because  its not selling  at the original  price.  
 
Marketing  
Marketing  is a branch  of management  studies.it  is a science  which  
is a set of actions  or practice  of making  a product  or service  
desirable  or popular  in the target  market.  The ultimate  aim is to 
get the consumer  make  a purchase  decision.  
Refer s to planning,  comtrolling,  staffing,  organizing  and 
interpreting  to create  a product  or service  with the motive  of 
earning  profit  which  later becomes  an organization al objective  
 
 
 180 Marketing  analytics  
Marketing  analytics  is mainly  used to find the ROI,  it is utilized  for 
metrics  study  and practices  to determine  the roi on elements  such 
as posts  videos,  landing  page,  website  reach,  ads performance  etc. 
They  are mainly  utilized  to check  performance  of the marketing  
strategy  utilized  and debug  issues  and improvise.  
 
Marketing  data  
Marketing  data is nothing  but a draw  data which  are collected  from  
the platforms  like social  media  account  or on the websites  etc, 
which  are yet to be converted  into useful  insights  
 
Marketing  engineering  
Marketing  engineering  is an approach  which  systematically  helps  
to harness  the knowledge  and the data and provides  effective  
decisions  in marketing  implementation  as well as with the new 
technologies  available  along  with the analytical  tools 
 
Marketing  insight  
It gives  us the results  for the problems  through  the marketing  
analytical  tools.  These  insights  are very useful  to take actions  
towards  the business  in the marketing  sector  
 
Marketing  qualified  lead  (MQL)  
Marketed  qualified leads  or MQL  are those  leads  which  have the 
likelihood  of becoming  a paying  customer  compared  to other  leads.  
These  leads  are based  on certain  criterias.  
Marketing  strategy  
It is used to strategically  plan the marketing  campaigns  and also to 
find new ways  to enter  the market  and also to expand  our target  
audience  and optimise  an executive  campaign  
 
Mass  customization  
Mass  customization  is a manufacturing  of product  at a low cost in 
high volume  for each customers  needs.  
 
Masterbrand  
A dominant  brand,  that is over other  minor  brands  in the same  
range  or business.  Example:  itc. 
 181 Merchandising  
Merchandising  is the promotion  of goods  and services  that are 
available  in retail  store  this encourages  customers  to purchase  it. 
 
Messaging  
Messaging  is a form  of communication  which  is used by brands  to 
communicate  the value  proposition  and benefits one offers.  The 
perceived  meaning  of such communication  is to help the target  
market  know  more  about  the brand.  
 
Metrics  
Metrics  are standards  which  are used to measure  something.  
 
Minimum  advertised  price  
Minimum  advertised  price  is a pre decided  minimum  price  that 
doesn't  permit  resellers  to advertise  prices  below  a specific  amount.  
 
Mobile  data  analytics  
Analyzing  the data that is provided  through  a mobile  platform  or 
properties  like mobile  sites or applications  that helps  us to 
understand  the user interaction  with the mobile  sites and apps 
 
Mobile  payments  
Mobile  payment  is a money  payment  that take place  digitally  
through  your mobile  device  or tablets.  
 
MOFU  (middle  of the funnel)  
MOFU  or middle  of the funnel  is a stage  where  prospect conducts 
research  and gets more  information  about  a solution  to a problem.  
 
Moneyback  
Moneyback  is an agreement  which  guarantees  customers  money  to 
be refunded  on an occasion  they are not satisfied  
 
Monthly  recurring  revenue  (MRR)  
MRR  or monthly  recurring  revenue  is the predictable  income  of 
an organization  which  is predictable  and reasonable  regular.  The 
formula  for MRR  is ARR  divided  by 12. 
 
 182 Monthly  sale index  
Monthly  sales index  is a measure  of seasonal  sales calculated  by 
each months ’ actual  sales by average  monthly  sales.  
 
Map  pack:  
The first three  results  that serves  up to local business  on Google  
serp results  
 
Market  entry  
An organization  which  enters  the foreign  business  market  / setup 
of the firm in different  countries  
 
Market  holding  price  
The additional  and illegal  trading  charges  implied  so as to see the 
market  can bear the hold market  share  
 
Market  positioning  
It is a pre designed  exercise  to achieving  the organised  objective  
 
Matrix  organization  
Having  more  than one marketing  accountabilities  and 
responsibility  where  the work  is divided  in two 
 
Media  scheduling  
Pre - designed  schedule  allocated  for the media  to advertise  and 
send messages  
 
Media  
A paid source  to convey  a messag e to the public  through  ads, tv 
and radio  
 
Mercantilism  
A person  who holds nationalist  doctrine  degree  of one nation  by 
succeeding  at the expense  of another  nation  
 
Message  
A set of data framed  according  to convey  the awareness  of the 
product  or service  
 
 183 Multinational  products  
Products  or services  created  not only for the home  country  but also 
having  trading  communication  with the other  countries  
 
Multiple  factor  indices  
An index  originated  by stock  selection  including  two or more  
variables  like volatility,  momentum,  alpha  value  etc. 
 
Managed  WordPress  hosting  
Web hosting  optimizes  specifically  for WordPress , where  the hosting  
company  assumes  several  of the routine  maintenance  tasks done  
 
Manual  submission  
Adding  a universal  resource  locator  (URL ) to the search engine  by 
themselves  
 
Marketing  automation  
The use of codes  to modify  the given  tasks associated  with 
marketing  activities  and connect  them  totally  to different  elements  
of the marketing  funnel  
 
Marketing  plan  
The part of the business  plan that is outlining  the marketing  
strategies  for a product  or service  
 
Media  kit 
A resource  created  by a publisher  to assist  prospective  ad buyers  to 
appraise  advertising  opportunities  
Meta  search  engine  
A search  engine  that displays  results  from  multiple  search  engines  
 
Meta  tag generator  
A tool that gets the output  of meta  tags based  on the information  
of input  pages  
 
Meta  tags  
Tags  to explain  varies  aspects  a online  web pages  
Found in the source code of each web page, meta tags are sets of 
instructions and/or identifi ers search engines read that describe the 
content included on your web page. Search engines use meta tags 184 when calculating your web site’s ultimate placement. There are two 
commonly used meta tags, the description and the keyword tags.  
 
Moderator  
A moderat or at a forum,  someone  who is entrusted  by the 
administrator  to assist  discussions  to keep it productive  and within  
the guidelines.  
 
Mousetrapping  
The use of browser  tricks  in a shot to keep a visitor  captured  at a 
web site, typically  by disabling  the "back" button  or by generating  
recursively  the pop-up window  constantly  
 
Multivariate  testing  
It is a method  in the marketing  research  locality  where  multiple  
variables  in a control  scenario  are simultaneously  changed  and 
ensuing  alternate  strategies  are tested, so as to improve  the 
effectiveness  of the final marketing  strategies  
  185 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“No great marketing decisions have ever been made  
on qualitative data.”  
—  John Scully  
  
186 N 
NAB  
National  Association  of Broadcasters.  An association  whose  
membership  is largely  composed  of radio  and television  stations.  
 
NAD  
National  Advertising  Division  of the Council  of Better  Business  
Bureaus.  This organization  serves  as a major  self-regulatory  
mechanism  for advertising.  
 
NARB  
National  Advertising  Review  Board  of the Council  of Better  
Business  Bureaus.  When  an alleged  problem  arises  with an 
advertisement,  and a satisfactory  solution  is not obtained  via the 
NAD,  above,  the NARB  acts in the capacity  of an appeals  board.  
It reviews  the decision  of the NAD,  and passes  judgment  on it. 
Narrowcasting  
Using  a broadcast  medium  to appeal  to audiences  with special  
interests.  For example,  the "All Knitting  Station"  would  be a 
narrowcast,  because  it appeals  to an audience  with a specific  interest.  
 
National  advertising  
Advertising  which  is aimed  at a National  Market,  as opposed  to 
Local  Advertising.  
 
National  brand  
A nationally  distributed  product  brand  name.  May also be 
distributed  regionally  or locally.  
 
Near -pack  (Near  Pack  Premium)  
An item offered  free or at a discou nt with the purchase  of another  
product.  The item can be positioned  close  to but may not touch  the 
purchased  product.  A type of product  promotion.  
 
Negative  
Developed  film that contains  an image  that has reversed  shadows  
and light areas.  
 187 Net cost  
The costs associated  with services  rendered  by an advertising  
agency  excluding  the agency  commission.  
 
Net unduplicated  audience  
The combined  cumulative  audience  exposed  to an advertisement.  
 
Network  
A national  or regional  group  of affiliated  broadcast  stations  
contractually  bound  to distribute  radio  or television  programs  for 
simultaneous  transmission.  
A network  is a group  of two or more  computer  systems  linked  
together.  
The types  of computer  networks  include  LANs  (Local  Area  
Networks),  Wide  Area  Networks  (WANs),  MANs  (Metropolitan -
Area  Networks)  and HANs  (Home -Area  Networks).  
 
Network  option  time  
Programming  time the network  controls  on each of its affiliate  
stations.  Also referred  to as network  time.  
 
Newsprint  
A soft, course  wood  pulp paper  used in printing  news papers.  
 
Nielsen  rating  
A measurement  of the percentage  of U.S. television  households  
tuned  to a network  program  for a minute  of its telecast.  
 
Noncommercial  advertising  
Radio  and television  advertising  that is designed  to educate  and 
promote  ideas  or institutions,  e.g., public  service  announcements.  
 
National  Account  
A large  geographically  diverse  customer  with high pre and post 
sales service  needs.  
 
National  Advertising  
Advertising  in one or more  media  which  individually  or collectively  
provide  nationwide  reach  or exposure  opportunity.2  188 National  Brand  
A manufacturer's  brand,  usually  enjoying  wide distribution.7  
 
Nielsen  
The largest  supplier  of marketing  research,  Nielsen  is most  well-
known  for its retail  audits,  providing  information  on grocery  
products,  alcoholic  beverages,  toiletries,  proprietary  drugs,  and 
product  movement  from  retail  stores  and for its rating  system  for 
television  shows.  Its specialty  is providing  services  on a syndicated  
basis,  i.e., it recruits  clients  for a specified  period  of time.  15 Nielsen  
in owned  by Dun & Bradstreet.  
 
Non  Durable  Goods  
Consumer  goods  such as food or clothing,  expected  to last less than 
three  years.1  
 
 
Non  Store  Marketing  
Retailing  through  means  other  than a retail  store  such as catalogs,  
telephone  orders,  mail,  and more  recently,  cable.  
 
Non  Tariff  Barriers  
Restraints  on international  trade  other  than tariffs.  Examples  of 
such restraints  are quotas,  domestic  government  purchasing  
policies,  and safety  and technical  standards.16a  
 
Noting  
Percentage  of a publicatio n's readers  who claimed  to have read or 
looked  at a specific  editorial  item,  advertisement,  type of ad, etc. 
 
Net Reach  
The unduplicated  number  of target  individuals  or households  
exposed  to a media  schedule  at least once (also referred  to as reach)  
is the net reach.  
 
Node  
Any single  computer  connected  to a network.  
 
 
 189 New  Media  
A generic  term  for the many  different  forms  of electronic  
communication  that are made  possible  through  the use of 
computer  technology.  The term  is in relation  to "old"  media  forms,  
such as print  newspapers  and magazines  that are static  
representations  of text and graphics.  
 
Neon  Sign  
A sign manufactured  utilizing  neon  tubing  (in form  of letters),  
which  is visible  to the viewer.  
 
Net profit  
The actual  profit  is after working  expenses  have been paid and it is 
calculated  by subtracting  retail  operating  expenses  from gross  profit.  
 
Net sales  
Net sales is the revenue  a retailer  makes  during  a specific  period  of 
time after deducting  customer  returns  and employee  discounts.  
 
Navigation  
The path or the route  we tend to move  through  particularly  the 
movement  from  one online  page to a different.  
 
Netiquette  
The acceptable  and right  means  of victimi zation  net i.e net 
prescript/cyber  etiquette . 
The etiquette  of the internet.  
 
Network  effect  
The state of affairs  wherever  in, the value  of service,  product,  or 
platforms  depends  on the number  of users  un agency  leverage  it. 
 
Nationalism  
Identification  of an individual  or an organization  in order  to know  
their home  country  
 
Non -tariff  barriers  
Creating  unwanted  restriction  during  import  or export  process  in 
order  to reduce  the potential  real-world  income  
 190 Network Marketing  
Network Marketing is a marketing strategy that aims to generate 
revenue from selling goods to customers, but also by building a 
team of  people under you who will do the same, often across 
specified geographical areas.  
 
Newsletter Marketing  
A fun way to promote a business is to produce a newsletter that 
highlights some of the newsworthy things that have happened for 
a business, as well as practical tips and information. A well written, 
well-designed newsletter can create a sense of inclusion and 
participation with customers and clients and can be an appealing 
benefit to business prospects.  
 
Niche Marketing  
A niche, refers to products, servi ces, or interests that appeal to a 
small, specialized section of the population. Finding a niche and 
filling it could be described as the secret recipe for growth in over -
crowded marketplaces  
  191 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“Marketing is not anyone’s job. It  is everyone’s job.”  
—  Jack Welch  
  
192 O 
O & O station  
Radio  and television  stations  owned  and operated  by a network.  
 
Off card  
Refers  to advertising  time sold at a rate that does not appear  on the 
rate card.  
 
Offset  lithography  
A planographic  printing  process . A photographic  image  from  a 
printing  plate  is transferred  to a rubber  blanket,  which,  in turn,  
transfers  or prints  the image  onto the paper.  
 
On-air tests  
Tests  recall  among  viewers  of a commercial  or program  during  a 
real broadcast  of the tested  communi cation.  
On-pack  (On-pack  Premium)  
Used  to promote  sales of a product.  Discount  coupons  or gifts that 
are attached  to or accompany  the product  to be purchased.  
 
Open  end 
(1) Time  left at the end of a commercial  or program  which  is 
provided  for the use of local  advertising  or station  
identification.  
(2) A radio  or television  program  with no specific  time to end. 
 
Opticals  
Visual  effects  used to instill  interest  as well as portray  mood  and 
continuity  to a commercial.  Dissolves,  Cross  fades,  and Montages  
are all optica ls. 
 
Out-of-home  advertising  
Exposure  to advertising  and mass  media  away  from  one's  home.  
Included  are outdoor,  point -of- purchase,  and radio.  
 
 
 
 193 Overlay  
A transparent  or opaque  covering  used to protect  designs  or layouts  
in the form  of separate  transparent  prints  that combine  to form  a 
finished  design  or graphic.  
 
Overrun  
Additional  numbers  of a print  vehicle  that are produced  in excess  
of those  needed  for distribution.  Overruns  may take place  to meet  
unexpected  needs  or demands.  
 
Odd  Lot 
An unbalanced  assor tment  of styles,  colors,  sizes,  fabrics,  and 
quality.  
 
Off Price  Stores  
Stores  which  sell brand  name  merchandise,  predominantly  
apparel,  textiles,  footwear,  and housewares,  at well under  the prices  
at which  those  same  brand  names  are being  sold in departme nt and 
specialty  stores.  Off price  stores  are able to sell at these  lower  prices  
for a variety  of reasons.  They  usually  offer little service,  and 
ambience  is not emphasized.  Often,  they buy manufacturer  
overruns  or end of season  merchandise  at sharp  discou nts. 
 
Oligopoly  
An industry  in which  there  are few sellers.  
 
Open  to Buy 
The amount  of merchandise  a buyer  may order  during  the balance  
of a given  period.  
The phrase  is most  common  in department  store  and other  soft 
goods  retailing.  
 
Opinion  Leader  
A perso n who influences  others.  
 
Order  Entry  System  
Computerized  systems  designed  to streamline  order  processing.  
Processing  an order  involves  a number  of tasks including  the 
transmission  of the order  to the firm in question;  the firm's  checking  
to see that the inventory  is available  and that the customer  is 194 creditworthy;  and the preparation  and shipment  of the product.  
Computerized  order  entry  systems  are now facilitating  every  phase  
of this process.13a,  20a 
 
Original  Equipment  Manufacturer  (OEM)  
A company  that buys a product  to incorporate  into what  it in turn 
makes  and sells.8  
 
Outlet  Store  
A store  specializing  in job lots and clearance  merchandise;  or a 
store  owned  by a manufacturer  to dispose  of surplus  stocks.14  
 
OTO  (One  Time  Only)  
A spot which  is available  only once.  
 
Over  the Counter  (abbreviated  OTC)  
A term  used to identify  such "proprietary  drugs"  as cough  medicine  
and aspirin,  which  can be purchased  without  a prescription,  as 
opposed  to "ethical"  drugs,  for the purchase  of which  a doctor's  
prescription  is needed.2  
Orienteering  
Using  a map and compass  in the field to determine  your route  of 
travel.  It has commonly  come  to mean  a type of competition  at 
which  competitors  try to navigate  across  challenging  terrain  from  
point -to-point  arriving  at the finish  first. 
 
Obstruction  
Obstruction  refers  to anything  that deters  the chance  of seeing  a 
site; Tree,  building,  another  hoarding  etc. could  be considered  as 
obstruction.  
 
Out of Home  
All advertising  that is specifically  intended  to reach  consumers  
outside  the home. Out of home  includes,  but is not limited  to, 
outdoor  media.  
 
Out of Home  Advertising  
Inclusive  term  that refers  to a wide array  of advertising  vehicles  
designed  to reach  the consumer  outside  the home,  including  
outdoor,  transit,  bus shelters,  bus bench es, aerials,  airports,  in-195 flight,  in-store,  movies,  college  campus/high  schools,  hotels,  
shopping  malls,  sport  facilities,  stadiums,  taxis,  telephone  kiosks,  
trucks,  truck  stops,  and other  specialized  media.  
 
Outdoor  Advertising  
The term  refers  to many  forms of media  that carry  advertising  
messages  to consumer  audiences  outside  the home.  Outdoor  
products  are divided  among  three  primary  categories,  billboards,  
street  furniture  and transit.  
Any outdoor  sign that publicly  promotes  a product  or service,  such 
as billboards,  movie  kiosks,  etc. 
 
Off-Premise  Sign  
A sign that advertises  products  or services  that are not sold, 
produced,  manufactured  or furnished  on the property  where  the 
sign is located.  An outdoor  display  is an off-premise  sign. 
 
Open  Space  
Poster  or painted  display  space  not currently  in use or under  
contract.  
Off price  
Off price  means  a retailer  provides  a high-quality  products  at 
cheaper  price , it can be a great  way to get customers  to your store.  
 
On-brand  
It is a perception  that what  is expected  by the customers  is what  is 
given  by the brand.  Staying  on-brand  for a long time will strongly  
boost  customer  loyalty  and relationship.  
 
Online  data  
Data  which  are gathered  from  digital  platforms  through  campaigns  
ads or other  engagement  media  through  social channels  or websites  
or even email  that are relevant  
 
Opportunity  
Opportunities  are those  situations  which  lead to advantageous  or 
profitable  outcomes.  
 
 
 196 Optimize  
Making  the best or highly  effective  use of a product/  activity/  
service.  Optimization  can be both technical  and non-technical  
 
Order  lead  time  
Order  lead time refers  to a company  place  a order  of production  
inputs  when  company  needs  it. 
 
Organic  
Organic  traffic  is the source  of traffic  which  comes  through  clicking  
on a non paid search  engine  result. It is a primary  measurement  of 
any SEO  campaign  and helps  the website  rank with relevant  search  
keywords.  
 
Outside  the box 
Somethi ng that is different  than what  is already  in place.  
 
Owned  media  
Any media  online  I want  to buy a company  or individual  and he 
or she has all the intellectual  rights  towards  its 
 
Owned  social  metrics  
The social  content  in the form  of post videos  tweets  that we 
maintain  and hold in current  social  handles  is known  as owned  
social  metrics  
 
Organic  search  
Organic  search  the unpaid entries  during  a program  result s to a 
page  that was derived to support  their contents'  connections  to the 
keyword  questions.  
It refers  to the programme  results  that can't be influenced  by paid 
advertising  and that they are stratified  consistent  with their 
connectedness  to the search  term.  
The unpaid  entries  during  a program  result s to a page that was 
derived to support  their contents'  connections  to the keyword  
questions.  
 
Outbound  link 
Outbound  link a link to a website  outside  of your website.  
A link to a website  outside  of your web site. 197 Opt-in email  
It could  be a term used wherever  in somebody  isn't other  initially  
to associate  degree  email  list and rather  given  the choice  to affix 
the emailing  list. 
 
Opt-out 
Is a call for participation  to be far away  from  associate  degree  email  
deployment  list owned  by the sender . 
1) It’s a sort of program  that assumes  inclusion  unless  explicit  
otherwise.   
2) To step down  yourself  from  an opt - out program  
 
Outbound  link 
The link that takes  you outside  of your website  or that takes  you to 
alternate  webpage  or web site. 
 
Option  
A contract  signed  by 2 parties  before  deciding  the future  actions  
 
Optimi zation  
A computer  program  or manual  efforts  that calculates  the best 
media  schedule  for a given  budget,  target  group  or candida te 
media.  
 
Offline Marketing  
Offline Marketing refers to any promotional communication that 
utilises ‘offline’ media channels. With mass adoption of the 
internet, many companies are finding new ways of integrating 
offline marketing with new technologies to  create more engaging 
customer experiences.  
 
Outbound Marketing  
Outbound Marketing promotes a product or service to people who 
weren’t looking to buy anything – the opposite of Inbound 
Marketing. A company initiates the conversation and sends its 
message o ut to an audience, to tell them they exist. Outbound 
Marketing examples include more traditional forms of marketing 
and advertising such as TV commercials, radio ads, print 
advertisements, tradeshows, outbound sales calls and mass emails   198 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“You can't just ask customers what they want and then try to give 
that to them. By the time you get it built, they'll want something 
new.”  
—  Steve Jobs  
  
199 P 
Package  
(1) A combination  of programs  or commercials  offered  by a 
network  that is available  for purchase  by advertisers  either  
singly  or as a discounted  package  deal.  
(2) A merchandise  enclosure  or container.  
 
Package  enclosure  
Same  as In-pack premium,  above.  
 
Package  insert  
Separate  advertising  material  included  in merchandise  packages  
that advertises  goods  or services;  also referred  to as Package  Stuffer.  
 
Painted  bulletin  
A freestanding  steel or wooden  structure,  approximately  50' wide  
by 15' high,  with molding  around  the outer  edges  similar  to a poster  
panel,  and including  a hand  painted  copy message.  Bulletins  are 
generally  found  near highways  or roofs  of buildings  in high traffic  
areas.  
 
Panels  
This includes  regular  and illuminated  types  of outdoor  advertising.  
A regular  panel  is only seen during  the daytime,  while  an 
illuminated  panel  is seen also from  dusk until dawn.  
 
Pantone  Matching  System  (PMS)  
A system  that precisely  characterizes  a color,  so that a color  can be 
matched,  even by different  printers.  By knowing  the Pantone  color  
specifications,  a printer  does not even need  to see a samp le of the 
color  in order  to match  it. 
 
Parity  products  
Product  categories  where  the several  brands  within  that category  
possess  functionally  equivalent  attributes,  making  one brand  a 
satisfactory  substitute  for most  other  brands  in that category.  
 
 200 Particip ation  
(1) Announcements  made  inside  the context  of a program  as 
opposed  to those  shown  during  station  breaks.  
(2) An announcement  or amount  of broadcasting  time which  is 
shared  by several  advertisers.  
 
Pass -along  readers  
A reader  which  becomes  familiar  with a publication  without  the 
purchase  of a publication.  These  readers  are taken  into account  
when  calculating  the total number  of readers  of a publication.  
 
Paste -up 
A camera -ready  layout  of illustrative  and type material  which  is 
configured  in the proper  position  on paperboard  and is used for 
reproductive  purposes.  
 
Payout  planning  
Approach  to advertising  budgeting  in which  the dollars  spent  to 
advertise  are represented  as an investment  toward  sales and profits.  
 
Per inquiry  
An agreement  between  a media  representa tive and an advertiser  in 
which  all advertising  fees are paid based  on a percentage  of all 
money  received  from  an advertiser's  sales or inquires.  
 
Percent -of-sales  method  
Method  of determining  the advertising  budget  based  on an analysis  
of past sales,  as well as a forecast  for future  sales.  
 
Perceived  risk 
A functional  or psychosocial  risk a consumer  feels he/she  is taking  
when  purchasing  a product.  
 
Personal  selling  
Sales  made  through  a medium  of face-to-face communication,  
personal  correspondence,  or personal telephone  conversation,  etc. 
 
Personalize  
To add a name  or other  personal  information  about  the recipient  
on direct  mail advertising.  201 Persons  using  television  (PUT)  
A percentage  of all persons  in a certain  viewing  area that are 
viewing  television  during a specific  amount  of time.  Used  by A.C.  
Nielson.  
 
Persons  viewing  television  (PVT)  
Same  meaning  as above,  except  this term  is used by Arbitron.  
 
Persuasion  process  
The process  used by advertising  to influence  audience  or prospect  
attitudes,  especially  purchase  intent  and product  perception  by 
appealing  to reason  or emotion.  
 
Phantom  
An illustration  showing  the exterior  of an object  as if it were  
transparent,  while  revealing  interior  detailing.  
 
Photo  animation  
A process  of creating  animation  through  the use of still 
photographs.  
 
Photo  boards  
A set of still photographs  made  from  a television  commercial,  
accompanied  with a script,  to be kept as records  by an agency  or 
client.  
 
Photocomposition  
A method  of setting  type by using  negatives  of the characters  of film 
or photographic  paper  rather  than metal  type slugs,  also referred  
to as Cold  type.  
 
Photoengraving  
(1) The process  of making  letterpress  printing  plates  by 
photochemical  means.  
(2) A picture  printed  from  a plate  made  by this process.  
 
Photo  plate  making  
A process  which  converts  original  art material  into printing  plates  
that are required  to print  ads. 202 Photostat  
A type of high contrast  photographic  negative  or positive  in the 
form  of paper.  Also referred  to as Stat. 
 
Pica  
(1) A unit of measurement  for type specification  and printing  
which  measures  width;  6 picas  to one inch.  
(2) A size of type,  12 points.  
 
Picture  window  
An ad layout  in which  the picture  is placed  at the top of the page,  
and the copy  is placed  below.  
 
Piggyback  
(1) A direct  mail offer that is included  free with another  offer.  
(2) Two commercials  which  are shown  back-to-back by the same  
sponsor.  
(3) Back -to-back scheduling  of two or more  brand  commercials  of 
one advertiser  in network  or spot positions.  
 
Point  
(1) A small  unit of measurement  for type,  equal  to 1/72  of an inch.  
(2) A small  unit for measuring  the thickness  of paper,  equaling  
0.001  inch.  
 
Point -of-Purchase  (POP)  displays  
Advertising  display  material  located  at the retail  store,  usually  
placed  in an area where  payment  is made,  such as a check -out 
counter.  
 
Positive  
A photographic  image  which  appears  as the original  image,  as 
opposed  to a negative  which  reverses  the black  and white.  
 
Poster  panel  
An outdoor  billboard  in which  advertising  is displayed  on printed  
paper  sheets  rather  than being  painted.  The most  widely  used form  
of outdoor  advertising;  standard  size approximately  25' x 12' with 
the image  printed  on sections  of 24 to 30 sheets.  203 Post  testing  
Testing  the effects  of an ad after it has appeared  in the media.  
 
Preemptible  rate  
A usually  discounted  rate for commercial  time which  is sold to an 
advertiser  and is not guaranteed.  Time  may be sold to another  
advertiser  who is willing  to pay more;  therefore,  the advertiser  
buying  this rate gambles  to save money  on the spot. 
 
Preferred  position  
A position  in a printed  publication  that is thought  to attract  most  
reader  attention  and is sold at a higher  rate; for example,  the back 
cover  of a magazine.  
 
Preprint  
A reproduction  of an advertisement  which  is viewed  before  actual  
publication  and is created  by an advertiser  for special  purposes,  
e.g., to serve  as retail  displays  or to gain support  from  retailers.  
 
Pretesting  
Testing  an advertisement  or an audience  sample  prior  to placing  
the ad in the media.  
 
Primary  demand  advertising  
Advertising  designed  for the generic product  category,  as opposed  
to selective  demand  advertising.  
 
Prime  time  
The broadcast  periods  viewed  or listened  to by the greatest  number  
of persons  and for which  a station  charges  the most  for air time.  In 
television,  the hours  are usually  8:00 p.m. to 11:00  p.m. E.S.T.  
(7:00  p.m. to 10:00  p.m. C.S.T.).  
 
Private  brand  
Product  brand  owned  by a retailer,  wholesaler,  dealer,  or 
merchant,  as opposed  to a manufacturer  or producer,  and bearing  
it's own company  name  or another  name  it owns  exclusively.  Also 
referred  to as Private  label.  
 
 204 Prize 
Barters  of merchandise  given  as prizes  on television  or radio  shows  
in return  for mentions  of the brand  names  of the merchandise  
donated.  
 
Product  differentiation  
Developing  unique  product  differences  with the intent  to influence  
demand.  
 
Product  life cycle  
A marketing  theory  in which  products  or brands  follow  a sequence  
of stages  including:  introduction,  growth,  maturity,  and sales 
decline.  
 
Product  management  
Assigning  specific  products  or brands  to be managed  by single 
managers  within  an advertising  agency.  
 
Product  positioning  
The consumer  perception  of a product  or service  as compared  to 
it's competition.  
 
Product -related  segmentation  
A method  of identifying  consumers  by the amount  of product  
usage,  usually  categor ized demographically  or psychographically.  
 
Production  
Process  of physically  preparing  the advertising  idea into a print  or 
broadcast  advertisement.  
 
Professional  advertising  
Advertising  directed  toward  professionals  such as doctors,  dentists,  
and pharmaci sts, etc., who are in a position  to promote  products  to 
their patients  or customers.  
 
Program  delivery  (Rate) 
Percentage  of a sample  group  of people  tuned  in to a particular  
program  at a particular  time.  
 205 Progressive  proofs  (Progs)  
Set of proofs  made  durin g the four-color  printing  process  which  
shows  each color  plate  separately  and in combination.  Also 
referred  to as Color  proofs.  
 
Promotion  
All forms  of communication  other  than advertising  that call 
attention  to products  and services  by adding  extra  values  toward  
the purchase.  Includes  temporary  discounts,  allowances,  premium  
offers,  coupons,  contests,  sweepstakes,  etc. 
A method  of increasing  sales of merchandise  through  advertising;  
any activity  designed  to enhance  sales.  
 
Promotional  mix 
Using  several  different  types  of communication  to support  
marketing  goals  which  include  Advertising  (see above),  Personal  
selling  (see above),  Publicity  (see above),  and Sales  promotions  (see 
below).  
 
Promotional  product  
A product  imprinted  with,  or otherwise  carrying,  a logo or 
promotional  message.  Also called  an Advertising  Specialty.  
 
Proof  
An impression  on paper  of type,  an engraving  or the like, for the 
purpose  of checking  the correctness  and quality  of the material  to 
be printed.  
 
Psychographics  
A term  that describes  consumers  or audience  members  on the basis  
of psychological  characteristics  initially  determined  by 
standardized  tests.  
The criteria  for segmenting  consumers  by life-style,  attitudes,  
beliefs,  values,  personality,  buying  motives  or the extent  of product  
usage. 
 
 
 
 206 Public  relations  (PR)  
Communication  with various  sectors  of the public  to influence  their 
attitudes  and opinions  in the interest  of promoting  a person,  
product,  or idea.  
 
Public  relations  advertising  
Advertising  by a corporation  that focuses  on publi c interest  but 
maintains  a relationship  to the corporation's  products  or agencies.  
 
Public  service  advertising  (PSA)  
Advertising  with a central  focus  on public  welfare,  and is generally  
sponsored  by a non-profit  institution,  civic group,  religious  
organiza tion, trade  association,  or political  group.  
Publicity  
A type of public  relations  in the form  of a news  item or story  which  
conveys  information  about  a product,  service,  or idea in the media.  
 
Puffery  
A legal exaggeration  of praise  lavished  on a product  that stops  just 
short  of deception.  
 
Pupilometrics  
A method  of advertising  research  in which  a study  is conducted  on 
the relationship  between  a viewer's  pupil  dilation  and the interest  
factor  of visual  stimuli.  
 
Psychological  segmentation  
The separation  of consumers  into psychological  characteristic  
categories  on the basis  of standardized  tests.  
 
Packer's  Brand  
An unadvertised  and unpromoted  brand  owned  by a 
manufacturer,  usually  sold on price.  
 
Patent  
A grant  of protection  from  would  be copiers  to an invento r of a 
product  for a definite  period  of time.  Such  a grant,  made  to persons  
obtaining  certification  from  the Patent  Office  of originality  of their 
product  or process,  currently  is extended  for 17 years  in the United  
States.  207 Penetration  Pricing  
A pricing  strategy  based  on a low price  relative  to actual  or 
potential  alternatives  designed  to (1) stimulate  purchase  by several  
customer  groups  (market  segments),  (2) gain a large  share  of the 
market,  (3) facilitate  production  economies,  and/or  (4) preempt  
potenti al competitors.  
 
Personal  Selling  
Oral  presentation  in a conversation  with one or more  prospective  
purchasers  for the purpose  of making  sales.  
 
Physical  Distribution  
The management  of the physical  movement  and handling  of goods  
from  the point  of productio n to the point  of consumption  or use.7  
 
Planned  Purchase  
A purchase  decision  made  in advance  of exposure  to or final direct  
contact  with a particular  product.  
 
Point  of Sale  Advertising  (Also Point  of Purchase  or POP)  
Displays  of various  kinds  used in retailing at one or more  in store  
locations  such as shelf,  window,  counter,  wall, island,  over/1wire,  
or checkout  area.  
 
Positioning  
The art of fitting  a product  to one or more  segments  of the broad  
market  in such a way as to set it meaningfully  apart  from  
competition  and thus optimize  opportunity  for greater  sales and 
profits.2  Positioning  can exploit  the physical  and/or  non-physical  
attributes  of a product  in order  to influence  the customer's  
perception  and to establish  the mental  space  which  that product  is 
to occupy  in the customer's  mind.  Positioning  strategies  can be 
implemented  either  through  advertising  and other  forms  of 
communication  or through  specific  product  attributes  themselves.  
 
Predatory  Pricing  
This term  is used to describe  a pricing  policy  that somehow  restricts  
competition  by driving  out existing  rivals  or by excluding  potential  
rivals  from  the market.12a  
 208 Premiums  
Items  of merchandise  offered  free or at a low cost as a bonus  to 
purchasers  of a particular  product.  
 
Price  Fixing  
Agreements  betw een or among  vendors  to set prices  including  
efforts  to raise,  stabilize,  or lower  them  by any one of a number  of 
means  including  splitting  markets  by rotating  bids, maintaining  
prices  by distributing  price  lists to competitors,  fixing  certain  
aspects  of the price  mix by agreeing  on markups  or discounts,  or 
various  other  conspiracies.  All joint efforts  to "raise,  depress,  fix, 
peg, or stabilize"  prices  are illegal.  
 
Price  Leader  
A firm whose  pricing  policies  are followed  by other  companies  in 
its industry.7  
 
Price  Line  
Prices  set by company  policy  to give a range  for customer  choice.  
 
Price  Packs  
Packages  which  contain  a stated  discount  on them.  
 
Price  Point  
Synonym  for price.  In some  industries,  this term is used to denote  
prices  at which  some  kinds  of prod ucts are traditionally  sold or 
which  are thought  of as having  noteworthy  psychological  meaning  
to consumers.  
 
Pricing   
The art of translating  into quantitative  terms  (monetary  units)  the 
value  of a product  to a customer  at a point  in time.8  
 
Primary  Demand   
Demand  for a product  category,  not just a company's  own brand.  
 
Prime  Time  
The evening  hours  of broadcasting  (from  7:30 p.m. to 11:00  p.m.),  
when  audience  potential  is greatest  and rates  charged  the advertiser  
are highest.  209 Private  Brands  (or Private  Labels) 
Brands  (or labels)  owned  by merchants  or agents  as distinct  from  
those  owned  by manufacturers  or producers.7  
 
"Problem  Children"  
One of four categories  of business  lines or products  in a portfolio  
theory  of product  management.  (The  other  three  are cash cows,  
stars,  and dogs.)  "Problem  children"  have small  relative  market  
shares,  weak  cash flow from  operations,  and, as a result,  large  needs  
for cash to fund fast growth.9a  These  products  are thought  of as 
problematic  because  it is particularly  difficult  to decide  whether  or 
not the chance  for fast growth  and future  profits  justifies  the cash 
investment  that is called  for. 
 
Product  Differentiation  
Any difference,  real or imaginary,  in products  which  may result  in 
a preference  for one over the other  even though  their prices  are. 
identical  or even though  one may be priced  higher  than the other.  
 
Product  Life Cycle  
The progression  of a product  from  introduction  to withdrawal.  The 
progression  is sometimes  thought  of as encompassing  five stages:  
introduction,  early growth,  late growth,  maturity,  and decline.  
 
Product  Management  
The planning,  direction,  and control  of all phases  of the life cycle  
of products,  including  the creation  of ideas  for new products,  the 
screening  of such ideas,  the/1coordination  of resear ch for physical  
development  of products,  packaging  and branding.  introduction  on 
the market,  market  development,  modification,  servicing,  and 
eventually  deletion  from  the product  line. 
 
Product  or Trademark  Franchising  (as distinguished  
from  Business  Forma t Franchising)  
A type of franchise  relationship  where  the franchisor  grants  to the 
franchisee  the right  to sell the franchisor's  product  and display  or 
use the franchisor's  trademark.  Although  the franchisee  may 
receive  training,  advertising,  and managemen t assistance,  the 
franchisee  generally  conducts  business  as an independent  
distributor.  Well known  examples  would  be automobile  and 210 gasoline  dealerships.  Product  or trademark  franchising  accounted  
for approximately  74% of franchise  sales in 1985.  
 
Product  Policy  
A product  is a tangible  good,  a service,  or an idea that satisfies  a 
customer  need.  Product  policy  is the determination  of the 
characteristics  of that product.  Included  under  product  policy  
would  be such issues  as the actual  features  of the product,  the 
number  and variety  of products  to be offered  and their relation  to 
one another  in the product  line, services  to be offered  with the 
product,  new product  introduction  and the deletion  of mature  
products  from  the line, naming,  packaging,  and others.  
 
Product  Portfolio  
Products  which  a company  attempts,  for strategic  purposes,  to 
manage  as a group.  
 
Product  Recall  
The retrieval  by a manufacturer  of products  that it has placed  in 
the hands  of wholesalers,  retailers,  or end users.  Such  retrieval  
typically  is prompted  by a discovery  of a defect  in the product.  
 
Product  Testing  
The solicitation  of reactions  to products  by encouraging  their 
actual  use among  a sample  of typical  customers,  if possible  in a 
manner  that allows  comparison  with competing  products  along 
critical  dimensions.  
 
Promotion  
The use of communication  to persuade  or convince  potential  
customers;  2. All communication  with the exception  of advertising  
and personal  selling.  Examples  here would  be contests  and sales 
aids; 3. A short  term price  cut. That  is, in certain  industries  the 
phrase  "to promote  a brand"  means  to cut its price.  
 
Promotional  Item  
In retailing,  merchandise  that has great  price  appeal  to a customer  
because  it appears  to be a bargain.  
 
 211 Psychographic  Segmentation  
The segmentation  of a market  on the basis  of such aspects  of the 
consumer  as: life style,  personality,  benefits  sought  (i.e., 
convenience,  prestige),  user status  (i.e., non-user,  user,  ex user),  
usage  rate, loyalty  status,  readiness  (i.e., unaware,  aware,  informed,  
interest ed, desirous),  and/or  marketing  factor  sensitivity  (i.e., 
quality,  price,  service,  advertising,  sales promotion).13  
 
Public  Relations  
Mass  communication  primarily  concerned  with the corporation  as 
an institution  rather  than as a vendor  of specific  items.  
 
Publicity  
Unpaid  non personal  presentation  of ideas  or products.  
 
Pull Strategy  
A marketing  strategy  in which  the manufacturer  rather  than the 
channel  of distribution  assumes  a great  share  of the burden  for 
promotional  effort,  often  through  the use of advertising  directed  at 
potential  end users  or buyers.  Such  a strategy  often  may 
accompany  a relatively  intensive  distribution  program  offering  low 
percentage  margins  to channel  intermediaries  and most  often  
accompanies  the sale of non-complex  products  at low per unit 
prices.  
 
Purchaser  
The individual  whose  responsibility  it is to obtain  a product  or 
service.4  (See DMU.)  
 
Push  Money  
Payment  by a manufacturer  to a wholesaler  or retailer  in excess  of 
the usual  margin  to provide  an added  incentive  for greater  selling 
effort.  
 
Push  Strategy  
A marketing  strategy  in which  the channel  of distribution  rather  
than the manufacturer  assumes  a great  share  of the burden  for 
promotional  effort,  often  through  the use of personal  selling  efforts  
directed  to customers.  Such  a strategy  may accompany  a selective  
distribution  program  offering  high percentage  margins  to channel  212 intermediaries  and most  often  accompanies,  the sale of relatively  
complex  products  at high per unit prices.  
 
Pass -on Readership  or Pass  along  Readership  
Readers of an issue of a publication  that was not bought  by them  
or a member  of their household.  E.g. at a dentist's  waiting  room  or 
a barber's  shop.  It is also known  as Secondary  Readers  or Tertiary  
Readers.  
Print  Order  (Run)  
The number  of copies  printed  (but not necessarily  sold or 
distributed)  by a publication  is referred  to as a Print  Order  (Run).  
 
Proposal  
A quote  that is provided  to an advertiser  by a media  company,  
specifying  service  and cost provisions  associated  with an advertising  
program.  It is comm on to all media.  
 
Panel  
Research  method  in which  the same  respondents  are interviewed  
again  and again,  over a period  of time.  This helps  in understanding  
trends  and patterns  of consumption.  
 
Penetration  
 Same  as coverage  or reach.  Penetration  refers  to the 
proportion  of the target  market  that has an opportunity  to 
see/1an advertisement  or campaign.  
 Refers  to the percentage  of/1universe  or/1the population  
or/1households  that own or consume  a product  or service.  
 
Pilots  
It is a 'dummy  interview'  that is carrie d out to familiari ze one's  self 
with the questionnaire  before  going  into the field.  It is also done  to 
test the questionnaire  before  putting  it into the field or before  
finali zing the questionnaire  for the project.  
 
Population  
The number  of people  represen ted by a survey,  or the number  of 
people  in a target  group.  
 213 Pop Strata:  
The urban  areas  covered  under  IRS have been  defined  in terms  of 
6 population  strata  while  the rural  areas  are defined  in terms  of 3 
pop strata.  The town  class and village  class defini tions  are as 
follows:  
Town  Class  Population  
1 40 Lakh  + 
2 10-40 Lakhs  
3 5-10 Lakhs  
4 1-5 Lakhs  
5 Below  1 lakh 
  
Town  Class  Population  
1 5000+  
2 1000  – 5000  
3 Below  1000  
 
Primary  Audience  
That  segment  of the target  audience,  which  is likely  to be the most  
potential  for buying  a brand  or category  or service.  It is also 
referred  to as primary  target  group.  
 
Profile  
A term used to define  a set of audience  through  a combination  of 
demographic/  psychographic  variables.  
 
Probing  
Extracting  information  from the respondent  to the maximum  
possible  extent /1without  giving  him/her  any clue. 
 
Path  
The hierarchical  description  of where  a directory,  folder,  or file is 
located  on your computer  or on a network.  
 
PDF  (Portable  Document  Format)  
A file format  designed  to enable  printing  and viewing  of documents  
with all their formatting  (typefaces,  images,  layout,  etc.) appearing  
the same  regardless  of what  operating  system  is used.  A PDF 
document  should  look the same  on Windows,  Macintosh,  Linux,  
OS/2,  etc. The PDF format  is based  on the widely  used Postscript  214 document -description  language.  Both  PDF and Postscript  were  
developed  by the Adobe  Corporation.  
 
Phishing  
An identity  theft scam  in which  criminals  send out spam  that 
imitates  the look and language  of legitimate  correspondence  from  
e-commerce  sites.  The fake messages  generally  link to web sites 
which  are similarly  faked  to look like the sites of the respected  
companies.  On the sites, you are directed  to enter  your personal  
information  for authentication  or confirm ation  purposes.  The 
information,  when  submitted,  however,  goes to the thieves,  not to 
the "spoofed"  company.  
 
Ping  
A DOS  command  to check  if a server  is running  well and to track  
system  errors.  
 
Pinterest  
A social networking site that allows users to pin and share 
images and other rich media to a board. Eighty -five percent of 
Pinterest usage happens on a mobile device  
 
Pop-up ads (or pop-ups)  
Term  for unsolicited  advertising  that appears  as its own browser  
window.  
 
Public  Utility  
The outside  walls  of a public utility  are used for advertising.  The 
commonly  observed  public  utilities  are: Water  Huts  Garbage  
Stations  Public  Restrooms  
 
Package  of Location  
All specific  advertising  panels  included  in an out of home  media  
program.  
 
Poster  
This is a term used for advertising  messages  that are printed  on 
paper  and posted  onto advertising  structures.  
 
 215 Pre-Ride  (Recc e) 
Physical  inspection  of site selected  for the campaign.  Pre-ride is 
generally  conducted  between  client  and media  buying  agency.  
 
Post -Ride  
An in-market  field check  of out of home  locations  after advertising  
copy  is in place.  
 
 
Projection  Media  
The projection  of large -scale  images,  graphics,  photographs  or 
logos  onto buildings  or other  structures,  for use in advertising  
campaigns,  promotional  advertising  and outdoor  advertising  is 
called  projection  media.  
 
P-O-P - Proof -of-Performance  
Certification  by an outdoor  company  that contracted  advertising  
service  has been  rendered.  
 
Periods  
The time for which  the media  is sold for, usually  in multiple  of 
months.  
 
Police Shelter  
The outside  walls  and front  panel  of a shelter  used by the traffic  
police  to park their vehicles,  for example,  gypsies,  jeeps,  
motorcycles,  etc. 
 
Pay Television  
A TV system  providing  programs  which  are available  only to the 
households  who subsc ribe. 
 
Pay Per View  
A type of Pay TV where  viewers  are charged  each time they watch  
the special  event  or movie  being  broadcast.  
 
Pre-emption  
An interruption  of a regularly  scheduled  program.  Therefore,  if an 
advertiser  has a spot pre-empted,  he may receive  a make  good  from  
the station.  216 Premium  
This normally  refers  to an extra  cost to be paid for ensuring  that an 
ad appears  on a specific  page  or place  in an issue or a specific  
position  in an advertising  capsule  on TV. 
An item,  other  than the product  itself,  which  is offered  free or at a 
nominal  price  as an incentive  to purchase  the advertised  product  
or service.  
 
Prime  Time  
This refers  to that part of the day when  the listening  or viewing  
audience  is largest  as compared  to other  parts  of the day, at an 
overa ll universe  level.  
 
Pulsing  
Refers  to the concentrated  bursts  of advertising  at regular  intervals.  
The use of advertising  in regular  intervals,  as opposed  to seasonal  
patterns.  
 
PVR  (Personal  Video  Recorder)  
A set-top box that stores  video  information  in digital  form.  
 
Promo  
Short  for promotion  (the short -form  plural  is promos).  The term 
refers  to the overall  activity  conducted  by a radio  station  or TV 
channel,  or any organization , designed  to help sell a particular  
product  or service.  More  specifically,  the word  refers  to the 
preliminary  advertisement  or announcement  of a radio  or TV 
program,  broadcasted  earlier  in the day of the program  or on the 
preceding  day or days.  
 
Paid  media  
Paid media  refers  to the marketing  strategy  where  you do pay for 
the promoti ng of your products  or services  either  on search  engine.  
It is an effort  which  is made  externally  for the marketing  and it in 
words  paid placement  
 
Paid  search  marketing  
Paid search  marketing  are the ads which  are put up in the search  
engine  results  page  for which  owner  has to pay certain  amount  to 217 run those  ads and as the customer  clicks  on it the owner  gets the 
benefits  out of it 
 
Paradigm  
Paradigm  means  a typical  pattern  of something.  
 
Parent  brand  
A well established  and trusted  brand,  that acts as an endorsement  
to many  other  sub-brands.  These  parent  brands  are trusted  by its 
customers  and hence  benefits  its sub-brands  with a lot many  
customers.  
 
Personas  (customer  personas)  
Any characteristics/behavior  of a customer  segment  that can be 
described  to have  an influence  on the brand.  This creates  great  
understanding  of specific  target  customer  preferences  and also 
helps  us in positioning.  
 
Pitch  
Pitch  refers  to the degree  of vibrations  or tone.it  remarks  the degree  
of highness  or lowness  
 
Pop up stores  
Pop-up store  is a short -term  store  that keeps  a physical  space  for a 
limited  amount  of time. It can be set up anywhere.  
 
Positioning  statement  
A futuristic  vision  in a written  format  of where  the company  sees 
itself or its products  and services  placed/positione d in the minds  of 
the target  customers.  It also details  the uniqueness  the brand  has 
compared  to its competitors.  
 
Private  label  
Without  owning  the production  facilities,  the brands  products  are 
sold in its name,  but manufactured  by any other  or third  party. 
Here  the brand  still gets to control  its packaging,  pricing,  etc. 
 
Product  life cycle  
Product  life cycle  is a stage of a product  once  it gets it into the 
market.  218 Product  positioning  
Positioning  a product  in the market  is to know  which  type of 
audience  is the product  going  to target.  It is made  sure that it is 
strategically  positioned  in a way that a particular  target  find interest  
in this product  
 
Product  strategy  
Product  strategy  is a strategic  vision  of the company  towards  a 
particular  product  and how it is going  to be growing  and expanding  
and what  kind of target  is it going  to be targeting  to as well as the 
pricing  strategy  the competitive  advantage  strategy  will be involved  
It says how the product  will benefit  the business  
 
Profit  
Profit  is essent ially a numerical  or financial  gain which  occurs  at 
the end of an activity.  It is usually  calculated  as the difference  
between  the amount  earned , amount  spent  and buying , operating  
or 
 
Programmatic  
This refers  to the nature  of a specific  schedule  or flow of an event  
 
Promise  
Promise  is more  of giving  good  grounds  of expecting  or assuring  
someone  that something  authentic  is set to result  in post a certain  
set of activities  or a particular  occurrence  
 
Purchase  order  
Purchase  order  is a document  given  by the supplier  to the customer  
when  the product  is purchased.  
 
Page  view  
Page  scan request  to load one hypertext  mark -up language  page  of 
an electronic  pc. 
Is a call for participation  to load one hypertext  markup  language  
file of an online  website.  
 
Pagejacking  
Pagejacking  stealing  of a page  from  the first website  and 
publication  of a replica  (or near-copy)  at another  website.  219 Pass -along  rate  
Pass-along  rate the proportion  of individuals  united  nations  agency  
pass away  a message  or file. 
The proportion  of individ uals who pass on a message  or file. 
 
Pay per sale (PPS)  
Pay per sale (PPS)  on-line advertising  payment  model  within  which  
payment  relies  exclusively  on qualifying  sales.  
 
Payment  threshold  
Payment  threshold  minimum  accumulated  commission  associate  
affiliat e should  earn to trigger  payment  from  associate  affiliate  
program.  
It is that the minimum  quantity  of commission  that has to be 
earned  by affiliate  before  a payment  is transferred  
 
PayPal 
An on-line payment  service  that lets its users  create  purchases  and 
receive  payments  via a user-defined  email  address.  Its associate  
electronic  commerce  platform  that has payment  between  parties  
through  on-line transfers.  
 
Permission  marketing  
Permission  promoting  marketing  focused  around  obtaining  
customer’s  consent  to receive  info from  a corporation.  
Promoting  is focused  around  obtaining  customer’s  consent  to 
receive  info from  a corporation.  
 
Portal  
Portal  a web site that includes  a set of ordinarily  used services,  
serving  as a start line and frequent  entry  to the net (web portal)  or 
a distinct  segment  topic  (vertical  portal).  It could  be a online  page  
providing  access  or links to different  sites.  
A web site that includes  a set of ordinarily  used services,  serving  as 
a start line and frequent  entry  to the web (web portal)  or a distinct  
segment  topic  (vertical  portal).  
 
Pagejacking  
Illegally  repeating  the one legitimate  web site content  to a different  
web site. 220 Pass / in 
In Selling  terms  it refers  to a chunk  of promoting  material  meaning  
a pass on to a person  by the recipien t. 
 
Pay per lead  (PPL)  
It’s an internet  promoting  payment  theme  wherever  associate  
agent  is procured  every  generated  lead that meets  the standards  set 
by the adverti ser. 
On-line advertising payment model within which payment relies 
exclusively on qualifyin g leads.  
Pay per lead (PPL) on -line advertising payment model within 
which payment relies exclusively on qualifying leads.  
 
Pay per sale (PPS)  
It’s an internet  promotion  system  wherever  within  the web site 
owner  or publisher  is paid on the premise  of the amount  of sales 
that square  measure  gener ated by an ad. 
On-line advertising payment model within which payment relies 
exclusively on qualifying sales.  
 
Permission  promoting  
It refers  to any quite  promotion  that asks for and respects  a 
customers  specific  consent once causation  marketing  info. 
 
Podcast  
The series  of audio  or video  files that square  measure  distributed  
over the net to be watched  and listened  on a computer or different  
device.  
 
Pop-under  ad 
The ad that opens  in a very separate  window  of an internet site that 
user has visited,  it usually  opens  within  the background.  
 
Pop-up ad 
They  square  measure  the shape  of on-line advertising  on www  
platform.  
 
Premium  WordPress  theme  
A theme  designed  for the WordPress  content  management  system  
that price  cash.  221 A theme  coded  for the word  press  content  management  system  that 
costs  money.  
 
Penguin  
It is a search  engine  developed  by Google  to determine  quality  of 
search  position  point  
 
Pigeon  
It is a Google  search  engine  algorithm  used for the locally  targeted  
information  for certain  searches  
 
PPC  / Pay-Per-Click 
It’s a model of net promoting within which the advertisers pay a 
fee when one in all their ads square measure clicked.  
Online  ad model  which  charges  once  it is clicked  
On-line advertising payment model with in which payment relies 
exclusively on qualifying click -throughs.  
Pay per click (PPC) on -line advertising payment model within 
which payment relies exclusively on qualifying click -throughs.  
 
Position  
A place  in search  engine  that searches  the results  where /1a site 
ranks  for a particular  query  and keywords  
 
Penalty  
A penalty  issued  by Google , to a webmaster,  for breaking  Google ’s 
guidelines  and imposing  them  with charges.  
 
Pdf digital  
Doc format  that stores  and provides  information  in texts,  images  or 
graphi cs 
 
Passive  exporter  
An item produced  in a domestic  market  can be sold in other  
countries  
 
Penetration  price  
It is a marketing  strategy  used by the business  to attract  customers  
to a new product  or services  by offering  them  for lower  price  
 222 Physical  distri bution  
Movement  of finished products  from  a company's  distribution  and 
fulfillment  to the end users  
 
Polycentrism  
Having  many  centres  especially  for authorities  or control  
 
Price  ceiling  
It is a limit on the price  of a product  that is imposed  by the 
governm ent to protect  customers  
 
Price  escalation  
It is an idea where  a price  increases  when  a product  is either  
imported  or exported  into a new foreign  market  
 
Price  floor  
A lower  cost that is set by a government  on the price  that can be 
charged  for a product  
 
Primary  data  
Someone  collecting  the data from  the original  source  first hand  
 
Product  organization  
It is a structure  of a company  that uses to develop  or manage  the 
market  of a product  
 
Product  
A product  can be service  that s offered  for a sale 
 
Promotion  
Publishing of a product  or organization  in order  to increase  the 
sales and to know  more  about  them  
 
Purchasing  power  parity  
It is the economic  theory  which  allows  us to compare  various  
currencies  to one another  
 
Pioneering  
Advancing  of ideas  or methods  
 223 Page view /1request  
To load one hypertext  mark -up language  page 
 
Page  jacking  
Stealing  of a page  from  the original  website  and publication  of a 
replica  (or near-copy)  to another  web site. 
 
Payment  threshold  
Minimum  accumulated  commission  associate  affiliate  should  earn 
to trigger  payment  from  associate  affiliate  program.  
 
Podcast  
A series  of audio  or video  files that are/1units  syndicated  over the 
web and keep on users  computing  devices  for later playback.  
 
Pop-under  ad 
It’s associated  to signboard  that displa ys during  a new browser  
window  behind  the current  browser  window.  
 
Pop-up ad 
It’s associated  to signboard  that displays  during  a new browser  
window.  
 
Panda  
It’s a major  change  in Google  search  results  ranking  algorithm  that 
was first released  
 
PBN  (private  blog  network)  
A network  of websites  that places  a high quantity  of links to another  
websites  
 
Polarizing  
To cause something, especially something that contains different 
people or opinions, to divide into two completely opposing groups:  
 
Performance Marke ting 
Performance Marketing is digital marketing that only costs 
businesses money when it delivers a tangible result. It is judged on 
the number of sales, leads, clicks and impressions, and dependent 
on what the company wants to measure.  224 Personalized Mar keting  
Personalized Marketing (sometimes referred to as one -to-one 
marketing) is an extreme form of product differentiation, which 
tries to make a unique product offering for each customer.  
 
Proximity Marketing  
Proximity Marketing utilizes location technol ogy like Bluetooth or 
Wi-Fi so that businesses are able to communicate with consumers 
via portable devices when they’re on the go. It can also help 
businesses develop more relevant advertising.  
 
 
 
  225 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“You can't just ask custome rs what they want and then try to give 
that to them. By the time you get it built, they'll want something 
new.”  
—  Steve Jobs  
Q 
Quantitative  research  
A method  of advertising  research  that emphasizes  measurement  of 
incidence  of consumer  trends  within  a popu lation.  
A study  that aims to quantify  attitudes  or behavior s, measure  
variables  on which  they hinge,  compare,  and point  out 
correlations.  It is most  often  conducted  via survey  on a sample  that 
226 must  be representative  of the overall  population.  If so, then the 
results  can be extrapolated  to the entire  population  studied.  
 
Quantity  Discount   
See Volume  Discount.  
 
Qualitative  Research  
It is concerned  with understanding  the process,  which  underlie  
various  behavior al patterns.  “Qualitative  Research”  is primaril y 
concerned  with “Why”.  The qualitative  research  usually  involves  
group  discussions  or depth  interviews.  
 
Questionnaire  
A structured  technique  for collecting  data consisting  of a series  of 
questions.  Questionnaires  can be self-completion  or administered  
by an interviewer.  
 
Quota  Sample  
This is in contrast  to random  sample.  A research  sample  that is 
recruited  according  to one or more  desired  characteristics  such as 
SEC,  age, gender /1etc. 
 
Query  
When  a user types  a question  or any search  topic  in the search  bar 
of search  engines  like Bing, Google  etc., it is called  a query.  
 
Quota  
A fixed  nature  of something  that a person  or group  is entitled  to 
receive  
The number  or amount  of constituting  a proportional  share  
 
Query Based Marketing  
A query is a question that  is programmed to retrieve information 
from a database. Queries are used frequently in Direct Marketing 
to obtain counts from a mailing list database. The data is then used 
to inform further marketing planning.  
 
 
  227 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“Even when you are marketing to your entire audience or 
customer base, you are still simply speaking to a single human at 
any given time.”  
—  Ann Handley  
R 
Random  sample  
A sample  taken  from  any given  population  in which  each person  
maintains  equal  chances  of being  selected.  
A research  sample  where  every  person  in the target  population  has 
equal  chance  of selection  and represents  one section  of the universe  
in terms  of any of the demographic  variables  such as SEC,  age, 
gender  etc. 
 
228 Rate  
(1) The amount  charged  by a communic ations  medium  to an 
advertiser  based  on per unit of space  or time purchased.  The 
rate may vary from  national  to local campaigns,  or may be a 
fixed  rate. 
(2) To estimate  a particular  media ’s audience  size based  on a 
research  sample.  
The quoted  or printed  cost of out of home  advertising,  usually  
stated  for a total program  GRP  level on a per week  or month  basis.  
 
Rating  point  
(1) In television,  one percentage  of all TV households  who are 
viewing  a particular  station  at a given  time.  
(2) In radio,  one percentage  of all listeners  who are listening  to a 
particular  station  at a given  time.  Both  instances  vary 
depending  on time of day. 
 
Reach  
(1) The estimated  number  of individuals  in the audience  of a 
broadcast  that is reached  at least once  during  a specific  period  
of time.  
(2) Also applies  to Outdoor  advertising  audiences.  
 
Recognition  
(1) Formal  acknowledgment  given  by a communications  medium  
to an advertising  agency  to recognize  that agency  as being  
bona  fide, competent,  and ethical;  therefore,  entitled  to 
discounts.  
(2) The ability  of research subjects  to recall  a particular  ad or 
campaign  when  they see or hear it. 
 
Reference  group  
A group  of people  or organization  of which  an individual  respects,  
identifies  with,  or aspires  to join, e.g., membership  or associative  
groups.  
 
Referral  premium  
A premium  offered  to customers  for helping  sell a product  or 
service  to a friend  or acquaintance.  
 229 Register  marks  
Indicator  symbols  located  in the margins  of negatives  to be used as 
guides  for perfect  registration.  
 
Remnant  Space  
Discounted  magazine  space  which  is sold to help fill regional  
editions  of the publication.  
 
Renewal  rate  
The percentage  of individuals  that renew  their print  media  
subscriptions  to extend  beyond  the previous  expiration  date.  
 
Rep  or Representative  
A person  who solicits  advertising  space  on behalf  of a particular  
medium.  
 
Residuals  
A sum paid to a performer  on a TV or radio  commercial  each time 
it is run, and is usually  established  by AFTRA  (American  
Federation  of Television  and Radio  Artists)  or SAG  (Screen  Actors  
Guild)  contract.  
 
Resolution  
Refers  to the clarity  of a television  image  as received  by a set. 
 
Restricted  line 
Sales  items  that are not legally  sold in certain  geographic  areas,  or 
only under  special  legal restrictions.  
 
Retail  advertising  
Advertising  which  promotes  local merchandisers'  goods  and 
services.  Also referred  to as Local  Advertising.  
 
Retail  trading  zone  
Defined  by the Audit  Bureau  of Circulation  as the area beyond  an 
urban  area whose  residents  regularly  trade  with retail  merchants  
within  the urban  area.  
 
 
 230 Retou ching  
To alter photographs,  artwork,  or film to emphasize  or introduce  
desired  features  and also to eliminate  unwanted  ones.  
 
Rip-o-matic  
A very rough  rendition  of a proposed  commercial,  composed  of 
images  and sounds  borrowed  (ripped - off) from  other  comm ercials  
or broadcast  materials.  
 
Road  block  
A method  of scheduling  broadcast  commercials  to obtain  
maximum  reach  by simultaneously  showing  the identical  
advertisement  on several  different  stations.  
 
Romance  card  
Written  material  that accompanies  an adverti sing specialty,  
providing  information  about  the product  and its background.  
 
Rotogravure  
A magazine  supplement  that is printed  by a gravure  process,  and 
run on a rotary  press.  This process  is useful  for large  runs of 
pictorial  effects.  
 
Rotoscoping  
The process of using  live and animated  characters  within  an 
advertisement.  
 
Rough  
An unfinished  layout  of an ad which  shows  only a general  
conception  to be presented  for analysis,  criticism,  and approval.  
 
Rough  cut 
A preliminary  arrangement  of film or tape shots  that are roughly  
edited  together  without  voice -over or music  to serve  purpose  in the 
early  stages  of editing.  
 
 
 
 231 Run -of-press  (ROP)  
A newspaper  publisher's  option  to place  an ad anywhere  in the 
publication  that they choose,  as opposed  to Preferred  position.  Also 
referred  to as Run-of paper.  
 
Run -of-schedule  (ROS)  
A station's  option  to place  a commercial  in any time slot that they 
choose.  
 
Rushes  
Rough,  unedited  prints  of a commercial  to be used for editing  
purposes.  Also referred  to as dallies.  
 
Rack  Jobbe r (also  known  as Service  Merchandiser)  
A wholesaler  who markets  specialized  lines of merchandise  to 
certain  types  of retail  stores  and who merchandises,  arranges,  and 
stocks  the racks  on which  these  items  are displayed.  Rack  jobbers  
are most  prevalent  in the grocery  industry.  
 
Rating  
The percentage  expression  of the size of a TV or radio  program's  
audience.  An "8" rating  means  that 8 percent  of all homes  with sets 
in the coverage  area were  tuned  in to a particular  program.  
 
Recall  Test  
A type of test the purpose  of which  is to assess  the actual  
communication  impact  of an advertisement  after it has appeared  
in the media.  Recall  tests involve  finding  persons  who are regular  
users  of the medium  in question  and asking  them  to recall  or play 
back everything  they can remember.  The administrator  may or 
may not aid them  in their recall.  
 
Reciprocity  
Trading  sales for sales (e.g., I'll ship my steel on your railroad  if you 
purchase  steel rails from  me). Such  arrangements  can be 
anticompetitive  and illegal.  
 
Reference  Group  
The group  to which  an individual  looks  when  forming  his or her 
attitudes.  232 Refund  
The return  of part or all of a payment.  A cash refund  is just that; a 
merchandise  refund  stipulates  that the refund  be spent  on other  
merchandise  offered  by the same  seller. 
Regression  
A form  of multivariate  analysis  which  predicts  a dependent  variable  
as a function  of one or more  independent  variables.  
 
Relative  Market  Share  
The market  share  of a product  relative  to the combined  market  
share  of the three  leading  competi tors. 
 
Reliability  
A term in statistics  meaning  repetitive  consistency.  A measure  is 
said to be reliable  if it consistently  obtains  the same  result  when  
measuring  the same  observation.  
 
Replacement  Market  
The market  for products  or components  of products  many of which  
are already  in the hands  of end users  but which  have been  used up 
or ceased  for other  reasons  to operate  effectively.  
 
Resale  Price  Maintenance  
The practice,  legal prior  to the repeal  of Fair Trade  Law enabling  
legislation  by Congress  in 1975,  of a manufacturer's  requiring  
adherence  to a prescribed  price  by wholesalers  and/or  retailers  
who resold  its goods.  
 
Reset  
The periodic  reorganization  of the shelves  of a retail  outlet.  The 
reset process  often  involves  intense  competition  among  
manufactur ers and their agents  for shelf space.  
 
Retailing  
Selling  to the ultimate  consumer.  
 
Robinson  Patman  Act 
This legislation,  passed  by Congress  in 1936  as an amendment  to 
the Clayton  Antitrust  Act, made  it illegal  to discriminate  in price  
between  competitors  who purchase  commodities  of like grade  and 233 quality  where  the effect  of the discrimination  may be to lessen  
competition  substantially.  Price  differentials  can be justified  if it 
costs  the seller  less to transact  with a particular  buyer,  if the price  
change  is based  on changes  in market  conditions  or the 
deterioration  of merchandise,  or if the seller  is seeking  to meet  the 
low price  of a competitor.  This act is enforced  by the Federal  Trade  
Commission.  
 
Roll  Out 
The process  by which  a firm with a product  offered for sale in a 
regional  market,  perhaps  as part of a test, extends  the physical  
distribution  and promotion  of the product  to a much  wider  
geographical  area.  
 
RPC  (Readers  Per Copy)  
The average  number  of persons  likely  to be exposed  to an average  
issue of a publication  is referred to as Readers  Per Copy.  
Readers  Per Copy  = Readership  / Circulation  or Print  Order  
 
Readership  
The average  number  of persons  who are likely  to be exposed  to one 
issue of a publication  is the readership  of that publication.  This is 
ascertained  through  a scientifically  designed  random  sample  
survey,  such as IRS. 
Readership  is defined  in two ways:  
1. Total  Readership  
2. Average  Issue  Readership  
Unless  otherwise  specified,  readership  refers  to average  issue 
readership.  
(1) The total numb er of readers  of a publication  (includes  Primary  
and Pass-along  readers).  
(2) The percentage  of people  that can recall  a particular  
advertisement,  aided  or unaided.  
 
Rating  
A measure  of audience  for a television  or radio  program,  used to 
establish  advertising  rates.  
 
 
 234 ROI  (Return  on Investment)  
A measure  of operating  performance  and efficiency  in using  assets,  
computed  by dividing  net income  by average  total assets.  
 
Roadblock  or Roadblocking  
A method  of scheduling  broadcast  commercials  to obtain  
maximum  reach  by simultaneously  showing  the identical  
advertisement  on several  different  channels.  
 
Reach  
The approximate  percentage  of a target  audience's  population  who 
notice  an advertising  message  at least once during  an Out of Home  
campaign.  
The number  of differen t persons  exposed  to a specific  media  
vehicle  or schedule  at least once.  Usually  measured  over a specific  
period  of time,  e.g., four weeks.  Also known  as cumulative,  
unduplicated  or net audience.  
 
Reporting  Unit  
This refers  to any geographical  unit that is reported  separately  in 
the IRS Analyze r Software.  
 
Right  Hand  Rule  
Starting  from  a starting  point,  an investigator  is to move  as per this 
rule. As the interviewer  comes  out of the first household  
interviewed,  he should  move  towards  his right  along  the same 
footpath  from  the house  he interviewed  first. 
 
Rich  Media  
Rich  media  advertisements  are banners  (or popups,  skyscrapers,  
interstitials,  etc.) which  are constructed  using  dynamic  tools such as 
Flash,  HTML  forms,  Java,  ASP,  Shockwave,  Javascript,  or other  
languages  or applications  that increase  the appearance  and/or  
functionality  of the ad beyond  that which  can be achieved  with a 
static  or animated  image.  For example,  a rich media  ad may 
include  sound,  a user registration  form,  a multiple  page  Flash  
applica tion, or other  more  sophisticated  media.  Rich  media  ads 
usually  command  higher  CPM  levels  than simple  image  redirects.  
New media  that offers  an enhanced  experience  relative  to older,  
mainstream  formats.  235 Rail  Advertising  
Station  or terminal  advertising  that is positioned  in close  proximity  
to train  tracks.  
 
Recall  
The recognition  of an out of home  advertising  message  by an 
individual  or audience,  generally  based  on a verbal  stimulus.  
 
Rotation  /Rotary  Bulletin  
The movement  of an advertiser's  message  from  one bulletin  
location  to another  within  a market  at stated  intervals  to achieve  
greater  reach  in the market.  
 
Re-branding  
Re-branding  usually  takes  place  after a merger  or acquisition  when  
an overall  upgradation  or revision  of a brand  takes  place.  
 
Re-positio ning  
When  a brands  customers  shift to another,  it is always  advisable  to 
reposition  your products  to enhance  its value  in the minds  of the 
customers.  It is done  by changing  a products ’ positioning  in a 
potential  market.  
 
Real -time  analytics  
Analyzing  real-time data and immediately  providing  insights  of 
information  that helps  us to make  quick  decisions  is known  as real-
time analytics  
 
Relevant  data  
Marketing  analytics  gives  us the very best insights  with the use of 
data so it is very much  important  to have  a very relevant  data that 
is the data must  not be five years  old to calculate  the current  
statistics  of customers  interest  
 
Request  for proposal  (RFP)  
RFP or request  for proposal  is a formal  business  document  which  
requests  vendors  and service  providers  to submit  bid proposals  
during  the procurement  process.  
 
 236 Request  for quotation  (RFQ)  
Request  for quotation  or RFQ  is a business  document  which  asks 
suppliers  to share  a comprehensive  quote  for the purpose  of 
purchasi ng a product  or an item.  
 
Request  for tende r (RFT)  
RFT  or request  for tender  is a professional  and formal  process  
where  suppliers  and service  providers  are invited  to submit  a bid. 
This is done  for the procur ement  of an item, commodity  or service.  
 
Return  on experience  
It is all about  the return  what is received  by increasing  the value  of 
investment  to the customer  experience  
 
Return  on influence  
It is about  the engagement  more  than monitory  returns.  It is all 
about  how well the social  connections  and interactions  happened  
due to the web strategy  utilized  for the influence,  has it affected  the 
attitude  and perception  of the audience  to take that action  
 
Return  on investment  
Return  on investment  is analyze d by taking  the data of investment  
as well as the return  on it to know  where  the company ’s positi on 
stands  or how well is marketing  sector  doing  
 
Return  on investment  (ROI)  
ROI  or return  on investment  is referred  toa metric  which  is 
commonly  represented  as a purchase  which  indicates  efficiency  or 
profitability  of investments.  This is computed  by divid ing return  by 
cost of investment.  
 
Retweet  
A forwarded or reposted tweet.  
Tweets with images receive 18% more click -throughs, 89% more 
likes, and 150% more retweets.  
 
Revenue  
Revenue  is the money  a business  organization  generates  during  a 
specific  period  or year or quarter  which  is also known  as sales.  
 237 Right  of first  refusal  (ROFR  or RFR)  
Right  of first refusal  or ROFR  or RFR  is a contractual  right.  This 
grants  the holder  the option  to perform  a specific business  
transaction  with an entity  before  any third party.  
 
Rule  of reciprocity  
Rule  of reciprocity  compels  an individual  to treat others  in a 
positive  manner  with the expectatio n that the person  will be treated  
int he same  way. 
 
Rate  card  
Rate  card document  description  costs for varied  ad placement  
choic es. 
It could  be a document  containing  costs  and outline  for the ad 
placements  choices  available from  a service  sector  like media  
outlet.  
A document  detailing  prices  for various  ad placement  options.  
Information  cards,  provided  by both print  and broadcast  media,  
which  contain  information  concerning  advertising  costs,  
mechanical  requirements,  issue dates,  closing  dates,  cancellation  
dates,  and circulation  data,  etc. 
 
Reciprocal  links  
Reciprocal  links between  2 sites,  typically  supported  an agreement  
by the positioning  homeowners  to exchange  links.  
The link between  2 sites,  typically  supported  by an agreement  by 
the positioning  homeowners  to exchange  links.  
 
Rankings  
A website's  position  in the search  engine  result  page . Ranking  gets 
influenced  due to various  factors  and tells that whether  the website  
appears  in higher  ranking  or not. 
 
Rank  brain  
Rain  brain  is a Google  core algorithm  which  determines  the most  
relevant  result  to search  engine  queries  using  machine  learning . 
The machine  learning  is an aspect  used here which  differs  it from  
other  updates .  
 
 238 Reciprocal  link 
Its an agreement  made  between  two webmasters  to provide  a 
hyperlink  within  their own website  to each other  site, it is usually  
done  to show  a partnership  between  two sites.  
 
Reddit  
It is an socia l news  website  and a portal  where  news  are circulated  
and promoted  by the site members.  
 
Redirect  
It is a technique  for moving  visitors  to a different  web location  than 
the one they requested . It happens  usually  because  the requested  
page  is not available.  
 
Referral  
A technique  of word  of mouth  or recommendation  from  existing  
customer  to others  in oder to make  new customers  is called  referral  
in marketing.  
 
Remarketing  
Remarketing  primarily  uses email  to re-engage  the past customers  
who have  already  done  shopping  from  your brand.it  is used by 
placing  a cookie  using  a java script  in the user browser .  
Remarketing helps businesses to remind a website visitor of a 
possible intention to purchase, by putting their product or service 
in front of them again on othe r websites.  
 
Real -Time Marketing  
Real -Time Marketing is any marketing strategy that uses up -to-
date information. It can’t be planned, so is spontaneous and is 
usually focused on current trends.  
 
Relationship Marketing  
Relationship Marketing is based on the  theory that customers who 
love your brand will spend more money with your brand. By 
focusing on building relationships with customers, they are more 
likely to remain loyal and make repeat purchases.  
 
 
 239 Registrar  
In the Internet world, a registrar refers to the domain name 
registrar that manages Internet domains. An example would be 
GoDaddy. Another domain name registrar, Namecheap, cites they 
have over 3.000,000 domains.  
 
Responsive  web  design  
It is a way to develop  your web in such a way so that it gets agile 
and get dynamic  according  to the preferable  screen  size. 
Responsive  web design  can be divide d into further  three  categories : 
media  query , the web browser , responsive  web 
 
ROAS  
Return  on ad spend  is a marketing  method  which  calculates  the 
amount  of revenue earned  for the money  spend  on advertising . It 
is similar  to return  on investm ent, you measure  the revenue  in 
return  of the investment  made  in digital  world.  
 
Robots.txt.  
This standard  specifies  how to inform  the web robots  about  which  
areas  of the webs ite should  not be processed  or scanned  and which  
URL s the crawlers  can access  to your site. r 
 
ROI  return  on investment  
Is a difference  between  net income  and the investment.  It shows  
the evaluated  efficiency  of the various  investment  made.  
 
RSS  publishing  
Frequently  updated  works  such as news  headlines  or blogs  in a 
standardized  format  is done  by RSS (Really Simple  Syndication)  in 
a wen feed format.  
 
Reciprocal  links  
It’s a link supported  associate  agreement  by 2 sites to link to every  
different  to extend  the web site traffic  and link popularity.  
 
Rectangle  ad 
Anyone  of the big, rectangular  banner  sizes prompt  by the IAB 
(interactive  advertising  bureau).  240 Any one in among  the large,  rectangular  banner  sizes prompt  by 
the IAB. 
 
Rep  firm  
Short  for web site illustration  companies,  its a commercial  sales 
partner  specializing  primarily  in single -site sales.  
 
Return  days  
The amount  of days associate  affiliate  will earn commission  on a 
buying  deal or lead by a referred  traveler.  
 
Return  on investment  (ROI)  
The term  accustomed  perceive  the gain of associate  investment  i,e 
the magnitude  relation  of profits  or losses  to the number  invested  
with.  
 
Rich  media  
New media  that gives  advanced  options  like video,  audio  or 
different  components  that encourages  viewers  to act and have  
interaction  with the content.  
 
Run  of network  (RON)  
Without  the flexibility  to settle  on specific  sites it’s a type of net 
promoting  wherever  on-line campaign  is applied  to wide 
assortment  of internet  sites.  
Ad buying  option  in which  ad placements  may appear  on any 
pages  on sites within  an ad network.  
 
Run  of web  site (ROS)  
It’s a type of digital  advertising  contract  usually  implies  that a 
banner  or different  style of on-line promotion  will appear on any 
page.  
 
Regiocentrism  
An orientation  of regional  market  given  to the world -wide strategic  
market  organization  
 
Regression  analysis  
It is a set of statistical  methods  that is used to estimate  relationships  
between  a dependent  variable  or more  independent  variable  241 Retailer  
It is a person  or/1a business  that sells goods  to public  
 
Revaluation  
The act of calculating  the value  of something  again  especially  to 
give it the higher  value  than before  
Rep  firm  
An ad sales partner  specializing  primarily  in single -site sales.  
 
Return  days  
The number  of days an affiliate can earn commission  on a 
conversion  (sale or lead)  by a referred  visitor.  
 
Return  on investment  (ROI)  
The quantitative  relation  of profits  (or losses)  to the number  
invested  within.  
 
Run  of site (ROS)  
Ad of shopping  for choice  within  which  ad placemen ts could  seem  
on any pages  of the target  website.  
  242 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“You can’t sell anything if you can’t tell anything.”  
—  Beth Comstock  
  
243 S 
Sales  promotion  
Marketing  activities  that stimulate  consumer  purchasing  and 
dealer  effectiveness  through  a combination  of personal  selling,  
advertising,  and all supplementary  selling  activities.  
 
Sales -response  function  
Refers  to the effect  of advertising  on sales.  
 
Sans -serif  type  
A typestyle  of lettering  with no serifs,  or cross  strokes  at the end of 
main strokes.  
 
Scanners  
An optical  character  recognition  machine  which  consists  of a scan 
head,  a computer  processor,  and an output  device.  Used  for 
interpreting  documents,  invoices,  bar-codes,  and photos  for use in 
Color  separations.  
 
Scene  setting  
The process of using  realistic  sounds  to stimulate  noise  in 
backgrounds  during  radio  production  such as car horns,  sirens,  
recorded  laughter,  etc. 
 
Screen  
(1) A printing  process  in which  a squeegee  forces  paint  or ink 
through  a screen  which  is decorated  with stencile d designs  onto 
the paper.  
(2) The surface  onto which  an image  of a slide or television  picture  
is shown.  
 
Seasonality  
The variation  in sales for goods  and services  throughout  the year,  
depending  on the season,  e.g. hot chocolate  is advertised  more  in 
the winte r, as opposed  to summer  months.  
 
 
 244 Seasonal  rating  adjustments  
In broadcast  media,  rating  modifications  that reflect  changes  in the 
season,  e.g. weather  and holidays.  
Selective  demand  advertising  
Advertising  which  promotes  a particular  manufacturer's  brand  as 
opposed  to a generic  product.  See Primary  demand.  
 
Selective  distribution  
Allows  manufacturers  to maintain  more  control  over the way their 
products  are sold and discourages  price  competition  among  sellers  
of the products  by distributing  their products  only to those  
wholesalers  and retailers  who follow  the manufacturer's  guidelines.  
 
Self-liquidating  premium  
A premium  offer paid by the consumer  whose  total cost including  
handling  fees are paid for in the basic  sales transaction.  
 
Self-mailer  
A direct -mail piece  in which  no envelope  or wrapper  is required  
for mailing.  
 
Semi -liquidator  
A premium  offer that is partially  paid by the consumer  as well as 
the manufacturer.  
 
Semiotics  
Refers  to theories  regarding  symbolism  and how people  glean  
meaning  from  words,  sounds,  and pictures.  Sometimes  used in 
researching  names  for various  products  and services.  
 
Serif  type  
Short,  decorative  cross  lines or tails at the ends of main  strokes  in 
some  typefaces,  such as Roman  lettering.  
 
Sets  in use (SIU)  
The percent  of television sets that are tuned  into a particular  
broadcast  during  a specific  amount  of time.  
 
 245 Share -of-audience  
The percent  of audiences  that are tuned  into a particular  medium  
at a given  time,  e.g. the number  of people  watching  television  
between  the hours  of 8:00 p.m. to 11:00  p.m. 
 
Share -of-voice  (SOV)  
A brand's  or group  of brands'  advertising  weight  expressed  as a 
percentage  of a defined  total market  or market  segment  in a given  
time period  
 
Shelf  screamers  (shelf  talkers)  
A printed  advertising  message  which  is hung  over the edge of a 
retail  store  shelf,  e.g. "On Special,"  or "Sale  item."  
 
Signature  
(1) A musical  theme  associated  with a television  program,  radio  
show,  or a particular  product  or service.  Also referred  to as a 
Theme  song.  
(2) Single  printing  sheet  which folds into 4, 8, 12, 16, and so on 
pages  to be gathered  and bound  to form  a part of a book,  or 
pamphlet.  
 
Silk screening  
A color  printing  method  in which  ink is forced  through  a stencil  
placed  over a screen  that blocks  out areas  of an image,  and onto 
the printing  surface.  Also referred  to as Serigraphy.  
 
Simmons  Market  Research  Bureau  (SMRB)  
A syndicated  service  which  provides  audience  exposure  and 
product  usage  data for print  and broadcast  media.  
 
Situation  analysis  
The gathering  and evaluation  of inform ation  to identify  the target  
group  and strategic  direction  of an advertising  campaign.  
 
Slicks  
A high-quality  proof  of an advertisement  printed  on glossy  paper  
which  is suited  for reproduction.  
 246 Slotting  allowances  
Fees paid by a manufacturer  to a retailer  for the retailer's  shelf 
space.  
 
Soft sell 
The technique  of using  low pressure  appeals  in advertisements  and 
commercials.  
 
Solid  
An arrangement  of type lines set vertically  as closely  as possible.  
Also referred  to as solid set. 
 
Specialty  advertising  
This is the older  term used for Promotional  products.  It remains  a 
commonly  used term by many  companies.  
 
Speculative  (Spec)  sample  
A sample  promotional  product,  with the prospective  buyer's  
imprint  on it, produced  with the hope  that the customer  will 
purcha se it. 
 
Split  run 
Two or more  different  forms  of an advertisement  which  are ran 
simultaneously  in different  copies  of the same  publication,  used to 
test the effectiveness  of one advertisement  over another  to appeal  
to regional  or other  specific  markets.  
 
Spot announcements  
Commercial  or public  service  announcements  that are placed  on 
television  or radio  programs.  
 
Spot  color  
The technique  of coloring  for emphasis  some  areas  of basic  black -
and-white  advertisements,  usually  with a single  color.  
 
Spot  televisi on (or radio)  
Time  slots in geographic  broadcast  areas,  purchased  on a market -
to-market  basis  rather  than through  a network.  
 247 Spread  
Refers  to a pair of facing  pages  in a periodical,  or an advertisement  
which  is printed  across  two such pages.  
 
SSL 
Secure s ockets layer (SSL) is a security technology that 
encrypts links between the server and browser to keep data 
passed between the two privately. Websites that are secure will 
have the HTTPs instead of  
HTTP. 36.4 percent of websites monitored by W3Techs do 
not use SSL.  
 
Staggered  schedule  
A schedule  of advertisements  in a number  of periodicals  which  
have  different  insertion  dates.  
 
Standard  Advertising  Unit  System  (SAUS)  
A set of uniform  advertising  procedures  developed  by the 
American  Newspaper  Publishers  Association.  
 
Standard  Industrial  Classification  (SIC)  
Defined  by the U.S Department  of Commerce  to be a classification  
of businesses  in a numeric  hierarchy.  
 
Standard  Rate  and Data  Service  (SRDS)  
A commercial  firm that publishes  reference  volumes  that includ e 
up-to-date information  on rates,  requirements,  closing  dates,  and 
other  information  necessary  for ad placement  in the media.  
 
Starch  scores  
A result  of a method  used by Daniel  Starch  and staff in their studies  
of advertising  readership  which  include  noted, or the percent  of 
readers  who viewed  the tested  ad, associated,  or the percent  of 
readers  who associated  the ad with the advertiser,  and read-most,  
or the percent  of readers  who read half or more  of the copy.  
 
Starch  Readership  Service  
A research  organi zation  (Starch  INRA  Hooper)  that provides  an 
advertisement's  rank in issue and Starch  scores.  248 Step -and-repeat  
A single  image  printed  repeatedly  in a pattern  on a single  sheet  of 
paper.  
 
Stet 
A Latin  term meaning  "let it stand,"  which  instructs  a printer  or 
typesetter  to ignore  an alteration  called  for in a proof.  
 
Stop  motion  
A photographic  technique  in which  inanimate  objects  appear  to 
move.  
 
Storyboard  
A blueprint  for a TV commercial  which  is drawn  to portray  copy,  
dialogue,  and action,  with caption  notes regarding  filming,  audio  
components,  and script.  
Strategic  planning  
Determination  of the steps  required  to reach  an objective  of 
achieving  the optimum  fit between  the organization  and the 
marketplace.  
 
Stratified  selection  
An equally  measured  statistical  sample  which  represents  all the 
categories  into which  the population  has been  divided.  
 
Stripping  
Positioning  film negatives  or positives  of copy  and illustrations  for 
the purpose  of creating  a printing  plate  for that ad or page.  Also 
referred  to as image  assembly.  
 
Subliminal  persuasion  
An advertising  message  presented  below  the threshold  of 
consciousness.  A visual  or auditory  message  that is allegedly  
perceived  psychologically,  but not consciously.  Also called  
Subception.  
 
Superimposition  (super)  
A proce ss in TV production  where  an image,  words,  or phrases  are 
imposed  over another  image.  249 Supplementary  media  
Non-mass  media  vehicles  that are used to promote  products,  e.g., 
Point -of-purchase  advertising.  
 
Supplier  
Companies  that sell goods  or services  to an advertising  agency  for 
their use in constructing  advertisements,  e.g., design  studios,  color  
houses,  printers,  and paper  producers.  
 
Swatch  proof  
A sample  of the material  for a promotional  product,  with the 
customer's  artwork  printed  on it in the specifie d colors.  
 
Sweeps  
Refers  to a time during  the months  of November,  March,  and May,  
when  both Nielson  and Arbitron  survey  all local market  broadcast  
media  for the purpose  of rating  the stations  and their 
programming.  
 
Syndicated  program  
A television  or radio program  that is distributed  in more  than one 
market  by an organization  other  than a network.  
 
Sales  Management  
(Also known  as Sales  Administration  or Sales  Force  Management)  
The planning,  direction,  and control  of the personal  selling  
activities  of a business  unit, including  recruiting,  selecting,  training,  
equipping,  assigning,  routing,  supervising,  paying,  and motivating  
as these  tasks apply  to the personal  sales force.  
 
SAMI  
An abbreviation  for Selling  Areas  Marketing,  Inc. Recently  merged  
with Burke,  SAMI  is a commercial  research  service  which  conducts  
wholesale  (rather  than retail,  like Nielsen)  audits.  Withdrawals  from  
grocery  warehouses  are monitored  every  four weeks.  
 
Sample  
(l) In statistics,  a limited  or finite  number  of items  of data selected  
from a universe  or population.  (2) In marketing,  one or more  units  
of a product  given  free (or sold at a price  far below  market)  in order  250 to induce  prospective  buyers  to give it a trial or to enable  them  to 
determine  its characteristics  by inspection  or analysis. 
 
Scanner  
A device  used at checkout  counters  of supermarkets  and some  other  
stores  which  emits  a laser beam  to identify  automatically  items  
marked  with the Universal  Product  Code  as they pass over the 
check  stand.  Scanners  have speeded  the checkout  process,  reduced  
personnel  needs,  and provided  valuable  data on inventory  
movement.  
 
Scrambled  Merchandising  
The tendency  for retail  establishments  to offer a growing  number  
of product  types,  leading  to an increasing  duplication  of 
assortments  among  vario us types  of retail  establishments.  This has 
led to an increase  in what  has been  termed  intertype  competition  
among,  for example,  supermarkets  offering  drug products  and 
discount  drugstores  offering  items  previously  sold principally  in 
supermarkets.  
 
Segmen tation  
The process  by which  groups  of potential  customers  are identified  
by geographic  area,  buying  behavior  patterns  they hold in 
common,  common  perceptions  they may share  for a product  or 
service,  and/or  common  uses to which  they may put a product  or 
service for the purpose  of (1) designing  more  efficient  marketing  
programs  that can be targeted  primarily  to one or more  selected  
segments;  or (2) positioning  a product  in relation  to competition  in 
a particular  market  segment.  
 
Selective  Demand  
The demand  for one particular  brand  as opposed  to that for a 
product  category  in general.  
 
Selective  Distribution  
The sale of a product  or service  through  a carefully  selected  subset  
of all available  wholesale  or retail  outlets  in a given  market  area.  
 
 
 251 Semidurable  Good s 
Goods  expected  to last between  six months  and three  years,  such 
as luggage  or shoes.  
 
Served  Market  
That  portion  of the market  for which  a company's  product  is 
suitable  and which  it is presently  targeting.  
 
Share  
The share  of audience  of a television  program  is the percentage  of 
households  using  television  during,  a specific  time period  which  is 
tuned  to the program  in question.  
 
Sherman  Antitrust  Act 
Passed  by Congress  in 1890  to prohibit  (1) monopolies  or attempts  
to monopolize;  and (2) various  acts, including  contracts,  
combinations,  or conspiracies  intended  to restrain  trade.  The 
Sherman  Act was aimed  primarily  at firms  operating  at one 
particular  level in a channel  of distribution,  particularly  
manufacturers.  
 
Shopping  Goods  
Goods  the purchase  of which entails  risk perceived  sufficient  to 
warrant  a search  aimed  at comparing  price,  quality,  style,  etc., 
among  a number  of possible  purchases.  
 
Shrinkage  
In retailing,  the value  of book  inventory  in excess  of actual  physical  
inventory.  The difference  repres ents losses  from  shoplifting,  
employee  theft,  breakage,  etc. 
 
Skinning  Strategy  
A pricing  strategy  based  on high initial  price  and successively  lower  
prices  designed  to appeal  in sequence  to market  segments  placing  
successively  greater  emphasis  on price  while earning  the highest  
possible  per unit profits.  
 
Soft Goods  
This term  is sometimes  used as a synonym  for "non -durable  
goods,"  i.e., consumer  goods  expected  to last less than three  years  252 such as food or clothing.  It is also sometimes  used to refer 
specif ically  to goods  that are literally  soft to the touch  such as 
textiles.  
 
Source  Effect  
The extent  to which  the nature  of a source  influences  the credibility  
of a message.  Most  citizens  of the United  States,  for example,  
would  be far more  likely  to believe  a news  story  they read in the 
New York  Times  than to believe  precisely  the same  story  if it 
appeared  in Pravda.  
 
Sourcing  System  
The complex  of outside  suppliers  and internal  manufacturing  
sources  for all materials,  component  parts,  supplies,  machinery,  
and equipment,  facilities,  and services  the organization  requires.9  
 
Specialty  Goods  
Goods  for which  a consumer  is willing  to expend  the effort  required  
to purchase  a most  preferred  item rather  than to buy a potentially  
acceptable  substitute.  
 
Specialty  Store 
A retail  store  that makes  its appeal  on the basis  of a restricted  class 
of shopping  goods.  By its selection  of these  goods,  it aims to 
differentiate  itself from  department  store  competition.  
 
Spiff  
A direct  payment  to a wholesale  or retail  salesperson  as an 
incentive  to the selling  effort  behind  a manufacturer's  product.  
 
Split  Run  
The running  of different  advertisements  in alternating  copies  of the 
same  issues  of a publication  to test the effectiveness  of the copy.  
 
Spot  Advertising  
The purchase  of television  or radio  time on a station  by station  or 
market  by/1market  basis  rather  than network  wide.  
 
 
 253 Star  
One of four categories  of business  lines or products  in a portfolio  
theory  of product  management.  (The  other  three  are cash cows,  
dogs,  and "problem  children.")  These  products  are share  leaders  in 
growing  markets,  which  may need  cash to sustain  their strong  
position.  
 
Starch  
A commercial  research  firm,  best known  for its Starch  Message  
Report,  which  attempts  to measure  the impact  of advertisements  
in maga zines  and newspapers.  
 
Stockkeeping  Unit  (Often  abbreviated  SKU)  
The lowest  level of disaggregation  at which  a product  can be 
ordered.  Thus , a shirt stockkeeping  unit would  be a particular  size 
(collar  and sleeve  length)  of a particular  style of a particu lar color.  
 
Strategic  Alliance  
A business  arrangement  more  intimate  and more  permanent  than 
that of preferred  vendor/major  customer  but short  of actual  
merger.  Firms  may enter  into a strategic  alliance  in order  to 
develop  some  new, shared  technology  or because the size of a 
contemplated  transaction  is extraordinarily  large,  the sale 
particularly  complex,  the need  for ongoing  technological  back up 
pressing,  and/or  the opportunity  for mutual  learning  great.  An 
example  is the relationship  between  Fujitsu  Fanuc , a Japanese  
robot  vendor,  and General  Motors.  Their  joint venture  provides  
an opportunity  for Fanuc  to learn  more  about  robot  applications  
in a factory  than it could  as a typical  vendor  and for General  
Motors  to better  understand  robotics  and to capitaliz e upon  its 
knowledge  by selling  factory  robot  technology  to other  companies.  
 
Strategy  
The pattern  of objectives,  purposes,  or goals  and major  policies  for 
achieving  these  goals,  stated  in such a way as to define  what  
business  the company  is in or is to be in and the kind of company  
it is or is to be. 
 
 
 254 Super  Store  
A store  similar  in general  layout  to a supermarket  but much  larger,  
averaging  around  30,000  square  feet compared  to 18,000  square  
feet for the supermarket.  Super  stores  sell not only groceries  but a 
large  variety  of convenience  items  (such  as garden  supplies)  and 
even some  bigger  ticket  durables  like televisions.  Some  super  stores  
offer such services  as laundry  and dry cleaning.  
 
Supermarket  
A large,  low price,  low margin,  high-volume, self -service  retail  store  
selling  food and a limited  range  of household  products.  The 
supermarket  has annual  sales of at least $2 million  and is under  
30,000  square  feet in size. 
 
Survey  
The organized  solicitation  of information  or opinions  from  a 
sample  or population  of respondents  for the purpose  of drawing  
conclusions  about  the population.  
 
Sole  Readership  
Overall  for a publication  is the estimated  number  of individuals  
who read only that particular  publication  and no other  
publications.  
 
Sole  Readership  – Language  
The number  of people  who are readers  of a publication  of any 
language  but do not read any other  publication  in that language.  
e.g. Sole Readership  of an English  Publication  refers  to the 
estimated  number  of readers  of the English  publication  who read 
only that publication  in the English  language.  
 
Sole  Readership  - Periodicity  
The number  of people  who are readers  of a publication  of any 
periodicity  but do not read any other  publication  in that 
periodicity.  e.g. Sole Readership  of a monthly  refers  to the 
estimated  number  of readers  of the monthly  who read only that 
monthly  across  monthlies  of all the languages.  
  255 Split  Run  
A facility  offered  by publications  to advertisers,  that allows  different  
advertising  copies  to be run in different  parts  of the circulation  
area.  
 
Supplement  
Refers  to the sections  added  to the main  body  of a newspaper  and 
distributed  free of cost at regular  frequency.  
 
Sq. Cms  (Square  Centimeter)  
Refers  to the height  of the ad in centimeters  * width  of an ad in 
centimeters.  E.g. Front  page  ad can be 20cms  x 12cms  = 240 sq 
cms (approximately  equal  to 60cms  x 4 column  centimeters).  Some  
daily  newspapers  have  recently  changed  their format  to 7-column  
width  (against  8 columns  earlier)  in line with some  international  
formats.  Consequently,  the ad sales units  have been  changed  to 
square  centimeters.  
 
Scheduling  
The act of deciding  how a media  plan should  be phased  and 
eventually  appear  in media  at a given  period  of time is called  
scheduling.  
 
Sample  
Those  respondents  identified  as being  eligible  to be interviewed  or 
questioned  for a survey.  
 
Sampling  Frame  
Data  used to generate  the sample.  More  specifically,  grouping  or 
listing  of all the eligible  units  (such  as countries,  postcodes)  or 
electoral  rolls,  which  are used to generate  the sample.  
 
Seconda ry Audience  
Target  Audience,  who are less significant  for a specific  brand/  
advertising  campaign,  as compared  to the primary  audience.  
 
SOV  (Share  of Voice)  
The brand's  share  of the total category  gross  rating  points  (GRPs,  
defined  under  Television  definit ions).  
 256 SOE  (Share  of Expenditure)  
The brand's  share  of the category  expenditure  on a medium/  
media.  
 
Scrutiny  
To check  for errors  committed  by the interviewers  in coding  the 
responses  and also the discrepancies  in coding  or asking  the 
questions.  
 
SCR  (Soc io Cultural  Regions)  
At the time of independence,  when  the Indian  sub-continent  had 
to be divided  politically  and administratively  into a number  of units  
(states  and districts),  it was important  that such a division  should  be 
made  so that each such unit was homogeneous  in composition.  
Therefore,  territories  were  then grouped  not by geographical  
contiguity  alone.  Based  on a number  of Socio -Cultural  parameters,  
the State  Re-organization  Commission  (1954)  drew  up the district  
and state boundaries.  
These  form  the basis  of the SCRs  (Socio  - Cultural  Regions)  : 
 Linguistic  homogeneity  
 Geographical  contiguity  
 Financial,  economic  and administrative  homogeneity  
 Rationali zation  of culture  and lifestyles  making  each one 
unique  from  other  districts  
 Caste  and class consid erations  
 
SEC  (Socio  - Economic  Classification)  – Revised  from  
May,  2011  
SEC  refers  to the “socio  - economic”  of the respondent.  The new 
SEC  system  is used to classify  households  in India.  
It's based  on two variables:  
 Education  of chief  earner  
 Number  of “consumer  durables”  (from  a predefined  list) 
owned  by the family.  The list has 11 items,  ranging  from  
electricity  connection'  and 'agricultural  land' - to cars and air 
conditioners.  
 
 
 257 SEC  Rural  (Socio  Economic  Class)  - OLD  
As originally  conceptuali zed and classified  by IRS, Rural  SEC is 
categorize d into 4 groups  based  on the education  and the type of 
household  viz. R1, R2, R3 and R4. 
R1 denotes  the upper -most  Rural  SEC  and R4 the lowest  SEC.  
 
Standard  Deviation  
A measure  of the dispersion  of a set of data from  its mean.  The 
more  spread  apart  the data is, the higher  the deviation.  
 
Standard  Error  
The absolutely  correct  value  of any measurement  can only be 
determined  by conducting  a census  of all cases  in the universe  and 
as and when  conducted,  it will require  years of fieldwork,  followed  
by long drawn  data compilation  (and expenses  will be prohibitive).  
Now  one would  imagine  that the larger  the sample  the lower  the 
relative  error  
though  true, beyond  a sample  size, the ratio between  “Reductions  
in SE” to the “incre mental  sample”  will be insignificant.  
Formula  
SE= Z * v(P*(1 -P)/N)  
 Where  Z is a function  of confidence  level typically  for IRS, 
which  operates  at 90% confidence  level.  The Z value  is equal  
to 1.64.  
 P = incidence  of a phenomenon  
 N = sample  size 
 SE = standar d error  
 Relative  Error  is Standard  Error  expressed  as a percentage  pf 
incidence  of the phenomenon.  
 RE = SE/P  
Note:  All sample  sizes in IRS are determined  so that any 
measurement  with incidence  > 
10% is measured  at 90% confidence  with an acceptable  relative  
error  less than 
+/-15%.  
 
Skipping  pattern  
The researcher  might  specify  that all households  falling  on the path 
of the interviewer  moving  by the Right  Hand  Rule,  should  not be 258 contacted.  Certain  specified  numbers  may be required  to be 
skipped.  For example,  it may be specified  that every  third  
household  is to be contacted.  In that case,  the interviewer  has to 
contact  the first household  starting  from  the starting point  and then 
contact  4th,7th,19th…  household  and continue  in this fashion.  
 
SP (Stating  addres s or starting  point)  
It is the point  (address)  from  where  an interviewer  has to start his 
interviewing  in a particular  area.  Interviewers  may be given  the 
addresses  of each respondent,  or may be given  a starting  address.  
A starting  address  usually  has both name  (of the respondent  or of 
the head  of the household)  and the address.  
 
Spontaneous  Recall  
Refers  to a measurement  technique,  in which  respondents  are 
provided  “no cues”  to recall  brands/  advertisements.  
 
SEO  (Search  Engine  Optimization ) 
Short  for search engine  optimization  or search  engine  optimi zer it is 
the process  of increasing  the number  of visitors  to a website  by 
obtaining  a high-ranking  placement  in the search  results  page of a 
search  engine  (SERP).  The higher  a website  ranks  in the results  of a 
search,  the greater  the chance  that that site will be visited  by a user. 
 
Spam  
To send a message  (usually  an advertisement)  to many  discussion  
groups  (bulletin  boards,  mailing  lists, and/or  newsgroups),  without  
regard  for its topical  relevance  
 
SMO  (Soc ial Media  Optimization ) 
Abbreviated  as SMO,  social  media  optimization  is the process  of 
increasing  the awareness  of a product,  brand  or event  by using  a 
number  of social  media  outlets  and communities  to generate  viral 
publicity.  Social  media  optimization  includes  using  RSS feeds,  
social  news  and bookmarking  sites, as well as social  media  sites and 
video  and blogging  sites. SMO  is similar  to SEO  (Search  Engine  
Optimization ) in that the goal is to drive  traffic  to your Web  site. 
 
Surf  
To search  for informatio n on the web in a random,  non-linear  way 259 Stretch  
A stretch  is a homogenous  part of a road without  major  traffic  
diversions.  A stretch  is the central  idea in IOS.  All estimations  are 
carried  out at stretch  level.  
 
Site 
Sites are panels  seen on the road that carry  advertisements  for 
people  on the move.  
Sites are classified  as: 
a) Hoarding  
b) Bus shelter  
c) Kiosks  
 
Shopping  Mall  Advertising  
A standard  backlit  advertising  structure  located  on shopping  mall 
property  with a size consistent  to a bus shelter  panel.  Most  mall 
advertising  structures  include  a mall directory  and multiple  
advertising  panels.  
 
Sign  
Any structure  used to display  information  regarding  a product  or 
service.  An outdoor  unit is a sign. 
 
Sign  Structure  
The assembled  components,  which  make  up an outdoor  
advertising  display,  including  but not limited  to: uprights,  supports,  
facings,  and trim.  
 
Signage  
Graphic  designs,  as symbols,  emblems,  or words,  used esp. for 
identification  or as a means  of giving  directions  or warning.  
 
Show  Card  Signs  
These  signs are used for trades  show,  dinner  menus,  directional  
signage,  point  of purchase  specials,  for all interior  signage.  These  
signs  are a great  advertisement  at a great  price.  They  come  in a 
variety  of sizes and are typically  made  of plastic  or cardboard.  
 
 
 260 Spot  Advertising  
Any advertising  presented  in selected  locales  rather  than on a 
national  level.  
 
Stadium  Advertising  
A variety  of advertising  formats  available  in stadium,  ranging  from  
wall-mounted  dioramas  (backlit  posters)  to field-side panels.  
 
Standee s 
A poster  or placard  that occupies  standing  room,  usually  having  
advertisements  on both sides.  
 
Static  Slides  
They  are full-color  advertisements  without  any animation  or 
movement  shown  on screens  for approximately  8-10 seconds  each.  
 
Station  Advertising  
Advertising  panels  located  in subway  or commuter  rail stations  or 
on transit  platforms.  Sizes  vary.  
 
Street  Furniture  
Advertising  displays,  many  that provide  a public  amenity,  
positioned  at close  proximity  to pedestrians  for eye-level viewing  or 
at a curbsi de to impact  vehicular  traffic.  Street  furniture  displays  
include,  but are not limited  to, transit  shelters,  newsstands/news  
racks,  kiosks,  shopping  mall panels,  convenience  store  panels  and 
in-store  signage.  
 
Structure  
A physical  framework  on which  out of home  advertising  is affixed  
or positioned.  
 
Size  of the Hoarding  
It measured  in terms  of height  and width.  Size = Height  X Width  
 
Subway  Advertising  
Advertising  panels  located  in subway  or commuter  rail stations  or 
on transit  platforms.  Sizes  vary.  
 
 261 Subwa y Card  
An advertising  poster  attached  to the interior  of a subway  car. 
 
Share  of Audience  
% of audience  listened  to a particular  radio  station  or watched  a 
TV channel  as compared  to overall  universe  listened  or watched.  
Many  people  confuse  ratings  with shares since  both are expressed  
in percentages.  A rating  always  relates  to a total population  (e.g. 
Census  Data),  whereas  audience  “share”  always  is expressed  in 
terms  of the total listening/viewing  population.  
 
SAAS  
Software  as service  s known  as SAAS.  
 
Sales  acceleration  
Sales  acceleration  refers  to the practice  of speeding  up sales 
processes  using  tools.  This helps  to impr ove the productivity  and 
efficiency  of sales professionals.  
 
Sales  automation  
Sales  automation  is the act of using  softwares  to simplify , speedup  
r stream  line the sales process  such as tracking  of customers,  
forecasting , inventory  monitoring  etc. 
 
Sales  champion  
Sales  champion  refers  to a prospect /1or custom ers who are deeply  
influe nced by the service  or product  of a specific  brand.  He/ She 
deeply  understands  and likes your product  to the point  of 
promoting  it through  word  of mouth  for its adoption  or success.  
 
Sales  coaching  
Sales  coaching  refers  to the process  of assisting  sales professionals.  
This is done  to improve  productivity.  Efficienc y and development  
of the individual  with new skills.  
 
Sales  cycle  
Sales  cycle  is a repetitive  process  which  includes  a predictable  
sequence  which  an organization  undergoes  while  selling  products  
or services  to customers.  
 262 Sales  demo  
A sales demo  is an process of displaying  functions,  benefits  product  
values.  This relates  to the particular  target  audience  and aims at 
leading  them  towards  making  a purchase  decision.  
 
Sales  development  representative  (SDR)  
Also known  as Business  Development  Representative  
(BDR )/1sales development  representative  or SDR is a specialist  
who focuses  on finding  new prospects  plus foundational  
relationships.  They  refresh  the sales pipeline  with new leads  for the 
organization.  
 
Sales  director  
Sales  director  is a senior  management  professional  who heads  the 
sales department  of an organization.  He leads  the formulation  of 
strategies  plus policies,  proposes  and rationalizes  departmental  
budgets,  supervises  regional  sales managers  and ensures  continuous  
sales growth  for the organizations.  
 
Sales  enablement  
Sales  enablement  is a process which  involves  strategy.it  provides  
sales professionals  with relevant  tools,  training  and technology  
which  leads  to improvement  of customer  engagement.it  helps  
generate  value  for all stakeholders  in the sales process.  
 
Sales  funnel  
A sales funnel  refers  to the visualization  of the entire  sales process.it  
carves  out the stages  through  which  prospective  customers  go 
through  till the purchasing  decisions.  
 
Sales  kickoff  
Sales  kickoff  is an important  event  for organizations.in  this major  
annual event , major  achievements  of the previous  year are recalled  
along  with new revenue,  organi zational targets , strategy , 
presentations,  keynote  speeches  and much  more.  The sales heads  
and dignitaries  refer to these  speeches  in order  to galvanize  the 
performance  in the coming  year.  
 
 
 263 Sales  lead  
Sales  leads  are potential  customers  of an organization.  They 
express  interest  in organization  offerings  and information  shared  
by your brand.  
 
Sales  manager  
Sales  managers  are executives  who lead a sales unit or team.  They 
work  upon  making  the team  highly  productive  in terms  of sales 
performance.  They designate  tasks and develop  the team  to meet  
targets  effectively.  
 
Sales  operations  
Sales  operations  is a process.it  consists  of aligns  busine ss operations,  
strategic implementations  etc. and is aimed  at achieving  
organi zational  goals  in areas  like sales revenue. Market  overage  
and growth.  
 
Sales  partnerships  
Sales  partnerships  are formal  collaborations  between  organizations  
or people.it  is aime d at mutual  benefit  of both the parties.  
 
Sales  pipeline  
Sales  pipelines  are a form  of visualization.  They show  the status  of 
every  lead in the customer  life cycle  or sales process.  
 
Sales  process  
Sales  process  follows  a series  of strategic  steps  which  are aimed  at 
driving  sales growth  with the alignment  of personnel , market  
insight , methodology  or technology.  
 
Sales  productivity  
Sales  productivity  indicates  the efficiency  of sales units.it  helps  
generate  revenue  for organizations  which  are based  on sales 
volume , payroll  expenditure,  personnel  activity  and other  factors.  
 
Sales  prospect  
Sales  prospects  are known  as potential  customers  of products  or 
services.  They meet  the given  benchmarks  or standards  of a 
customer. They have  attributes  like financial  capac ity, buying  264 authority,  purchase  willingness  etc. and found  to be sufficient  to 
qualify  in the sales funnel  as a prospect.  
 
Sales  prospecting  
Sales  prospecting  is a process  which  refers  to finding , building  and 
qualifying  a candidate  pool or potential  buyer s or clients.  This is 
done through  networking,  cold calling,  advertising  and other  
engagement  methods.  
 
Sales  qualified  lead  (SQL)  
Sales  qualified  leads  or SQL  are potential  customers  who have met 
the minimum  criteria  and shoe a higher  likelihood  of opting  in or 
purchasing.  
 
Sales  sequence  
Sales  sequence  is an established  activities  order  such as voice  calls,  
emails  along with the frequency  at which  sales team  engages  a 
prospect  or account.  This is guided  by data analytics.  
 
Sales  training  
Sales  training  is a informative  process  which  helps  in the 
improvement  of sills, behavior  and mindset  of sales professionals  
which  helps  in upgrading  their selling  performance.  
 
Salesforce  administrator  
Sales  force  administrator  refers  to individuals  who are given  the 
responsibility  to maintain  higher  employee  productivity  and 
engagement  through  technology,  process  improvement  and other  
methods.  They  are also expected  to operate  and maintain  
salesforce  CRMS . 
 
Sandler  training  
Sandler  training  is a popular  organization  which is known  for 
training  professionals  on sales performance,  leadership  and 
management.  
 
Satisfaction  guaranteed  
In marketing , customers  differentiate  your brand  based  on the 
satisfaction  level.  Brands  differentiate  themselves  based  on cost, 
price  and how they can serve  lower  purch asing power  customers.  265 Scraping  
Scraping  is the process  of extracting  large  data from  websites  and 
is also known  as data harvesting  or data scraping.  
 
Seamless /1process  
Activity  which  has no gaps or with less disruptions  
 
Search  analytics  
Search  analytics  takes  help of the search  data to analyze  the 
interaction  between  the search  results  and the web searches  and 
the result  of such search  engine  statistics  useful  for the search  
engine  marketing  
SEM is a form of internet marketing that seeks to promote a 
website by increasing its visibility in search engine results pages 
(SERPs.) SEM is accomplished primarily through paid advertising 
and search engine optimization by adjusting and/or re -writing 
website content to include keywords, w ith the intention of 
achieving higher search rankings.  
 
Search  engine  optimization  
Optimi zing your website  or an ad so well enough  that it comes  on 
the first page  in the organic  part of the search  result  is known  as 
search  engine  optimization  
 
Segmentation  
Segmentation  is the process  of subdividing  a large  market  into 
distinct  partitions  or segments  which  are based  on demographics  
and other  factors.it  is aimed  at formulating  sperate  strategies  and 
implementing  the same  to better  engage  consumers  in each 
segm ent. 
 
Segmenting  the customer  data  
Segmentations  or categori zations  according  to the age group  
gender  or education  level can be only done  using  the analytical  part 
which  gives  us insights  about  which  group  of people  belong  to 
which  category  and so on 
 
Selling, general,  and administrative  (SG&A)  
Selling,  general  and administrative  or sg & a refers  to non-
production  expenditure.  They  are itemized  in an organization's  266 income  statement  under  operating  costs.  These  are inclusive  of 
business  management  expenses  as well as costs incurred  in the 
promotion,  sale and distribution  of the company’s  products  and 
services.  
 
Sender  policy  framework  (SPF)  
Service  policy  framework  of SPF domain  keys identified  mail 
(DKIM ) verification  are online  security  processes.  They prevent 
email  fraud , phishing , impersonation,  spam,  spoofing,  and other  
malicious  online  activities.  
 
SERP  
Shorthand  for a page of search  engine  listings,  typically  the first 
page  of organic  results  
 
Service  brand  
Service  brands  are those  that focus  on custome r service  interactions  
rather  than any other  forms  of product  manufacturing.  Example:  
airline  companies.  
Service  level  agreement  (SLA)  
Service  level agreements  are contracts  between  service  providers  
and consumers.  They specify  quality , availability , restrictions  and 
other  service  aspects.  
 
Serviceable  available  market  (SAM)  
SAM  or serviceable  available  market  is a part of tam or totl 
addressable  market.it  can be reached  by organizations  on current  
capabilities  or prior  track  records.  
 
Serviceable  obtainabl e market  (SOM)  
Serviceable  obtainable  market  or SOM  is that portion  that can be 
reasonably  captured  in the short  term.it  is the smallest  of the three  
market  scales  (TAM,  SOM,  SAM).  
 
Share  purchase  agreement  (SPA)  
Share  purchase  agreement  or spa is a contra ct between  comp any, 
shareholders  and investors.  It sets basic  terms  for shares'  purchase  
and sales.  It is also called  SSA or share  sale agreement.  
 
 267 Shareholders’  agreement  (SHA)  
Shareholders'  agreement  is a contract.it  is done  between  the 
shareholders  of a company  prescribing  how the company’s  
operations  should  be conducted  and stipulating  the rights  and 
obligations  of shareholders.  
 
Show Marketing  
Statistics reveal that about 90% of information in our brain is 
stored in the form of visuals and that people respond to visual – 
‘show’, more than textual information. Marketers across different 
industries are now making use of various types of visual content to 
engage with their audience.  
 
Social Media Marketing  
Much like Relationship Marketing, Social Media Mar keting 
focuses on customer engagement. Sites like Facebook and Twitter 
provide an opportunity for businesses who believe that investing in 
stakeholder communication and engagement across digital 
platforms, will reap rewards.  
 
Shopping  cart 
Software  used to make  a site's product  catalog  available  for online  
ordering,  whereby  visitors  may select,  view,  add/delete,  and 
purchase  merchandise  
 
Sig file 
A short  block  of text at the end of a message  identifying  the sender  
and providing  additional  information  about  them  
 
Signaling  
Signaling  is a process  where  the consumer  conveys  readiness  to 
purchase  a product  or service.it  is indicated  by signals  or triggers  
such as willing  to sign up, event  participation,  solutions  and 
questions  etc 
 
Siloed  
Siloed  refers  to a descriptive  term  for an organization  whose  units , 
teams  or departments  lack collaboration,  coordination  or synergy.  
They  lack because  they are run and managed  as seperate  exclusive  268 bubbles.  Teams  and individuals  who prefer  such arrangements  are 
said to have  a “silo mentality.”  
 
Single  sign  on (SSO)  
SSO  or single  sign on is a method  which  allows  access  to 
independent  software  systems  using  a single  id and password.  This 
is considered  safe in both cybersecurity  and enterprise  
permissioning.  
 
Site search  
Search  functionality  specific  to one site 
 
Skyscraper  ad 
An online  ad significantly  taller  than the 120×240  vertical  banner  
 
Small  & mid -size business  (SMB)  
SMB  is an acronym  for small  to medium -sized  businesses,  which  is 
often  referred  to as small  and midsized  business.  A business  with 
100 or lesser  employees  is usually  considered  small,  while  one with 
100-999 employees  is considered  to be a medium -sized  business.  
 
Smarketing  
Smarketing  is a process  of close  alignment  of sales and marketing  
operations  of a business . This is done  with the aim of increasing  
revenues  through  a shared  integrated  strategy.  
 
Snackable  
Snackable  in marketing  means  quick , easy to understand  and 
straight  forward  marketing  content.  These content s can be further  
used for promotion  or serve  as purely  digital  media  content.  
 
Social  CRM  
It is a marketing  strategy  that helps  us in sales and customer  service  
activities  which  encourages  the customer  engagement  and 
interactions  through  online  channels  and helps  to improve  
participation  
 
 
 
 269 Social  media  listening  
Social  media  listening  is a tool or a software  that helps  a brand  to 
listen  online  conversations  about  their brand  image  this also helps  
to monitors  and analyze  these  online  conversations  
 
Social  networking  
The process  of creating,  building,  and nurturing  virtual  
communities  and relationships  between  people  online  
 
Social  selling  
Social  selling  refers  to the deliberate  use of social  online  networks  
as sales channels.  Here the sellers  directly  engage  and develop  
relationships  with prospects  probing  their needs  and providing  
relevant  plus valuable  insight.  
 
Software  as a service  (SAAS)  
SAAS  or software  as a service  is a software  distribution  model  
where  customers  access  and use the software  under  a subscription  
agreement.  This service  is used with the help of cloud  and internet  
technologies.  
 
Software  capitalization  
Software  capitalization  refers  to an accounting  method.it  treats  
software  procurement  expenses  or development  as fixed  assets.  
Solution  
A solution  is referred  to as a combination  of ideas  strategies,  
processes,  technol ogies and services  which  effectively  assist  
organizations  to achieve its goals  and challenges.  
 
Solution  selling  
Solution  selling  refers  to as a sales approach  which  is commonly  
adopted  in a business -to-business  environment.  Here the 
salesperson  probes  customer  issues  and develops  solutions  using  the 
organization's  products  or services.  
 
Spam  
Inappropriate  commercial  message  of extremely  low value  
 
Spell -binding  
A factor  / element  which  catches  the eye/ holds  attention  270 Spiff  
A spiff is a quickly  awarded  incentive  like financial  bonus , paid 
vacation  or non-cash proze  for meeting  milestones  like first 
premium  sale etc.spiffs  are introduced  when  offering  new products  
or increasing  production  for a given  period  of time.  
 
Spin  sellin g 
Spin refers  to an acronym  for four types  of questions  like situation,  
problem , implication,  need  payoff.  It is generally  referred  to by 
sales professionals  and they ask prospects  to establish  customer  
centric  selling  paradigm  plus increasing  closing  rate. 
 
Splash  page  
A branding  page  before  the home  page  of a web site 
 
Sponsorship  
Advertising  that seeks  to establish  a deeper  association  and 
integration  between  an advertiser  and a publisher,  often  involving  
coordinated  beyond  the banner  placements  
 
Stak eholder  
Stakeholders  are entities  with interest  in the organizations'  
processes  or product  and which  is concerned  about  the company's  
well-being.  
 
Statement  of work  (SOW)  
SOW or Statement  Of Work is a proje ct management  docume nt 
which  defines  parameters  like nature,  scope , deliverables , activities , 
costs  and schedule  of work  being  performed  by a vendor  for 
a/1client.  
 
Stickiness  
The amount  of time spent  at a site over a given  time period  
 
Strategic  investment/smart  money/corporate  venture  
capital  (CVC)  
Strategic investment  or corporate  venture  capital  are investments  
made  by venture  capitalists , angel  investors  and corporations  in 
start-ups or organizations  which  are deemed  promising.  Investors  
provide  both cash and non-cash investments  in the form  of market  271 insights,  customer  networks , domain  expertise,  branding  and 
promotion.  
 
Structured  data  
Structured  data refers  to organized  information  which  can easily  
be added  into, managed  and searched  for in a specific  data base.  
 
SME – Subject Matter Expert  
Subject  matter  expert  (SME ) subject  matter  expert  or SME  is an 
individual  who is considered  as an authority  or expert  in a specific  
domain,  field or topic.  
 
Super  affiliate  
An affiliate  capable  of generating  a significant  percentage  of an 
affiliate  program's  activ ity 
It is capable  of generating  a major  proportion  of associate  degree  
affiliate  program’s  activity.  
 
Surround  session  
Advertising  sequence  in which  a visitor  receives  ads from  one 
advertiser  throughout  an entire  site visit 
 
Symbol  
They  are part of a logo, basically  graphical  representations,  to gain 
customer  recognition.  Example:  colonel  sanders  face symbol  on kfc 
logo.  
 
Synergy  
The interaction  and cooperation  of two or more  organizations  or 
people  to reach  a selected  / pre-planned/  unplanned  objective.  
 
System  of record  (SOR)  
System  of record  or SOR  is an information  storage  plus 
management  system  which  protects  data integirty.it  serves  as an 
authoritative  source  of specific  data items  in systems  where  there  
are multiple  sources  of the same.  
 
Schema  mark up 
This is a microdata  which  helps  search  engines  to understand  your 
content  and give you more  desired  and informative  results.  It is also 272 refer as semantic  vocabulary  that you can also add in your html for 
your website.  
 
Search  network  
A group  of search  related  websites , where  your ads and free 
products  can appear .  
 
Search  engine  
A software  system  designated  for all kind of searches.  It is a tool 
designed  for us to get the relevant  information  what  we want.   
For example  YouTube, Google . 
 
Search  operator  
Search  operator  or search  parameters  are the ones who is 
responsible  for narrowing  the focus  of the search  so that we can get 
the most  relevant  answer  for our query.  
 
SEM  (Search  Engine  Marketing)  
When  business  or an orrganization  pay for their advertis ement to 
appear  in search  engine  is called  search  engine  marketing . 
Whenever  people  use internet  to popularize  there  products  are 
called  SEM  
 
SEO  (search  engine  optimization)  
It is an art and science  of getting  your page  to rank higher  in search  
engines . It the process  of improving  the quality  and quantity  of upr 
website .  
 
SERP  
Search  engine  result  page is the page  that appears  after you submit  
your query  in search  engine . SERP s usually  include  paid search  
and pay per click ad. 
 
Sessions  
A session  can be defined as a period  of interaction  with your site 
from  a unique  visitor  on a particular  device.  For example , a single  
ad session  can contain  multiple pages  views  and ad impressions.  
 
 
 273 Sitelink s 
The link helps  the user to travel  deeper  into the web site directly  
from  the ad supply.  It's situated  to a lower  place  your text of your 
ad and it facilitate  customers  to search  out the direct  link of the 
location  what  they were  trying  to find. 
 
Sitemap  
It could  be a folder  wherever  all the data relating  to the page , videos 
and different  files of a web site is found.  Sitemap  helps  search  
engines  to scan them  and to crawl  the location  even a lot of with 
efficiency.  
A list of crawlable website pages that helps search engines organize 
site content.  
 
Slug  
A slug could  be a distinctive  a part of associate  universal  resource  
locator  foreach  and each page of the web site. We are able to 
perceive  the slug during  a means  that it's a vicinity  of universal  
resource  locator  that explains  the page's  content.  
 
Spam  
Spam  could  be a digital  junk, unsolicited  communication  sent in 
bulk over the net or through  any messaging  system  with the aim of 
business or economic  advertising  or non-commercial  proselytizing , 
or just causation  identical  message  to identical  user over and once 
again.  
Inapprop riate commercial  message  of extremely  low value.  
 
Spider  
Spider  conjointly  called  internet  crawls  that uses web and crawls  
into the web site and stores  data for the search  engines  to index.  
 
SSI certificate  
It could  be a digital  certificate  provided  associ ated that 
authenticates  a website's  identity  associate  permits  an encrypted  
association.  Secure  sockets  layer  it’s a security  protocol  that makes  
associate  encrypted  link internet  server  and application  program .  
 
 
 274 Search  engine  
It’s a package  program  that helps  folks to search  out the knowledge  
that they're  searching  for, using  keywords  or phrases.  
 
Search  engine  optimization  
The method  of choosing  the targeted  keyword  phrases  associated  
with a web site and guaranteeing  that the location  places  well once  
those keyword  phrases  square  measure  a part of an internet  search.  
 
Search  engine  spam  
Also referred  to as as spamdexing , it's the purposeful  manipulation  
of computer  program  indexes.  
 
Search  engine  submission  
It the method  wherever  in we tend to square  meas ure creating  our 
computer  listed  with computer  programs.  
 
Search  retargeting  
The method  of exploitation  the previous  search  history  of the user 
to form  the ads accessible  wherever  the users  interest  lies. 
The use of a site visitor’s  search  history  as a basis for the ads that 
the visitor  will see. 
 
Self-serve  advertising  
The capability  of associate  advertiser  to position  their own ads 
while  not the help of associate  advertising  sales representative.  
Advertising  that can be purchased  without  the assistance  of a sales 
representative  
 
Search  
Try to find somethin g by either  looking  or seeking  for certain  
information  
 
Secondary  data  
The data that has already  been  collected  through  primary  source  
and it’s a secondhand  data 
 
Self-reference  criterion  
It is when  you make any decisions  or judgements  based on your 
own cultural  values,  experience  and knowledge  275 Skimming  price  
A strategy  often  related  to innovative  and high demand  product  
 
Sourcing  
It is the practice  of locating  and selecting  business  based  on set of 
criter ias. 
 
Standardi zation  
The process  of creating  standards  to guide  the creation  of a product  
based  on the consens us of all the relevant stakeholders.  
Standardization or standardization is the process of implementing 
and developing technical standards based o n the consensus of 
different parties that include firms, users, interest groups, standards 
organizations and governments.  
 
Standardi zed plans  
These  plans  offer 2 primary  benefits  simplifying  plan choice  and 
usage  for customers  
 
Strategic  business  unit 
It is a profit  center  that focuses  on products  or technologies  by 
offering  them  in market  and competing  with other  products  
 
Surveillance /1monitoring  
A behavior , activities  or information  for the purpose  of gathering  
or managing  information  
Surging  
Refers  to group of individuals  or natural  force  
 
Search  engine  
A program  that indexes  documents,  then attempts  to match  
documents  relevant  to the users  search  requests.  
 
Search  engine  optimization  
The method  of selecting  targeted  keyword  phrases  associated  with 
a webs ite, and making  it certain  that the location  places  well once  
those  keyword  phrases  are square  measures  a half of an online  
search.  
 276 Search  engine  spam  
Excessive  manipulation  to influence  search  engine  rankings,  often  
for pages  which  contain  little or no relevant  content.  
 
Search  engine  submission  
The act of supplying  a URL  to a search  engine  in an attempt  to 
make  a search  engine  aware  of a site or page.  
 
SERP  
Shorthand  for a page  of program  listings,  generally  the primary  
page  of organic  results  
 
Shopping  cart 
Software  used to make  a site’s  product  catalog  available  for online  
ordering,  whereby  visitors  may select,  view,  add/delete,  and 
purchase  merchandise.  
 
Sig file 
A short  block  of text at the end of a message  identifying  the sender  
and providing  additio nal information  about  them.  
 
Site search  
Search  functionality  specific  to one site. 
 
Skyscraper  ad 
An online  ad significantly  taller  than the 120×240  vertical  banner.  
 
Social  networking  
The process  of creating,  building,  and nurturing  virtual  
communities  and relationships  between  people  online.  
 
Splash  page  
A branding  page  before  the home  page  of a web site. 
 
Sponsorship  
Sponsorship  support  advertising  that seeks  to determine  a deeper  
association  associated  with integration  between  an publicist  and a 
publish er, usually  involving  coordinates  beyond -the-banner  
placements.  
 277 Stickiness  
The amount  of time spent  at a site over a given  time period.  
 
Surround  session  
Advertising  sequence  in which  a visitor  receives  ads from  one 
advertiser  throughout  an entire  site visit. 
  278 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“Sometimes reality is too complex. Stories give it form.”  
– Jean Luc Goddard  
  
279 T 
Tabloid  
A size of newspaper  that is roughly  half the size of a standard  
newspaper.  A page  size is normally  14" high by 12" wide.  
Refers  to a newspaper  smaller  in size as compared  to the 
broadsheet  newspaper.  
E.g Mid-Day,  Mumbai  Mirror  etc. 
 
Tachistoscope  testing  
A method  used in advertising  and packaging  recall  tests.  Used  to 
measure  a viewer's  recognition  and perception  of various  elements  
within an ad by using  the different  lighting  and exposure  
techniques  of a Tachistoscope  - a device  that projects  an image  at 
a fraction  of a second.  
 
Tag line 
A slogan  or phrase  that visually  conveys  the most  important  
product  attribute  or benefit  that the advertiser  wishes  to convey.  
Generally,  a theme  to a campaign.  
 
Target  audience  
A specified  audience  or demographic  group  for which  an 
advertising  message  is designed  
 
Target  market  
A group  of individuals  whom  collectively,  are intended  recipients  
of an advertiser's  message.  
 
Tear  sheets  
A page cut from  a magazine  or newspaper  that is sent to the 
advertiser  as proof  of the ad insertion.  Also used to check  color  
reproduction  of advertisements.  
 
Teaser  campaign  
An advertising  campaign  aimed  at arousing  interest and curiosity  
for a product.  
 
 280 Telemarketing  
The use of the telephone  as a medium  to sell, promote,  or solicit  
goods  and services.  
 
Theater  testing  
A method  used in testing  the viewer  responses  of a large,  randomly  
selected  audience  after being  exposed  to an ad. 
 
Thumbnail  
A rough,  simple,  often  small  sketch  used to show  the basic  layout  
of an ad. 
 
Time  compression  
A technique  used in broadcast  production  to delete  time from  
television  commercials.  
 
Tracking  studies  
A type of research  study  that follow s the same  group  of subjects  
over an extended  period  of time.  
 
Trade  advertising  
Advertising  designed  to increase  sales specifically  for retailers  and 
wholesalers.  
 
Trade  character  
People,  characters,  and animals  that are used in advertising  and 
are identi fied with the products,  e.g. Jolly Green  Giant  and Tony  
the Tiger.  
 
Trade  name  
The name  under  which  a company  operates.  
 
Trade  stimulants  
Sales  promotions  directed  toward  retailers  and distributors  that are 
designed  to motivate  them  both and increase  sales. 
 
Trademark  
Icon,  symbol,  or brand  name  used to identify  a specific  
manufacturer,  product,  or service.  
 281 Traffic  builder  
A promotional  tactic  using  direct  mail.  Designed  to draw  
consumers  to the mailer's  location.  
 
Transit  advertising  
Advertising  that appe ars on public  transportation  or on waiting  
areas  and bus stops.  
 
Transparency  
A positive,  color  photographic  image  on clear  film. 
 
Traffic  Count  
The recording  of the vehicles  and pedestrians  passing  by a given  
point.  
 
Transit  Displays  
Displays  affixed  to moving  public  transportation  vehicles  or in the 
common  areas  of transit  terminals  and stations.  Transit  displays  
include,  but are not limited  to: bus panels,  train/rail  panels,  airport  
panels,  taxi panels  and mobile  advertising  signage.  
 
Transit  Poster  (Bus) 
Posters  attached  to the exterior  of buses.  Common  displays  are king 
panels,  queen  panels  and tail panels.  King  panels  are on the street -
side of the bus. Queen  panels  are on the curbside  of the bus and 
tail panels  are on the back of the bus. 
 
Transit  Poster (Commuter  Rail)  
Posters  displayed  in commuter  railway  stations  and on trains.  
 
Transit  Media  
Transit  media  is a form  of out of home  advertising  that uses 
vehicular  platforms  to establish  a mobile  brand  presence.  
 
Transit  Shelter  
A curbside  structure  located  at regular  stopping  points  along  urban  
bus routes.  
 
 
 282 Tri-Vision  
An outdoor  unit with a slatted  face that allows  three  different  copy  
messages  to revolve  at intermittent  intervals.  
 
Traffic  Flow  
A graphic  presentation  of the traffic  volume  upon  any system of 
streets,  arteries  or highways,  indication  by width  of lines,  which  
vary with the amount  of traffic  carried.  
 
Transparent  ink 
Ink used in four color  printing  process  that allows  for colors  
underneath  the ink to show  through.  
 
Trap  
To combine  differen t layers  of colors  in order  to create  various  
colors  in the four-color  printing  process.  
 
Trim  size 
A size of a magazine  or newspaper  page  after trimming.  
 
Turnover  
The rate of audience  change  for a specific  program  during  a 
specific  amount  of time.  
 
Type  font 
Refers  to the complete  alphabet  for a specific  typeface.  
 
Typeface  
A designed  alphabet  with consistent  characteristics  and attributes.  
 
Typography  
The designated  setting  of type for printing  purposes.  
 
Targeted  Gross  Rating  Points  
Gross  rating  points  with the base defined  as a specific  target  group.  
For example,  if the target  market  is men,  ages 18–34, 100 gross  
rating  points  would  mean  that all the individuals  in that group  had 
been  reached  once,  or half of them  twice,  or a third  of them  three  
times,  etc. 
 283 Tariff  (l) 
A customs  duty or tax laid on goods  as they enter  or exit a country.  
These  duties  are either  specific  (i.e., according  to the number  or 
bulk of the items)  or ad valorem  (i.e., according  to the value  of the 
items).  (2) A schedule  of regulat ed rates  and rules  affecting  the 
application  of rates  for specific  products.19  
 
Tear  Sheet  
An entire  actual  page  containing  an advertisement,  illustration,  or 
article  clipped  from  a publication.  Manufacturers  who have 
cooperative  advertising  or merchandise  allowance  programs  with 
retailers  often  demand  that the retailers  submit  tear sheets  as proof  
of performance.  
 
Telemarketing  
The use of the telephone  for selling  as part of a planned  and 
systematic  effort  to reduce  expenditures  for personal  sales calls.  
Test Marketing  
An attempt  to evaluate  the nature  and degree  of customer  
acceptance  of a product  by actually  putting  it on the market  in 
selected  areas.  It may involve  using  a full-scale  marketing  program  
in those  areas,  or it may use different  combinations  of marketing  
factors,  such as promotional  appeals,  prices,  or types  or intensity  of 
distribution  in various  areas  in an attempt  to determine  the most  
effective  way of marketing.  
 
Trade  Association  
An association  of manufacturers  or dealers  engaged  in a particular  
trade  for interchange  of information,  establishment  of standards,  
and other  activities  of common  interest  to the members.  
 
Trade  Promotion  
Devices  designed  to obtain  special  short -term  merchandising  
and/or  sales support  from  distributors,  to induce  retailers  to 
promote  a product  through  advertising  and display,  or to stimulate  
retailers  and their sales clerks  to "push"  a certain  manufacturer's  
product  rather  than that of a competitor.  
 
 
 284 Trade  Show  
A gathering  of sellers  and buyers  for the purpose  of displaying  and 
surveying  respectively,  new products,  processes,  or services.  
 
Trademark  
A brand  that has been  given  legal protection.  
 
Trading  Area  
A district  whose  size is usually  determined  by the boundaries  within  
which  it is economical  in. terms  of volume and cost for a marketing  
unit to sell a product.  
 
Trading  Company  
There  are two types  of trading  companies.  One,  the specialized  
trading  companies  (Senmonshosha  in Japanese),  exist all over the 
world.  These  firms  specialize  by product,  function,  and region.  
Thus , a firm which  imports  footwear  to the United  States  from  
Italy is a specialized  trading  company.  By contrast,  the general  
trading  company  (Sogoshosha)  is diversified  in terms  of product,  
function,  and region.  The largest  Japanese  trading  compani es, such 
as Mitsui,  Mitsubishi,  and Sumitomo,  have  a presence  all over the 
world.  They  facilitate  all aspects  of transactions,  including,  for 
example,  physical  distribution  and insurance.  Their  transactions  
are not limited  to the family  of firms  of which  they are a part. They  
move  a great  variety  of products  in and out of many  countries.  
 
Trading  Up 
An attempt  to induce  a current  or prospective  owner  of a product  
to purchase  a more  expensive  model  or version  of the same  
product.  
 
Transfer  Price  
The price  charged  by one unit of a corporation  when  it supplies  a 
product  or service  to another  unit of the same  corporation.  
 
Turnover  or Turns  
The total number  of times  during  the course  of a year that the 
average  inventory  is sold. 
 
 285 Tying  Contract  
An arrangement  in which  the seller  agrees  to sell one product  (the 
tying  product)  only if the buyer  agrees  to buy the seller's  other  
product  or products  (the tied products).  Such  arrangements  are 
subject  to prosecution,  if competition  relative  to the tied product  is 
substa ntially  reduced.  
 
Tear  Sheet  
Refers  to the page clipped  from  a newspaper  or magazine  as proof  
that an ad has appeared  as scheduled.  An invoice  to seek payment  
normally  accompanies  it. 
 
Total  / Claimed  Readership  
“It is an aided  recall  of readership  of any publication  enlisted  in the 
survey  during  predefined  period  that varies  by periodicity  of the 
publication  and it excludes  the readership  recall  corresponding  to 
the day of interview.”  
By readership  we mean  it is "read  or looked  at", it is not only careful  
reading  but it could  also be glancing  through  the pages.  Just seeing  
the cover  does not mean,  "looking  at". However,  for dailies  even 
seeing  the cover  page  would  be considered  as “looking  at” provided  
the daily  is t a k e n in the hand  and some  time is spent on it. It does 
not matter  where  it may have  been  looked  at, for e.g., in a train or 
in a doctor's  clinic  or at a hairdresser's  / barber’s  shop,  in an office  
or a library  or at a friend's  place  or even borrowed.  
 
Publication  Periodicity  Predefined  Period  
Quarterlies  In last 1 year 
Bi-monthlies  In last one year 
Monthlies  In last 6 months  
Fortnightlies  In last 3 months  
Weeklies  In an average  month  
Bi-weekly  In an average  month  
Five day dailies  In an average  week  
Six day dailies  In an average  week  
Dailies  In an average  week  
 
Teaser  
An advertisement  that precedes  the major  portion  of an advertising  
campaign,  intended  to build  curiosity.  286 Target  Audience  
Refers  to the desired  or intended  audience  for advertising  as 
described  or determined  by the adver tiser.  Usually  defined  in terms  
of specific  demographic  (SEC,  age, sex, income,  etc), purchase  or 
ownership  characteristics.  
 
Tactical  Advertising  
A short -term  advertising  campaign  usually  based  on an existing  
strategy  and used to take advantage  of specifi c circumstances.  
 
TGI  (Target  Group  Index)  
A large  scale  quantitative  research  that provides  information  on 
product  and media  consumption  coupled  with psychographics  in 
addition  to demographic  parameters.  
 
Test  Market  
Refers  to the geographic  location  selected for the introduction  of a 
new brand  or advertising  campaign.  Apart  from  marketing  efforts,  
media  availability  and media  costs also play a crucial  part in the 
selection  of a test market.  
 
Top  of Mind  
In advertising  research,  this phrase  is used to describe the first 
brand  name  or advertising  campaign  that a respondent  mentions  
without  aiding  or prompting  in any manner.  
 
Tabulation  Punching  
Analyzing  and processing  the data.  
 
Thread  
A series  of postings  on a particular  topic.  Threads  can be a series  
of bulletin  board  messages  (for example,  when  someone  posts  a 
question  and others  reply  with answers  or additional  queries  on the 
same  topic).  A thread  can also apply  to chats,  where  multiple  
conversation  threads  may exist simultaneously.  
 
TAM  (Television  Audi ence  Measurement)  
Television  Audience  Measurement  (TAM)  or TAM  Media  
Research  is the TV Viewership  analysis  firm of India.  Its objective  
is to help provide  perspective  on a complex  industry  such as media.  287 TRP  (Television  Rating  Point)  
This is a percentage  of the target  audience  watching  a single  
programme  or a commercial  or a slot at a given  point  in time.  
Expressed  ad% by default.  
TRP  = (Viewers  at any given  time/  Estimated  universe)  * 100 
 
Tag 
A tag is an identifying  marker  in WordPress  which  is used to classify  
posts  based  on topic  and keyword  research.  Tags  are more  popular  
whereas  categories  are broad  and thematic.  
 
Tagline  
A memorable  and meaningful  short  phrase  that communicates  a 
brands  mission,  personality,  quality,  etc, to the customers.  
 
Target / targeting  
Targeting  refers  to specific  groups  or subsets  of potential  customers  
a company  is planning  to sell its products  or services  to.it is a 
process  of end-to-end marketing  for involving  specific  engagements  
in such groups.  
 
Template  
A template  is a generic  fil which  is like a framework  and shows  
standard  sections  or features  of specific  kinds.it  is used to create  a 
new document  of the same  types  in a much  lesser  time consuming  
manner.  
 
Tenor  
Tenor  is referred  to the amount  of time left for fully settling a loan 
until the financial  contract  defining  its terms  and conditions  
expires.  
 
Text  ad 
Advertisement  using  text based  hyperlinks  
 
Title  tag 
Html  tag used to define  the text in the top line of a web browser,  
also used by many  search  engines  as the title of search  listings  
An html refers  to the element  used to describe  specific  topics  ofa 
web page.  The title tags are displayed  in top bars of a web 288 browser.it  is best to gave title tags featuring  main,  identified  
keywords  rather  than something  basic  like "home"  
Html  tag used to define  the text in the top line of a web browser,  
also used by many  search  engines  as the title of search  listings.  
 
Top  10 
The top ten search  engine  results  for a particular  search  term 
The prime  10 results  for a specific  search  term. 
 
Top  level  domain  (TDL)  
TDL or top-level domain  is the highest -ranking  domain  types  in 
the hierarchical  domain  system  of the internet.  For example , they 
include  extensions  like. info,.com,.org  etc. 
 
Top  of the funnel  (TOFU)  
Tofu  or top of the funnel  is the largest  portion  of sales or marketing  
funnel  where  prospects  enter  the screening  process  until only the 
leads  most  inclined  to purchase  are left. It is a descriptive  term  for 
raw leads  who have shown  initial  interest  in a service  or product  
due to inbound  marketing  or outbound  customer  engagements.  
 
Total  addressable  market  (TAM)  
TAM  or total addressable  market  refers  to the total revenue  
opportunity  for a specific  business.  
 
Total  available  market  (TAM)  
TAM  or total available  market  is the total revenue  potential  for a 
specific  amount  of product  or service  and also includes  its future  
imprint.  
 
Total  value  to paid  in (TVPI)  
TVPI  or total value  to paid in is the ratio of distributes  and 
undistributed  investments  in a fund to the amount  of capital  
invested.it  is used to measure  fund performance.  
 
Touches  
Units  of milestones  of points  of contact  which  are used to measure  
marketing  effort  are called  touches.it  measures  how to transform  a 
prospect  into a viable  or qualified  lead and is also called  
touchpoi nts. 289 Touchpoint  
Any point  of interaction  between  a customer  and/1a brand  that 
could  create  a long lasting  impact.  This could  happen  through  a 
text ad, website,  social  media  post,  etc. 
 
Tracking  code  
Tracking  code  refers  to the script  which  is placed in the header  and 
footer  of the website.it  passes  information  along  with the software  
tools for the purpose  of data collection.  Tools like Google  analytics , 
Google  Adwords  etc use tracking  codes  so that all information  is 
tracked  from  the websites.  
 
Trade  mark  
A legal protection  to identify  a product  or services  brand  name/  
brand  mark  to stand  out unique,  which  legally  no other  firm can 
copy.  
 
Trend  analysis  
Analyzing  the ongoing  trends  and interest  of people  I am the most  
effective  strategy  of marketing  indust ry is what  is collected  and 
taken  as an insight  from  trend  analysis  
 
Trend  analysis  
Trend  analysis  is analyzing  the patterns  and the movements  of 
recently  observed  data to predict  the future  boost  in product  sales 
or stock  price  trends  
 
Trick  banner  
A bann er ad that attempts  to trick people  into clicking,  often  by 
imitating  an operating  system  message  
A banner  ad that makes  associate  degree  attempt  to trick 
individuals  into clicking,  typically  by imitating  a software  system  
message.  
 
Triggers  
Triggers  are signals  or occurrences  which  meet  certain  criteria  to 
be considered  as an opportunity  to make  a sale. 
 
 
 290 Twitch  
Twitch  is a live streaming  video  owned  by amazon.it  showcases  
video  game  streams  and e-sports  tournaments.  
 
Twitter  
Twitter  is a free social  media  networking  platform  which  allows  its 
users  to share  images,  videos  and links which  are known  as tweets.  
It is used to share  information  and utilizes  hashtags  to categorize  
information  feeded.  You can follow  people  and see their tweets  in 
your feed and they can see yours  if they follow  you. 
 
Twitter  advertising  
Twitter  advertising  helps  digital  marketeers  promote  their brand  or 
organization  on twitter.  These  advertisements  appear  in feeds  
and/1have the potential  to grow  awareness  and reach  prospe ctive 
custom ers. 
 
Two -tier affiliate  program  
Affiliate  program  structure  whereby  affiliates  earn commissions  on 
their conversions  as well as conversions  of webmasters  they refer to 
the program  
 
Tariff  
A tax on goods  that is coming  into or going  out of the country  
 
Terms of access  
The period  of commencing  on effective  data and continuing  
through  it 
 
The world  bank  
A bank  having  relation  with the world -wide members  (un) which  
provides  long term  loan to the countries  who are in need  
 
Transfer  pricing  
Shifting  of product  and services  from  one country  to another  to its 
same  branch  
 
Tempting  
Getting  attached  to something  
 291 Two  tier affiliate  program  
Affiliate  program  structure  whereby  affiliates  earn commissions  on 
their conversions  likewise  as conversions  of webmasters  they ask the 
program.  
 
Transactional Marketing  
Often thought of as conflicting with ‘relationship marketing’ this 
form of marketing is about driving sales and meeting demand. 
Retailers have to encourage consumers to buy using coupons, 
discounts, liquidations, an d sales events.  
 
Tradeshow Marketing  
Many products have to be experienced to be bought. Tradeshows 
are industry gatherings where customers are invited to come 
sample all that the industry has to offer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  292 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“You can’ t just place a few “Buy” buttons on your website and 
expect your visitors to buy.”  
– Neil Patel  
  
293 U 
Unaided  recall  
A research  method  in which  a respondent  is given  no assistance  in 
answering  questions  regarding  a specific  advertisement.  
 
Unfair  advertising  
Advertising  that is likely  to harm  the consumer.  The FTC  has the 
power  to regulate  unfair  advertising  that falls within  a very specific  
legal definition.  
 
Unique  selling  proposition  
The unique  product  benefit  that the competition  can not claim.  
 
Up-front  buys  
The purchasing  of both broadcast  and print  early  in the buying  
season.  
 
Utility  
The value  a consumer  receives  from  a product's  design.  
 
Universal  Product  Code  
Often  abbreviated  UPC,  the Universal  Product  Code  is a 
numerical  and bar-coded  item identifi cation  number  that can be 
read by a scanner  at the checkout  counter  of a grocery  store.  These  
codes  make  possible  the more  efficient  tracking  of the store's  
inventory21a  
 
Unduplicated  Audience  
The total audience  reached  by a media  plan after discounting  the 
duplication  factors  between  media  and media  vehicles  (also called  
net reach).  
 
Urban  and Rural  Classification  
According  to the Census  of India  2001,  the following  criteria  were  
adopted  for treating  a place  as urban:  
 All statutory  towns,  i.e., all places  with a municipality,  
corporation,  cantonment  board  or notified  town  area 
committee,  etc. 294  All other  places  which  satisfied  the following  criteria:  
 A minimum  population  of 5,000  
 At least 75% of the male  working  population  engaged  in 
non-agricultural  pursuits  
 A density  of population  of at least 400 per sq. km. (1,000  per 
sq. mile),  
 Apart  from  these,  the outgrowths  (OGs)  of cities  and towns  
have  also been  treated  as urban.  
 All areas  not identified  as 'Urban'  are classified  as 'Rural'.  
 
UA (Un-aided  Awareness)  
Asking  the respondent  to name  as many  brand  names  (of a product)  
as possible  on his own without  giving  him any clue. The respondent  
is given  time to think  and the order  he mentions  the brand  name  is 
not important.  
 
Universe  
The overall  set for any targeting . 
 
Unweighted  Base  
Another  name  for unweighted  sample.  Those  survey  respondents  
who were  successfully  interviewed.  
 
Unstructured  Questionnaire  
It's a questionnaire  where  the answers  are to be recorded  exactly  
the way they are given  by the respondents  (with out any codes).  
These  are open -ended  questions  where  interviewers  elicit responses  
to the maximum  extent  possible.  
 
URL  (Uniform  Resource  Locator)  
The World  Wide  Web  (WWW)  address  of a site on the Internet.  
 
Unique  Users  or Unique  Visitors  or Unique  Impres sions  
Unique  users  refers  the number  of distinct  individuals,  as 
determined  by IP address,  user login,  cookie,  or some  combination  
thereof,  who visit a web site or view a banner  ad. Most  ad networks  
favor  sites which  generate  a large  number  of unique  impre ssions  
over sites whose  users  view large  numbers  of pages.  
 295 UNP  (Unique  Pole  or Unipole)  
A large  hoarding  supported  by a single  pole that carries  a single  
advertisement.  
 
Un-illuminated  Unit  
An outdoor  unit that has not been  equipped  with lighting  for night- 
time illumination  of an advertising  message.  
 
Under  delivery  
Delivery  of less impressions,  visitors,  or conversions  than 
contracted  for a specified  period  of time 
 
Unicorn  
A startup  company  is referred  to as a unicorn  when  its value  is over 
$1 billion  
 
Unique  buying  proposition  (UBP)  
An intentional  creation  of brand  value  in the minds  of the 
customers,  creating  a message  that our brand  could  uniquely  satisfy  
the needs  of the respective  customers.  
 
Unique  selling  point/proposition  (USP)  
The distinct  advantage  an organization  or product  has over its 
competitors  or other  players  is known  as unique  selling  proposition.  
 
Unique  selling  proposition  (USP)  
An intentional  strategy  to expose  the uniqueness  of a brand  in the 
market  place,  mainly  showing  off the product  features.  It also 
influences  its presentation  in front  of the audience.  
 
Unique  visitors  
Individuals  who have visited  a web site (or network)  at least once in 
a during  a fixed  time frame  
 
Unit  economics  
Unit economics  refers  to the application  of economic  principles.  
They are known  to impact  single  entities  such as business  or a 
customer.  
 
 296 Up and to the right  
Up and to the right refers  to a good  business  description.this  refers  
to the position  of a line graph  which  reflects  positive  growth  over a 
long time.  
 
Upselling  
Upselling  refers  to a technique  where  a seller  introduces  better  
versions  or upgradations  or addons  for the buyer  which  increases  
the average  order  value.  
 
URL /1location  
Of a resource  on the internet  
 
Usability  
Usability  is a quality  attribute  that assesses  how easy user interfaces  
are to use. The word  "usability"  also refers  to methods  for 
improving  ease-of-use during  the design  process. . .. Learnability:  
How  easy is it for users  to accomplish  basic  tasks the first time they 
encounter  the design?  
 
User  
The consumer  of a product  or service  is usually  known  as the user.  
 
User  experience  (UX)  
User  experience  (UX)  covers  most  aspects  related  to a users'  
interaction  with a product , service , brand  or business.  User  
experience  is known  to influen ce user’s  emotions,  viewpoint,  
attitude,  and behavior  and finally  drive  a call to action.  
The user experience (UX) is a combination of interactions 
with a product, website or app a user goes through, which 
may lead to positive or negative emotions and atti tudes. If 
you utilize UX design to satisfy enough people to boost your 
customer retention by as little as 5%, you will be rewarded 
with a profit increase of at least 25% (Source)  
 
User  interface  (UI) 
User  interface  refers  to the interaction  with access,  use and interact  
with appliances,  software,  digital  devices  and other  machines  of 
consumers.  
 297 Unsurpassed  
Having  superior  compared  to the rest 
 
Unconventional  
Not based  on any particular  content  
 
Under  Delivery  
Delivery  of less impressions,  visitors,  or conv ersions  than 
contracted  for a specified  period  of time.  
 
Unique  visitors  
Individuals  who have visited  an online  web site (or network)  a 
minimum  of once  in a very throughout  a hard and fast time-frame  
 
URL  
Location  of a resource  on the net. 
 
Undercover Marke ting 
This strategy is about creating intrigue and drive to purchase. This 
can be done by retaining information  or diverting attention until 
the timing is right for launch. Common uses are in event 
marketing, the film  industry, or even for the release of a brand -new 
product or service to its marketplace.  
 
  298 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“Master the topic, the message, and the delivery.”  
– Steve Jobs  
  
299 V 
Values  and lifestyles  (VALS)  research  
A research  method  which  psychologically  groups  consumers  based  
on certain characteristics  such as their values,  lifestyles,  and 
demographics.  
 
Vehicle  
A specific  channel  or publication  for carrying  the advertising  
message  to a target  audience.  For example,  one medium  would  be 
magazines,  while  one vehicle  would  be Time magazi ne. 
Refers  to a specific  publication  in the press,  or a programme  in 
electronic  media,  or an outdoor  site. 
 
Velox  
A type of paper  used for it's superior  reproduction  qualities.  
 
Vertical  discount  
A reduced  rate offered  to advertisers  who purchase  airtime  on a 
broadcast  medium  for a limited  amount  of time,  e.g., one week.  
 
Vertical  publications  
Publications  whose  editorial  content  deals  with the interests  of a 
specific  industry,  e.g., National  Petroleum  Magazine  and Retail  
Baking  Today.  
 
Vignette  
(1) An illustr ation  that has soft edges,  often  produced  by using  
cutouts  or masks.  
(2) A photograph  or halftone  in which  the edges,  or parts  of, are 
shaded  off to a very light gray.  
 
Voice -pitch  analysis  (VOPAN)  
An advertising  research  technique  of analyzing  a subject's  voice 
during  their responses,  to test their feelings  and attitudes  about  an 
ad. 
 
 
 300 Voiceover  (VO)  
The technique  of using  the voice  of an unseen  speaker  during  film, 
slides,  or other  voice  material.  
 
Validity  
The degree  to which  a measure  represents  the object  or concept  
which  it is intended  to measure.  
 
Value  Added  
The extent  to which  an organization  enhances  the price  customers  
are willing  to pay for its goods  or services  through  the creation  of 
form,  place,  time,  or ownership  utilities.  Value  added  is determin ed 
by subtracting  the cost of materials,  supplies,  fuel, and contract  
work  from  the value  of the shipments.6a  
 
Value  Pricing  
Pricing  on the basis  of the buyer's  perception  of the value  of the 
product  to him or her rather  than on the basis  of the seller's  costs.13  
 
Variety  Store  
A retail  establishment  offering  many  kinds  of merchandise  at low 
prices  and with few attendant  services.  Woolworth's  is a good  
example.11  
 
Vertical  Integration  
The acquisition  of firms  or the development  of divisions  in earlier  
or later stages  of the production  process.  For example,  an apparel  
manufacturer  which  purchases  retail  stores  or which  establishes  its 
own division  for the building  and operating  of such stores  is 
vertically  integrating.  In this case,  the integration  is forward , 
toward  the consumer.  If the apparel  manufacturer  purchased  a 
textile  company  or established  a textile  division,  it would  be 
backward  integrating,  away  from  the consumer.  
 
Volume  Discount  
An amount  deducted  in advance  from  payment  that is due as a 
reward  for buying  in quantity.1  There  are a wide variety  of such 
discounts.  Discounts  can be given  on each unit above  a base;  or 
they can be established  step wise,  with,  for example,  a 5% discount  
on units  11–20, a 6% discount  on units  21–30, etc. Other  variants  301 include  the volume  rebate  (a year end refund  according  to the 
volume  purchased  by the account  during  the year)  and the growth  
volume  rebate  (given  on the difference  between  purchases  from  one 
year to the next).  
 
Voluntary  Chain  
A group  of retailers  each of whom  owns  and operates  its own store  
and is associated  with a wholesale  organization.14  
 
Voucher  Copy  
A free copy  of a publication  sent to the advertiser  as proof  that a 
paid-for advertisement  had appeared.  
 
Volume  Discount  
Discount  incentives  for adverti sers who commit  to a specified  level 
of spend  with a media  owner  or agency.  
 
Video  Billboards  
Bulletins,  posters  or wallscape  with screens  that can beam  full 
colour  ads to motorists  from  sundown  to midnight.  Potentially,  Out 
of Home  advertising  may even include  holographic  displays,  laser 
lighting  systems,  and satellite  transmissions  to enable  advertisers  to 
produce  virtually  any effect  they desire  on their out of home  
displays,  laws permitting.  
 
Visibility  
Visibility  refers  to whether  or not a particular  site is visible  from  a 
certain  predefined  distance.  
Visibility in regards to online marketing is the process of 
being easily seen and found by your target audience online in 
search engines, directories and websites of a related industry.  
 
Vox Pop 
A qualit ative  consumer  research  tool, usually  in the form  of a brief 
street  interview,  where  people  are recorded  giving  spontaneous  
answers  to set questions.  
 
 
 
 302 VAS  (Value  Added  Services)  
Additional  services  offered  by a network  which  add value  to those  
services  already  available  on the network.  VAS  generates  
additional  revenue  by offering  increased  benefits  to its subscribers.  
 
Visits  
The number  of distinct  visits  to a web site within  a specified  time 
period,  such as one day or one month.  Visits  are an imprecise  term 
and numbers  may vary considerably  depending  on the type of 
calculation  used,  but many  log and statistical  applications  define  a 
visit as a single  browser  session  by a single  IP address.  Page  views  
and unique  visitor  counts,  computed  individually  and in 
combination,  are far more  useful  in determining  the relative  
popularity  of a web page  or web site. 
 
Value  proposition  
A value  proposition  is a statement  which  covers  various  aspects  
such as benefits  and unique  attributes  which  consumers  might  want  
to patron ize on. 
 
Vertical  banner  
A banner  ad measuring  120 pixels  wide and 240 pixels  tall 
 
Viral  
A piece  of information/news  which  rapidly  spreads  in the internet  
marketing  space  
 
Viral  marketing  
Marketing  phenomenon  that facilitates  and encourages  people  to 
pass along  a marketing  message  
Getting your customers talking about your products and services is 
very important to growing awareness for your business. Viral 
Marketing is about spreading the word through creative campaigns 
that are good enough to share - in order to keep your products in 
the heart and minds of the global consumer.  
The promoting development that facilitates and encourages 
individuals to pass on a marketing message.  
 
 
 303 Visitors  
Visitors  are metrics  in Google  analytics.  They are used to quantify  
users of a webs ite over a particular  period  of time.  These visitors  
are often  broken  down  between  new and returning  visitors.  
Returni ng visitors  are those  who have  browsed  at least once  in the 
given  time frame.  
A person  who has visited  a website  atleast  once  in the reporting  
time period .  
 
Visits  
Visits  are an old term  in Google  analytics.  They are also called  
"sessions"  
Visits  is a method  used to measure  the total number  of times  a user 
has visited  your website.  It is an indication  of continue  process  of 
visiting of a website  by a customer.  
 
Vlog  
A blog or a diary  that publishes  video  content  
 
Vertical  banner  
A banner  ad measurement  of 120 pixels  wide and 240 pixels  tall. 
 
Video Marketing  
Video Marketing is fast becoming a preferred channel for viewers 
to lea rn more about a product or service offering and how it will 
benefit them. It is increasingly effective in engaging prospective 
customers and providing all the right reasons to purchase.  
 
VCP Theory  
Visibility + Credibility = Profitability  
 
  304 Glossary of Ma rketing Terms  
 
“Our head of social media is the customer”  
– McDonald’s  
  
305 W 
Wash  drawings  
Tonal  drawing,  similar  to watercolor,  intended  for halftone  
reproduction.  
 
Waste  circulation  
(1) Advertising  in an area where  the product  or service  is not 
available  or has no sales potential.  (2) Persons  in an advertiser's  
audience  who are not potential  consumers.  
 
Wave  scheduling  
An advertising  strategy  that consists  of scheduling  space  in the 
media  in intermittent  periods,  e.g., two weeks  on, two weeks  off. 
 
Wear  out 
The point  reached  when  an advertising  campaign  loses it's 
effectiveness  due to repeated  overplay  of ads. 
Weight  
(1) An adjustment  made  in a survey  sample  to correct  for 
demographic  or geographic  imbalances.  (2) Number  of 
exposures  of an advertisement.  
(2) The total impact  of an advertising  campaign  in terms  of 
number  of commercials,  insertions,  advertising  rupees,  reach  
and frequency.  
 
White  space  
Unoccupied  parts  of a print  advertisement,  including  between  
blocks  of type,  illustrations,  headlines,  etc. 
 
Wipe  
A transition  of scenes  in a visual  production  where  one image  
appears  to wipe the previous  one from  the screen.  
 
Word  painting  
A technique  used in the radio  broadcast  industry  that uses highly  
descriptive  words  to evoke  images  in reading  material  as an attempt  
to place  the listener  into the scene.  
 306 Warehouse  Outlet  
A large  retail  facility  located  in a warehouse  type building  or with 
an adjoining  warehouse.  Warehouse  outlets  compete  on the basis  
of low prices  made  possible  by their no frills approach.  They  are 
located  in low rent areas,  offer few if any services,  and make  
maximum  use of vertical  space  in the storage  of their large  
inventories.  
 
Warranty  
An undertaking  of responsibility  by the seller  of a good  or service  
for the quality  or suitability  of the produc t. An express  warranty  
(which  can be written  or verbal)  is one based  on express  statements  
voluntarily  made  by the seller.  An example  of an express  warranty  
would  be an automobile  manufacturer  that warrants  that its vehicle  
will perform  as promised  for seven years  or 70,000  miles,  
whichever  comes  first. Warranties  can also be implied.  An implied  
warranty  is one not made  directly  by the seller  but implied  by law, 
for example,  that a product  sold as food is fit for human  
consumption.  
Warrant  
Warrant refers t o a contractual right entitling the holder to 
purchase shares in the issuing company during a specified period 
for a fixed amount, called exercise price.  
 
Warm Call  
Warm Call is the process or act of calling or visiting a sales prospect 
with whom the sale s professional has had a prior contact such as 
during an event or via a referral.  
 
Warm Email  
Warm Email is the process or act of emailing a sales prospect with 
whom the sales professional has had a prior contact such as during 
an event or via a referral . 
 
Wholesaler  
A business  unit which  buys and resells  merchandise  to retailers  and 
other  merchants  and/or  to industrial,  institutional,  and 
commercial  users  but which  does not sell to ultimate  consumers.  
 
 307 Wastage  (Spillover)  
Advertising  reach  of audiences  or markets  other  than the specified  
target  audience  or market,  usually  uncontrollable.  
 
Weighting  
In a random  sample  survey,  this is a method  used for controlling  
sample  biases  if any. For e.g.; if the proportion  of male  to female  in 
the sample  is 40:60  vis-à-vis universe  distribution  of 50:50,  then 
weighting  enables  correction  of the sampling  biases  through  
differential  weights.  
 
Weighting  Unit  
Any geographical  unit that is separately  weighted  and projected  to 
the universe  is referred  to as a weighting  unit. Usually , a number  
of weighting  units  will cumulate  to a reporting  unit (every  
geographic  unit for which  you can generate  outputs  from  IRS 
software).  
 
Webmaster  
The person  responsible  for administering  a web site. 
Web  2.0 
Web  2.0 is the term given  to describe a second  generation  of the 
World  Wide  Web  that is focused  on the ability  for people  to 
collaborate  and share  information  online.  Web  2.0 basically  refers  
to the transition  from  static  HTML  Web  pages  to a more  dynamic  
Web  that is more  organi zed and is based  on serving  web 
applications  to users.  Blogs,  wikis,  and web services  are all seen as 
components  of Web  2.0. 
 
Worm:  
A worm  is a virus  that does not infect  other  programs.  It makes  
copies  of itself,  and infects  additional  computers  (typically  by 
making  use of network  connections)  but does not attach  itself to 
additional  programs;  however , a worm  might  alter,  install  or 
destroy  files and programs.  
 
Webliography:  
A listing  of source  World  Wide  Web  sites. 
 
 308 Warehouse  management  system  
Warehouse  management  system  is a computer  software  designed  
for managing  the movement  and storage  of materials  in warehouse.  
 
Web  analytics  
It is analysis  of the website.  It involves  collection  of customer  data 
reporting  of performance  of website  like website  reach,  bounce  
rate, clicks.  It also helps  us understand  where  the customers  are 
involved  in the website  
 
Web  browser  
A software  application  that allows  for the browsing  of the world  
wide web 
 
Web  design  
The selection  and coordination  of available  components  to create  
the layout and structure  of a web page 
It is a website  page  created  for choosing  and arranging  of elements  
 
Web directory  
Organized,  categorized  listings  of web sites 
Arranging  group  of words  / elements  in a website  
 
Web  hosting  
The business  of providing  the storage,  connectivity,  and services  
necessary  to serve  files for a website  
 
Web  site traffic  
The amount  of visitors  and visits a web site receives  
It is a session  where  it calculates  the amount  of visit by the user in 
website  page  
 
Web  site usability  
The ease with which  visitors  are able to use a web site 
 
Wholesale  
Wholesale  is the sale of goods  in the large  quantities  to retailers  who 
resell  them.  
 
 309 Win-win 
A situation  wherein  all the parties  involved  benefit  in some  way or 
the other  
 
Word -of-mouth  marketin g 
A marketing  method  that relies  on casual  social  interactions  to 
promote  a product  
Marketing  a product  with casual  social  way of interactions.  
This is the passing of information from person to person 
through verbal communication. Consumers love to share a nd 
recommend ‘great’ products and services. It is important for 
marketers to ensure their messages are clear and with meaning 
and that product or service benefits are clearly communicated 
across every medium.  
 
Wordmark  
The logo of a company  that includes  only the full name  of the 
company  and no extra  symbols  or other  graphical  elements.  
Example:  Google . 
 
Web  2.0 
It is a term that best describes  the changing  trends  in world  wide 
web technology  and web design , which  enhance  the functionality , 
secure  informati on and improve  creativity . Its best describes  the 
evolution  of internet  then and now.  
 
Website /1constitution  
Of various  web pages  and related  content  with the common  
domain  working  under  one web server.  All public ly accessible  
websites  constituted  in world  wide web. 
 
Webinar  
An online  event  using  audio  and video  components  hosted  by an 
organization  for broadcasting  some  information  to a particular  
group  of people . It is a kind of seminar  via web. 
 
Wireframe  
It is a blueprint  or a schematic  which  programmers  and designers  
use to communicate  their structure  of the software  because  it gives  310 dimensional  illustration  of a page  interface  of the software  or 
website  you are building.  
Wireframes are rough or low -fidelity representations of a service or 
a product that  show how either is structured and organized. In web 
development, wireframes serve as one of three types of modeling, 
the other two of which are prototypes (a much detailed and 
interactive representation of a website), and mockups (the most 
visually -intens ive representation to convey styling and visual 
appeal).  
 
Web  hosting  
Its a services  of providing  storage , connectivity  and other  necessary  
services  to the server  files. 
 
Whois  
A protocol  in which  it uses a set of instructions  in order  to display  
informati on 
A utility that returns ownership information about second level 
domains  
 
Web  site usability  
It is a support  from  the web application  that is given  to the website  
related  tasks.  
 
Wholesaler  
A person  who acts as an mediator  for supplying  goods  from  
manuf acturing unit to the retailer  or buying  the product  in/1bulk 
from  the manufactures  and selling  it to the retailers  
 
Web  browser  
A software  application  that allows  for the browsing  of the world  
wide web.  
 
White Hat  
White Hat is a descriptive term to denote  good and lawful 
behavior, but came to also include legalized activities (including 
sanctioned hacking) that are otherwise illegal in a different context. 
Many companies pay for White hat hackers to stress -test their 
computer systems and expose vulnerabili ties. 
 311 White Label  
White Label is a term describing a product or service that can be 
purchased by a business entity and legally re -sold, marketed, and 
distributed under the entity’s own brand or trademark. Most of 
these products are turnkey and lightweigh t. 
 
Widgets  
A small gadget or mechanical device, esp. one whose name is 
unknown or unspecified.  
 
 
  312 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
 “If you’re looking for the next big thing, and you’re looking where 
everyone else is, you’re looking in the wrong place.”  
– Mark Cuban  
  
313 X 
XML  
XML  is a standard  markup  language  that defines  other  markup  
languages.  It defines  a set of rules for encoding  documents  in a 
format  that is both human  readable  and machine  readable .  
 
XML  sitemap  
It is a file that consists  all website's  important  pages  to make  sure 
that they can be easily  find out by Google . It helps  search  engines  
with an efficient  list of the URL s on a site. 
 
Xerox  
With a shortage of digital marketing terms that start with the letter 
X, let’s to use this opportunity to mak e a point: even with all of the 
changes in marketing technology, we can’t forget that sometimes 
what’s old becomes new again.  Many marketing companies have 
gotten away from print marketing. It is true that some print 
marketing campaigns could require an u p-front cost, some print 
marketing – especially direct mail marketing – continues to yield a 
higher ROI and has the potential to connect with some customers 
better than digital marketing.  Rock My Image incorporates 
custom print marketing options with cust om digital marketing 
strategy.  
 
Xtreme Marketing  
Radical, high -risk marketing that will leave your budget in ruin...  
OK, you caught us 😊  
We just made that one up.  
 
 
 
 
  314 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“The man who stops advertising to save money is like the man who 
stops the clock to save time.”  
– Thomas Jefferson  
  
315 Y 
Yelp  
It is a social  media  site where  users  can share  their experience  like 
there  ratings  and reviews .  
 
YouTube 
It is a social  media  platform  in which  people  usually  watch  videos  
posted  by others and can upload  their own videos.  It is one of the 
foremost  video  distribution  sites in the world.  
 
YouTube advertising  
It is a cost-effective  way of reaching  to a large  base of audience  with 
different  interest and almost  every  business  can find their target  
audience  within  Youtube's  user base.  
 
Yahoo!  Search  
It is an internet  search  service  provided  by American  website  
Yahoo!  Since  2009  it uses Microsoft's  Bing search  engine  to display  
web search  result.  
 
Yahoo!  Advertising  
It’s a new global  ad market  place launching  with premium  
publishers  with more  visibility and control  over advertising  on their 
sites.  
 
Youth Marketing  
Youth marketing is any marketing strategy that’s directed towards 
the younger generation, and where they are the target market for 
a product or service.  
 
Yext  
Yext lets marketers manage their local content, listings, store pages, 
social pages, campaigns, and more through the functionally 
integrated Yext Geo Marketing Cloud. Over 250,000 businesses, 
including dozens of Fortune 500 compan ies and top retailers use 
the Yext Cloud.  
  316 Glossary of Marketing Terms  
 
“Every sale has five basic obstacles: no need, no money, no hurry, 
no desire, no trust.”  
– Zig Ziglar  
  
317 Z 
Zero Cost Strategy  
A decision or tactic that doesn’t have any $$ costs or expe nses when 
you execute it; many guerilla marketing tactics are ‘zero cost’;  e.g. 
you can improve perception and prospect of selling a home if you 
declutter the main rooms by packing excess stuff into boxes and 
putting the boxes in the garage or basement ; e .g. cross -promotion 
– you reach out to a local business that also serves mom + dads of 
early readers and offer to put their brochures at the front desk of 
your library or near story  time space, and they agree to post flyers, 
schedule of story  time hours an d mention to their clients  
 
ZMOT – (Zero moment of truth)  
The zero moment of truth (ZMOT) refers to the point in the buying 
cycle when the consumer researches a product, often before the 
seller even knows that they exist. Term created by Google referrin g 
to the first stage of the 4 moments of truth.  
 
ZIP code  
A geographical classification system developed by the U.S. 
government for mail  
distribution, a nested numeric range of 5 to 9 numbers.  
 
ZZZ... Snooze Marketing  
Non-compelling, non -engaging marketi ng and communications 
that sends people to sleep. We would avoid this strategy, and all 
associated costs  
  318 Marketing Insights  
 
In this section you will find all the marketing information related 
to the industry. Read on and tell your friends and peers what  you 
know 
 
  
319 Marketing  Insights  
World  Population  at a glance  
Country   Population   Population  (In BN) 
World  
Population  7,91,74,53,100  7.91  
India  1,38,00,04,385  1.38  
China  1,43,93,23,776  1.44  
US 33,10,02,651  0.331  
Source: worldometers.info  
India  Popula tion at a glance  
India    
Male:  Female  Ratio  51.96:  48.04  
Total  Households  in India  19,95,84,361  
No of people  per household  in India  4.57 
Source: statisticstimes.com/ Wikipedia  
 
Top 10 Metro Population in India  
Mumbai  1,24,42,373  
Chennai  46,46,732  
Delhi 1,10,34,555  
Kolkata  44,96,694  
Bengaluru  84,43,675  
Hyderabad  67,31,790  
Surat  44,67,797  
Ahmedabad  55,77,940  
Pune  31,24,458  
Jaipur  30,46,163  
Total  6,40,12,177  
Source: census2011.co.in  320 India  Sex ratio  by age group  (2020)  
Age group  Male  Female  M per 100 F 
00-04 6,17,05,157  5,61,00,408  109.99  
05-Sep 6,11,56,249  5,54,70,476  110.25  
Oct-14 6,55,29,162  5,92,47,144  110.6  
15-19 6,67,20,828  5,95,35,435  112.07  
20-24 6,51,90,651  5,79,19,863  112.55  
25-29 6,24,64,037  5,56,67,536  112.21  
30-34 5,94,14,201  5,36,92,757  110.66  
35-39 5,49,83,196  5,03,00,522  109.31  
40-44 4,78,00,063  4,45,85,968  107.21  
45-49 4,15,69,276  3,94,47,158  105.38  
50-54 3,58,71,178  3,43,62,501  104.39  
55-59 3,06,83,717  2,96,69,493  103.42  
60-64 2,51,98,480  2,47,10,588  101.97  
65-69 1,97,65,111  1,96,67,183  100.5  
70-74 1,23,42,949  1,30,92,551  94.275  
75-79 72,77,333  82,33,711  88.385  
80-84 39,79,437  48,02,826  82.856  
85-89 16,95,954  21,13,999  80.225  
90-94 5,03,975  6,38,562  78.923  
95-99 1,03,730  1,44,394  71.838  
100+  18,753  32,521  57.664 
Total  72,39,73,437  66,94,35,596  108.15  
Source: statisticstimes.com  
Did you know???  
Uttar  Pradesh  with a population  of more  than 166 million  holds  
distinction  of being  the most  populous  state in the country  followed  321 by Maharastra  (97 million)  and Bihar  (83 million).  The other  large  
states,  in terms  of population  size are West  Bengal  (80 
million),Andhra  Pradesh  (76 million),  Tamil  Nadu  (62 million),  
Madhya  Pradesh  (60 million),  Rajsthan  (57 million)  and Gujrat  (51 
million).  These  states  together  account  for 76 percent  of the total 
population  of the country.  
Source: censusindia.gov.in  
Towns  and Cities  in India  
India  is urbanizing  rapidly  and about  377 million  people  live in 
7935  towns/cities(census,  2011)  across  the country  which  
constitutes  about  31.2 % of the total population.  The number  of 
towns  has significantly  increased  from  5161  in 2001  to 7935  in 
2011.  During  the fifties  and sixties  of the twentieth  century,  the 
country  experienced  rapid  growth  of its urban  population.  But 
during  the last few decade sIndia  has experienced  urban  
deceleration.  The country  has experienced  a noticeable  slowing  
down  of the rate of urbanization  and urban  growth  in the past two 
decades(1981 -1991  and 1991 -2001).  But there  has been  an urban  
turn around  in 2011  which  reported  an acceleration  of 
urbanization.  For the first time since  independence,  the absolute  
increase  in urban  population  exceeded  to that of the increase  in 
rural  population  though  69% of the total population  live in rural  
areas  which  is highly  significant.  There  is high inequality  in the 
distribution  of the urban  population  by size class categories.  About  
70%  of the total urban  population(265  million)  live in 468 towns  
which  is also reflected  in Gini Index  and Lorenz  curve.  Against  this 
background,  the recently  released  2011  census  data provides  an 
opportunity  to explore  and analyze  this urban  turn around.  
Source: iussp.org  
 
 
 
 322 World  Population  facts  and figures  
Total  Households  in US 13,27,36,055  
No of people  per household  in US 2.49 
Total  Households  in China  52,26,89,264  
No of people  per household  in China  2.70 
Source: wikipedia.org  
Working  Population  in India  
As per the Census  2001,  the Indian  workforce  is over 400 million  
strong,  which  constitutes  39.1 % of the total population  of the 
country.  The workers  comprise  312 million  main  workers  and 88 
million  marginal  workers  (i.e., those  who did not work  for at least 
183 days in the preceding  12 months  to the census  taking)  Sex 
differential  among  the number  of male  and female  worker  in the 
total workforce  is significant.  Of the total 402 million  workers,  275 
million  are males  and 127 million  females.  This would  mean  that 
51.7 percent  of the total males  and 25.6 percent  of the total females  
are workers.  The number  of female  workers  is about  less than half 
the number  of male  workers.  In terms  of proportion,  68.4 percent  
of the workers  are males  and 31.6 percent  females.  The census  
taking).  
Main  workers  constitute  77.8 percent  of the total workers.  The 
remaining  are marginal  workers.  Among  the main  workers,  female  
work ers, are only 23.3 % and 76.7%  are male  workers.  Majority  of 
female  workers  (87.3  percent)  are from  rural  areas.  This is also 
twice  that of male  workers,  which  may be due to their being  
employed  predominantly  in activities  like cultivation  and 
agricultural  labor.  In the urban  areas,  majority  of female  workers  
are engaged  in Households  industry  and other  work.  
Interestingly,  among  marginal  workers  females  outnumber  the 
males.  In three  of the four categories,  viz. cultivators,  agricultural  
laborers  and househ old industries,  female  marginal  workers  
outnumber  male  workers.  323 Number  of Workers  ('000s)  
Category  Persons  Males  Females  
Total  population  10,28,610  5,32,157  4,96,453  
Total  workers  4,02,235  2,75,015  1,27,220  
Main  workers  3,13,005  2,40,148  72,857  
Margin al workers  89,230  34,867  54,363  
Non-workers  6,26,376  2,57,142  3,69,234  
Cultivation  1,27,313  85,417  41,896  
Agricultureal  labourers  1,06,957  57,329  49,446  
Household  industry  workers  16,957  8,744  8,213  
Other  workers  1,51,190  1,23,525  27,665  
Source  : PCA India,  Census  of India 2001  
 
The workers  have  been  classified  by the type of economic  activity  
into broad  the type of economic  activity  into nine broad  categories  
as per National  Industrial  Classification,  1998.  Distribution  of 
main  workers  by industrial  category  shows  that agriculture  sector  
still employs  largest  number  of workers.  The dependence  on 
agriculture  is brought  out by the fact that of the 313 million  main  
workers  in the country,  166 million  (56.6%)  has been  engaged  in 
‘Agricultural  and allied  activities’.  This is followed  by 
‘Manufacturing  Industries’,  which  employed  about  42 million  
(13.4%).  There  are 31.1 million  workers  in the services  sector  
forming  10 % of the total main  workers  with similar  number  
engaged  in ‘Wholesale  retail  trade  and repair work,  Hotel  and 
restaurant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 324 DISTRIBUTION OF MAIN WORKED BY DIFFERENT 
INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES, INDIA 2001  
Industrial  category  Main  Workers  
('000s)  Percentage  
(%) 
Total  main  workers  * 3,12,972  100 
Agricultural  & allied  activities  1,76,979  56.6 
Mining  & quarrying  1,908  0.6 
Manufacturing  41,848  13.4 
Electricity,  gas and water  supply  1,546  0.5 
Construction  11,583  3.7 
Wholesale,  retail  trade  & repair  work,  
Hotel  and resturants  29,333  9.4 
Transport,  storage  & communications  12,535  4 
Financial  intermediation,  Real  estate,  
business  activities  6,109  2 
Other  services  31,131  10 
Source  : Industrial  classification  data based on sample.  
Note:*  Total  main  workers  is based  on actual  values  of cultivators  
and Agricultural  labourers  from  full count  (inclu ded in agricultural  
& allied  activities)  and estimated  values  for industrial  categories.  
 
  325 GDP of Top 20 countries  
# Country  GDP  
(Nominal 
2017)  GDP 
Growt
h Population  GDP 
per 
capita  Share of 
World 
GDP  
1 United 
States  $19.485 Trn  2.3%  325084756  $59,939  24% 
2 China  $12.238 Trn  6.9%  1421021791  $8,612  15% 
3 Japan  $4.872 Trn  1.7%  127502725  $38,214  6% 
4 Germany  $3.693 Trn  2.2%  82658409  $44,680  5% 
5 India  $2.651 Trn  6.7%  1338676785  $1,980  3% 
6 United 
Kingdom  $2.638 Trn  1.8%  66727461  $39,532  3% 
7 France  $2.583 Trn  1.8%  64842509  $39,827  3% 
8 Brazil  $2.054 Trn  1.0%  207833823  $9,881  3% 
9 Italy $1.944 Trn  1.5%  60673701  $32,038  2% 
10 Canada  $1.647 Trn  3.1%  36732095  $44,841  2% 
11 Russia  $1.578 Trn  1.6%  145530082  $10,846  2% 
12 South Korea  $1.531 Trn  3.1%  51096 415 $29,958  2% 
13 Australia  $1.323 Trn  2.0%  24584620  $53,831  2% 
14 Spain  $1.314 Trn  3.1%  46647428  $28,175  2% 
15 Mexico  $1.151 Trn  2.0%  124777324  $9,224  1% 
16 Indonesia  $1.015 Trn  5.1%  264650963  $3,837  1% 
17 Turkey  $852 Bn  7.4%  81116450  $10,498  1% 
18 Netherlands  $831 Bn  3.2%  17021347  $48,796  1% 
19 Saudi 
Arabia  $687 Bn  -0.9%  33101179  $20,747  1% 
20 Switzerland  $679 Bn  1.1%  8455804  $80,296  1% 
Source: worldometers.info  
  326 Schools  and Colleges  in India  
As per the latest  record  of the Central  Government  (As on 
14.9.2020),  there  are 14,94,052  schools  in India.  
State/UTs  Total  Number  of Schools  
      
Government  Aided  Private  
Andaman  & Nicobar  Islands  339 2 72 
Andhra  Pradesh  45013  2346  15862  
Arunachal  Pradesh  3179  64 503 
Assam  47223  5065  6084  
Bihar  72590 689 6031  
Chandigarh  121 7 74 
Chhattisgarh  48671  434 6842  
Dadra  & Nagar  Haveli  300 10 35 
Daman  & Diu 112 4 23 
Delhi  2784  253 2666  
Goa 833 514 139 
Gujarat  35202  5734  13641  
Haryana  14516  26 7913  
Himachal  Pradesh  15433  0 2778  
Jammu  & Kashmir  2408 0 29 5552  
Jharkhand  35954  1177  1400  
Karnataka  50184  7417  20604  
Kerala  5011  7195  3156  
Lakshadweep  45 0 0 
Madhya  Pradesh  122056  874 29105  
Maharashtra  66033  23554  19400  
Manipur  3073  587 1003  
Meghalaya  7802  4181  2220  
Mizoram  2564  231 1025  327 Nagaland  2007 0 745 
Odisha  55483  5770  4957  
Puducherry  423 33 283 
Punjab  19404  458 8495  
Rajasthan  67578  0 35603  
Sikkim  854 19 417 
Tamilnadu  37728  8355  12439  
Telangana  29822  707 11621  
Tripura  4309  46 343 
Uttar  Pradesh  163142  8090  87433  
Uttarakhand  16934  616 5519 
West  Bengal  82876  127 11777  
All 1083678  84614  325760  
Source:  UDISE+  -2018 -19 
(Provisional)  
      
Source: allschoolsinindia.in  
  328 Transportation  in India  
 More  than 1.6 million  buses  are registered  in India,  and the 
public  bus sector  operates  170,000  buses  carrying  roughly  70 
million  people  per day.  
Source: intelligenttransport.com  
 As per the 2011  Census,  36% Indians  either  walk or cycle  to 
work  while  30% live in close  proximity  of their workplace  and 
do not need  to travel.  Additionally,  18% use publi c transport  
and the balance  16% use personal  vehicles  to travel  to work  
— 3% by car and 13% use two-wheelers.  
Source:  wri-india.org  
 Indian  Railways  is among  the world's  largest  rail network,  and 
its route  length  network  is spread  over 67,956  kms, with 
13,169 passenger  trains  and 8,479  freight  trains,  plying  23 
million  travellers  and 3 million  tonnes  (MT)  of freight  daily  
from  7,349  stations.   
Source:  IBEF.Org  
 India’s  passenger*  traffic  stood  at 115.37  million  in FY21.  
Domestic  passenger  and international  passenger  traffic  
declined  at a CAGR  of -9.02%  and -28.64%,  respectively,  
from  FY16  to FY21,  owing  to COVID -19-related  restrictions  
on flights  in FY21.  In FY21,  airports  in India  pegged  the 
domestic  passenger  traffic  to be ~105.2  million,  a 61.7%  YoY 
decline , and international  passenger  traffic  to be ~10.1  
million,  an 84.8%  YoY decline,  over the fiscal  year ended  
March  31, 2020.  In October  2021,  the average  daily  domestic  
passenger  flight  departures  stood  at >2,300,  with average  daily  
domestic  traffic  being  >283,000  air passengers.    
Source: IBEF.Org  
 
  329 Durables  penetration  
 
TV Penetration:  210 Million  TV Homes  
Source: Indianexpress.com  
 
Dish  TV penetration  
Dish TV Penetration  71 Mn active  users  (Dec 2020)  
TataSky  40.0 Million  
AirTel  17.86  million  
DishTV  18.06 Million  
Sun DTH  11.6 million  
DD Free Dish 40.0 million  
Statistic s For Active  DTH  (Direct -to-Home) subscribers  
in India   
 Nearly  71 million  active  DTH  (Direct -To-Home)  subscribers  
were  reported  as of December  2020.  
 March  2019  reported  the highest  number of active  DTH  
subscribers,  that is, 72.44  million.   
 The number  of active  users  fell from  72.44  million  in March  
2019  to 68.92  million  in June 2019.  
 70.70  million  was the total active  subscriber  base of Pay DTH  
as of the quarter  ending  September  30, 2020. This number  is 
in addition  to the subscribers  of the free DTH  services  of 
Doordarshan.  
 March  2020  to December  2020  saw a consistent  rise in the 
number  of subscribers,  that is, 70.26  million  in March  2020  to 
70.99  million  in December  2020.   
 The DTH  subsc ribers  base expanded  marginally  by 2.8 lakh 
in the first quarter  of 2020,  that is, January  2020  to March  
2020.  (Source:  Livemint)   
 The DTH  subscriber  base grew  by 320,000  in the second  
quarter  of 2020.  (Source:  Digital  TV News)  
 Numerous  DTH  platforms  added  290,000  subscribers  during  
the last quarter  of 2020,  as compared  to 120,000  subscribers  
during  the third  quarter  of 2020.  (Source:  Exchange4Media)  330 Statistics On The Leading  DTH  Operators  In India  
 At the end of March  2021,  the leading  DTH  operators  were  
Tata Sky, Dish TV India,  Bharti  Telemedia,  and Sun Direct  
TV. 
 At the end of March  2021,  Tata  Sky was the leading  DTH  
operator  with a 33.3 percent  market  share.  
 Tata  Sky is followed  by Bharti  Telemedia  with a market  share  
of 25.54  percent  in 2021.  
 Dish TV has the third -largest  market  share  of 24.09  percent  in 
2021.  
 Sun Direct  TV has the least market  share  with 17.07  percent  
in March  2021.  
 Tata  Sky Market  Share  Increased  to 33.3%  while  Dish TV 
Further  Dips to 24.09%  in 2021.  
 Tata  Sky is the leading  DTH  service  provider  with a market  
share  of 32.58%  in 2020.  At the end of the first quarter  of 
2020,  Tata  Sky had a 32.09%  share,  and it increased  to 
32.58%  by the end of September  2020.  
 The second -largest  DTH  operator  in 2020  was Dish TV. 
However,  Dish TV lost a huge  percentage  of its market  share.  
 The remaining  two service  providers  – Airtel  Digital  TV and 
Sun Direct  also increased  their market  share  marginally  in the 
financial  year of 2020.  
 The Pay DTH  subscriber  base has increased  from  70.58  
million  in June 2020  to 70.70  million  in September  2020.  The 
total active  subscriber  base was 69.30  million  on September  
30, 2019.  However,  the number  of subscribers  increased  
slightly  to 70.70  million.  
 Tata  Sky, Airtel  Digital  TV, and Sun Direct  saw growth  in 
subscriber  count  in the second  quarter  of 2020  as per the 
Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of India  (TRAI).  
Source: Wikipedia  
  331 Consumer  Durable  penetration  in India  
Fans  80% 
TV 60% 
Mixer/  Grinder  35% 
Fridge  30% 
Air coolers  17% 
Washing  
Machines  10% 
ACs 7% 
Microwave  Oven s 5% 
Source: Statista  
 
Mobile  phones  and Phone  Brands  
Total  Mobile  
Penetration  1.18Bn  Connections  
Smartphone  
penetration  600 Mn or 53% 
IPhone  
Penetration  Number  of Apple  iPhone  shipments  India  2017 -2020.  In 
2020,  Apple  shipped  3.2 million  smartphones  to India.  It 
was Apple's  best year in the country,  a 60 percent  
growth  over the previous  year's  shipment.  Apple's  
market  share  in India  stood  at 2.4 percent  the same  year.  
Xiaomi  
Penetration  Xiaomi  led the market  in Q3 2021  with a 22% shipment  
share.  Three  out of the top five models  during  the 
quarter  were  from  Xiaomi  
Internet  
Users  700 Mn Users  
  India  Adds  25Mn  Smart  phone  users  every  quarter  
Data  
consumption  India  has the highest  data consumption  which  is about  
12 GB per person  a month.  
Top data 
provi ders in 
India  Reliance  Jio held the highest  share  of subscribers,  at 
around  37 percent,  in the wireless  network  market  across  
India  in the middle  of 2021.  The company  had over 437 
million  subscribers  during  the same  time period.  The 
number  of mobile  subscr ibers across  the south  Asian  
country  amounted  to over a billion  in 2020.  
Source:  Economic Times/ Statista  332 Computer  Penetration  
Computer  penetration  
(All) Only  11% of households  possess  any type of 
computer,  which  could  include  desktop  
computers,  laptops,  notebooks,  netbooks,  
palmtops  or tablets.  
  There  is a rural -urban  digital  divide,  such 
that rural  broadband  penetration  is only 29 
percent  against  a national  average  of 51 
percent.  ... Between  March  2020  to 
February  2021,  Indian  schools  were fully 
closed  for 62 percent  of instruction  days,  
and partially  for 38 percent.  
  With  over 560 million  internet  users,  India  
is the second  largest  online  market  in the 
world,  ranked  only behind  China.  It was 
estimated  that by 2023,  there  would  be over 
650 million  internet  users  the country.  
Despite  the large  base of internet  users,  the 
internet  penetration  rate in the country  
stood  at around  50 percent  in 2020.  This 
meant  that around  half of the 1.37 billion  
Indians  had access  to internet  that year.  
Laptop  Penetratio n Top 6 vendors  by number  of units  shipped,  
2021  
Lenovo  : 24.7%  
HP : 21.8%  
Dell : 17.6%  
Apple  : 7.6%  
Acer  : 7.2%  
Asus : 6.4%  
Source:  ORFOnline.org/ S tatista / Wikipedia  
 
  333 Media  
Satellite  TV 
Penetration  There  are currently  900 permitted  private  
satellite  television  channels  in India  as of 
February  2021.  Numerous  regional  
channels  are available  throughout  India,  
often  distributed  according  to languages.  
Top TV channels  in 
India  Top 10 Channels  - All India,  2+ (000s)  
SUN  TV: 3021  
Star Utsav:  2637  
Star Plus: 2541  
Star MAA:  2461  
Star Vijay:  1805  
Radio  Penetration  Daily  radio  consumption  amounted  to 
about  16 minutes  on average  across  India  in 
2020.   
  In April  2020,  as per a survey  by AZ 
Research  PPL,  commissioned  by the 
Association  of Radio  Operators  for India 
(AORI)  Radio  listenership  in India  touched  
a peak of 51 million . 
  Broadcast  radio  (AM)  today  reaches  a 
staggering  99%  of the Indian  population,  
while  FM radio  reaches  65%.  According  to 
the EY-FICCI  report  'A billion  screens  of 
opportunity',  47 new radio stations  were  
operationali zed in 2018  across  35 cities,  
taking  the total number  to 386 radio  stations  
in the country.  
Cinema  Penetration  6,327  single  screens  (2019)  3,200  multiplex  
screens  (2019)  
NetFlix  Subscription  According  to consulting  firm Omdia,  Netflix  
has roughly  4.4 million  subscribers  in India.  
 
Leading  Netflix  markets  worldwide  
2021  
In the second  quarter  of 2021,  the United  
States  remained  Netflix's  leading  market,  
with around  67 million  subscribers.  Brazil  
ranked  second  with around  18 million, 
followed  by the United  Kingdom,  Germany  
and France.  Latin  America  in particular  is a 
growing  market  for the SVoD  provider,  and 334 subscriber  numbers  in the region  hit around  
35 million  in the second  quarter  of 2021.  
HotStar  Disney  
Subscription  Disney+  Hotstar's  paid subscriber  base has 
declined  by 2.74 million  to 43.66  million  for 
the quarter  ended  2nd October.  In the prior  
quarter  ending  3rd July, the streaming  
platform's  total paid subscriber  base stood  at 
46.4 million.  
Amazon  Prime  Video  
Subscription  Amazon  Prime  Video  has 18 million  
subscribers  in India  as of June 2021,  
according  to Media  Partners  Asia (MPA),  an 
independent  provider  of research,  advisory,  
and consulting  services.  And this number  is 
expected  to go up to 21.8 million  by end of 
this year. 
Zee5  Subscription  ZEE5  currently  has 72.6 million  monthly  
active  users  (MAUs)  and 6.1 million  daily  
active  users  (DAUs).  It is estimated  that 
Zee5  has around  four to five million  
subscribers,  which  is in the same  range  as 
Netflix  in India  in terms  of paid users.  
No of Google  
Searches  Google  processes  over 3.5 billion  searches  
per day. More  than one billion  questions  
have been  asked  on Google  Lens.  
Facebook  With  more  than 2.6 billion  monthly  active  
users,  Facebook  is the most popular  social  
media  world wide.  With  an audience  of this 
scale,  it is no surprise  that the vast majority  
of Facebook's  revenue  is generated  through  
advertising.  
  There  are over 290 million  Facebook  users  
in India  alone,  making  it the leading  
country  in terms  of Facebook  audience  size. 
Instagram  There  are 201 Mn IG users  in India.  US 
with 157Mn  users,  Brazil  with 115Mn  
Twitter  Total  Number  of Monetizable  Daily  Active  
Users:  199 million  
Total  Number  of Tweets  Sent per Day:  500 
million  
Total  Twitter  users  in 
India  24.45  Million  Indians  are on Twitter  this is 
followed  by Brazil  @ 19.05Mn  and UK @ 
19.05  Mn 335 Total  Tweets  Every  second,  on average,  around  6,000  
tweets  are tweeted  on Twitter,  which  
corresponds  to over 350,000  tweets  sent per 
minute,  500 million  tweets  per day and 
around  200 billion  tweets  per year.  
Top  Newspapers  in India  
Rank  Newspaper  Language  City Average Issue 
Readership 
(AIR)  
2019 (in 
millions)  Owner  
1 Dainik Jagran  Hindi  Various 
cities and 
states  16.9 Jagran 
Prakashan 
Ltd. 
2 Dainik 
Bhaskar  Hindi  Various 
cities and 
states  15.6 D B Corp 
Ltd.  
3 Hindustan  Hindi  Various 
cities and 
states  13.2 HT Media 
(Hindustan 
media 
ventures ltd.)  
4 Amar Ujala  Hindi  Various 
cities and 
states  9.7 Amar Ujala 
Publications 
Ltd. 
5 Malayala 
Manorama  Malayalam  Various 
cities and 
states, Dubai  
and Bahrain  8.5 Malayala 
Manorama 
Company Ltd.  
6 Dina Thanthi  Tamil  Tamil Nadu, 
Bangalore, 
Pondicherry, 
Mumbai and 
Dubai  7.4 Founded by S. 
P. Adithanar  
7 Lokmat  Marathi  Various 
cities of 
Maharashtra 
and Goa  6.3 Lokmat 
Media 
Limited  
8 Rajasthan 
Patrika  Hindi  Various 
cities and 
states  5.9 Rajasthan 
Patrika Pvt. 
Ltd. 
9 The Times of 
India  English  Various 
cities and 
states  5.6 The Times 
Group  336 10 Mathrubhumi  Malayalam  Kerala, 
Chennai , 
Bangalore, 
Mumbai, 
New Delhi  4.8 The 
Mathrubhumi 
Group  
11 Eenadu  Telugu  Various 
cities and 
states  4.6 Ramoji Group  
12 Sakal  Marathi  Various 
cities in 
Maharashtra  4.1 Sakal Media 
Group  
13 Gujarat 
Samachar  Gujarati  7 cities in 
Gujarat and 
in Mumbai 
and New 
York City  3.3 Lok 
Prakashan 
Ltd. 
14 Sakshi  Telugu  Various 
cities in 
Andhra 
Pradesh and 
Telangana  3.2 Jagati 
Publications 
Ltd. 
15 Ananda Bazar 
Patrika  Bengali  West 
Bengal, 
Odisha, 
Jharkhan d, 
Bihar, 
Delhi, 
Mumbai and 
other cities 
in India  3.0 Ananda 
Publishers  
16 Dinamalar  Tam il  Various 
cities in 
Tamil Nadu  2.9 Dinamalar 
Publications 
Ltd. 
17 Sandesh  Gujarati  5 cities i n 
Gujarat and 
in Mumbai  2.9 The Sandesh 
Ltd. 
18 Prabhat 
Khabar  Hindi  Various 
cities in 
Jharkhand, 
Bihar, and 
West Bengal  2.9 Neutral 
Publishing 
House Ltd.  
19 Bartaman  Bengali    2.8   
20 Divya Bhaskar  Gujarati    2.7   
21 Pudhari  Marathi    2.6   
22 Vijaya 
Karnataka  Kannada  Bangalore  2.6 The Times 
Group  
23 Dinakaran  Tamil    2.5   337 24 Punya Nagari  Marathi    2.5   
25 Praja Vani  Kannada    2.1   
26 Deshabhimani  Malayalam    2.1   
27 Maharashtra 
Times  Marathi    1.7   
28 Andhra Jyothi  Telugu    1.6   
29 Punjab Kesari  Hindi  Various 
cities in 
Punjab, 
Haryana and 
Himachal 
Pradesh  1.6 The 
Hindsamachar 
Ltd. 
30 Hindustan 
Times  English  Various 
cities and 
states  1.5 HT Media  
31 Youthistaan  English  Various 
cities  and 
states  1.3 Youthistaan 
Media Ltd.  
Source: Wikipedia  
Automotive  
2 
Whe
elers 
(All) 75% Penetration  
However,  despite  India  being  the world's  largest  two-wheeler  
market,  India  still has very low penetration  level of two 
wheelers.  In India,  about  102 out of 1000  people  have two-
wheelers,  which  is less than half of penetration  levels  in 
Indonesia  (281)  and Thailand  (291).  
4-
Whe
elers 
(All) According  to the survey,  out of the 20.05  lakh households  
surveyed,  51.78%  of the households  declared  to be owners  of 
personal  vehicles,  out of which  40.35%  possess  only two-
wheelers,  4.34%  households  only four-wheelers  and 6.59%  
households  possess  both two- and four-wheelers,  the report  
states.  
Cars 
(Any  
Car) The current  car penetration  level in Indiais  20 per 1,000  
peopl e, compared  to that in the US (797 per 1,000)  and UK 
(519 per 1,000)  
Currently,  there  are an estimated  30 million  cars  in India.  
  As of 2020,  India  is the 5th largest  automobile  market  in the 
world,  surpassing  Germany  in terms  of sales.  
Source:  Statista / Magzter.com/ Adlittle.com/ Wikipedia  
 338 Ad Expenditure  Report  
Total  Media  Spends  In absolute  terms  ADEX  has degrown  
from  Rs. 67,603  crore  to Rs. 54,151  
crore,  a drop  of a whopping  Rs. 13,452  
crore,  the highest  ever drop  in one year 
in the history  of Indian  ADEX.  The last 
time Indian  ADEX  has seen any 
negative  growth  was way back in 2009,  
when  on account  of the Lehman  crisis  
Indian  ADEX  had degrown  by 9%. At 
Rs. 54,151  crore  ADEX  today  has gone  
back  to the level it had achieved  in 
2017  and if you look at only traditional  
ADEX,  then it has gone  back to the 
level that we achieved  five years  ago in 
2015.  
TV Expenditure  INR 22508  (In Crore)  
Print  expenditure  INR 11925  (In Crore)  
Radio  Expenditure  INR 1270  (In Crore)  
OOH  Expenditure  INR 1292  (In Crore)  
Cinema  INR 182 (In Crore)  
Online  Expenditure  INR 16974  (In Crore)  
Source:  Madison  Pitch Report  
  339 Consumers:  
Ecommerce  in 
India  Owing  to the increasing  internet  user 
base and favorable  market  conditions,  
India  has a lot of potential  in the e-
commerce  industry.  Growing  at an 
exponential  rate, the market  value  of 
the e-commerce  industry  in India  was 
approximately  22 billion  U.S dollars  in 
2018.  This number  was estimated  to 
reach  200 billion  U.S. dollars  by 2027.  
The Current  E-Commerce  market  size 
in India  is 84 Bn US$ 
  Estimated  to be over 500 Mn Users  
Total  Flipkart  Users  
in India  Started  in 2007,  Flipkart  has enabled  
millions  of consumers,  sellers,  
merchants,  and small  businesses  to be a 
part of India's  digital  commerce  
revolution,  with a registered  customer  
base of more  than 350 million,  offering  
over 150 million  products  across  80+ 
categories  
Total  BigBasket  
Users  in India  They  have  10 million  registered  
customers.  Big Basket  processes /1more  
than 1-3 lakh order  daily  across  25 
cities  in India.  
Swiggy/  Zomat o It said Swiggy  was doing  1.59 million  
orders  per day, and its gross  
merchandise  value  (value  of food and 
non-food orders)  in the period  was up 
69%  year on year to $984  million  on 
the back of higher  average  order  values  
compared  to pre-pandemic  levels  and 
higher  revenues  from  delivery  fees and 
advertising  sales.  
Total  Malls  in India  In 2018,  there  were  253 shopping  malls  
in the eight  major  metropolitan  areas  of 
India.  This was a stable  year-on-year 
increase  from  188 malls  in 2012.  By 340 2022  it is expected  that around  one 
hundred  malls  are completed.  
  The Biggest  Mall In India  Is One Stop 
Spot To Have  All The Fun! 
Phoenix  Market  city Mumbai  
(4,000,000  sq ft) ... 
LuLu  International  Shopping  Mall,  
Kochi  (3,900,000  sq ft) ... 
Phoenix  Market  City Pune  (3,400,00 0 
sq ft) ... 
Phoenix  Market  City Chennai  
(2,400,000  sq ft) ... 
Mantri  Square  mall Bangalore  
(1,700,000  sq ft) 
  Delhi -NCR  has the maximum  
number  of malls  compared  to any 
other  city in India  
 
Source:  Statista  and Business  Standard  
 
 
 
 
 
 341  
 
Did you know?  
 
In this section you will find all the interesting stories, anecdotes 
about many brands  and categories.   
Their interesting information and trivia.  
 
 
 
 
 
342 DID  YOU  KNOW ?  
We all have  purchased  something  from  Amazon  some  time or the 
other  but rarely  do we pay attention  to its logo;  that curved  arrow  
from  A to Z is there  for a reason.  Well,  it’s to tell everyone  that 
Amazon  sells A-to-Z products,  i.e., items  from  almost  every  
product  category.  
 
Amazon.com employees spend two days every two years working 
at the c ustomer service desk — even the CEO — in order to help 
all workers understand the customer service process.  
Amazon, also owns Zappos, ShopBop, Goodreads, and 
Audible.com  
The original name of Amazon was ‘Cadabara’ but was changed soon 
due to pronunciation issues.  
Ever noticed the Amazon logo has an arrow that points from A to 
Z? It’s to represent that the online giant sells exactly that – everything 
from A to Z.  
 
Reliance  Jio has become  India's  most  dominant  telecom  player.  It 
enjoys  immense  popularity  amon g households  and there  is at least 
one person  in the family  with a Jio connection.  Ever wondered  
about  the meaning  behind  Jio? The word  Jio is a mirror  image  of 
the word  Oil! 
 
343 
Candy  Crush  is one of the most  downloaded  games  today.  People  
obsess  over unloc king the next level in Candy  Crush.  Did you know  
that Candy  Crush  brings  in more  than $633,000  in revenue  every  
day? One's  obsession  becomes  someone  else's  income.  
 
 
Pepsi  got its name  from  pepsin,  the digestive  enzyme.  The name  
Pepsi  was chosen  because  Caleb Bradham,  the inventor  of the 
famous  drink,  believed  that his drink  was a 'healthy'  cola that 
helped  with digestion.  
 
The sports  brand  Nike  was named  after the Greek  goddesses  of 
victory.  
Nike’s famous swoosh logo cost them a measly $35 dollars. Years  
later, the design student behind it was given a diamond -encrusted 
ring in the shape of the world -renowned emblem.  
The Nike sign isn't a tick or check mark  
Originally called BRS (Blue Ribbon Sports), the company was 
renamed after Nike, the winged Greek go ddess of victory. The 
famous "swoosh" symbol that's been its logo ever since represents 
her wings and speed.  
 
 
344 The word  LEGO  is formed  from  the Danish  word  “Leg  Godt”  
which  means  'play well' in English.  In Latin,  it means  ‘putting  
together’.  
 
 
The name  VOLKSWAGEN  means  ‘Peoples  Car’ in German.  
 
The Volkswagen group owns Bentley, Bugatti, Lamborghini, Audi, 
Ducati, and Porsche.  
 
The siren  logo of STARBUCKS  is used to indulge  people  in the 
seductive  character  of the coffee.  
 
Starbucks spends more on health  care insurance for its employees 
($300 million) than on coffee beans.  
Starbucks has added an average of two stores daily since 1987.  
345 Starbucks uses over 93 million gallons of milk per year, the 
equivalent of 155 Olympic -sized swimming pools.  
 
The Twitter  bird has a name,  and this blue birdie  is called  Lary.  
 
Twitter CEO Dick Costolo used to work as an improv comedian, 
including a stint at the legendary Second City in Chicago.  
 
Twitter accounts with the most followers worldwide as of April 2022 
(in million s) 
Twitter Account  Followers in Millions  
Barackobama  131.5  
Justinbieber  114.3  
Katyperry  108.8  
Rihanna  106.0  
Christiano  98.8 
Taylorswift  90.3 
Ladygaga  84.5 
Source: NationalNews.com  
The CIA reads 5 million tweets daily.  
Twitter limited the original t weet length to 140 characters, which 
was later increased to 280. The company is now considering to 
increase it further.  
The current technical limits for accounts are: Direct Messages 
(daily): The limit is 1,000 messages sent per day. Tweets: 2,400 per 
day. 
Barack Obama (130.1m followers) with most followers In first place 
we have two -term President of the United States, Barack Obama.  
1 in 5 US adults use twitter  
Users generate 4 million likes every minute. More than 250 billion 
photos have been uploaded to  Facebook.  
346 Instagram accounts with the most followers worldwide as of March 
2022 (in millions)  
Instagram Account  Followers in Millions  
christiano  415.45  
kyliejenner  320.23  
Leomessi  313.15  
Selenagomez  304.97  
Therock  304.94  
Arianagrande  300.62  
kimkard ashian  293.95  
Source: Statista  
LinkedIn has an overall of 675 million users from all over the world, 
while 310 million of them are monthly active users. 38.6% of the 
LinkedIn traffic comes from the countries like the US with 38.6% 
and India with 16.8%.  
Coca-Cola wouldn't have existed without American 
prohibition  
Coca -Cola was originally created by John Pemberton, an injured 
Confederate Colonel, who wanted a substitute for his morphine 
addiction. He called it French Wine Coca, a nerve tonic. When 
Atlanta pa ssed prohibition legislation in 1886, Pemberton had to 
redo the formula, basically to make a non -alcoholic version of his 
tonic. He named the drink Coca -Cola, the drink we all know and 
love.  
 
Coca -Cola  has around  3500  beverages  and 500 products  under  its 
catalog.  
347 Coca Cola spends an average of $4 billion on branding each year. It 
pays off, though – 94% of the world’s population recognize the red 
and white logo.  
More than 8,000 glasses of Coca -Cola are knocked back every 
second.  
In 2000, Coca -Cola launched a stealth campaign against water called 
"Just say no to H2O."  
 
The McDonald's logo is based on the shape of the stores 
and not the word McDonald's  
 
The McDonald's logo is one of the most widely recognized in the 
world, probably only behind Coca -Cola. 'M' for McDonald's and 
all that. But the truth is, the logo wasn't inspired by the name of the 
company. The original store's architecture had golden arches on 
either side. The owner wanted it so that people could recognize a 
McDonald's outlet from a distance. So when they were redesigning 
the logo, they decided to take inspiration from the restaurant's 
iconic architecture.  
McDonald’s  feeds  more  than 68 million  people  every  day. This 
figure  outnumbers  the United  Kingdom's  population.  
McDonald’s originally sold h ot dogs not burgers.  
One in eight American workers have been employed by 
McDonald's.  
Mercedes'  is named  after Mercedes  Jellinek,  the daughter  of 
businessman  Emil  Jellinek  who bought  Daimler  vehicles  (the 
parent  company  of Mercedes).  
348  
How  a lucky  weekend  in Vegas  saved  FedEx?  
In the early  1970s,  just a few years  after FedEx  was formed,  the 
fledgling  company  was already  in dire straits,  losing  up to a million  
dollars  a month,  At one point,  it looked  like they wouldn't  be able 
to meet  their financial  commitme nts. While  waiting  for a flight,  
Fred Smith,  the founder  of the company,  impulsively  hopped  on a 
plane  to Las Vegas,  where  he won $27,000  playing  Blackjack.  The 
company  was saved  and Fred Smith  had one helluva  story  to tell. 
 
Lamborghini  sports  cars  exist  because  of Enzo  Ferrari's  
pride  
Lamborghini  was originally  a tractor  manufacturer.  The owner,  
Ferruccio  Lamborghini,  had an interest  in luxury  automobiles,  
especially  Ferraris.  While  doing  a routine  check,  Lamborghini  
found  that the clutch  in his Ferrari  was broken  and he discovered  
that the car used the same  clutch  as his tractors.  When  he asked  
Enzo  Ferrari  for a better  replacement,  Ferrari  dismissed  him saying  
he was a tractor  maker  and did not know  anything  about  race cars. 
I guess  we all know  how that turned  out. 
349  
Lamborghini is synonymous with swanky supercars yet it started out 
making farm equipment.  
BMW  became  a car manufacturer  because  Germany  lost 
World  War  I 
BMW  originally  started  off as an aircraft  manufacturing  company.  
After  Germany's  defeat  in WWI,  all airplane  manufacturing  
companies  had to cease  production,  one of the many  terms  of the 
Versailles  Armistice  Treaty.  With  the company  facing  bankruptcy,  
BMW  shifted  to motorcycle  production,  soon followed  by the 
manufacture  of cars in 1928.  Thei r current  logo is a tribute  to their 
aviation  heritage.  
 
 
 
 
350 The Apple  logo isn't a tribute  to Alan Turring  
Although  it would  have been  apt, the truth  is far from  poetic.  The 
most  accepted  theory  is that Steve  Jobs's   favourite  fruit was the 
apple.  Which  explains  why their first computer  was named  after 
his favourite  McIntosh  apple.   
This was the first version  of the Apple  logo.  
 
Apple today is one of the most cash -rich companies in the world. 
In fact, Apple has more cash in hand than the US treasury!  
Every iPhone Ad ever published has the time set to 9:41. This is 
the time that Steve Jobs actually officially launched the iPhone!  
 
The iPad 2 would cost $1,140 if it were made in America.  
Everything you say to Siri is sent to Apple, analyzed, and stored.  
The retina scan technology of your Apple product is not made by 
Apple but manufactured by Samsung.  
Apple had a third founder, Ronald Wayne, who had a 10% stake in 
the company. He left the fledgling company after 12 days and 
forfeited his shares for $2,300 (a bout $9,600 today).  
351 UPS  was founded  by 2 kids  with  a cycle  and $100  
United  Parcel  Service,  or UPS as it's better  known,  had extremely  
humble  beginnings.  In 1907,  19 year-old James  Casey  founded  the 
company  with $100  borrowed  from  a friend  and a bicycle.  The 
teenager  also served  as president,  CEO  and chairman.  Today,  the 
company  is the world's  largest  package  delivery  company.  Not bad 
for a kid with a cycle.  
 
Fanta  was created  in Nazi  Germany  
During  the height  of World  War II, Nazi  Germany  was subject  to 
a number  of trade  embargoes.  Because  of the lack of raw materials  
and ingredients,  the head  of Coca -Cola  Deutschland.  Max Keith,  
decided  to create  a new drink  for the German  market,  using  
whatever  they had - "the leftovers  of leftovers".  The name  comes  
from  the German  word  for imagination  (Fantasie),  and they had to 
stretch  every  bit of it to make  this drink.  
 
 
352 Puma  and Adidas  exist  because  of a family  feud  
In the 1920s,  brothers  Rudolf  and Adolf  "Adi"  Dassler  were  
running  a successful  shoe manufacturing  company,  Dassler  
Brothers  Shoe  Factory.  However,  during  World  War II a growing  
rift between  the two widened  due to a misunderstanding.  Later,  
after the culmination  of the war, Rudolf  was picked  up by 
American  soldiers  and accused  of being  a member  of the Waff en 
SS (he wasn't).  Rudolf  was certain  it was his own brother  who 
turned  him in. The two split, with Rudolf  forming  Ruda  (later  
renamed  to Puma),  while  Adi formed  Adidas.  The two never  
reconciled  and are buried  in the same  cemetery,  but as far away  
from  each other  as possible.  
      
PUMA is the third largest sportswear manufacturer in the world. 
The company was founded in 1948 by Rudolf Dassler. It came in 
to Existence due to relationship between the two brothers 
deteriorated and Split one Company into Two . 
Turn over for some more general trivia   
353 Automotive Trivia  
The trademark red color wasn’t Ferrari's first preference.  
 
The "new car smell" is composed of over 50 volatile organic 
compounds.  
 
Banking and Finance Trivia  
Do you know how many ATMs are there i n India?  
The number of ATMs across the country stood at over 2.13 lakh 
by the end of September 2021, and over 47 per cent of these are in 
rural and semi -urban areas, the Finance Ministry said in 
Parliament on Monday.  
According to the RBI data, scheduled c ommercial banks have 
installed 2,13,145 ATMs (automated teller machines) up to 
September 2021.  
In addition to this, 27,837 White Label ATMs (WLA) were also 
installed by WLA operators up to September 2021  
Source: Economic Times  
 
Cigarettes & Alcohol Trivia  
The actor who played the role of 'Marlboro man' in the 
advertisements for Marlboro cigarettes died due to lung cancer, 
something predictable.  
 
Jack Daniel’s employees get a bottle of whiskey every month to 
coincide with payday.  
 
Pulling the perfect pint o f Guinness takes time and skill – 119.5 
seconds while pouring at an inclination of 45 degrees, to be exact.  
 
John Walker, the man behind the world -famous Johnnie Walker 
whisky, was a teetotaler.  
 
To make a perfect pint of Guinness, pour it at an inclinati on of 45 
degrees for 119.5 seconds precisely.  
 354 CARLSBERG beer used the Swastika symbol in its logo till 1940 
to demonstrate ancient culture and heritage.  
 
The key ingredient behind the popular ABSOLUT VODKA is 
two pounds of winter wheat. Winter wheat is us ed because of its 
high starch content. Also, the plant is very sturdy and does not 
require the use of pesticides and fertilizers. ABSOLUT VODKA 
does not contain any genetically modified ingredients.  
 
 
Education Sector Trivia  
India has over 45,000 degree co lleges, over 1000 universities and 
around 1500 top institutes.  
Source: IndiaToday.in  
 
 
Fashion Trivia  
Napoleon's wife hired a person named LOUIS VUITTON to 
make box covers and pack her luggage.  
 
Levi Strauss was an aristocrat. He didn’t wear his brand of d enim 
pants because they were meant for the labor class.  
 
FMCG Facts  
Dettol is the largest selling antiseptic brand in the world and is 
present in 124 countries.  
 - It is estimated that Dettol is used 2 billion times each day!  
FMCG Accounts for 38% of the t otal Advertising spends, this is 
followed by Automobiles @ 9%, E -Commerce @ 9%, Education 
@ 8%, Telecom @ 5%  
 
 
Food and Beverages Trivia  
Baskin Robbins once made ketchup -flavoured ice -cream.  
 
Nestle wowed its Japanese market when it launched green tea -
flavoured Kit Kats.  355  
BEN & JERRY, famous for its ice -creams, originally planned to be 
a bagels company.  
 
Take a closer look at Toblerone’s logo and you’ll see a hidden bear, 
a nod to its home of Bern, otherwise known as The City of Bears.  
 
One jar of the sweet  spread Nutella is sold every 2.5 seconds.  
 
Taco Bell has proved to be a huge flop in Mexico, as Mexicans 
were confused by the Americanization of their traditional cuisine.  
 
Ever wondered what the letters in M&M’s chocolate stand for? 
They’re the initials of the inventors, Mars and Murrie.  
 
Raspberry bellini crisp, anyone? That was the bizarre offering from 
British crisp company, Tyrrells.  
 
Another one originally set up by brothers is Domino’s Pizza. After 
8 months in the trade, one of the siblings decided to swap his slice 
of the action for a used Volkswagen Beetle  
 
Cereal is the second -largest advertiser on television today, behind 
automobiles.  
 
A customer in a wheelchair successfully sued Chipotle in 2010, 
claiming its tall ordering counter denied him fro m seeing the 
"Chipotle experience."  
 
 
General Trivia  
The Guinness book of world Records has declared Tupperware as 
one of the greatest inventions of the 20th century.  
Gambling generates more revenue than movies, spectator sports, 
theme parks, cruise ships,  and recorded music combined.  
 
Burj Khalifa is the tallest building in the world and has been 
constructed by Samsung.  
 356 Technology may have moved on but the Rubik’s Cube remains the 
best-selling toy of all time.  
 
BP (British Petroleum) once forked out a who pping $211,000,000 
on their logo redesign.  
 
If Bill Gates were a country, he'd be the 37th richest on earth.  
 
Warner Music owns the copyrights to "Happy Birthday," so it's 
technically owed royalties every time you sing it to someone on 
their big day.  
 
Robe rt Chesebrough, the inventor of Vaseline, ate a spoonful of 
the stuff every morning.  
 
Seventy percent of small businesses are owned and operated by a 
single person.  
 
Changing the U.S. $1 bill for a $1 coin would save the U.S. $4.4 
billion in 30 years.  
 
Sixty-four percent of consumers have made a purchase decision 
based on social media content.  
 
If you have $10 in your pocket and no debts, you are wealthier than 
25% of Americans.  
 
The original name of the famous toy BARBIE is Barbara Millicent 
Roberts.  
 
Tom' s of Maine is owned by Colgate -Palmolive.  
 
The "Mayfair" filter in Instagram generates the most likes.  
 
More than 80 million "mouse ears" have been sold at Walt 
Disney World to date.  
 
 
 
 357 Media and Entertainment Trivia  
In 1999 Netflix started offering subsc ription -based DVD service. 
Even now around 2.7 Million people subscribe to Netflix’s DVD 
service.  
 
Disney – Disney is one of the most loved brands in the world and 
like any other brand, has a host of interesting stories behind it. 
Some of them range from the voiceover artistes of Mickey and 
Minnie Mouse being married to each other real life, there have 
actually been three babies born in Disneyland, the list is never -
ending.  
 
Walt Disney held the patent for Technicolor for two years, making 
him the only ani mator allowed to make colour animated films!  
 
Marvel Comics once owned the rights to the word "zombie."  
 
Hindi Mainline General Entertainment Channels/ Hindi Second 
line General Entertainment Channels account for 5000 -6000 
Crores followed by Sports @ INR 3 500-4000 Crores, News @ INR 
2200 -2700 Crores  
Capitol Cinema is one of the Mumbai's oldest theatres. Located 
just opposite Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus, it was built 
by Kunvarji Paghtivala. It is a Heritage grade II Victorian structure 
constructed i n 1879.  
 
 
Newspaper Trivia  
The total number of registered publications, as on 31st March, 
2018: 1,18,239  
Newspaper category: 17,573  
Periodicals category: 1,00,666  
The largest number of publications registered in any Indian 
language (Hindi): 47,989  
The seco nd largest number of newspapers & periodicals registered 
in any language (English): 14,626  358 The state with the largest number of registered publications (Uttar 
Pradesh): 17,992  
The state with the second largest number of registered publications 
(Maharashtra ): 16,241  
The total circulation of publications during 2017 -18: 43,00,66,629  
Hindi publications: 19,56,21,990  
English publications: 5,34,53,564  
Urdu publications: 2,52,89,731  
The largest number of publications that submitted Annual 
Statements in any Indian  language (Hindi): 15,327  
The second largest number of publications that submitted Annual 
Statements in any language (English): 2,393  
The largest circulated Daily: Ananda Bazar Patrika, Bengali, 
Kolkata: 11,18,440  
The second largest circulated Daily: Hindu stan Times, English, 
Delhi: 9,57,176  
The largest circulated Hindi Daily: Punjab Kesari, Jallandar: 
7,18,563  
The largest circulated multi -edition Daily: Dainik Bhaskar, Hindi 
(58 editions): 51,19,720  
The second largest circulated multi -edition Daily: The Ti mes of 
India, English (34 editions): 43,34,769  
The largest circulated periodical: Sunday Times of India, 
English/Weekly edition, Mumbai: 8,18,768  
The largest circulated periodical in Malayalam: Vanitha, 
Malayalam/Fortnightly edition, Kottayam: 5,84,261  
Source: Office of Registrar of Newspapers for India  
 
Mumbai Samachar is Asias oldest Newspaper. It was first 
introduced in the year 1822 on a three small quarto sheets. 10 
inches by 8 inches, and a half sheet supplement in all containing 14 
pages of printed m atter 359 Technology Trivia  
Google was initially called BackRub. The research project Sergey 
Brin and Larry Page undertook at Stanford University was termed 
BackRub but in 1997, they renamed their search engine to Google 
because it was a play on the mathematic al expression for the 
number 1 followed by 100 zeros.  
 
The famous mobile behemoth Nokia started its journey as a wood 
mill in the Nokia city of Finland. The brand then entered into the 
rubber products segment.  
 
Five IBM employees have won the Nobel prize f or their excellent 
performance in the field of technology to date.  
 
The name Adobe came from the river Adobe Creek that ran 
behind the house of Adobe Systems Inc's co -founder John 
Warnock.  
 
Yahoo is an acronym of ‘Yet Another Hierarchical Officious 
Oracle’ . 
 
Samsung soared to fame after it swapped dried fish and groceries 
for smartphones and supersized TVs.  
 
More people in the world have mobile phones than toilets.  
 
Samsung accounts for 20% of Korea's gross domestic product.  
 
YouTube broadcasts about one -third of the U.S.'s multimedia 
entertainment.  
 
The average smartphone user checks Facebook 14 times a day.  
 
The Asia Tiger Funds' stock symbol is GRR.  
 
Microsoft Corporation acquired SKYPE for the US $8 million in 
2011.  
 
eBay has 25 million sellers and 157 m illion registered buyers. The 
number keeps increasing every second.  360 Adding /4 to the end of Facebook's URL will take you to Mark 
Zuckerberg's profile.  
 
Facebook is primarily blue because Mark Zuckerberg suffers from 
red-green color blindness.  
 
Industry sou rces said Amazon and Flipkart average 2 -2.5 million 
orders per day  
Both platforms (Swiggy and Zomato) typically clock over 1.5 
million orders a day. While Zomato's previous record was over 
4,000 orders per minute, Swiggy clocked over 5,000 orders per 
minut e last New Year's Eve. Both platforms clocked over 2 million 
orders each, compared to the 1.3 -1.5 million they usually clock in 
a day.  
JioMart and BigBasket are doing orders in the range of 500,000 
and nearly 300,000 each per day according to retail indust ry 
sources. Experts say that the order value per transaction is low for 
the two platforms at Rs 500 -600 
 
Retail Trivia  
The Ikea store layouts are designed like mazes so that customers 
who walk in, get lost and land up getting more time in the stores.  
 
Each  week nearly one -third of the U.S. population visits a 
Walmart.  
 
Victoria's Secret is the most followed retailer on Instagram.  
 
Some Google Trivia  
Although Google does not share exact numbers, as reported by 
SEOTribunal.com, Google handles 3.8 million sear ches per 
minute on average across the globe. That comes out to 228 million 
searches per hour, 5.6 billion searches per day, or 2 Trn searches 
per year!  
Summary: Google Search Statistics 2021  
 Google has been visited 62.19 billion times this year.  361  Google has  92.18 percent of the market share as of July 
2019.  
 Google processes over 3.5 billion searches per day.  
 More than one billion questions have been asked on Google 
Lens.  
 63 percent of Google’s US organic search traffic originated 
from mobile devices.  
 Facebo ok was the most searched keyword on Google.  
 84 percent of respondents use Google 3+ times a day or 
more often.  
 46 percent of product searches begin on Google.  
 90 percent of survey respondents said they were likely to 
click on the first set of results.  
 Organic search produced 23 percent of all site visits.  
 Google’s first doodle was a Burning Man stick figure.  
 Google is a play on the word “googol.”  
 Google’s first office was a rented garage.  
 A former caterer for The Grateful Dead was Google’s first 
chef 
 Googl e New York began at a Starbucks on 86th Street.  
 Gmail was launched on April Fool’s Day, no joke.  
 Googlers ride colorful “gBikes” around the Googleplex.  
 Google negotiated its acquisition of YouTube’s at Denny’s 
over mozzarella sticks.  
 Google has had a pet -friendly office since the beginning.  
 When it went public, Google was valued as much as General 
Motors.  
 As of February 2022, Google and Alphabet had more than 
70 offices in over 50 countries around the globe, including 
Germany, the Czech Republic, Finland, C anada, Mexico, 
Turkey, and New Zealand.  
Source: oberlo.in/ Entrepreneur.com   362 Sources  
GLOSSARY OF MARKETING TERMS  
MARKETING INSIGHTS & DID YOU KNOW  
 
1. Christine Ammer and Dean S. Ammer. Dictionary of Business and 
Economics, (New York: Free Press,  1984).  
2. Ayer Glossary of Advertising and Related Terms, (Philadelphia: Ayer Press,  
1972).  
3. Carl E. Block and Kenneth J. Roering. Essentials of Consumer Behavior, 
(Hinsdale, IL: Dryden,  1979).  
4. Thomas V. Bonoma and Benson P. Shapiro. Segmenting the Industrial 
Market, (Lexington, MA: Heath,  1983).  
5. Louis E. Boone and David L. Kurtz. Contemporary Marketing, (Hinsdale, 
IL: Dryden,  1980).  
6. Robert D. Buzzell, Robert E. M. Nourse, John B. Matthews, Jr., and 
Theodore Levitt. Marketing: A Contemporary Analysis, (New York: 
McGraw Hil l, 1972).  
6a.  Census of Manufactures, 1982.  
7. Committee on Definitions of the American Marketing Association. 
Marketing Definitions, (Chicago: American Marketing Association, 
1963).  
8. E. Raymond Corey. Industrial Marketing: Cases and Concepts, (Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall,  1976).  
9. E. Raymond Corey. Procurement Management: Strategy, Organization, and 
Decision Making, (Boston: CBI Publishing,  1978).  
9a.  George S. Day. Analysis for Strategic Market Decisions, (St. Paul, MN: 
West, 1986).  
10. The Discount Mer chandiser, June 1987.  
lOa. 
 Cat
herine L. Hayden, The Handbook of Strategic Expertise (New York: Free 
Press, 1986).  
11. James L. Heskett. Marketing, (New York: Macmillan, 1976).  
12. Barbara Bund Jackson. Computer Models in Management, (Homewood, 
IL: Richard D. Irwi n, 1979).  
12a.  Paul L. Joskow and Alvin K. Klevorick. "A Framework for Analyzing 
Predatory Pricing Policy," Yale Law Journal 89, No. 2, 1979.  363 13. Philip Kotler. Marketing Management, (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice 
Hall, 1980). 13a.  Philip  Kotler.  Principle s of Marketing,  (Englewood  
Cliffs,  N.J.: Prentice Hall,  1986).  
14. Murray Krieger. The Complete Dictionary of Buying and Merchandising, 
(New York: National Retail Merchants Association,  1980).  
15. Donald R. Lehmann. Market Research and Analysis, (Homewood, IL: 
Richard D. Irwin,  1979).  
16. Theodore Levitt. Industrial Purchasing Behavior: A Study of Communications 
Effects, (Boston: Division of Research, Harvard University Graduate 
School of Business Administration,  1965).  
16a.  Macmillan Dictionary of Modern Economics (New York: Macmillan, 1986).  
17. Maurice I. Mandell. Advertising, (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 
1974). 17a. Marketing News, March  1985.  
18. E. Jerome McCarthy and William D. Perreault, Jr. Basic Marketing, 
(Homewood IL: Richard D. Irwin,  1981).  
19. Erwin Esser  Nemmers. Dictionary of Economics and Business, (Totowa, 
N.J.: Littlefield, Adams,  1976).  
20. Sidney A. Packard, Arthur A. Winters, and Nathan Axelrod. Fashion 
Buying and Merchandising, (New York: Fairchild,  1980).  
20a.  David J. Reibstein. Marketing: Concepts , Strategies, and Decisions, 
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1985).  
21. Benson P. Shapiro. "Improve Distribution with Your Promotional 
Mix," Harvard Business Review 55, No. 2 (1977).  
21a.  Louis W. Stern and Adel I. El Ansary. Marketing Channels, (Engl ewood 
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1982).  
22. Hirotaka Takeuchi. "A Note on Retailing Institutions," (Boston: HBS 
Case No.  9 580 042).  
23. "Test Marketing Sharpens the Focus," Sales and Marketing Management, 
March 16, 1981. 23a. The Food Marketing Industry Speaks, 1986.  
24. Joe L. Welch. Marketing Law. (Tulsa, OK: Petroleum Publishing,  
1980).  
25. Kirkland A. Wilcox and Joseph G. San Miguel. Introduction to Financial 
Accounting, (New York: Harper & Row, 1980).  
26. MRUC.net  
27. Google.com  
28. Wikipedia  
29. Canva.com (images)  
30. Intellicraftresearch.com  364 31. Stepinoff -crosier.com  
32. Moorelegaltechnology.com  
33. Saleshacker.com  
34. Meltwater.com  
35. Clockwork.UK  
36. Rockmyimage.com  
37. IndiaToday.in  
38. EconomicTimes.in  
39. Statista.com  
40. Entrepreneur.com  
41. Worldometers.info  
 
View publication stats