                                       
                                                                                                Executive Summary  
© 2009 Demand Metric Research Corporation  
  
Assess Advertising Concept Effectiveness  
 
While many advertisements have a chance to win graphic design competitions, most 
do not deliver on the simple, fundamental, characteristics required for effective 
marketing communications. Read this summary to learn  the key characteristics of a 
solid advertising concept, and download our Advertisement Evaluation Matrix . 
 
 
What Makes an Advertising Concept Effective?  
 
• Engaging  - does the advertisement stop the reader and engage them to 
continue spending their time to learn more about your offer?  
 
• Credibility  - are your claims believable? Can they be backed up?  
 
• Impression  - will the ad be remembered? Does it create a lasti ng 
impression? How likely is this ad to be recalled in a future survey?  
 
• Action -Oriented  - does the ad provide a strong, clear, call -to-action?  
 
• Significance - does the ad promote features & benefits the audience will care 
about? Is there any way to make t he message more relevant?  
 
• Integration  - is this advertisement part of an integrated, multi -channel 
campaign that accurately reflects your brand & core messaging?  
 
• Branding  - how well does this ad promote your key brand attributes?  
 
 
Action Plan:  
 
1. Establish  your Brand  - i f  y o u r  b r a n d  i s  n o t  i n t e g r a t e d ,  u p -to-date, or just 
n e e d s  a  t u n e  u p ,  u s e  o u r  Branding Selection Tool  and Brand Scorecard  to get 
set clear goals, objecti ves, targets, & initiatives for your brand this year.  
 
2. Position Each Product/Service  - use our Product Positioning Tool  and/or 
Feature, Advantage, Benefit Tool  to define your core messaging.  
 
3. Assess Each Ad Concept  - use our Advertisement Evaluation Matrix  to 
evaluate the effectiveness of each proposed advertising concept. Use this tool 
to identify where each advertisement can be improved before production.  
 
4. Make the Right Decision  - re-assess improvements & select the be st 
advertisement for the campaign.  
 