Unforgettable influence.
Unforgivably cheap.
$2.4 mil.in earned media 
from an ad and billboard that never ran.
The cover of 
The New York Times
 by throwing a small freak show.
A new liquor category
 
created without a drop of advertising.
Your own influencer channel, 
created from zip, in 9 months.
Supermodels in a supermarket
 
that stop conversation on
The View
.
This is awareness without advertising.
Figure 1:Campaigns worth $3.5 mil. in free buzz.Why brave brands are buzzy.
As the owner of a small company or a brand manager in a big company you don’t
need to be told that advertising has changed.
You see Nike and Gillette on one side and Donald Trump on the other getting
beaucoup press by pissing people off. Or so it seems.
As this book will show you, they planned it that way. And now you can too without
offending anyone if you’re willing to be brave.
After all, the world is only going to get noisier. That’s why this book will help you
solve the basic mother of all marketing challenges.
Getting the word out. 
With a buzz.
Published 2019 by KHP Corporation. All rights reserved. Published in arrangement with the author and ABDigital Corporation.
Denver, CO and Minneapolis, MN.Prologue. Advertising vs. Advertising.
In the 20
th
 century “advertising” and advertising campaigns were synonymous. While the
occasional poster plastered somewhere might generate awareness for free you generally had to
pay another business to make your creative output work as “advertising.”
The internet changed all this.
Since the internet’s inception it has always been possible to create stuff and disseminate it online
without paying anyone but an ISP (in the days before coffee shops). As the internet evolved this
opportunity declined while remaining less expensive than paying legacy networks and
publishers.
Legacy media providers remained expensive till they were obsoleted or acquired from 2005-
2012.
[1]
 Yet, ironically, our new media overlords have been acting exactly like the traditional
media companies they replaced. They would have you believe that campaign content will never
become “advertising” till you pay them to run it for you. Without their distribution channel, it’s
all dreck
While they disdain the term “advertising” certain giant marketing automation companies are just
as arrogant —they say you can’t get your message in front of an audience without their software.
[2]
  At least their model requires real stuff, unlike content farms and fraudsters.
But this is all still basically bullshit.
Content becomes “advertising” when someone else notices it and acts upon it. Today you don’t
need to pay an intermediary to make that happen.
This means no PPC, no retargeting, no one charging you for the privilege of a faster ride on the
information highway.
[3]
 That’s because marketing, digital or traditional, is no longer about
advertising.
It’s about advocacy.
And advocates will work for free.One. 
What Brand Advocacy Is.
End Goal: 
Understand brand advocacy and the hybrid
approach.
Brand advocacy
 
is the process of getting 
influential people and organizations 
to talk about
your brand through 
omnichannel media.
 
It also leverages what is called “
inbound marketing
”
to nurture your advocates and your customers.
A search for “brand advocacy” will retrieve a statement like the one below. This definition
inaccurately implies that brand advocacy is merely an online phenomenon, but it is still a very
workable explanation.
Let’s take a closer look at each of brand advocacy’s components:
Influential people use media channels
 to discuss your brand. Unlike straight PR, they usually
will reference an advertising campaign that we design for you but do not 
pay
 an outside
organization like Facebook or TV network to distribute.
Inbound marketing
 is not the first step in brand advocacy but instead the final step that allows
you to continually refine your marketing materials and fulfill the needs and wants of your of
brand advocates.
As you read our book we will spend a great deal of time discussing the pros and cons of the
media mix. Without understanding media, its harder to understand how brand advocacy works.Figure 2: Typical campaign vs. brand advocacy reach and frequency.
Why Brand Advocacy is Free
While nothing is absolutely guaranteed about brand advocacy, it can increase the “reach and
frequency” of your message (measured in Gross Rating Points GRPs) very fast and 
often for free.
Brand advocacy generates free awareness because it is driven by shareable content that is 
freely
distributed.
 Creating the content, however, requires hiring professionals to get you started
You will also need to work at keeping your advocacy alive and your advocates happy which
once again means paying a few people to help you out.
Let’s put this into perspective however. We still live in a world where brand A spends $130
million on advertising while brand B relies on free media, a few ads, and a hairdresser.
We all know how this story ends.Figure 3: A world-class example of the need for brand advocacy.Separating the Advocacy From the Advocate.
We don’t believe you should spend all your money on expensive software to help you identify
advocates or consultants that can’t write or draw either.
At our agency, we’ve tried pretty much every new piece of software and idea in brand advocacy
since 2010. It’s all been great to have, but not all that helpful over time. Or maybe we’ve been
too embarrassed to recommend tools like “Ambassify” and “Smarp”.
The real reason current approaches to brand advocacy fail is because they don’t separate the
advocate from the advocacy. While you can point to cave drawings to prove the lasting power of
advocacy, we prefer to share the insights of Canadian media professor Marshall McLuhan.
In his seminal work, 
Understanding Media
, he coined two famous terms. “The Global Village”
to describe how TV was making the world a smaller place and “the media is the message” to
describe how it altered human behavior.
School teachers in McLuhan’s time will tell you homework excuses skyrocketed after the price
of TVs dropped low enough for everyone to own one.
The funny thing about media, however, is that it can be manipulated to amplify the heck out of a
message. Which is why the advocacy itself—or the message – is still more important than the
advocate who delivers it. Advocates merely heighten the message by setting it free to take its
own course.
McLuhan lived that belief. When his book “The Medium is the Message” (a follow up to
Understanding Media
) came back from the printer with “Message” spelled as “Massage” he ran
with it!
McLuhan’s phrase had become so widely accepted by the media pundits, zeitgeist surfers and
counterculture heroes of the time, he could play with his creation. Had Professor McLuhan seen
himself (advocate) instead of his message (advocacy) as important we would 
not be talking about
him in 2019.
That is why we spend most of our time at the beginning of a campaign analyzing the range of
mediums for your message-from the current fads of paid advocates and inbound marketing-to the
time-tested hybrid approach of Paid, Earned, Shared and Owned media or PESO.Figure 4: A comic strip that showcases McLuhan's playful side. While ideas once took years to take hold in the early days
of mass media, today they can take seconds to spread. This applies to good ideas as well as bad ones. But what else is new?Identifying Advocates & Spreading The Word
Figure 5: A chart identifying advocate archetypes. [
See page 51
]
While there are software programs that can help you identify advocates, we find it more useful to
identify “personas” that are unique to your market. We spend a great deal of time on this in our
focus process (see next chapter).
Additionally, like all agencies that engage in public relations and advertising we maintain our
own CRM system for advocates and media that track preferences, sharing profiles, spheres of
influence and the like.Figure 6: A popular figure on Instagram (circa 2019).
If you have a faddish product or fatuous audience, we will often suggest buying influencer
audiences on tapinfluence.com and/or aspireIQ. Tapinfluence can link you to 50,000+
influencers and performance data on people like Sage Goldnik (above) who will lose his
influence once he overeats, loses his hair or is exposed by his friends in High School. But
seriously, the world has always had paid influencers like Sage who endorse stuff.
In certain fashion circles, these influencers, who work constantly to update their social feeds,
blogs, and promotions have supplanted the old guard.
Paid influencers have also emerged in business like Tim Ferrriss 
(“The Four Hour Work
Week”and a record label) Casey Neistat (Video Blogger) among others. While they are not the
new 
Wall Street Journal
, they have impact.
On that note, any conference speaker could become an influencer that promotes you for pay,
potentially.
In business, however, you will get more value fom non-paid influencers that maintain a strong
media infrastructure to spread the word such as those found in event marketing, wine and spirits,travel destinations, general b to b, and sports.
The most effective brand advocacy is still generated by the editors, analysts and opinion makers
paid by media companies to spread the word. They are effective because they are credible.
True buzz travels along corridors of trust that networks of editors, analysts and opinion makers
have created over time. These corridors will remain concrete and viable while paid influencers
come and go.
Campaign-Driven Media
Buzz, like any living thing, can die off quickly if it is not cultivated. That is why you will need to
feed your advocates with “buckets” of campaign-driven tactics and content. While some tactics
can be replaced by digital only tactics, a bucket of campaign tactics should include both online
and offline media.
In a Jeb-Bush world, massive media buys will always remain a predictable route to awareness.
And there’s always a $1 million post from Kylie Jenner which is no different than having Joe
DiMaggio sell Mr. Coffee (which he did years ago.)
But this is not the real world, which is why new marketing tactics have emerged as worthy
competitors to the old. Paid Influencers, particularly those with niche audiences or “nano”
influencers, are a viable alternative to paid mass media if their audiences match up with your
brand’s attributes.
Why Awareness Comes First
It’s hard to go into business if you can’t get the word out. Generating awareness is at the top of
any marketing funnel, yet it’s not a top priority for many popular marketing strategies. Here are
the three most popular in 2019:
Inbound Marketing
 is the process of creating a “customer journey” through precisely targeted
articles and blog posts so compelling that customers literally find you. This is a “build it and they
will come approach” which works with money, patience and hope.
Product Market Fit
 tactics involve creating a minimum viable product that you test and re-test
until you can satisfy market needs so insatiable that the product sells itself. It works with enough
big data. It’s also what Steve Jobs could do in his head.
Influencer Marketing
 puts awareness first. We just don’t like it when it’s forced or inauthentic.
Think posts from LinkedIn “Influencers.”
While there are myriad marketing tactics available to you today, it just feels like awareness
remains delegated to paying the famous or the FAANGs enormous sums to run marginal
campaigns that follow you to yoga practice.
And no, you are not imagining that paid media follows you around; it is a very popular technique
called ad or content “re-targeting.” This involves tracking bots that essentially pick up on your
digital footprint once you visit a site and invade your space all over the web till the re-targeting
contract runs out.
Or you relent and buy something. Unless it is a car. Then it will never stop.PESO. The Hybrid Approach.
We’re a bit harsh about other marketing tactics because they are marketed as all-or-nothing
approaches. Brand Advocacy, on the other hand, is a hybrid that borrows the best ideas from all
approaches efficiently and effectively.
Case studies abound on how the use of both “inbound” content and “outbound” brand advocacy
can increase return on your marketing investment within a few short months while 
reducing 
your
overall spend.
While marketing savvy businesses and brands today use some form of “hybrid” advocacy they
settle for a Prius-caliber media mix when they could be driving a Porsche for a few pennies
more. We call this hybrid the PESO paradigm.
PESO stands for “paid, earned, shared, owned,” media
 
and segments all marketing channels
at a brand’s disposal into discrete groups. It allows us to look at our efforts through any one of
these four lenses to see if there are opportunities to integrate additional channels into our new or
existing programs.
By organizing brand advocacy around this bigger picture, you can more fully exploit
opportunities and balance out strengths and weaknesses. The model also allows us to make sense
of the channels where we are making our current investments, promote winners and eliminate the
losers.
Paid Media 
is most commonly associated with large media buys and PPC advertising. As we
mentioned previously, paid influencers should also be considered a paid channel.
Earned Media 
is the primary currency of brand advocacy. A highly innovative way to generate
earned media is by creating advertising content that journalists and opinion makers report on. A
newsworthy advertising campaign is a classic example of this approach.
Shared Media 
is commonly associated with social media postings on channels like Instagram,
Snapchat, Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, etc. It is very similar to earned media in most respects.
Owned Media 
is a true growth area for media. This is the stuff you create yourself with help
from professionals. This includes anything you can think of—from a magazine to a full-length
movie.Figure 7 The PESO Model.
The above graph shows the breadth and depth of the PESO model. Because it is an
“Omnichannel” model, it incorporates both offline and online media and includes opportunities
like co-branding, paid partnerships, affiliate marketing, “native advertising” and brand
ambassadors.
A advertising campaign that can support each of the circles or “buckets” in the model remains
the most effective way to generate awareness without paying the FAANGs.Figure 8: The Pros and Cons of PESO
Campaign-driven brand advocacy offers the pros of paid media with 
very few cons. In fact, we’lleven split hairs with our own PESO chart by calling out that owned media 
can 
find an audience
quickly or that earned media 
can 
be scaled.
Because brand advocacy continually surprises us. And it will surprise you too.
This work to launch tourism for the quaint lakeside destination of Excelsior, MN was our first ever brand advocacy campaign.
Instead of positioning the spot as bucolic and idyllic we targeted the 
growing zeitgeist at the time that Starbucks and chains were
making everywhere seem like everywhere else.
Resultant press reached into the $ millions with coverage on ABC, NBC, CNN, FOX, Newsweek and a documentary on the town
that aired on Canadian Public Television. The campaign was voted “Business Story of the Year” by 
The Business Journals
 and
took the lead in a round up in TIME-magazine which mentioned our campaign alongside a $25 million campaign for Las Vega
s
.What Brand Advocacy is Not
Brand advocacy is different than “word-of-mouth” because it requires you to build a stable of
content that is brand driven.  This may include, but is not limited to, a branded ID, 30 second
video spots, short films, a soundtrack, banner ads, text only ads, whitepapers and an avalanche of
pictures, memes and posts.
Brand advocacy is also focused on leveraging “words” that already exist—or what we call
leveraging other people’s audiences (LOPA).
Signs of A Brand Advocacy Impostor:
They tell you it is purely word-of-mouth
They tell you it is all digitally driven
They sell you on advocates instead of advocacy.
They sell you on advertising like PPC (and that is just for starters).
Their whole spiel just feels inauthentic
.
Brand advocacy differs from purely digitally driven advocacy in its assumption that content
creates its own awareness. It is closest in practice to the way a novelist develops a “readership.”
We’ve already pointed out the promise and pitfalls of paid advocates a.k.a. “influencers.” We
will always look upon them skeptically along with many of our peers in the advertising, public
relations and publicity profession.
Pundits are already questioning the staying power of these self-made celebrities. While they have
followers galore everyone knows the deal is quid pro quo. If everyone is doing it, soon no one
will be getting anywhere.
Our biggest issue with paid advocates is their lack of spontaneity and surprise. Advocates feel
fulfilled by finding stuff and delivering it to their audience. That is why paid influencers come
and go, but true, trusted advocates with a following will remain relevant and valuable to brands.Figure 9: Why people share stuff onlineTwo: 
Focus
|
Clarity|DimensionThe Process Your Peers Are Using.
By now you should have a clear understanding of what brand advocacy is. The rest of this book
will cover how to create it through the process of focus, clarity and dimension.
This process has one aim—to help you generate immediate and sustained awareness. We depict
this process with a painting that we commissioned at our founding. Hundreds of companies have
seen themselves at some point in this picture. Go to 
abdbuzz.com
/baware
 to see for yourself.
Figure 10: Our painting [
see more on page 52
].
Focus
 
is a matrix driven method which
 
separates your corporate perceptions from customer
realities. You will input your own information and information from outside sources to
determine your Minimum Viable Truths (MVTs) to put to the test. It requires you to make bold
decisions based on limited information about advocates and advocacy.
Focus should be completed in a business quarter.Figure 11: Rough whiteboard generated during focus.
Clarity 
is the refining step in our process. It is funnel-based and linear. It requires you to clarify
your minimum viable truth (or truths) down to one essential truth, which is hard to do.
The clarity phase usually involves a limited run of online testing that can last from 7-21 days. In
this phase you will test your MVTs 3 at a time to 3 advocate or real personas through email
messaging, live ad concepts and landing pages that you score for results.
Clarity is an exercise in sacrifice that is going to burn a little before it comes together. Steven
Spielberg has said “If you can’t write out your movie idea on a matchbook, you don’t have an
idea.”
Clarity is on-going. You will know it when you see it.Dimension 
involves articulating and disseminating your essential truth through omnichannel
techniques. While it puts the premium on owned and earned techniques it may eventually
involve paid media based upon your ambitions.
The dimension phase also involves ongoing monitoring and measurement of your campaigns.
Remember that this is a process and not a project. We will usually create up to 3 dashboards for
you to analyze the performance of your core content, your social media performance and a
master dashboard that incorporates offline and/or traditional metrics.
You should be able to achieve a projectable level of awareness without paying for media.
Reading this book will help you achieve this goal
.
Figure 12: Inbound leads without outbound advertising.Three:
 Focus
End Goal: 
Discern between PMF and MZF.
Welcome to focus. Some people find this the most exhilarating part of our process, while others
find it a bit esoteric. Fortunately, the focus matrix does lend itself to a clear demarcation between
the art and science of brand advocacy and it is efficient at generating Minimum Viable Truths
(MVTs).
The Focus Matrix
The planning phase of focus is depicted in the matrix below. Here you will think about your
goals in terms of quadrants, a series of interlocking circles and the interrelationships between
each.
Figure 13: The focus matrix [
See page 53-54
].Quadrants and Circles
The Focus matrix captures information in four quadrants: corporate, market, demographic and
media. It is important to fill each quadrant with accurate information. 
The matrix should be
populated in about a week.
The circular portions of the matrix are designed to help you think up brand truths that are
relevant, believable and differentiating. It is risky to rely purely on your own assumptions. Focus
generates testable truths that help you objectively assess message strengths, weaknesses and
opportunities.
If you are really pressed for time, then you can jump directly to the essential questions that must
be asked of any marketing effort:
Who are we trying to reach? 
Using the quadrants, you will fill in people you believe are
important for advocacy, with help from a professional.
Through which media?
 
You will use the PESO paradigm to balance the media mix, with help
from a media planner that understands the metaverse.
With what message?
 
While it is possible for you to generate this critical piece on your own, it
pays to have a professional with the winnowing.
None of these questions will be helpful if you cannot get the ultimate question out of the way.
What are you trying to accomplish?
If you don’t know the answer to this question you might want to go away and 
do a rethink. You
will know your answer once you can clearly articulate your objective and how the art and science
of brand advocacy might help you achieve it.
That means translating something like this:
“I want to sell a million shoes, fast.”
Into something like this:
“I want to create a market for edible footwear now that Crocs has abandoned their niche. I will
invest in 1, 3 and 6 month-tests to build awareness fast.”
This will also outline business problems that brand advocacy can’t solve.We were once hired by a non-profit client that thought they needed awareness when their real
problem was a lack of mentors. Once they realized their goal was to find mentors who would
work hard for free, we told them to invest more of our fees with their talent recruiting firm.The Art and Science of Creating MVTs
The real locus of focus is the Product Market Fit (PMF) and the Message Zeitgeist Fit (MZF).
These are “best-of-breed” approaches for your MVTs, your Essential Truth and successful brand
advocacy.
[4]
The PMF path is, ostensibly, the more scientific way to arrive at your MVTs.  The UZP path is
more instinctual. It is important to understand both.
Product Market Fit (circa 2013)
Companies once focused marketing departments on isolating unique selling propositions (USP)
that today can be called the Product Market Fit (PMF).
A classic example is the early TV advertising for aspirin when Ted Bates Agency successfully
positioned Excedrin for headache relief. The USP was unique but it was barely supported by
data.
Most innovative companies today rely less on human insight and more on arbitraging big data to
arrive at the ideal Product Market Fit to create a position.
A classic PMF is how Airbnb successfully integrated its service with Craigslist in 2004. This
case study has become a somewhat legendary example of what they call “growth hacking” in
Silicon Valley that involved finding a way into the Craig’s List API—or backdoor to their data.
Without data generated by the classified pages of the internet (Craigslist) there may not have
been an Airbnb.
Airbnb staff constantly monitored new usage data from Craigslist to isolate key MVTs. These
included 
“rental apartments are messy”
 and 
“renting from an owner is cheaper than renting
from a company”.
These are not so much truths as they are data-driven statements of fact. Airbnb staff, in turn, used
this data to drive advocacy by leveraging it for blogging, editorial and social media
opportunities.
It is possible to build a brand advocacy campaign around the PMF model. On the surface this
may appear the most predictive of the two approaches.
On a deeper level, however, it requires a precise alignment of other forces to make it work. In
this sense, it is the unicorn of the two approaches.
That’s because Product Market Fit advocates aren’t really into hatching new ideas as much as
they are 
hitching rides on products that already exist. 
It can be shameless the way this happens,
but if your stars are aligned it can work.
Today advanced metrics programs offer myriad ways to analyze online behavior. PMF advocates
hope this data will yield that killer insight or “aha moment” that leads to a product that
effectively sells itself.The Sharing is the Message. Sometimes.
Interestingly, while online products can’t always “sell themselves,” they can be designed to
promote themselves. The difference between spreading a headache and a hit is to design “good
stuff” that is engineered to be shared.
PMF advocate 
Ivan Kirigin
 says, “if your product involves sharing at its core, you should focus
on  
encouraging
 it.” DropBox grew by giving away free storage to users who shared their
service. HotMail achieved growth along similar lines.
Archie Abrams at high growth firm 
Udemy
 continues this train of thought. “Companies that win
find a channel like email, Facebook notifications or push notifications that can sustainably drive
users back to their product.” Of course, if you think this sounds like online marketing you are not
alone.
Figure 14: Creating Brand Advocacy through USP|PMF means you’ll cross paths with people like Archie. And you won’t
need this book, because your product will sell itself.Message Zeitgeist Fit (2018)
The best way to generate awareness without advertising relies more on big ideas than big data. A
brand’s market fit is often less important than its relationship to a zeitgeist for brand advocacy.
“The future is here. It’s just not widely distributed yet.”
--William Gibson
Zeitgeists are the “spirits of a time”
[5]
 that can be latently or explicitly observed in a culture;
particularly in communities online.
[6]
  Random events are influenced by larger dynamics.
Cultural clues yield incredible insights for messaging. Social archetypes reveal patterns of
conversations.
Our stable of case studies at ABdigital is based around this proposition. Time and again we have
generated awareness by relating a brand message to zeitgeists “not widely distributed” yet.
[7]
While not our campaign, the use of Colin Kaepernick as the face of Nike for the 2018 NFL
Season is instructive. By leveraging Kapernick’s image in a large close up shot and the politics
of social protest, Nike created a 31% increase in online sales in the following business quarter.
Gillete recently created a media flurry by creating an ad campaign that re-examined the position
of “The Best a Man Can Get” by questioning the meaning of masculinity. Like Nike, they
received a backlash along political lines, but their sales increased for a time.
A textbook example of zeitgeist positioning is Donald Trump’s use of #MAGA which tapped
into the zeitgeist of the “Silent Majority. While his detractors may still prove the KGB elected
him, we’re putting our money on his MZF.We often look at musicians as classic readers of the Zeitgeist. Jelly Roll Morton, for example, ushered in modern jazz long before
the advent of marketing professionals.
Four: 
Clarity
The Clarity Funnel & Brand Advocates
Once you have staged your goals and arrived at your Minimum Viable Truths, you are ready for
clarity, or more specifically, for the Clarity Funnel. The Clarity Funnel helps you test your
MVTs till you arrive at your one essential truth.
The most efficient way to commence this “winnowing” process is to create advocate personas
which can be real people (that represent a demographic or position) or composite sketches.
Advocate personas help you think clearly about your message, how it connects to a zeitgeist, and
to the people who mold and shape it.Whether real or representative, advocate personas are generated from demographic 
and
psychographic information. Some digerati and designers are fond of decking out personas with
cool names and clothing choices.
Or you can just point to Betty Crocker.Advocate Personas & The Funnel
The Clarity Funnel is designed to capture minimally predictive information about your
messaging. It also serves as a key step in “mapping” an advocate journey that is constantly
refreshed and refined (see next chapter).
We’ve seen companies spend even more time on creating journey “maps” than they do on
personas. While the journey is important, it is more important to test ideas to “plan” the trip. This
is where we rely on real micro campaigns, replete with content, that you test against advocate
personas.
Figure 15: Example of a simple clarity funnel with 3 advocate personas and 3 MVTs to test with landing pages. This chart
depicts the use representative personas, not real people [
See page 55
].Are You There Yet?
Clarity is the part of our process when the gates open and the route to awareness without
advertising appears.  At least that is what is supposed to happen.
All of this is possible provided you can master one essential thing—to get your Minimum Viable
Truths down to one. This is an exercise in sacrifice, compounded by the fact you will be
choosing from a range of equally valid truths. The good news is that you don’t have to do this on
your own.
Working Through 3s
Clarity begins with choices. At our agency we often say that there are no wrong choices in
marketing, just some that are “more right” than others. That is why it is critical in focus to have a
professional bring your Minimum Viable Truths to life through words, pictures and video.
It ultimately comes down to showing and testing real concepts against a real audience to truly
understand what you have.
The “micro campaigns” we mentioned a few paragraphs earlier are not just a few words on a
screen. They are at least 
3 concepts
 
taken to finished stage to help you think through the
implications and impact of your MVTs. We then set up an online “Funnel Test” to gauge
reaction against an advocate base for at least 
3 weeks
.
Figure 16: A “Buyer’s Journey” funnel. Seen one, you’ve seen them all.
While the timing of this phase will vary, you can gain some predictive information in 7 – 21
days. This information, in turn, is used to clarify your one essential truth, your advertising
campaign (that you don’t run) and direction for your content.The Advocate Journey. Redux.
Generating awareness without advertising requires bold action in the face of uncertainty. This is
where we may circle back to the advocate’s “journey” (like a “Buyer’s Journey, see above).
When we test MVTs, we not just looking for high open rates on emails or video views but how
well they support the key touchpoints of a journey.
Figure 17: Advocate persona targeted by interests
Those touchpoints can be measured more quantitatively than qualitatively. Unlike a few years
ago, today you can score quantitative information from a landing page and 2-3 test concepts as
quickly as you can compile a Facebook page. While we don’t create a “fixed map” of those
touchpoints, a tour guide of sorts can be exceptionally useful.
While the details will change from advocate to advocate, brand to brand and zeitgeist to zeitgeist,
mapping out the advocate journey with quantitative findings will harden your essential truth.
More general compass than GPS, it is still brand advocacy implemented at the most granular
level.5: 
Dimension
End Goal: A sense for media and analytics.
Dimension is the final phase of our process and a donkey kick to the legs of your essential truth.
A weak truth leads to pain. A strong truth leads to performance.
That is why we encourage our clients to think about the metaverse for marketing. The metaverse
describes the online conversations that are indirectly related to your product, brand or service.
Your goal is to inject a new voice into those conversations and steer them more your way.
If your brand is attracting a high level of influencer interest, being actively shared by high-value
people, and showing lengthy session time, the FAANGs 
will
 elevate your brand message
organically. Content that creates its own advocates, after all, equals more advertising revenue for
the FAANGs.
Figure 18: A report on “Good Censorship” from Googl
e
.
The previous chart illustrates a recent project by Google that outlines how they go about
“mapping narratives”. Keep in mind that 
this is an active process to determine what is elevated
on their site and what is pushed down. This project, called “The Good Censor,” is pertinent to
media planning today.
Assuming your message is built well (based upon a single essential truth) then the goal of a
media planner today is to map out the potential intersection of brand advocacy and online
narratives to generate earned media.
The Media Mix
Brand advocates are your best channel for generating earned media. Your goal as a marketer is to
give them something they can share. The chart below depicts a campaign we created for a chain
of bars. We used their own bar channel and social channels to build brand advocates.Figure 19: Content bucket in a big budget campaign.PESO and the “Data-Driven” Approach.
Brands today have a “data-driven” obsession. PESO has become a very popular model in
marketing precisely because it measures so many variables:
Paid Media
: 
Exchanging money for distribution, whether an ad or content.
Earned Media: 
Trading valuable content for an authority’s audience.
Shared Media:
 
Amplifying content through your own audience.
Owned Media:
 
Aggregating an audience for content.
Figure 20: The PESO model.PESO Analytics
How much awareness do you need to accomplish your business goals? The answer to this
question is different for every brand, product or service.
Whatever your awareness goals may be, the modern way to monitor campaign effectiveness is to
measure 
conversion goals
 
This generally means anything you can tie to a specific action like a
download, editor inquiry or sales call.
To keep things organized, we group analytics into three areas of focus.
Area One: 
Omnichannel Analytics.
Analytics 
are 
multilayered and complex. That is why we encourage clients to follow just a few
key metrics on their website and set up simple conversion goals to get started. Visit 
Google
Analytics 
for tutorials that cover the basics.
Figure 21: Simple conversion goals on the Google dashboard.
From this foundation we will then create customized dashboards. While details will vary,
measuring the PESO mix requires at least 
three dashboards:
The first dashboard
 
should measure your blog performance on a granular level. Metrics will
proceed from the general to the specificFigure 22: Dashboard that tracks general engagement.Once you drill down deeper on Dashboard One you will generate information on landing
pages that create the most session time, posts that lead to conversions, dwell time on
post, video shares, follow-on posts and even the performance of ads vs. organic content.
This type of dashboard does not provide a true omnichannel view of awareness. It is,
however, incredibly useful at helping you measure what content is working most
effectively on your site.
When
 
you 
combine this dashboard with a marketing automation system like Hubspot you can
get a closer look at how this site activity converts to leads
The second dashboard
 
should append your blog and site performance to your
performance across social and interactive 
channels.Figure 23: Social metrics dashboard.
This type of dashboard focuses heavily on what is called “off page SEO” and isolates channels
that generate the highest quality traffic and engagement
 
among numerous other variables.By now you could be thinking “
that’s a lot of dashboards, just give me one
.”
 
While it’s true that
an omnichannel media mix should have a single dashboard to keep things simple, it is not always
feasible.
You also might notice that we use a variety of systems to create dashboards and that the UI (User
Interface) changes. This is because there is no “one size fits all” vendor for analytics. Which
leads us back to the original lodestar.
Your third dashboard should be created entirely in Google Analytics, tweaked to measure
online and offline channels. No more, no less.
We’ve chased every new development in analytics the past decade, from KISS Metrics
(behavioral metrics), Meltwater (expensive PR metrics) SEMRush, Hootsuite, Facebook and
Instagram tools and more.
They all measure, in one way or another, what you can measure in Google Analytics if given
enough time. Whatever Google overlooks, they eventually incorporate into their platform (i.e.
cohort behavior, look alikes).
Today’s analytics platforms can inexpensively pull data from about ten sources into one
dashboard at a time. Which is plenty. Our advice, then, is to rock Google Analytics and support
it with a dashboard or two that allows you to drill down on the PESO metrics that matter most.Area Two: 
Integrated Offline Analytics
Simmons Research 
is the gold standard
 
for measuring traditional media. We have used
Simmons to measure up to 40 different digital media activities alongside traditional TV,
magazines, radio and outdoor.
Cision and Meltwater 
are the predominant platforms
 
for measuring classic public relations.
Sadly, the FAANGs are rendering the media they measure obsolete. Google Analytics and a
supplementary dashboard can be taught to follow all the same stuff—especially earned media,
conversation density and “talk signals” or what influencers 
might
 say.
Area Three: 
Self-Learning Systems & Automation
Workflows
 
are used to generate data about prospects while automating the process of sending
emails and white papers. 
Lead scoring
 
is a more advanced form of workflow that provides
granular data about prospects. We believe 
Hubspot
 
and
 
Ontraport
 
have the best tutorials on
how to set these systems up.
In our next volume of 
Awareness Without Advertising
, we take a much deeper dive into
analytics and how to use them for brand advocacy. This book has been written to get you to the
point where you have something to analyze.
For example, we once worked for a huge HMO that had an entire staff devoted to analyzing
prototype sites that generated about 300 sessions. It is impossible to gain predictive information
from a data set that small.
Figure 24:Useful processes like lead scoring are an ongoing essential. This is an example of how a content bucket cancontinually yield insights.
While the range varies by client, we would say that 750 sessions (unique visitors to a site) is
robust enough to be predictive. Anything less than that requires only the basic stuff that comes
with a Wordpress or similar site.
If you are not generating activity above this level, you have other issues at stake. While firing
your agency might assuage the pain, hiring a new brand advocacy hotshot can still leave you in
hot water.6: 
From Awareness to Action
End Goal
: Using MQLs SQLs and getting your data into a CRM.
Generating awareness will fill the top of your sales funnel with potential leads. You will then use
some common analytics processes to qualify and eventually score those leads derived from a
PESO mix of media. If these steps are done properly, the only thing left is to close deals.
Although that rarely happens.
Setting up workflows and lead scoring systems takes time. Typical conversion goals measure
online downloads and blog subscriptions. While it is probable that someone who downloads a
whitepaper and subscribes to your blog is a quality prospect, the opposite is possible.
While you can continue to qualify leads online or through your workflows, you will eventually
want to reach out to your prospects directly. It is critical that your conversion data integrates with
your CRM to make this happen.
MQLs and SQLs
Hubspot has coined a variety of terms that are universally applicable to lead management and
conversion. We like the terms Market Qualified Leads (MQLs) and Sales Qualified Leads
(SQLs).
An MQL is a lead that has met enough goals in a workflow (or a sequence of actionable items) to
be handed off to sales. At the most granular level the art and science of advocacy is about
amassing maximum MQLs for a minimal investment.
Converting your MQLs into SQLs simply requires you to convert all that data into a CSV file
you input into Salesforce. It is critical that 
you work with your marketing team to align your
marketing information with key sales metrics.
All the major marketing automation platforms today integrate easily with Salesforce although not
all of them provide real time data sharing.
Generally, the level of integration of your “MQLs” into your CRM system will be dictated by the
size and scope of your salesforce automation efforts.
Nurturing Awareness
The ultimate benefit of following an awareness campaign from the first signs of interest to the
final sale is educational. You learn a great deal about your brand message and how it should
evolve.
Ultimately, however, it is impossible to deduce from a lead score how valuable a prospect is.
That can only be known, once a customer clicks the buy button, requests a sales call or a demo.
In our next book we will go into greater detail about how you can use lead scoring to convert
more customers.  If you are wondering why we did not just start there, we have a simple reason.Without awareness there are no leads.
That’s why we started, and will finish, with 
this
 book
.Epilogue.
We have a saying at our agency that “it is better to be decisive than certain” when you think
about business and the future.
Despite AI, Big Data and Big Mark et. al. no marketing approach will ever be 100% predictive
or decisive until the robots really do take over. If that happens none of us will be around to worry
about it anyway.
The more you practice the principles in this book the closer you will inch from creating a few
advocates to establishing a community of followers.
Because brand advocacy done right goes big. Bigger in proportion to your investment than any
other strategy for brand awareness today.
Of that, we are certain.
Decisively.
Advocacy Snapshot: 
Barton Brands
"Demented" is how NPRs Lynne Rosetto Kasper described our campaign for Wide-Eye
Caffeinated Schnapps from the parent of Corona Beer. This product was successfully launched
last fall in 14 markets across the country and quickly shot to the #3 bar mixed shot in five
DMAs.
Ms. Kasper (whom we know and love) was referring to the product itself, but her comments lead
to more buzz that culminated in lines stretching outside the International Wine & Spirits Show in
Las Vegas just to taste it. A first.Advocacy Snapshot: 
Lucid Brewing
Lucid Brewing has become a keynote case study for advocacy. Not only was our original (and
very fake) advocate’s cover blown by his creator a few weeks after we created both the brand,
the blog and the site from SCRATCH, but the Brewery blew past all sales records for a regional
brewery making it to 
2000 barrels in its first year.
This campaign targeted the opposite of the current “craft beer” zeitgeist 
and borrowed cues
from Italian and modernist design.Advocacy Snapshot: 
The MPL
“The Minneapolis Public Library – has a new ad campaign out to hype the new downtown
library. One side of the poster has a big picture of Mao; beneath him, it says, well, MAO. On the
other side, a picture of the new library, with the letters MPL, for Minneapolis Public Library.
What’s the connection? Mao was a former librarian. Albeit one who favored only one book,
unlike the MPL.
The campaign also features J. Edgar Hoover and Batgirl, because they, like Mao, were librarians
at some point in their lives. It’s a stretch and a little weird, but it made us look and that’s the
point.”
© Skyway News, 2013
This simple post in a local business site elicited comments from tsunami of national and
international bloggers, including “hidebound anti-Communists” and the MPL opened to huge
success. 
The campaign simply targeted the reverse of the “boring librarian” archetype
.Bibliograph
y
:
Awad, T. A., & Fatah, S. M. (2015). The Impact of Social Media Branding on
Developing Brand Advocates for Start-Ups. 
Journal of Online Marketing, 5 
, 37-59.
Banfield, Jerry; Gerard, Michel. (2016). 
Facebook Marketing and Advertising in
2016: What works for my page with 2 million likes?
Berghofer, F., Hofbauer, G., & Sangl, A. (2018). Indicators to Choose a Suitable
Marketing Automation Platform. 
International Journal of Management Science and
Business Administration, 4
, 52-60.
Boyd, J. K. (2008). 
Introducing the Future Now: Using Memetics and Popular
Culture to Identify the Post-9/11 Homeland Security Zeitgeist
.
Choi, J. P., Jeon, D. S., & Kim, B.-C. (2015). Net Neutrality, Business Models, and
Internet Interconnection. 
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7
, 104-141.
Conill, R. F. (2015). 
Incorporating native advertising: Assessing journalism’s new
trend of camouflaging church as state
.
Friston, K. J., Lin, M., Frith, C., Pezzulo, G., Hobson, J. A., & Ondobaka, S. (2017).
Active Inference, Curiosity and Insight. 
Neural Computation, 29
 , 2633-2683.
Gilder, G. (2019). 
LIfe After Google. The Fall of Big Data and the rise -of the
Blockhain Economy."
New York: Knopf.
Hanson, A. M. (1986). Ragtime: Its History, Composers, and Music by John Edward
Hasse. 
Indiana Magazine of History
.
Kaul, V. (2012). Changing Paradigms of Media Landscape in the Digital Age.
Journal of Mass Communication and Journalism.
Loredana, P.-B. (2017). Inbound Marketing - the most important digital marketing
strategy. 
Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Brasov. Series V : Economic
Sciences 
(2), 61-68.
Munnukka, J., Uusitalo, O., & Jokela, E. (2014). 
Advocacy participation and brand
loyalty in virtual brand community
.
Pulipaka, L. K., Laigo, G. R., & Bhatti, A. H. (2016). 
FLIPPED LEARNING: A
PEDAGOGICAL APPROACH IN TEACHING MATHEMATICS
.
Pulipaka, R. (2016). 
Design synthesis and anticancer activity of rutheniumII
polypyridyl and piano stool type rutheniumII arene complexes
.
Tandoc, E. C., & Maitra, J. (2018). News organizations’ use of Native Videos on
Facebook: Tweaking the journalistic field one algorithm change at a time. 
New Media
& Society, 
1679-1696.Tikno, T. (2018). Exploring the Acceptance for Pixel Technology Implementation in
Facebook Ads among Advertisers in Indonesia. 
KnE Social Sciences,
Ventura, L. (2018). 
The Reception of Hegel in Egypt and the “Spirit of Time” (
Zeitgeist )
.
Wilder, K. M. (2015). 
Brand advocacy: Conceptualization and measurement
.
Kublach Haller Books are published by KHP Corporation, 7500 West 77
th
 Street, Suite 35, Minneapolis, Minnesota with offices
in Denver, Colorado and Columbia, South Carolina.
Copyright 2019 by KHP Corporation. All rights reserved. Published in arrangement with the Author and ABdigital Corporation.
Printed in Columbia, South Carolina ad Dover, Delaware USA.[1]
 (Kaul, 2012)
[2]
 (Loredana, 2017)
[3]
 (Choi, Jeon, & Kim, 2015)
[4]
 (Awad & Fatah, 2015) (Berghofer, Hofbauer, & Sangl, 2018) (Wilder, 2015) (Gilder, 2019)
[5]
 (Ventura, 2018)
[6]
 (Boyd, 2008)
[7]
 See www.abdbuzz.com: American Express, Constellation Brands, The Sharper Image, WNBA et. al