1
®
YYYYoooouuuunnnngggg    &&&&    RRRRuuuubbbbiiiiccccaaaammmm    GGGGrrrroooouuuupppp2
BrandAssetBrandAsset  Valuator Valuator®®
Smart Metrics for Smart Decisions
How do you manage what you can’t measure? What value are investments that are not linked
to returns?  These are two of the most critical challenges currently facing brand management.  In
some business sectors brand value accounts for over half a firm’s intangible value.1  A brand is too
valuable an asset to manage without the help of smart metrics to help make the smartest decisions.By adopting a clear definition of  a brand and precisely measuring it in a way that is linked to
financial performance,  marketers can gain an edge in making  more intelligent brand decisions.
Young & Rubicam’s  BrandAsset Valuator
®  
(BAV®)  model begins with a definition…
“A brand is a set of differentiating promises that
link a product to its customers.”
Brand Valuation Has Not Been Scientific
         The 20th century is replete with many brand
success stories.  Brand analysis, however, cannotmake the same claim. Its tendency to focus on
lagging indicators often means that corporations
detect brand problems after they have already
taken root in consumers’ minds. That’s often too
late.  After all, driving is tough when you only look
at the rearview mirror. Brand problems are all 
meaningful and marketers are constantly facing new questions. These can be small, “What kind of
food brands should an airline be serving on board
its planes?”; or big, “Which country should we
expand this brand to next?”; or  positively critical, “What strategic partnerships will add to ourbrand’s value, rather than dilute it?”
Y&R’s Approach Has Been Revolutionary
It is important to assess a brand’s current achievements and stature.  It is even more powerful
when  the future potential of a brand can be measured as well.  Y&R ’s BrandAsset Valuator® offers
this  opportunity.  Combining exhaustive amounts of  consumer data with a proven model of
brand-building, BrandAsset Valuator®  anticipates future operating earnings and operating margins.
This  can enhance the marketing-decision process in a variety of substantive ways.  BrandAsset
Valuator®  can help managers understand marketplace opportunities and the types of risk that go
with them.  It can provide a deeper understanding of consumer behavior: for example, sheddinglight on reasons why some segments are willing to pay a higher price for a highly differentiatedbrand.
BrandAsset Valuator
® stands apart from other brand study aids in a number of ways.  It is
predictive, focusing  on leading indicators instead of lagging. It is exhaustive
in every way, size and scope.  Most importantly, it  evaluates a brand in the entire world of brands,
not in its “ category.”  BrandAsset Valuator® is not only just useful for creating brands.  It is useful
for  managing brands in the long term—through ups and downs.
©2003 Young & Rubicam Inc.  All rights reserved.
“Bra ndAsset ® , BrandAsset Valuator ® and “BAV ® ” are registered trademarks of Young & Rubicam Inc.
1Output from BrandEconomics ®  model utilizing then years of BAV ®  data.3
The Four Key Brand Metrics of BrandAsset Valuator®
BrandAsset  Valuator® demonstrates that brands are built in a very specific progression of
four  consumer  perceptions: Differentiation , Rele vance , Esteem and Knowledge .  More th an 350,000
consumer interv iews conducted acro ss the glob e,  measuring more than  55 di fferent consumer
perceptions with regard to over 20,000  brands, have shown these four measures — the Four Pillarsof BrandAss et Valuator
® — to be consistently linked to a brand’s ability to deliver revenue and
profit for its owner — no matter th e category, no matter the country, no matter the age of the brand.
These Pillars measure a brand’s strength and stature — its value as an asset capable of creating
wealth.  To appreciate the diagnostic  advantages of BrandAss et Valuator®, it is worthw hile to
examine the fundamental nature of brands.
Bran dAsset Valuator® Mirrors How Relationships Are Built
Studying brands me ans studying relationships — the  re lationships between brands and the
people wh o buy or don’t buy them.  It means  studying the  inner wo rkings of relati onships, not just
assessing whether those  relationships are healthy.  As  about every individual knows from personalexperience, relationships are hard to build and maintain.  There’s a real balancing  act to a goodrelationship, and a progression to the way it  de velops.  Cons ider the  start of  a relationship.
Something catches a person’s eye.  Something  diffe rent.   Something that stands out.  Something
that makes a person think, “Hey, this is  worth investigating more.”  Next, one decides whether it’s
appropriate or relevant  to the  individual’s life.  Then there’s esteem—the more a person gets toknow  someone or something, the  more respect will develop.  Finally, there’s the  knowledge that
comes from inti macy, really  knowing the brand. BrandAsset Valuator
® demonstr ates that brands
are built this  way, too. And the Four Pillars,  like the stages in the relationship described above,
provide the fram ework fo r understanding brands.
How Brands Are Built
Four Primary Aspects4
The Four Pillars Diagnose Brand Health
The Four Pillars of BrandAsset Valuator® —Differentiation, Re levance,  Esteem and
Knowledge  — were selected because movement in these, more than any  other combination of
dimensio ns, explains why brands grow , how they can get sick and how they can be managed back
to health.  The quantitative relationships  among these dimensions provide the basis of brand
diagnosis.
Out of more th an 55 consumer  perceptions measured by BAV® for 20,000 brands, the Four
Pillars have shown themselves to be consistently meaningful in understanding brand growth.
Brands can be  evaluated by these individual measures.  However, it is the relationships between
these measur es that show the true picture of a brand’s health — its intrinsic value, its capacity to
carry a premium price and its ability to fend off competitors.  While brands can be measured against
other brands within a category, it is by measuring them across all categories that a brand’s true
strengths and weaknesses become clear.
BAV® differs from other typical brand studies by
 reporting how well a brand performs on key measures
vs. a ll the other brands in a particular country.  Thus,
a brand’s score on a Pillar such as Differentiation  is the
percentile rank the brand achieved versus all others.
eBay, for ex ample, had a percentile rank of 97th in
the United States in first half of 2003, which means
that it ranked higher th an 97% of the 2,340 brands
covered by BAV®.
By plotting  all four  measures— Differentiation,
Relevance,  Esteem and Knowledge — and ranking
brands across all categories, BAV® serves as an
 exceptiona l diagnostic tool for building and managing
 bran ds.
Differentiation Is the Engine  that Pulls th e Brand Train
Differentiation is critical to brand success.    If a brand is going to be  successful it  must first
build  Differentiation .  BAV® illustrates clearly that  Differentiation  is critical in the successful
development and ma intenance of a brand. Martin Sorrell, WPP Chief Executive Officer, summarizes
the importance of Differentiation , “Differentiating  what  you do and sell is critical when competing
in industries wi th overca pacity.”2
The Differentiation  metric has three components: Different, Unique  and Distin ctive .  Different
captures the ability of an offering to stand out from its competition.  Difference can either be
positive or ne gative, liked or  disliked.  Uniqueness  tends to reflect a brand’s essenc e, beliefs, and
personality.
Uniqueness  is highly correlated to a brand’s original ity and authen ticity.   Distin ctiveness  is
about a brand’s prestige and it s pricing power.  Distin ctiveness  captures the br and’s ability to
command a premium price … it s ‘worthmoreness.’  Successful new brands have consistently shown
higher rankings for  Differentiation than the other three Pillars.  As these three examples show,
Biore  ranked in the 83rd  percentile for Diffe rentiation  by Second Half 2002.   BlueMountain.com
ranked abov e the 77th percentile and Emeril! Live ranked  above the 94th percentile.
2Harvard Business School Bulleting/February 2000.5
Differentiation  doesn’t lose its importance.  It remains crucial, even as a brand’s performance
on the other Pillars grows and remains strong, and even as a brand achieves market leadership.  Yet,
as brands mature, BAV® finds that Differentiation  often declines. A low or declining level of
Differentiation  is a clear  warning—often the first warning—that a brand is fading. Changes in
Differentiation  appear well before any weakness appears in a brand’s business  results or other
more traditional research.  Declining Differentiation  is a sure sign that weakness is coming.  This
doesn’t have to happen to all brands that achieve  longevity.   Even after reaching maturity, a brand
can perpetuate its Differentiation .
Relevance Drives Penetration
The second step in brand development is Relevance . If a brand is not relevant, or personally
appropriate to consumers, it is not going to attract or retain them.  Again, the progression within the
Pillars mirrors human relationships.  Differentiation  can lead to a fling, but without a belief that
another person has a relevant connection to one’s own life, a person won’t engage in a seriousrelationship.  Successful new brands – on a growth trajectory – tend to show higher Differentiation
than Relevance .  This indicates that consumers perceive the brands as distinctive, with room for the
brands to become even more relevant to their ways of life.   Intuitively, Relevance would seem to
come first in a brand’s progression.  If it’s not relevant, why would consumers bother with it in thefirst place?  However, BAV
® shows that Differentiation  is what catches the eye – if a brand doesn’t
stand out, you can’t judge its Relevance .  Without Differentiation , a brand just gets lost in the crowd.
But once Differentiation  has been achieved, Relevance  is the source of a brand’s staying power.  The
lack of Relevance  is the reason  so many fads come and go.
The relationship  between Relevance  and Differentiation  varies to significant degrees by
country.  Generally speaking, the more advanced a country’s level of economic development is – thegreater its excess productive capacity or its excess supply of goods and services – the more crucial abrand’s Differentiation  becomes.  Excess capacity is related to a higher number of brands within
categories.   There are more than 1,000 hair-care brands in the United States, for example.
6
        With so many brands to choose from, consumers have to rely  on Differentiation  in the initial
stages  of forming a brand relationship. In such an environment, Relevance  is not a natural
outgrowth of Differentiation .  In the United States, there is essentially a zero correlation between
these two Pillars.  For a marketer, the second Pillar does not come automatically from having
 achieved the first.        Together, Relevance and Differentiation   are the key  elements of Brand Strength.  Differentiation
gives  birth to the brand and is critical for its continued reason for being, while  Relevanc e drives
franchise size.  BrandAsset Valuator
® shows that Relevance  is the key to household penetration. It can
differ substantially among various consumer groups, even when those  groups agree on the brand’sDifferentiation.   Niche brands often achieve high Differentiation  and modest Relevance  among the
general population, and higher Relevance  among a specific audience.  They tend to be among the
highest-margin brands in the marketplace.  This relationship between the  first two Pillars can create acompelling business opportunity.  Many of the premium cosmetics, fragrance and fashion brands fallinto this type.
        Creating Relevant Differentiation  is critical and is the central challenge for all  brands. In general,
brands that have managed to achieve high levels on both measures lead — or even define — theircategory or subcategory.
Esteem Reflects Popularity and Quality
         The third key measure identified by BrandAsset Valuator® is Esteem — the  extent to which
consumers like a brand and hold it in high regard. E steem  relates to how well a brand fulfills its
implied or overtly stated consumer promise.   It doesn’t occur without Differentiation  and Relevance
having preceded it, but it  can outlive those Pillars by many years. Brands that show high Esteem  even
after losing ground on Differentiation  and Relevance , tend to be older brands that have  grown stagnant
in their development.7
Esteem  is influenced by two factors: perceptions of Quality and Popularity.  As expected,
Quality has a strong relationship with Esteem . But, when Popularity is added in, the relationship
becomes even stronger.  In a sense, Quality can be thought of as representing one’s own experience
with the brand, and Popularity as representing how you think others experience the brand.  Muchcan be learned about a brand’s consumers by studying which of these factors is dominant for aparticular brand or category.
Knowledge Captures Intimacy and Understanding
If a brand has established its Relevant Differentiation  and consumers come to hold it in high
Esteem ,  brand Knowledge  will follow.  High Knowledge  means consumers understand and have
internalized what the brand stands for.  High Knowledge cannot be attained only by higher levels of
media support spending.  It has to be achieved, and it generally takes time.  Knowledge  is the end
result of all of the marketing and communications efforts and experiences consumers have had witha brand.
Relationship Tells the Story
Measuring the relationship among the four Pillars is crucial in diagnosing the health of the
brand.   There are two healthy patterns.  When Differentiation is greater than Relevance , the brand
has room to grow. Examples of brands showing a healthy Pillar pattern are: Harley DavidsonWilliams-Sonoma, Ikea, Bloomberg Business News  and Yahoo! Instant Messenger.
When Relevance  is significantly greater than D ifferentiation , the brand has become
commoditized.  Its Uniqueness has faded and price has become the primary reason to buy.  Brands
such as:  Exxon, Mott’s, McDonald’s, Crest, Minute Maid, Fruit of the Loom, Peter Pan (peanutbutter) are examples of this pattern.
8
              The other  healthy 
 pattern is when Esteem  is
greater than Knowledge , and the 
consumer says, “I’d  like to get toknow you better.” Consumers have motivation to find out moreabout your brand.  Some examplesare: Coach Leatherware,
Tag Heuer, Calphalon, Movado,
Blaupunkt, Pella Windows, Palm,
and Technics.
When Knowledge  is greater than Esteem , consumers are saying, “I know you more than I like
you.”   The brand has become too familiar and consumers have no motivation to listen to you.  Too
much  Knowledge  has become a dangerous thing.  Examples of these brands are:  National Enquirer,
TV Guide, Spam, The Simpsons, Chrysler, Maxwell House  and Sanka. To repair unhealthy brand
patterns, marketers must break down this high level of Knowledge  in order to make room to build
the other Pillars.
Brand Strength and Brand Stature
BAV
® will also group together the leading indicators —  Differentiation  and Relevance  — and
the  lagging indicators — Esteem  and Knowledge .  These two pairs of Pillars are  essential in
mapping  the life of a brand.   The combination of Differentiation  and Relevance forms Brand
Strength  – a leading indicator in a brand’s ability to exist as a viable entry in the marketplace.
Brand Strength allows the brand to both  defend itself from competition and generate margin,earnings and economic value. The combination  of Esteem  and Knowledge  forms Brand Stature,
which captures  a brand’s pervasiveness in the  marketplace.  Brands used to be measured only on‘liking’ ( Esteem ) and ‘knowing’ ( Knowledge ).  Today, we know that Brand Stature is a lagging
indicator of a brand’s weakness thus it declines  after Brand Strength erodes.
9
Mapping A Brand’s Life:  The Power Grid
BAV® uses a two-dimensional plot
 to measure Brand Strength and Brand Stature.  The strength is measured on the vertical “y-axis” [ Differentiation, Relevance ]
and stature is measured on the horizontal“x-axis” [ Esteem, Knowledge ].  The Power
 Grid provides a model for mapping anddiagnosing the life of a brand. New brandsbegin in the lower left quadrant – with
low strength, low  stature.  As the brand
develops, it rises to the upper left quadrant – where strength is significantly higher than
 stature.  It is here where niche brands and brands with unrealized potential reside. This is high margin territory.  In order to maximize shareholder value, brands should be strategically leveraged to move to the upper rightquadrant, where powerful leadership brands reside.  When brands get into trouble, the first thing toerode is Differentiation , causing leadership brands to decline.  This loss in Differentiation  reduces
the ability to extend the brand across new consumer and market segments.  As a result, there is a
huge loss in intangible value.
The Benefits of Brand Leadership
Only 2% of brands in BAV® achieve leadership
status: above 80% on all four Pillars, such as Hallmark.
One of the benefits of brand leadership is low volatility. Consumers are willing to forgive and forget brand misfortunes.  A second benefit is that most traditionalconsumer segments have a consistently high perception of the
brand.  This is the foundation for many marketing
 efficiencies.  And, as mentioned before, leadership brands maximize shareholder value.
1993
1997199920012002
2003 First Half
020406080100
02 0 4 0 6 08 0 100
Brand StatureBrand StrengthConsistent Strength Over time10
Flirting with Disaster:  Differentiation is Dissolving
Howard Johnson and Greyhound are
examples of brands that have lost most of
 their strength but have retained most of
their stature.  The stories of these erodingbrands have been well publicized.
Most of the time, consumer perceptions
are way ahead of typical brand tracking data.The enhanced ability of BrandAsset Valuator
®
to guide marketing decisions and investments
comes from its early warning signals.
 Traditional consumer survey techniques havefocused on lagging indicators: Esteem  and Knowledge .  These techniques can mask the underlying
problem a brand has with low or declining Differentiation .  By the time traditional measurement
techniques detect this problem, it may be too late to deter its impact on sales and profitability.
Brand Revitalization
While products often  have a lifecycle, BAV®  has shown that brands can be  eternal.  When
brands get  sick,they can be revitalized.
Consider 7-Eleven, a  retail brand under attack  in the past decade.  The brand  maintained
strong ratings  for  Differentiation, Esteem   and Knowledge  in the very  early  1990’s.  But, as early
as 1993, 7-Eleven’s  Differentiation  had dipped dramatically.   By 1999, the brand’s  Differentiation
reached depths of despair.   Fortunately,  7-Eleven has  been  able to  breathe  new  life  into the
11
brand – increasing  Differentiation as well as   Relevance   and Esteem .
This has been achieved by focusing on:  renovating stores, upgrading / expanding
merchandise and increasing proprietary fresh food with innovative fare, among other things.
These efforts have driven an increase in consumer perceptions of service, tradition, trust,
value, innovation, and quality.
It Pays to Build Strong Brands
      With more than 400 cases over a ten-year period, across 18 economic sectors, BAV® has
plotted   Pillar data against  revenue growth, margin,  NOPAT and economic value added (EVA®).
BAV® has found a consistent pattern of results.  Differentiation  is the margin driver – the higher a
brand’s  Differentiation , the higher  its  margin potential.  Brands that grow their Differentiation  on
average have about a 50% higher  operating  margin than those which allow their  Differentiation  to
decline.
Relevance  is the key to market penetration – brands with high Differentiation and Relevance
tend to be market leaders or be heading in that direction.  Those brands that have the foresight to
grow both their  Differentiation  and their Relevance  show the greatest increase on operating
earnings.  Those brands that only grow their Relevance  and allow their  Differentiation to decline
will gain  nothing.
BrandAsset Valuator® Is Essential in a World of Convergence
Traditional forms of marketing research evaluated brands by category: soft drinks or fast-food
restaurants or toothpaste.  Today, driven by technological change, social change (the way goods are
consumed) and economic change (mergers and consolidations), category perspectives are not only
limiting, they’re often useless.
12
What’s happening? Brands are being extended across numerous product categories.  Dannon
now sells water along with yogurt products.  Ferrari is a brand of sunglasses as well as cars.  Sony
makes movies and recordings, along with consumer electronics, computers and more.  Category
distinctions themselves are blurring.  New cellphones are available that can function as a camera(take  pictures), a personal desktop assistant, and a computer (with access to the Internet).Categories themselves are elastic, constantly evolving entities.
Distribution channels are also continually changing and, with them, the competitive
framework. Consumers can buy computers, tires and fresh shrimp in a single store.  They can shopon the phone, by catalog, and on the Internet.  But perhaps the most compelling reason that brandsshould be studied across the entire brandscape is that consumers don’t live, act or make purchasedecisions in categories.  They live in, and consume, a world of brands. They hold opinionsabout brands that leap across the category boundaries imposed by marketers.  Every day, they makechoices between brands in different categories.
13
For  all these reasons, BrandAsset Valuator®  evaluates brands outside of the traditional
category framework. BAV® creates a market brandscape.  Some brands look quite strong when
measured simply against their own categories. For example, if you look at the category of rental car
brands set against the entire brandscape, it is quite clear that they are weak.  There may be anopportunity for a brand to relevantly differentiate itself in a way that would redefine the wholecategory.
Building Brand Loyalty
BAV® enlightens how traditional
selling models work with brand development.Selling  models — Awareness,
Interest, Desire and Action  — are inextricably
entwined with brand Pillars  of  Differentiation,
Relevance, Esteem  and Knowledge .
An increase in differences one admires
 (Differentiation  and Esteem ) coupled with
increases in  brand Relevance stimulate
consideration and trial.  Maximizing the“differences one admires” is key to
increasing  users’ level of commitment –that is, loyalty.  If brand experience fails,
the brand  promise – Differentiation   and
Esteem  – will drop, prompting switching
 behavior.
The goal is to maximize differences
one admires ( Differentiation / Esteem ),
 which tends to result in an expansion of profitable customers.  Based on this fact, BAV
®  in  conjunction with Kevin
 Lane Keller  (E.B. Osborn Professor  of
 Marketing, The Amos Tuck School,
 at Dartmouth),  developed a BrandResonance
®  Loyalty Model.
BrandAsset Valuator® Constructs Work Globally
With measurements in 44 countries, BrandAsset Valuator® uniquely gauges the nature of
international marketing opportunities. There has been much discussion and interest in the lastdecade in global branding — the idea that a brand can develop with nearly equal strength aroundthe world by marketing in one voice everywhere. BrandAsset Valuator
® shows that brand
development  across cultures  is more complicated than that.  The research indicates that there are0102030405060708090100
DIFFERENTIATION RELEVANCE ESTEEM KNOWLEDGEPercentile Rank   
23%   
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100% % of Never Used     77%   Non users
Don’t consider     
Non- Users
 would Consider      0102030405060708090100
DIFFERENTIATION RELEVANCE ESTEEM KNOWLEDGEPercentile Rank   
Incremental increase  from Non-users 
who don’t consider toNon-Users 
who would consider
Level
III
Level
II
Level
 I41%   Be38%   21%    
Users Building Commitment0102030405060708090100
DIFFERENTIATION RELEVANCEESTEEM KNOWLEDGE
Incremental increase in from level 1 to level 2
Incremental increase in from level 2 to level 3
0102030405060708090100
DIFFERENTIATION RELEVANCE ESTEEM KNOWLEDGE
0102030405060708090100
DIFFERENTIATION RELEVANCE ESTEEM KNOWLEDGE
14
two dimensions to global brands: 1) Consistency of Brand Strength and Brand Stature together, (as
measured by the Four Pillars from country to country) and 2) Consistency of brand meaning, which
BrandAsset Valuator® measures by clustering brands on dozens of imagery dimensions, across all
countries.  Preliminary analyses suggest that brands that are strong around the world and have aconsistent meaning globally perform better financially than strong brands with inconsistentmeaning.
Not surprisingly, Disney is the brand with the most consistent meaning from country to
country. In each country, Disney’s Imagery Profile falls into the same Global Brand Paradigmcluster of “Fun.”  Coca-Cola, another powerful global brand, is the brand with the most consistentbrand strength around the world. This is seen on the Power Grid for Coca-Cola, which representsthe Brand Strength and Brand Stature summary measures for the four Pillars.
 BrandAsset Valuator
®  analysis of a brand’s Pillar pattern across different countries compared
with other brands within those same countries can greatly enhance strategic decision-making withregard to global brand development. In addition, BrandAsset Valuator
®’s assessment of common
brand meanings is important for global development.
Classic
StatusFriendly
ResponsiveValue 
DrivenCurrent 
StyleLittle 
KnownLeader
InnovatorsFunBasic
StandbysUnfocused
Argentina
AustraliaBrazilCanada
Colombia
Czech Rep.FranceGermanyHolland
Hungary
ItalyJapanMexico
PRC
RussiaSouth AfricaSpainSweden
Switzerland
ThailandUKUSAVenezuela
002 0 4 0 6 08 0 100
Brand Stature   ArgentinaAustraliaBrazilCanadaColombiaCzech RepDenmarkFranceGermanyHollandHungaryItalyJapanMexicoNorwayPolandP.R. ChinaRussiaS.AfricaSpainSwedenSwiss
ThailandUKUs
Venezuela
20406080100Brand Strength   Coca-Cola
Worldwide Power GridDisney15
BrandAssetBrandAsset   ®® Archetypes Archetypes
Brand Personality and Differentiation
In an era where
 technologies and service offerings are easily replicated,quite often thestrongest differentiatingaspect of a brand is its character or personality.Brand personality has
been studied for decades
largely in the absence ofcompelling evidence tosupport conclusions onhow to modify the existingpersonality of a brand or change it to something else.
BrandAsset
® Archetypes
 is a quantified analytic tool, linked to BAV® data, which addresses  both the character of a brand
and how it needs to grow in the future.  Affirmation of the validity of the recommendations that
emerge from Archetypes analyses comes from BAV® data: the most powerful Archetype profiles
for a brand produce outstanding Pillar Patterns and Power Grid locations.
The idea that brands have “personalities” that are similar
in some way to the personalities that people have was elaborated by Alex Kroll, a former CEO ofY&R, in a speech to the Association of National Advertisers in October 1989,  “Individualisticbrands… have cre ated characters that have a richness, a complexity, an authority far greater than
the words ‘brand personality’ imply… th ey have managed to embody the kinds of conflicts,
contrasts, sequences of events, odd shapes, and unpredictable ordering of events that great plays,
novels, paintings, and sculptures have always contained.”
BrandAsset
® Archetypes comprises twelve Archetypes grouped into four sets of three.
[Exhibit 1]   Each of the four domains (thought, emotion, energy, and substance) has a cardinal
Archetype, defined by the domain in which it falls.  All of the other Archetypes are blends.  Forexample emotion dominates within the Actress but she is also comprised of energy.
The model also incorporates gender essence.  The vertical axis represents masculinity; the
horizontal represents femininity.  Thus, Enchantress is purely feminine, Jester purely masculine.As with the defining characteristics, the other Archetypes are gender blends:  Warrior is mostlymasculine but also has some feminine influences.
Exhibit 116
Each of the Archetypes specializes in particular tasks or activities as indicated in [Exhibit 2] .
Each of these activities can be described in terms of adjectives that are also shown in the exhibit.  It
is these adjectives that
measure BrandAsset®
Archetypes.
Another  very
 important feature of the model is that itdescribes a Shadow for each Archetype.    The Shadow represents the
dark side of  an Archetype
 – what happens if the
Archetype loses sight  of its purpose 
[Exhibit 3] .
 For example. the Sage who loses his purpose in life (giving peacefulsanctuary to itinerantTroubadours) fades intoobscurity as the Hermit.
The Shadow is a very
important concept.  Healthy brands are those that avoid the Shadow  side by maintaining balanced
identities.
Anecdotal evidence confirms the dangers of a dominant dark side.  It may very well have
been the case that IBM started getting into real trouble when, as the Patriarch of the computing
world, they 
slipped into a Dictator mindset.For a while, it could be said thattheir  operating
principal was “The
IBM way or the highway.”  The brilliant Apple commercial, “1984,”dramatized
IBM in this way
and opened the door for Apple’ssuccessful entréeinto the world thathad been, up
to then, largely the
province of IBM.
Exhibit 2
Exhibit 317
Do the measures of Brand Archetypes yield expected results?  [Exhibit 4]  shows examples of
brands that score high on each of the Archetypes.  [Exhibit 5]  shows high-scoring Shadows.  These
attributions make a great deal of sense.  To mention just a few:  Intel is the perfect Sage because its
presence, “Intel Inside,” promises the user peace of mind.  Ford Mustang is the ideal car toepitomize the freedom and joy of driving a fast and agile automobile.
Among the Shadows, professional wrestling fills the role of Sorcerer quite nicely since it is
viewed by many as a  dark and hollow athletic competition.  Firestone was under a great deal of firein the U.S. at the time of the survey due to faulty tire construction and thus Addict (wounded,jealous, tragic) is an appropriate designation.
.
intelCNN
National Geographic
Winnie the Pooh
Victoria’s Secret
GUCCI
Ford Mustang
EnergizerHarley-DavidsonBest WesternJohnson & JohnsonMasterCard
High Scoring BrandsExhibit 418
What is especially remarkable about these designations is that respondents were not
prompted with the Archetype or Shadow  names.  So finding the child’s character, Winnie the Pooh,in the Angel’s innocent Archetype is quite validati ng as is Energizer batteri es in the Jester’s resilient
one.
There also are significant category effects for Archetypes.  News media fall into Magician, as
do most high tech and computer brands.  Most automobile brands (and all of the Armed Services)are identified with Warrior.  Queen is the dominant Archetype for hotels, many food products(especially “ comfort” foods), and a large number of retailing brands. All foods show strong Mother
Earth scores.
Analyses of BrandAsset
® Archetypes help to identify character weaknesses in a brand in
advance of its marketplace decline.  It gives direction to communication or marketing actionsneeded to overcome weak brand perceptions, and delineates  personality possibilities for brandswith shallow personality perceptions.  Furthermore, it helps to keep communication on track;suggest ways to connect to the inherent truths in a brand; give directions for evolving the brandover time; and, allows insight for creating communication messages that span time and distance.
Professional Wrestling
Russia
Taco Bell
Hollywood
South Africa
Marlboro
Jerry Springer ShowNintendoFirestoneMartha StewartMontgomery WardCuba
Exhibit 519
BrandAssetBrandAsset ®®  Extensions  Extensions
BrandAsset Valuator®  Informs Today’s Marketing Issues
In addition to projecting a brand’s prospects for margin growth, earnings growth and global
development, BrandAsset Valuator® can be used for a variety of other assessments and analytical
pursuits. It has been useful in the study of price elasticity, and also for sales modeling. It offers
insights that have proved immensely valuable in analyzing all sorts of growth and investmentoptions from identifying the best alliance partners to co-branding initiatives to investing in sub-brands or line extensions. Y&R has also been successful in integrating BAV
® data and methods into
clients’ own databases, thereby combining useful tools with more focused or proprietary sources of
data. BrandAsset Valuator® also has its own line extension: Media BrandAsset  Valuator®, which
applies BAV® data and techniques to brand media planning,  thereby offering better rationales for
selectivity, both in media type and media content.
BrandAsset Valuator® Is Becoming Even More Powerful
And more initiatives are in development. Y& R is committed to investing in BrandAsset
Valuator® on an ongoing basis with the same vigor that leading brand companies invest
in product R&D, for the benefits of better data and analytical tools can match— or exceed—those
provided by better  products, colors or flavors.
BrandAsset Valuator® Alliance with Stern Stewart: BrandEconomics®
BrandEconomics® is a joint initiative of BrandAsset Valuator® and Stern Stewart to provide an
entirely new type of consulting service for brand strategy and management.  The BrandEconomics®
approach to brand analysis, strategy and valuation represents a major improvement in the
advisory services previously available to brand owners.  First, the Brand advice is integrated, being
equally grounded in the consumer and business understanding of brands.  Second, the advice is
robust, combining the analytical rigor of Stern Stewart’s EVA® methodology with Young &
Rubicam’s BrandAsset Valuator® model and database.  Most important, the advice is actionable
because it addresses the consumer and business drivers of a brand’s competitive position directly.
As you have seen, BrandAsset Valuator® allows us to  identify the basis of brand advantage
across different markets and categories.  Using Economic Value Added (EVA®) we are now able to
prioritize market opportunities on the basis of their potential for value creation.  The combination ofthese disciplines enables us to advise clients on the brand strategies most likely to deliver marketand financial success.
BrandEconomics
® has developed a proprietary approach to the valuation and management of
brands based on a deep understanding of the drivers of the financial performance of brands and the
bases for their consumer franchise.  Extensive modeling using inputs from the BrandAsset Valuator®
database has produced the first wholly objective estimates of brand values across important product
and service sectors.
The BrandEconomics® approach enables us to understand the current performance of a brand
and the future growth opportunities - and challenges - that the brand faces.  In financial terms, itmeans we can identify the proportion of a brand’s value represented by its Current Operating Valueand its Future Growth Value respectively.  This allows us to focus our advice on the twin prioritiesof delivering superior current  performance and creating future growth opportunities through the
brand.20
The BrandEconomics® Offerings
Brand Audit
Current competitive positioning and intrinsic value for a brand or portfolio of  brands. This
can be taken down to specific, clearly defined competitive frames by  product segment, geography
or customer type.
Evaluation of Strategic Alternatives
Quantifying the impact of different initiatives on the brand portfolio, selecting  optimal brand
strategies, and assisting in setting priorities for resource allocation  across the portfolio.  These
alternatives can include acquisition, divestiture and  partnership opportunities.
Brand Extensions
Assess brand elasticity across new product segments through attribute  analysis, examine
relative brand health versus competitors, and apply detailed  financial analysis to assess the
economics of individual segments to determine the  attractiveness and probability of success ofpotential extensions. Additionally, it  provides analysis of brand partnerships/alliances or licensingopportunities.
Investor Relations
Validate strategies and aid in communicating these to investors.
BrandAsset Valuator ® Tool Kit
General Positioning Work
Alliances and Co-Branding
Master and Sub-Brand Relationships
Media Planning BrandAsset Valuator ®
Brand Elasticity
Global Branding
Internet Branding