BRAND 
MEDIA
STRATEGYALSO BY ANTONY YOUNG
Profitable Marketing Communications
:
A Guide to Marketing Return on Investment
(with Lucy Aitken)
Strategies in a DownturnBRAND 
MEDIA
STRATEGY
INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
PLANNING IN THE DIGITAL ERA
ANTONY YOUNG
BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY
Copyright © Antony Young, 2010.
All rights reserved.
First published in 2010 by PALGRAVE MACMILLAN® in the U.S.—a division of St. Martin’s Press
LLC, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Where this book is distributed in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world, this is by Palgrave
Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited, registered in England, company number
785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies and has companies and
representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, the United Kingdom,
Europe and other countries.
ISBN: 978-0-230-10474-7
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Young, Antony, 1964–
Brand media strategy : integrated communications planning in the digital
era / Antony Young.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-230-10474-7 (hardback)
1. Branding (Marketing)  2. Internet marketing.  3. Social media.
I. Title.
HF5415.1255.Y68     2010
658.8’27—dc22
2010025259
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
Figures by Antonette Maysonet.
Design by Letra Libre, Inc.
First edition: January 2011
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1Printed in the United States of America.This book is dedicated to the amazing planning, buying and digital
people at Optimedia US, from whom I draw inspiration every day
.CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Foreword
 by Jack Klues
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1
GOOGLE AND FACEBOOK
How they’re changing the game
CHAPTER 2
THE NEW MEDIA PLAYBOOK
A new set of rules for a new media world
CHAPTER 3
A SHIFT FROM MEDIA PLANNING
TO COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Enter the Super Planner
CHAPTER 4
FOCUSING ON OUTCOMES, NOT OUTPUTS
Setting the Brand Media Strategy communication goals
CHAPTER 5
INSIGHT OVER ANALYSIS
Finding a way in for the Brand Media Strategy
CHAPTER 6
1 + 1 = 3Sparking consumer brand conversations through media
CHAPTER 7
CONDUCTING THE ORCHESTRA
Making integration real
CHAPTER 8
UNLOCKING MOMENTS OF RECEPTIVITY
How media context helps advertising
deliver more relevant communications
CHAPTER 9
TOUCH POINT SELECTION
Determining the right media channel mix
CHAPTER 10
DIGITIZING THE BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY
Not just another medium
CHAPTER 11
EXECUTION IS THE X-FACTOR
Bringing the Brand Media Strategy to life
CHAPTER 12
MEASUREMENT AND METRICS
Making the Brand Media Strategy accountable
Further Reading
Notes
IndexACKNOWLEDGMENTS
E
verything I know about this business has come from the people I’ve met or
worked with. Industry thought leaders, figures in the agency world, clients
I’ve worked with, media and business partners and of course my remarkable
colleagues at Optimedia US and ZenithOptimedia Worldwide.
I wanted to particularly thank the planning brain trust at Optimedia US,
who over the past four years have helped evolve our agency’s thinking
behind OPEN and torture test many of the Brand Media Strategy concepts in
this book. In particular, I want to acknowledge Keith Mackay, Susan
Eberhart, Chris Pyne, Vijay Rao, Tom Scott, Greg Kahn and James
Shoreland.
Over the years, I have been very fortunate to work with some outstanding
communications planning talent at ZenithOptimedia Worldwide, especially
Frank Harrison, Derek Morris, Gerry Boyle, Guy Abrahams and David
Benson. They unknowingly or directly have contributed to this book through
conversations and debates on planning.
Great clients are usually behind great work. Many past and present clients
have pushed and challenged me personally to think, act and alter my
approach to developing their media communications.
Special thanks to Claire Atkinson for her invaluable perspective and
contribution to this book.
I’d also like to thank Antonette Maysonet for creating the figures for
Brand Media Strategy
 and Tate Evans for aiding and abetting this book
project. Nora Scullin has over the past few years helped me craft my brand
media strategy analyses for 
Advertising Age
 and has my gratitude. My thanks
to Belle Lenz and Alysha Walker at DiGennaro Communications for their
helpful advice.
Thanks also to Ann Marie Kerwin, Nat Ives and Abbey Klaassen at
Advertising Age
 and to Jonah Bloom, its former editor and now chief
executive officer at Breaking Media, for allowing me to write about brandmedia strategy each month. And to David Klein and Cynthia Manson for
bringing this opportunity to write an entire book on it!
Of course, this book would not have been as good as it is without the
ingenious input of Laurie Harting, executive editor at Palgrave Macmillan.
Finally, to Nancy, for her encouragement and tolerance in allowing me to
selfishly bring this book to fruition.
Antony Young
December 2010FOREWORD
T
he hit television series 
Mad Men
 captured the collective imagination of
millions of viewers by depicting a romantic period in the history of the
American advertising industry. What fans might fail to recognize is that the
pervasive drinking, smoking and office romances might have been facilitated
by the relative simplicity of the marketing craft in the 1960s. In “the golden
age of advertising,” big ideas inspired extravagantly produced television
commercials that would ultimately air on a handful of networks. Print, radio
and outdoor ads played a supporting role. Full stop.
Antony Young entered the world of advertising long after the 
Mad Men
 era
but early enough to witness the profound changes that have rocked the
marketing industry in recent years. The twenty-first century ushered in a new
paradigm—enabled by consumer choice, exploding technology and
proliferating media—and in the process totally redefined the way marketers
understand, find, reach and engage their customers. As someone who started
his career at Saatchi & Saatchi and rose to lead Optimedia—one of the
world’s most successful marketing and media agencies—Antony has helped
such giants as Sony, Coca-Cola, McDonald’s, Nokia, Procter & Gamble and
Toyota navigate the chaotic landscape of consumer-brand connection.
In 
Brand Media Strategy
 Antony parlays nearly twenty-five years of
industry experience and human observation into a veritable instruction
manual for connecting brand messages to people when and where they are
most receptive. Full of practical advice and case studies, the book is a must-
read for every industry planner and an illuminating education for anyone who
seeks to decipher communications planning in a digital world.
To put the new world order into perspective, consider Nike, which spent
$90 million in 1990, predominantly on television advertising. By 2006 the
athletic shoe giant was spending $678 million on advertising, and 67 percent
of that budget went to online and other digital media.
Thanks to Google, Facebook, YouTube, smart phones, mobile internet and
countless place-based opportunities, the path to the passionate for a marketeris complex and convoluted. The mass audience has shattered into a million
distinct communities. And while the consumer population is re-amassing, it is
doing so according to unique affinities and personal preferences for products,
gadgets, content, information, entertainment and so on. Consumers spend
nine hours a day engaging with media, and all messages are opt in—or out.
All of these realities contribute to what we call “the blur” of the marketing
landscape. 
Brand Media Strategy
 is an industry application—a GPS if you
will—that guides practitioners as they navigate that blur for clients.
Jack Klues
Chief Executive Officer,
VivaKi Publicis Groupe, Directoire
December 2010INTRODUCTION
I
n the first decade of the new millennium a digital revolution swept into the
midtown headquarters of New York’s media moguls and snapped all the
golden rules. Upending business models and the role of mass media itself,
that revolution has also engulfed Madison Avenue. The ongoing turmoil
brought with it an invigorating tumult of fresh ideas, inspiration and
innovation in the marketing and promotion of brands.
Brand Media Strategy
 is a handbook to help guide the reader in a world
where few rules remain. It sets out to help marketing and ad executives turn
those exhilarating conference room a-ha moments into winning real-world
executions. This book offers strategies that will withstand the turbulence of
the ever changing digitally enhanced media communications age.
During the last decade two companies in particular, Google and Facebook,
have altered the face of mass marketing. In late 2000, Google unleashed a
product called AdWords that handed marketers the ability to capture
consumers much further down the purchase funnel. With Ad-Words,
marketers could bypass traditional mass media strategies (in television, radio
and print) and directly target people searching for details of a specific service
or product. It gave the marketer unprecedented visibility and accountability
into advertising as a medium.
Just three years later Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and some friends
from Harvard University created a force in personal communication that has
entranced the world and even dethroned Google as the most visited 
website
in the United States. While the site has yet to figure out a way to unlock
major ad dollars, it has had a wide effect on how we think about addressing
online communities. Facebook also created a system for disseminating brand
preferences that zap back and forth between friends and acquaintances from
New York to Nepal. Whoever thought of declaring they were a “fan of
Nutella” to their network of friends before Facebook arrived? Facebook’s
most significant impact on media planning can be summed up with the most
persuasive phrase in marketing: word of mouth.These two ventures have been followed by others, but the power and
precedence of Google and Facebook are unrivalled and have shaken the
advertising and media professions to their core, forcing a reappraisal of how
brands employ media to promote themselves. Marketers and their agencies
are scrambling to adapt existing skills and reinvent new ones to take
advantage of these major shifts. Digital expertise has moved to the center of
planning. It is no longer the icing on the cake.
This book is not about digital media itself but about its impact.
 Marketing
is now as focused on microtargeting as it is on mass media, on response as it
is on branding, on earned media as it is on paid media. The lines have blurred
across all traditional borders. Google and its band of Silicon Valley
engineers, and those Facebook classmates, have crashed the party and
changed the media ecology.
Yet over 85 percent of advertising is still invested in the so-called
traditional media channels. The owners of television, radio, out-of-home and
print media aren’t taking all this change lying down. They are evolving as
technology plays a more prominent role in creating content for consumers
accessing it, not just from television or print, but from gaming devices, smart
phones and tablet devices.
Think about how online video sites such as Hulu, owned by News
Corporation, NBC Universal and Disney have given marketers the ability to
craft campaigns that cross from television to PC and reach viewers wherever
they consume media products. Think about how a tweet, a Facebook message
and an email from an unknown Illinois senator affected the outcome of an
American presidential election.
The rules of engagement have changed. Digital and data have formed
powerful bedfellows. And this has been transformational for marketers. The
conventions of media planning and buying are being overhauled, and the bar
for measuring effectiveness is so much higher than before.
The most progressive marketers tap into new media as well as leverage
new ways of dealing with all media channels to win in the marketplace. This
book will give you the road map and the compass to develop strategies that
work for brands big and small.
A variety of titles already offer instruction and guidelines for advertising
media planning, branding and digital marketing. This book is different. It is
for the planner who wants to navigate the new media landscape to develop aBrand Media Strategy through communications planning.
Brand Media Strategy
 shares dozens of case studies that delve deep into
planning approaches, including an in-depth discussion of how President
Barack Obama used social media to win over voters. We illustrate how
Homer Simpson engaged fans to pay to see the 
Simpsons
 movie in record
numbers, when they could see the family on television every week for free.
We reveal what went into Denny’s television and online campaign that got
two million people into their restaurants in a single day. And we share some
of the strategic thinking behind Unilever’s integrated communication
programs for Dove and Axe.
Brand Media Strategy
 shows you how brands navigate today’s media
setting by being more calculated and creative. Finally, it provides both
marketer and agency the resources to help teams move beyond tactics to craft
strategies that ensure brand media communications drives the desire for top-
line growth.
Above all, this book is about standing out and being outstanding.
WHY WRITE THIS BOOK?
I’ve written this book with three main ideas in mind. First, 
Brand Media
Strategy
 deals with the important area of communications planning. Rather
than being about how communications for each individual medium is
planned, it is about how to develop a strategic and holistic plan that drives
brand marketing across platforms. This book complements existing branding,
digital and media planning titles.
Brand Media Strategy
 focuses on what works and what doesn’t and how to
make effectiveness central to marketers’ media programs. It tackles how to
embrace all media touch points, from the traditional to the experiential,
digital and word of mouth. It also provides a framework and tools for
planning these strategies. This book explores methods for agencies and
brands to connect communications planning to the creative process.
Second, this book is based on what the media looks like today. It is not an
updated edition of an established best media practices title that has sought to
add in digital. I look at how the best brands are using media today to be more
effective in this more accountable, interactive world.
The latest developments in media, notably in the digital space, haveredefined the media landscape and reinvented established advertising
practices. This book is not intended to be a history lesson; it is a snapshot of
today’s ever changing media world and a manual for how brands can best
engage with it. It is filled with dozens of very current cases.
This book strongly advocates that digital cannot be a separate function or
an adjunct to communications planning. It is in fact one of the most powerful
channels and levers for brand communications, one that is integral and often
central to 
every
 media campaign. In the United Kingdom digital advertising
spending today exceeds that of television. In the United States, digital media
will represent a thirty-billion-dollar advertising market by 2012.
1
I wrote this book in the midst of the harshest recession since the Great
Depression. Accountability and effectiveness are front and center as never
before and have become staples for brand marketing communications.
Marketers who succeed in this environment will continue to prosper when the
economy improves because of what they’ve learned now. The media that
flourishes and innovates in this environment will be the media that survives
in the long haul.
Lastly, I’ve written this book to assist people who are responsible for
developing Brand Media Strategies. If you are an agency planner or buyer,
you have witnessed some incredible changes in your craft. You’re constantly
challenged to question established practices, go into new places and be a
pioneer in communications. Media’s role has stretched beyond its traditional
boundaries. There are so many more options and new technologies to
consider. You are in one of the most exciting industries I know of, and
staying on top of it as it changes and learning new skills are two of the
toughest but most essential parts of your job.
This book is also for those in brand management and media management,
the people responsible for allocating and managing marketing
communication budgets. You don’t have to know the ins and outs of media
planning and buying, but it’s important for you to own the strategy. Media
represents an important part of the marketing mix. Ultimately, you are
accountable for your decisions, not the agency. This book helps you direct
and manage your agency’s output.CHAPTER 1
GOOGLE AND FACEBOOK
HOW THEY’RE CHANGING THE GAME
G
oogle and Facebook and a host of other digital media have disrupted the
marketing communications profession. The two companies, each in its own
unique way, have changed the game. While it is tempting to dismiss popular
online fads, the impact of Google and Facebook goes way beyond their
respective numbers of visitors or valuations. They have reshaped mass
communications globally and opened up opportunities for marketers to
execute more accountable, influential and multidimensional campaigns.
Branding has been the foundation of the advertising industry for a century.
Broadcast and print advertising’s forte was in growing brand awareness and
building a brand. In some respects, digital media has set higher standards, in
effect repositioning the industry’s perspective of established media, because
digital media enables consumer response measurement. Tracking and
optimization tools for online media provide granular and near real-time
response to creative material, which allows not just a higher degree of
accountability but more sophistication in influencing buyer behavior.
Digital media also provides a level of interactivity that by its very nature
enables a more personalized experience. Users are able to get information
how and when they want it. The internet has become the information medium
of choice and a significant factor in influencing purchase decisions. For
marketers, digital media provides insight into how to reach customers and
convert interest into intent to purchase.
The peer-to-peer connectivity of social media needs to become central to
every marketer’s thinking. Will we soon take product recommendations from
our ten closest friends on Facebook or from a blog found on Google?Marketers are preparing for these possibilities. According to
comScore/Kelsey Group research, nearly one in four internet users looked at
online reviews before selecting a restaurant or hotel or legal, travel, medical,
automotive or home services.
1
 Another survey reveals that, among teens, 39
percent of word of mouth about a brand happens online via text, email,
instant messaging, chats and blogs.
2
Knowing the digital media space is vital to getting the most out of
advertising. Let’s take a brief look at the two companies.
GOOGLE: THE MAGIC, THE LOGIC
For decades, advertising has been about creativity, art and emotional
connections. And then about a decade ago, Google shook things up, bringing
with it an advertising era based on math, reason and logic. Google offered to
solve the age-old conundrums of marketers: waste and accountability. What
marketer wouldn’t want solutions to both?
Google helped advertisers by delivering the ability to directly target
consumers at the moment they’re looking for a product or service. Google
serves up an ad on its search site and elsewhere at the precise point in time
that people are researching a potential purchase or, even better, ready to buy
online. Quite simply, Google’s AdWords program has revolutionized the way
companies big and small advertise.
One has only to look at Google’s financials to see the extent of its success.
According to one estimate, AdWords accounts for 95 percent of Google’s
profit. Full-year profit at Google was $6.5 billion in 2009, while revenue was
$23.65 billion. By comparison, Time Warner’s entire Time Inc.
division, which publishes titles as large as 
People
 and 
InStyle,
 reported
profits of $246 million in 2009.
Google’s ability to serve as a conduit for sellers looking for customers has
created billions of dollars in profitability, and few think Google’s potential is
anywhere near fulfilled, such is its lock on our collective consciousness.
“Google and its competitors have created the first application to leverage the
database of intentions in a commercial manner: paid search,” writes John
Battelle in 
The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of
Business and Transformed Our Culture.
3
 Battelle came up with the phrase“the database of intentions” to convey the power Google holds in knowing
what we’re all searching for, whether it’s boots, books, doctors or divorces.
Google’s advantage comes in matching advertisers to all those searches for
information. What ads web users see depends on a variety of factors, but the
most important one is the ads’ relevance to the initial search phrase. “It is a
very efficient marketing program,” says former Gateway online strategist
Antonella Pisani. “You are capturing people while they are interested.”
4
For an example of AdWords’ effectiveness, take Paul Bond Boots, an
Arizona-based family-owned business that sells cowboy boots. When asked,
“How good of a program is Google AdWords for small business?” one of the
company executives said, “In my opinion it would be indispensable at a time
like this.”
5
 In 2009, the company’s ad showed up on the right in the
sponsored links section when “cowboy boots” was typed in the search box.
But Google AdWords isn’t a media sales tool for just the Paul Bonds of this
world. Fortune 100 companies such as CitiGroup, IBM and even Google
competitor Microsoft rely on Google’s utility and targetability for their
commercial success. It’s hard to imagine Amazon as the company it is today
without Google AdWords.
The change that Google has wrought on advertising cannot be overstated.
It forced a paradigm shift for advertisers, moving their decision making away
from targeting demographics and mass audiences to connecting with
individuals in a much more relevant way. As a result marketers have seen
wastage significantly reduced. Since AdWords’ cost is based on 
an auction
model connected to the price and effectiveness of the advertising, the onus is
on the advertiser to develop more effective copy. Google’s brilliance is that
advertisers can see whether a coupon or a free recipe is more effective. And
even better, advertisers can adjust their plan almost instantaneously without
significant additional costs, in contrast to making ad changes in traditional
media, which is slow and expensive.
Advertisers can’t buy their way to the top—the ads have to be relevant to
the people typing the search term, and Google ranks the site they are directed
to by its quality. And that is a critical point for a marketing strategy—how
well do you know customers and how well are you targeting them with the
message 
they
 want to hear. How much marketers pay for their ads to be
clicked on is decided by factors that Google—not the advertiser—controls.
Yet Google has democratized advertising, making it accessible to smalladvertisers and taking away the clout and scale enjoyed by bigger fish.
Ken Auletta in his book 
Googled: The End of the World as We Know It
observed that Google believes it is helping to shape a new and better media
world by making the buying of advertising more accountable and transparent.
In Google’s view, the company serves consumers by offering advertising as
information. And by offering a bidding system based on rewarding the more
responsive ads it is helping to improve advertising performance.
6
Google’s largest impact on the media business as a whole has been to force
it to compare its conventional metrics with sophisticated internet data. In an
attempt to stem the flow of dollars to more accountable media, television
networks agreed to move from program ratings—the currency of the industry
since television ad buying began—to commercial break ratings, which made
it possible to estimate how many people were viewing a particular
commercial. Newspaper executives only provide circulation figures; whereas
online advertisers know exactly who’s reading what story when readers
connect digitally.
What’s more, consumers’ appetite for online searches appears to be
growing. Worldwide, those aged fifteen or older conducted 131 billion
searches in 2009—a 46 percent jump on the previous year’s number,
according to comScore. Google’s share of that figure in the United States
alone was 65.6 percent.
7
Google has highlighted the undeniable fact that the established advertising
business was built around a soft measurement—say, ratings or readers or
impressions. The increased transparency of online advertising’s direct impact
on sales and leads is pushing other media to do better. Our clients will no
longer accept “estimated measures” of success when digital media provides
them with hard data that can be tied directly to results.
Interestingly, the search giant isn’t known for doing its own brand
advertising very often, but it does reach out to the ad community through the
odd print ad. One such ad, 
figure 1.1
 (see page 12), explains in very simple
terms four ways the company can help marketers. In many ways that copy
reflects this new era of advertising accountability that Google champions.
Google isn’t resting on its search laurels. Google entered the ad network
business with AdSense in 2005. AdSense offers advertisers the opportunity to
serve relevant display ads—text, image or video—based on content and user
and behavioral data. Their bet on mobile devices is manifested in the Androidoperating system and an array of mobile applications. Speaking at
Atmosphere, Google’s conference for chief information officers, Google’s
chief executive officer Eric Schmidt signaled the company’s focus on that
platform when he said, “Mobile will ultimately be the way you provision
most of your services. The way I like to put it is the answer should always be
mobile first. You should always put your best team and your best app on your
mobile app.”
8
 During the week of the 2010 television upfronts, Google
launched Google TV, which attempts to make live television and the Internet
into a seamless experience for viewers. The most interesting feature of
Google TV is that, by essentially treating websites as television channels,
viewers will have access to a virtually unlimited number of content choices
on a single display, their television set.
FACEBOOK’S INFLUENCE OF HALF A
BILLION FRIENDS
The number of social media sites is exploding, and usage is up in almost
every dimension—as good a reason as any for marketers to take note. And
here’s the clincher: Facebook is now the biggest website in the world.
FIGURE 1.1Launched by Mark Zuckerberg in 2004 from his Harvard University dorm,
Facebook began life as a site to help fellow students share videos andmessages rather than emailing them or uploading them to clunky sites.
Facebook’s simple interface, rather like Google’s simple home page, is one
reason its popularity has leapfrogged other sites such as MySpace. In 2010
Facebook had over 500 million users. The website claims that the average
user has 130 friends.
Perhaps the most stunning statistic is time spent on Facebook. Web users
are spending much more time connecting with their groups. According to
Nielsen figures for December 2009—a much-watched period since people
spend more time in December connecting with friends and family and doing
online shopping than any other month—time spent on social networking sites
rose 86 percent compared with the previous year. On December 25 Facebook
overtook Google as the top site in terms of traffic for the first time.
9
According to Facebook, half of their active users log in to the site every day.
While Facebook’s advertising revenue has been limited thus far, its impact
on the marketing business has been huge. Suddenly the power of word of
mouth, networks and small groups can become magnified globally, as we saw
with candidate Obama’s message of hope and his call to action.
When a new disaster strikes in the world, social media sites, such as
Facebook and Twitter, are increasingly the places that people turn to first, to
find out what happened from friends or witnesses reporting before the news
media. The New York-based 
Haitian Times
 wrote in January 19, 2010, that
“the use of social networks as a major way of communications is a first for
Haitians, who have traditionally relied on radio and word of mouth as the
best source of information.”
10
David Kirkpatrick writes that Zuckerberg and others at Facebook “believe
[that] more visibility makes us better people. Some claim, for example, that
because of Facebook, young people today have a harder time cheating on
their boyfriends or girlfriends. They also say that more transparency should
make for a more tolerant society in which people eventually accept that
everybody sometimes does bad or embarrassing things.”
11
 This idea has
migrated to brands and how people respond positively to the transparency
that social media encourages. In a world where consumers are becoming
more cynical and dismissive of corporate-controlled brand messaging,
Facebook represents the media of the everyday person. Hence marketers and
their agencies are trying to tap into the Facebook effect. They’re trying to
create Facebook brands built out from within the Facebook community andthus personally relevant in this more transparent and authentic world.
Here’s a handful of reasons why marketers need to know about Facebook
and other social media networks:
They provide a rich data mine of people’s current interests, for example,
a book or movie. It’s a global focus group.
They enable marketers to see what’s working and what’s not and put
more money behind those products and services gaining most positive
mentions (see the Coca-Cola brand page on
www.facebook.com/cocacola
).
Facebook and others might one day replace email as a simple form of
messaging.
Social media sites are portable and can be accessed from a smart phone,
enabling marketers to connect 24/7 and also serve up messages based on
the viewer’s location.
“Like” pages allow users to tell their friends of their support for certain
brands.
Facebook gives advertisers the ability to target; Facebook users share
their geography, birthday, gender, relationship status, age and education
level.
The early internet advertising strategy of driving traffic to a corporate
site has been superseded by the strategy of brands living on sites that
users enjoy spending time on.
The smartest brands are on Facebook and doing their utmost—building
brand pages, building traffic for those pages and promoting their products in
entertaining ways. “Companies cannot traverse the web quick enough.
They need to create these unpaid armies of customers to do this on their
behalf,” claims Jeremiah Owyang, a partner with Altimeter Group.
12
One of the most popular brand sites is Coca-Cola’s, built not by the
company but by true brand evangelists. The company’s 7.6 million fans post
their love of the drink alongside photos of their Coke merchandise
collections.
13
 Similarly, Starbucks has 10.3 million fans sharing their
enjoyment of caramel lattes in a sentence or posting videos of their kids
enjoying the cafés.
14
 The page has an option for suggesting a friend so you
can share your love of a product. Best Buy, another company with a huge
Facebook presence, has built a page that doesn’t promote products; rather, itlets visitors get feedback about products from other Facebook friends and
provides the marketer with feedback from customers. The site also has a
Shop and Share feature.
As social media continues to evolve, new sites and platforms will arise and
be the first to catch the next wave. But Google and Facebook are the first
significant players to have broken through and influenced everyone in our
business. It won’t ever be the same.CHAPTER 2
THE NEW MEDIA PLAYBOOK
A NEW SET OF RULES FOR 
A NEW MEDIA WORLD
In the old world of top-down, one-way communication, a company
told you what it wanted you to hear, and you had the choice to take it
or leave it. In the new digital world of transparency and ready access
to amazing quantities of detailed information on just about everything,
companies will be held much more to account.
—Simon Clift, former global chief marketing officer,
Unilever
A
s a kid growing up, I remember discarding my Larry Bird Converse
sneakers for the latest set of Nikes. I really did think they made me jump
higher and shoot the basketball better. I would later learn when I entered the
ad business that it was all about branding.
Nike is one brand that has wisely used its marketing to remain relevant.
It has transformed its Brand Media Strategy from the golden age of mass
advertising to one that takes full advantage of the Google and Facebook era.
Back in the eighties and nineties Nike’s ad campaigns were the gold
standard of the marketing community. Michael Jordan was the face of the
brand for youngsters, whether they lived in an inner city or a leafy suburb.
The sneaker brand aired its first national television spot in 1982. By 1988
Nike launched that unforgettable tagline “Just do it,” which became an
Advertising Age
 top-five slogan of the twentieth century. The marketing
helped propel the company to a 23 percent share of the athletic shoe market.
1Fast-forward twenty years and Nike’s strategy looks very different. In
2006 Nike spent just 33 percent of its $678 million US budget in traditional
media, a 55 percent drop from the previous ten years.
2
 Now, Nike shows
many of its ad spots only on the internet. A two-minute, forty-six-second spot
starring soccer player Ronaldinho garnered twenty eight million views on
YouTube.
3
The Nike vice president for global brand marketing, Joaquin Hidalgo,
espouses this approach, commenting, “Consumers don’t want to be told
what’s cool. People don’t want more products, they want more experiences....
Now we put consumers smack dab in the middle of everything we do, placing
them in the center and engaging with them is what we like to do. Our
consumer is growing up in a different world. One big thing changing in their
world is the notion that they are digitally enabled and connected.”
4
For that approach, Nike realized that advertising wouldn’t be enough, and
the firm began to develop “experiences.” The company created an online
community for runners when it offered them its Nike+ sensor. The sensor
records a runner’s activity on an Apple iPod. Runners upload their workout
activity to a website and read web logs written by coaches.
Separately, the athletic apparel giant arranged for five coaches and
seventeen pacers to lead runs through Central Park three times a week
starting from one of Nike’s stores in Manhattan. Nike organized the Human
Race, a 10K running event in twenty-five cities with eight hundred thousand
participants.
Nike released its fourth line of sneakers attached to the NBA star Le-Bron
James, called Nike Air Zoom LeBron IV. The shoe was the sole sponsor 
of
an episode of ESPN’s 
SportsCenter,
 and Nike distributed four hundred
thousand DVDs of the making of the shoe and its unique ad campaign,
proving that advertising can be seen as entertainment.
The company used a host of fresh media outlets for the sneaker debut,
including MTV.com and ESPN.com. The marketing department ran video
clips on MTV2 and erected a neon billboard near New York’s Madison
Square Garden that continuously showed LeBron dunking.
There is no question that what Chris Anderson dubbed the long tail of
media (all the small outlets that target tiny audiences that when put together
represent a targeted mass) presents tremendous opportunities to a savvy
marketer.
5
 Nike proved this by using the tail to outmaneuver its rival Adidasduring the 2010 soccer World Cup: Leading into the tournament, Nike
launched a three-minute video ad called “Write the Future” on its Facebook
page. The spot featured famous footballers such as England’s Wayne Rooney
and Portugal’s Cristiano Ronaldo. Fans were encouraged via an online tool to
edit the spot. These edited versions competed for votes.
Five weeks after its debut, the online spot had been viewed by over 20
million people. Nike enjoyed twice as much buzz associated with the World
Cup than official sponsor Adidas.
6
Nike has evolved its marketing along with the times, it has employed new
forms of advertising on new media channels as they hit critical mass and it
has shown just how close to the consumer companies have to be to stay front
of mind.
Stefan Olander, global director for brand connections at Nike, says, “We
want to find a way to enhance the experience and services, rather than
looking for a way to interrupt people from getting to where they want to go.”
7
Nike’s products continue to be in demand and it remains the world’s number-
one seller of athletic footwear and apparel.
THE MEDIA WORLD IS EVOLVING FAST
The media business has always shaped how advertising has evolved. The two
businesses are intertwined like no others. They feed each other, they support
each other and they innovate together. Newspaper publishers created the ad
industry, radio aired sponsored programs in its early days and television
fueled brand advertising in its golden years. The eighties saw the growth of
cable television and the targeting of the MTV generation, while the nineties
ushered in the internet and an army of digital agencies and interactive
advertising. This led to more sophisticated targeting, better understanding of
response and the development of corporate and brand websites along with an
unprecedented level of interactivity. At the opening of the 2010s, we see the
ad model is shifting yet again, with Google and Facebook leading the way in
remaking communications. There’s a new agenda and a new media playbook
for marketers.FROM BROADCAST TO BROAD “CATCH”
“Technology is creating new media options faster than most people can
assimilate and is causing more multitasking,” says Gary Drenik, president of
the consumer intelligence firm BIGresearch.
8
As we get greater internet access, more bandwidth and increased
portability of media and content, we have discovered that consumers’
appetite for information and entertainment grows geometrically. Linear
media is fast giving way to liquid media, in which consumers can move
seamlessly from setting to setting. And it is commonplace for people of all
ages to consume multiple media—television, internet, newspaper, text
messaging and other media—at the same time.
The concept of mass media has shifted. Television’s top-rated show twenty
years ago, 
The Cosby Show,
 reached 27 percent of the population; today’s
American Idol
 reaches less than 9 percent.
9
We’re seeing media’s growing long tail. As we consume more media, the
existing media channels are fragmenting and new ones are being added. The
proliferation of new channels means less viewer time per channel. The
explosion of new video and content created by the internet and mobile
platforms divides audiences into smaller and smaller segments. Current mass
media markets are ephemeral, and revenues per channel will decrease.
We are moving from a world of broadcast to broad “catch.” Consumers are
harder to reach and creating mass awareness is more complex. In the past,
running a concurrent television and newspaper campaign was enough. People
would see both. Now viewers may see one, the other or neither. Campaigns
need to be multimedia and multichannel, and creative ideas have to travel and
make sense in different formats. As many as 60 percent of television viewers
go online while they’re watching, and websites of magazines and newspapers
add video stories daily.
10
With most media consumed with only partial attention, the impact of
advertising decreases. Today, McKinsey estimates that television advertising
is only 35 percent as effective as it was in 1990.
11
 Clutter is one of the
biggest problems for marketers.
An implication of this shift is that marketers need more than great creative;
they need to have the message appear in the right context. For advertising toreach consumers and not be filtered out, it must be in a relevant place where
the consumer will be more likely to engage with the message.
Advertising is bought and sold today in ways dramatically different from
the past. Some companies aggregate audiences across multiple distribution
channels—such as the online ad networks—and others deliver messages
directly to individual users after discerning their attitudinal and consumption
patterns.
EVERYONE’S A MEDIA COMPANY
We are witnessing an explosion of media creation across blogs, video and
photo sites, social networks and beyond. People’s media activities are
increasingly focused on participatory channels such as Facebook. In
September 2010 there were over 500 million people on Facebook, 145
million on Twitter and 20 million bloggers.
Five years after its launch, YouTube exceeds two billion video views per
day. Every minute, people upload twenty-four hours of video content to the
video channel owned by Google. Mobile devices have become much more of
a social media channel today, with more smart phones sold than PCs.
It’s a content jungle out there: personal profiles, Apple’s “There’s an app
for that” product line, the OpenSocial standard and more all vie for consumer
attention.
ADVERTISER FILTERING
As a backlash to the ever increasing onslaught of advertising, consumers
filter and, even worse, block advertising. Technologies such as TiVo and
banner blockers have seen to that. Online print editions have also reduced
advertiser intrusiveness.
Research companies are stuffed with data on how much people hate
advertising. According to a survey from Sweden’s Research International, 22
percent actively avoid advertising in all media. A global media survey from
media intelligence firm Synovate found that 67 percent of respondents
thought television had too many ads and that roughly 40 percent thought thesame of the internet. The study also revealed that more than 80 percent of
internet users in Australia, Canada, Spain and the United States actively
avoid websites containing “intrusive” advertising.
12
Consumers overwhelmed with ad messages are, not surprisingly,
increasingly selective about what they watch and the advertising messages
they trust. Media companies recognize this, and some have developed
interesting TiVo-busting solutions. For example, the CW Television Network
created content wraps to weave beauty products into small advice spots
around the reality show 
America’s Next Top Model.
 Google is testing a
system based on choice. Users are asked which ad or advertiser they don’t
want to see.
THE SPEED AND ACCESSIBILITY OF DATA
Ratings and readership have been the basis for media planning and the
currency of media buying for the past fifty years. But marketers today have
much more information about media and consumer purchase habits.
Current media measurement is designed for planning campaigns based on
the principles of building brands and driving mass awareness. The industry 
is
moving fast toward direct marketing principles that at their heart are about
measuring response and gaining more exact return-on-investment numbers.
The accessibility of data, and the speed at which it is available, has made it
easier for marketers to evaluate and optimize campaigns with higher
precision. Marketers have been able to adjust a campaign as it evolves, fine-
tuning efficiency and response. New media-measurement techniques have
allowed marketers to test and improve each campaign over time, changing
creative, media placement, position and timing.
The digital era has bypassed demographics. Marketers have a clearer
picture of a consumer from the content they’ve viewed. Online data could,
for instance, tell a car manufacturer which model consumers looked at on
their own site. They could then correlate that with the consumer’s zip code
(deduced from information the consumer entered on a weather site) and the
consumer’s tastes (from the consumer’s access of sports or fashion sites).
Websites deliver a wealth of response and impact data, for instance, the
number of impressions (or views), response or cost per click, number ofonline video views, level of engagement (time on site, number of pages
viewed, purchase activity), pass-on of the site to friends and the number of
online friends a person has. Marketers can gain insight by measuring the level
and intensity of conversations via blogs, Twitter, aggregator Digg.com and
social networking sites. This rapid delivery and accessibility of data has
created an industry built to track, evaluate and optimize. Marketers adjust
their campaigns more speedily now that they know what works and what
doesn’t.
Stephen DiMarco, chief marketing officer for Boston-based Compete,
referring to his company’s merging of data with Cannondale’s to create a
consumer panel with online and offline data, says, “Since we have ‘matched’
our panel with Cannondale, we can determine what [consumer packaged
goods] products our panelists have purchased. This means we can use this
information as the basis of our segmentation and then build media plans
based on the recency and/or frequency of purchase in a product category like
diapers.”
13
A MEDIA MASH-UP 
Speaking at an Optimedia client digital off-site in June 2010, VivaKi’s chief
innovations officer Rishad Tobaccowalla observed, “All analog media are
becoming digital. Most digital media are becoming mobile. Most mobile
media are becoming analog.”
Established media aren’t being left out of the picture; they’re buying and
creating their own new media. The world’s oldest advertising medium, the
out-of-home (OOH) industry (for example, billboards), is investing heavily in
digital OOH networks. In a deal valued at $1.8 billion, CBS acquired CNET
Networks, including TV.com, one of YouTube’s biggest suppliers. NBC
Universal and News Corporation came together to create online video player
Hulu. The partners later welcomed the Walt Disney Co. as a participant.
Disney also has a close relationship with Apple and was the first to sell its
television shows via iTunes.
The business is no longer about buying online versus television versus
print. We are witnessing the rise of audiovisual media with advances such as
three-dimensional television, interactive television and mobile video.Arguably, iPads and etablets could be the predominant platform for
magazines in the future.
Media companies are looking to sell across platforms such as television
and the internet, and the media plan will follow that content. The media
business was built on delivering large audiences, measured by demographics,
and advertisers bought those audiences. Now the media business targets by
content, behavior and response. To give an example, the hit comedy 
The
Office,
 broadcast Thursday nights on NBC, is available after the broadcast on
the online video site Hulu.com. Fans can also follow a blog written by one of
the show’s characters, Dwight, and view unedited scenes on their mobile
phones. One example of an advertiser taking advantage of a cross-platform
approach was Hyundai in Fox’s 
24.
 In addition to advertising in the show,
they were the only automotive advertiser to build into the show brand and
product placement. They promoted and ran exclusive scenes online for the
next week’s show. They advertised their 
association with the show in print
and radio. Lastly, they sponsored the 
24
 episodes on Hulu.
Smart phones are fast becoming the platform of choice for accessing social
media applications. Mobile technology has increased the applications’ utility
and accessibility among users. And mobile technology seems to be meeting
very analog needs—ordering pizza, reading magazines, searching for local
addresses and accessing directions.
THE ECONOMICS OF ESTABLISHED 
MEDIA COMPANIES ARE ERODING
All this choice for advertisers is driving down costs. Traditional media outlets
are suffering.
In 2009, 369 magazines ceased publishing and 64 print titles were entirely
replaced by online editions. Consumers these days want information in real
time. Newspapers are losing audience as Generation Y reads print online and
classified advertising shifts to the internet. As the cost of producing
information becomes too much to bear for major network news departments,
Twitter has stepped in, breaking news faster, and for free, thanks to unpaid
amateurs on the ground.
At the same time, social media still searches for a revenue model, andmobile advertising is in its infancy. We’re seeing a pushback on media, with
the likes of News Corporation and the 
New York Times,
 with its prominent
online properties, instituting pay walls on websites.
The chaos is creating opportunities, with media companies wanting to
amortize their content and their resources differently. The next few years will
see a dramatic shift in how the entire media business is underwritten, whether
by the consumer or the advertiser.
THE NEW MEDIA PLAYBOOK
In truth, we’ve been seeing the mass media age erode for some time. Search
engines and social media have just added to the pressure on the gas pedal.
The shift in the media world and with consumers is a double-edged sword for
those in the advertising and communications business. We’re an industry that
thrives on fashion and fads. But the changes I’ve just outlined have real-
world implications for developing and executing Brand Media Strategies.
There are eight important implications for the new media playbook.
CREATE INVOLVEMENT AND RELEVANCE,
NOT JUST AWARENESS
Advertising has always been about engaging the consumer. In the golden age
of mass media, it was all about the creative: the funniest commercial, the
most captivating print ad. Now advertising is as much about creating
involvement and relevance as grabbing attention.
Since generating awareness is expensive and more difficult to achieve in a
fragmented, partial-attention media economy, advertising relies on precision
—it’s less about the number of people exposed to a message and more about
locating the right audience. The notion of advertising interrupting consumers
is giving way to a more audience-friendly approach. As consumers filter and
avoid advertising, the context of advertising is becoming as important as the
content.
In today’s market, advertisers are working even harder to put the right
message in front of the right target group at the right time to improve theperformance of their communications. To give an example, the Volkswagen
Polo has been using online video to reach its customers in Europe. VW
knows exactly whom it wants to target: a man between the ages of twenty-
five and thirty-nine, who “watches soccer matches, checks out the Playboy
site and reads 
Der Spiegel
 magazine.”
14
 That’s a whole lot different from and
more specific than the demographic buys of television, targeting men ages
eighteen to thirty-four.
Christian Baudis, the European head of Tremor Media, a New York-based
advertising network, tells Bloomberg, “We go to them [the client] and say
here are 150 sites with video content that is attractive to that target group.
Targeted advertising is more efficient. It costs less money to reach the target.
That’s the beauty of it.”
15
Jeremy Allaire, head of Brightcove, a company that helps manage video
content on scores of websites, adds that with online advertising a marketer
knows exactly how many people have seen the ad. In contrast to a brand
impression on television, he said, “on the Internet, a video ad comes up and
it’s designed as a call to action for the user and they can click it, taking them
to the marketing Web site.”
16
Media technology and its rapid development have increased advertisers’
ability to exploit the relevance and context of the messages. But the pursuit of
relevant context is not limited to digital media. Major broadcasters are
exploring more integrated sponsorships or branded entertainment in program
platforms. The win-win is when it works organically for the brand and the
program. Print publications are developing smart advertising and editorial
programs that offer synergy for brands. And cable television companies are
positioned to orchestrate addressable advertising, which the advertising
industry sees as the next step for television. Addressable advertising is
television’s version of online advertising. It targets households with relevant
ads based on viewer and household data.
ADOPT DIGITAL PRACTICES AS BEST PRACTICES
FOR ALL MEDIA
Marketers and their agencies are finding inspiration in the digital world.
Digital agencies tossed a lot of what was wrong with the traditional businessand invented new ways to operate. The general advertising industry would be
more effective if it adopted the marketing thinking and skills that digital
marketers have championed for years.
Brand versus Return on Investment
What’s more important, brand or return on investment? Digital marketers
have been able to more consistently walk the tightrope between the two. The
digital world has owned the return-on-investment mantra. Interactive media
has grown in popularity because it can track response, behavior and sales. It
establishes metrics at the outset of a campaign and tracks performance
against them. Metrics quickly evolved beyond response campaigns to brand
campaigns, from basic page views and click-through statistics to engagement
and sales-effect metrics. In comparison, analog marketing measures such as
ad awareness and brand measures appear soft and often are unrelated to
business outcomes.
Integration
The cascading of marketing agency specialists (direct response, media,
customer relationship management, design, sponsorship, entertainment
marketing, custom publishing, etc.) has the industry debating whether this has
led to sacrifice of integration. Digital advertising, with a few exceptions, has
built its model on a fully integrated service. Marketers expect digital people
to give them a knowledgeable critique of the website, creative, research,
brand and media activity and to integrate it all. Imagine having your creative
team at an ad agency sitting alongside media and adjusting their TV ads
according to response!
Campaign Planning versus Campaign Optimization
Digital marketers tweak marketing communications in real time. If an idea
fails, they make adjustments along the way. The new thinking advocated by
digital marketers is to constantly test and reapply. This has also led to
creating different models and a cost structure for developing creative
executions and content.
Cutting Out Advertising WasteThe ability to segment targeting has been around ever since the publishing
industry launched special interest titles. The potential to cut waste or
narrowly target through niche print or television media and messaging never
really got off the ground. We continue to be locked into a media buying
currency of cost per thousand demographic audience such as all adults
eighteen to forty-nine. We rarely if ever see marketers employ different
creative on, say, Syfy versus MTV. But digital marketers have made this
happen, and they are getting results.
Participation Media
It was only a few years ago that the internet was being written off as an
advertising medium as agencies tried desperately to fit old media logic into
the new media environment.
The viral, irreverent campaign of Burger King’s subservient chicken in the
United States broke new ground by encouraging twelve million viewers to
type commands that a man dressed in a chicken suit responded to, to
reinforce its “Have it your way” tagline.
Marketers need to incorporate all these kinds of skills and disciplines into
their general communications.
LET CONSUMER INSIGHT DRIVE THE MEDIA STRATEGY
Until we take steps to advance our understanding of people we won’t
be able to enjoy the full benefits of this exciting new age.
—Susan Gianinno, chairman and chief executive officer,
Publicis North America
Media selection is more than just reaching the consumer; it’s delivering
memorable, interactive and emotional occasions with the brand. The key is
planning media from the consumer’s perspective. Yet media agency planners
are guilty of being media facing instead of consumer facing. In the mass
media era, planning was all about measuring audiences and buying media on
the basis of the most efficient and best levels of coverage. Awareness has
given way to involvement and relevance. Today’s strategies need to be driven
by communications platforms with insight at the center.MEDIA NEUTRALITY
If consumer insight drives Brand Media Strategy, then it follows that
marketers and their agencies have to be Switzerland when it comes to
deciding which media to use. Because influence has become more important
than reach, how the hierarchy of media changes depends on the category and
brand task. We can’t assume television is the lead medium or that digital
should drive all campaigns. Brand media dollars are too precious to make
such broad statements. Nor can we rely solely on advertising as the primary
marketing tool. Marketers have at their disposal paid, earned and owned
media, and each brings something to the equation.
This has major implications for marketers’ approach to development of
their marketing communications. The process for developing advertising
needs to start with “Where should we be?” and then move to “How to say it?”
rather than the other way around. All touch points help build a brand.
Different mixes of marketing channels and media create different outcomes.
The role of media and channel selection has become more of a strategic
decision by marketers.
MICROMEDIA MAKES WORD-OF-MOUTH MARKETING
MORE SCALABLE
Word of mouth has always been the most effective way to market a brand,
and it is now more scalable. Micromedia has made it so.
Micromedia is media consumed separately from traditional media, even if
traditional media outlets are producing it. Think about all the people who
read the 
New York Times
 financial Dealbook blog but may never pick up the
newspaper. Micromedia is a video on YouTube versus E! Entertainment or
an iTunes download versus a CD.
Micromedia can be reconstructed and aggregated in many different ways,
such as RSS feeds or blog networks or podcasts. Micromedia simultaneously
expands the media supply and atomizes it. The size of media products
shrinks. More of us are snacking, taking bite-size pieces of media as smart
phones and iPods transform downtime into opportunities to catch up on
email, share information or watch a webisode. The downside is that less of us
are sitting down to the full five-course menu.Media such as Facebook and Twitter metastasize word of mouth. The
benefit for marketers is that all this media activity has made the consumer
conversation more widespread. Marketing messages can be spread online,
and that’s put new vigor behind grassroots media outlets with a closer
connection to their readership. Consumers are more likely to believe other
individuals than a faceless corporation. Friends and acquaintances are seen as
more authentic and transparent.
Even journalists are influenced by social media: 89 percent reported using
blogs for their research.
17
 Earned media (free media, PR, buzz) needs to
become integral to many brand communications. Consumers’ participation in
media means they are part of the medium and message for brands. In many
cases they are willing partners if properly tapped.
SEARCH IS THE LAST MILE OF MARKETING
Online search is now the most important medium in advertising. Coming
from a media guy whose career has been made by developing great
television, print or OOH campaigns, that’s a sweeping statement. But here’s
why. It’s where people start to look for information and filter the information
that’s out there. It makes the whole experience of looking for products and
services so much more personal.
It’s certainly the most accountable. Google’s model of weighting ads that
are more relevant has rubbed off on the advertising world. The more relevant
an ad message, the more effective, because the message is then seen as
information. No more ad avoiders. And when consumers seek information
about products and services, they usually turn to Google or any of the other
search engines, such as Bing or Yahoo! Search is second only to browsing in
malls as the most influential activity in encouraging purchase, according to a
survey by Netpop Research.
18
No one visits a website home page anymore—they walk in the back door,
the page that Google sent them to. Google is the starting point for most
consumers who want to find out more about a brand or need help making a
decision. It has almost single-handedly replaced the traditional role of print
advertising and in-store advice in providing product information.
Any advertising effort then should prioritize the search strategy.
Integrating search with an existing effort is a major opportunity. Supportingmarketing efforts that are lower in the purchase funnel, when customers are
in the information-gathering stage of researching a product or service, will
likely improve their efficiency. Search allows marketers to tap into awareness
and interest generated by your current advertising.
Search inquiries very often are generated by publicity. When Michelle
Obama appeared on Jay Leno’s 
Tonight Show
 and mentioned her outfit was
from J. Crew, the retailer leaped on the opportunity, bought the search term
“Michelle Obama” and set up a page on JCrew.com that promoted her outfit.
Search exploits one of the most powerful qualities of marketing: relevant
messaging. It influences brand decisions and increases brand consideration
when prospects are in the market. Search is not just an advertising medium; it
is a sales-lead tool, so set the budget accordingly.
CONTENT IS ROYAL
[The agency’s job is to create] content so valuable and useful that
[consumers] wouldn’t want to live without it.
—Jeff Hicks, chief executive officer, Crispin Porter + Bogusky
19
Crispin Porter + Bogusky has in many ways led the way in mastering the mix
of content and digital in communications. The agency’s campaigns, such as
those for Burger King and Domino’s Pizza (in which they created a website
where people order pizza and then can follow their order like a FedEx
package), illustrate how it has managed to achieve crossover from advertising
to content and entertainment.
Branded entertainment is on the rise, and in some cases marketers can have
the last word when it comes to which shows continue and which get canned.
In the case of 
Chuck,
 an NBC show, the support of Subway—where the lead
character works—helped give the series a new lease on life.
A survey from the Association of National Advertisers found that 38
percent of members were spending more on branded entertainment in 2010
than in previous years, as an alternative to the thirty-second spot.
20
Scott Donaton, author of 
Madison and Vine,
 describes how branded
entertainment has become an everyday reality of the communications
industry as media companies look to monetize their content.
21
 To meetincreased interest in branded entertainment, media agencies have created
internal divisions that cater to this need. Mindshare set up Mindshare
Entertainment. IPG established Ensemble, and my own agency network
group, Zenith Optimedia, rolled out its global content division NewCast in
multiple markets.
The CBS series 
Survivor
 helped create a new model for advertiser
involvement in a television show thanks to Mark Burnett, who weaved in
product rewards for contestants with a game of survival.
Advertising is mutating, and increased bandwidth has propelled it into all
kinds of audiovisual content. Web users are taking brands into their own
hands, whether it’s creating Super Bowl commercials for Doritos or dropping
mints into cans of soda on YouTube. One channel, the Al Gore-backed
Current TV, offers viewers a forum to create shows as well as commercials.
Entertaining content is seen as more authentic. What else could explain the
stampede of brands to the writers’ rooms of late-night comedians? The team
for Comedy Central’s Stephen Colbert created an entire segment for Kraft by
setting up a tongue-in-cheek fight between mayonnaise lovers and the Kraft
product Miracle Whip.
PERSONALIZATION
In 2006 
Time
 famously named as its person of the year You. The magazine
reasoned that collaborative efforts such as Wikipedia, YouTube and My-
Space defined the year much more than any single individual.
Welcome to the me generation. 
Time
 wrote that the web is “a tool for
bringing together the small contributions of millions of people and making
them matter. Silicon Valley consultants call it Web 2.0, as if it were a new
version of some old software. But it’s really a revolution.”
22
The individual experience is what consumers demand, what connects and
engages them. Now that demand is possible to meet through technology,
marketers are finding it necessary to tap into it. That started with the 
user
experience online. The consumer’s ability to interact with web content was
the first step in the personalization experience. Google finds content
customized to a person’s search terms. Facebook pages are customized to
your friend information and filtered through your news feeds.The access to data based on behavior or stated interests is opening another
door to serving up ads to users. Hulu and other video sites give you a choice
of ads to view. That level of customized targeting is now offered with
television ads through set-top-box data from pay-television companies or opt-
in content. Mobile media provides the flexibility to build location into the
messaging. The trick is in putting the bits of information back together again
in a way that appeals to the viewer.
All the data is defining more customer segments that can be reached and
ultimately sold to. A message that resonates with the widest group of people
is relatively blunt mass media. A recession coupled with multiplying media
options for targeting different segments has pushed marketers to think about
whether they need to go big and reach the masses or be very selective and
reach new moms or cat owners. Google’s innovations and other digital
advances, such as addressable advertising platforms, are helping advertisers
single out the most logical target customers and the loyal enthusiasts.
Being able to pinpoint and efficiently target these micro groups with
specific offers and products is making the role of Brand Media Strategy more
important and effectively taking waste out of the equation. Addressable
advertising trials show how much more receptive customers are when
advertising messages interest them. Publicis Groupe’s Starcom conducted
trials in Baltimore, Maryland, and Huntsville, Alabama, in concert with sales
organization Comcast Spotlight that proved that more targeted television
placement increased advertising efficiency by 65 percent.
23
The new media playbook reflects the evolving media landscape where
technology has forced brands to catch up with a more wired, mobile and
attention-elusive consumer. Advertising ceased to be about just the ads a fair
while ago. The digital era has changed all that. The golden age of the Brand
Media Strategy has arrived.CHAPTER 3
A SHIFT FROM 
MEDIA PLANNING TO
COMMUNICATIONS
PLANNING
ENTER THE SUPER PLANNER
In today’s marketing and media environment only the naïve and
foolish confuse presence with impact.
—Stephen Heyer, former chief operating officer
Coca-Cola Company, now chairman and
chief executive officer, Harry & David
1
P
eople often ask me, “What is the difference between media planning and
communications planning?” My response is that media planning is focused
on reaching as many of the right audience in the right place at the right time
and at the right cost as possible, whereas communications planning is less
about 
reaching
 people than 
influencing
 them.
The increased scrutiny of big business by Wall Street, the growth of the
internet and the intensity of the global recession that began in 2008 
have
resulted in a need for more rigor in sharpening the focus on the Brand Media
Strategy.ENTER THE SUPER PLANNER 
AND COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Communications planning allows a more strategic way of determining key
media choices and connection strategies. It is about moving away from the
job of delivering messages to audiences and moving toward better
understanding of how consumers receive and respond to communication. The
starting point is the consumer, not the media channel or the discipline. When
practiced at its best, communications planning not only develops the Brand
Media Strategy but also informs the creative. Communications planning has
already evolved to the point that important marketers are giving it high
priority. Procter & Gamble and Johnson & Johnson both appointed agency of
records (AORs) in the United States for communications planning.
In his book 
Space Race,
 Jim Taylor argues that communications planning
first began with Ogilvy’s formulation of a 360-degree philosophy in 1997:
“Soon after came Unilever’s ‘fish’ process which later became the ‘ABC’
process. Within which communications planning as a discipline was born.”
2
For a long time media strategy was based on delivering creative messages
efficiently and effectively. Clients used full-service agencies that gave them a
little of everything they needed, with integration between the various
marketing disciplines a given.
The difficulties emerged as media agencies split off from their creative
brethren as part of the great unbundling movement. This started the
disintermediation between creative and media. The predominance of creative
agencies as the lead agency began to be challenged as the media long tail
expanded and some clients worried that creative shops defaulted to a
television or print execution to address their every marketing challenge.
The advent of specialist and independent media agencies such as Carat and
Zenith in Europe began by the mid-1990s. From there they moved into 
the
rest of the world, including the United States, separating media and creative.
Initially, the driving force for the separation was to consolidate the scale and
volume of media buying. But new theories have arisen about how media
channels influence the consumer, and rather than simply focusing on which
media channels to choose, a handful of agencies saw a gap in the market and
began pioneering the world of communications planning, a businessessentially free from the legacy of advertising or mass media.
The focus on communications planning intensified in the 2000s, with over
a dozen independent communications planning shops establishing themselves
in London. The larger full-service media shops quickly caught up and the
discipline gained traction globally. High-end strategy was a much better sell
to clients than the fast-commoditizing buying business.
As the media marketplace evolved, summed up in the previous chapter,
communications planning and the Brand Media Strategy have become more
important ingredients in the advertising development process.
This was highlighted in 
Advertising Age
 by editor at large Matthew
Creamer in April 2006 when he wrote, “As consumers’ attention drifts
among more and more media outlets, everyone agrees that the time is ripe for
the discipline of channel planning to blossom in the US. While
communications planning is more typically associated with media agencies,
more full-service creative shops are incorporating into their account-planning
departments the people and tools that can take apart a marketing budget in a
media-agnostic way and be willing to shift spending—often away from
mainline advertising.”
3
Creative agencies have experimented with communications planning as a
discipline to bridge this gap. Agencies like BBH, Goodby Silverstein &
Partners and JWT established internal communications planning functions.
Sometimes these were called Channel Planning or Engagement Planning or
Context Planning, and all had the general purpose of partnering with account
planning, creative and digital to facilitate more integrated communications.
AN EVOLVING ADVERTISING 
AND COMMUNICATIONS PROCESS
As the next iteration of the internet begins and online search and social media
unfold, clients’ need for communications planning to rationalize their
relationships has become more urgent. Desire for integration and
coordination has become a necessity.
This task has been made more complex by the growing number of agency
relationships. For example, in addition to the creative and direct responseagency partnerships, social media has brought public relations into the
foreground and digital agencies have mushroomed as the demand for
response- and data-driven plans has grown.
Once a brand’s creative strategy was at the heart of marketing. Now clients
must consider as equally important the Brand Media Strategy, and ideally the
two should sit together and inform each other.
This is a departure from the mass media approach of developing creative
first, with media’s job being to place the ads in front of the right people. As
explained earlier, context, relevance and involvement have become important
components in making the communications more potent. Communications
planning is about ensuring that these factors are built into the advertising
process.
The Brand Media Strategy precedes the media planning process and is the
principal input into the media planning brief. It also should help clients
understand the best use of each touch point and how all media
communication channels can be integrated.
NEW SKILLS FOR THE NEW PLANNER
Communications planning in the Google and Facebook era needs a broader
set of skills and expertise beyond media planning experience and a flair for
ideas.
BEING STRATEGIC
Strategy
 is one of the most overused and misused words in our business.
People toss it around like candy on Halloween night. I’ve seen strategies that
were really just a list of objectives. Sometimes they were tactics and
initiatives. I subscribe to the Michael Porter school of strategy:
Create a unique and valuable position, involving a different set of
activities.
 A Brand Media Strategy needs to offer unique space for the brand
to occupy and own. The communications planner doesn’t just plan a
campaign that meets objectives but also develops a differentiated Brand
Media Strategy that will deliver a competitive advantage.Strategy requires you to make trade-offs.
 A Brand Media Strategy must
choose what 
not
 to do. No client I’ve ever worked with has had the budget to
do everything. Being strategic requires choices, such as determining where to
allocate the resources that will deliver a greater return. I always worry when I
read media award papers that tout “surrounding the consumer with 360°
communications.” It conjures throwing stuff against the wall and seeing what
sticks.
Strategy involves creating fit among your activities.
 Brand Media Strategy
works best when media ideas, initiatives and tactics combine into a bigger
and more complete strategic platform or idea. This is particularly important in
a world with an increasing number of touch points. The consumer
consistently getting the same message is key to integrated communications.
4
DIGITAL PROFICIENCY IS ESSENTIAL
Adding digital expertise across the agency functions has become a priority
and no more so than with the communications planner. While you don’t need
to be fully proficient in analytic algorithms, you have to help manage digital.
In this media mash-up it doesn’t make sense to have only a digital strategy
or mobile strategy. Clients are looking for “a strategy.” The real challenge 
for
marketers is to integrate digital solutions into the total plan. What role do
they play now, and how should the budget be allocated? Given its
importance, I will deal with this specifically in 
chapter 10
.
ACQUIRING EXPERTISE IN CONSUMER INSIGHT
Getting a feel for customers’ emotional response to a category or brand I
found to be the most challenging skill to develop for communications
planners coming from general media agency or media planner backgrounds.
Media planning has traditionally been more analytic than those other
backgrounds. Evaluating the quantitative performance of media plans based
on reach, frequency or cost efficiency is second nature. So is analyzing brand
and purchase data or optimizing digital performance marketing campaigns.
However, the notion of using intuition or gut feel makes many planners
uncomfortable. My experience working with the planning teams at Optimediawas that acquiring consumer insight is a skill that can be developed. We
found that once the planners had some experience in it they became more
confident. I know of some media agencies that have got there by hiring
creative agency account planners. Whichever way you go, insight
development skills are absolutely central to establishing Brand Media
Strategies in the new marketing world. We will cover insights in depth in
chapter 5
.
MULTICHANNEL UNDERSTANDING
Digital media adds complexity as well as opportunity to marketing plans.
Traditional definitions of advertising have expanded in integrated
communications. Being media neutral means deploying a wide selection:
one-to-one, experiential, word-of-mouth, point-of-purchase and point-of-
consumption media. The need for channel planning and selection is becoming
a key requirement for brands, as is message integration across all marketing
channels. The rigor and measurement that media agency planners offered in
traditional media is being demanded across this vast choice of channels.
THE RISE OF THE GEEKS
Data planning has become a marketer’s best friend. Performance marketing
and business data to develop insights and optimize marketing
communications programs are fast becoming as important as ideas and the
creative process. And with that comes more rigor and confidence in the
accountability and scalability of the planning.
COLLABORATION QUALITIES
If you think about the expertise we’ve just discussed, the communications
planner really does have to be a super planner. In truth, it is rare to find all
these skills in one person. That’s why I’ve found that one of the most
important qualities is the ability to collaborate and work openly and closely
with those who have these skills, whether in the agency or outside it. This is
not a profession for a control freak! In my experience the best magic inplanning comes when it’s not clear where an idea comes from, when it isn’t
clear where the role of one member in the client’s communications team
starts and another’s finishes. If this can be facilitated, then you’ve achieved
the communications planning Shangri-la.
DEVELOPING STRUCTURE 
FOR COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
The best part about being a communications planner is having the creativity
and freedom to develop and present your ideas in a very individual way. I’ve
never been an advocate of paint-by-numbers planning or insisted on
following a strict process.
I’ve found that the best planners bring different ideas and perspectives to a
problem and won’t be put in a box. Two of the most impressive planners I
have worked with directly are Derek Morris and Gerry Boyle out of our
United Kingdom office. (Both have since moved on from planning to much
bigger roles in the Publicis corporate world. Derek as chief operations officer
of VivaKi UK and Gerry as chief executive officer of ZenithOptimedia UK.)
Derek was a deliberator who sought input and allowed ideas to bubble and
evolve for several weeks before making a decision. Gerry in contrast would
lock himself in his office and emerge the next morning having nailed a
strategy. Both were amazingly effective at reaching solutions, but each got
there his own way.
I’ve worked with planners who are very visual, planners who are analytic,
planners who are superorganized and planners who struggle to make it into
the office before 11:00 A.M. They’ve all brought something special and
unique to our agency’s planning product. My point is that it’s necessary to
create a broad framework and provide the tools that help steer the planning,
but it’s more important to create a culture around planning and a planner
community that is constantly striving to push the product forward.
At Optimedia we developed an approach to planning we call OPEN. It has
a very specific philosophy and was built jointly by the agency brain trust. It is
something all at the agency own. This book isn’t about selling our agency
ideas and philosophy, but I’ve provided in the following pages some helpful
techniques and tools based on OPEN for planners and creative people.A FRAMEWORK TO DEVELOP 
EFFECTIVE BRAND MEDIA STRATEGIES 
Perhaps it goes without saying that, while there is an element of art and
intuition in communications planning, the Brand Media Strategy needs to be
commercial. In other words, planners ought to be offering something that will
help sell more product.
The strategy should be clearly defined and have a point of view: Who are
we trying to communicate to? How should the communication work? The
communications planner must also make some clear choices and tradeoffs
about how and where the budget will be spent. The constant temptation for
agencies and clients is to jump into specific solutions and move to the tactical
too soon. They want to create a television ad or a print campaign, 
a website
or a microsite. The focus is on executing the work or the plan. In my
experience, there is often insufficient scrutiny given to budget allocation and
the communications mix. This happens for obvious reasons. Specialist
agencies are compensated upon execution. Even on the client side, units
within the marketing department opt to protect their budgets. Separately, they
have strong data about how their individual channels perform but very little
on how they work in conjunction.
Within the marketer’s own organizations, silos are also a struggle. A report
from the Association of National Advertisers noted that “nearly 60 percent of
respondents said significant change was needed in their business’ approach to
marketing if its function was to shift to a higher, more visionary level. One
fourth of respondents said significant change was needed by their team and
department.”
5
That’s why the Brand Media Strategy has become a more important
strategic function. Its role is to address two important questions: Where to
play, and How to win. 
Where
 means touch points; stages of the buying
process; the time of day, week and year; and individual media vehicles. 
How
refers to the way media is used to drive the brand messaging harder than and
differently from the competition and the way the media is leveraged to create
response. Understanding where and how to advertise comes before
determining what to say and the tactics that will take that message to the
target consumer.The growth of digital behemoths such as Google and Facebook have given
more scope for brands to deliver more sophisticated and differentiated Brand
Media Strategies. For instance, Coca-Cola and Pepsi have for over a century
competed head to head. They are very similar products but use very different
Brand Media Strategies. In 2010 Pepsi opted not to advertise in the Super
Bowl, preferring to launch a social media campaign instead. Coca-Cola
meanwhile continued to advertise in the big game.
Marketers have sought to create advertising that either reinforces brand
messaging or elicits a response from the customer. These goals are not
exclusive, however; marketing can do both. A mixture of media tactics and
how the tactics are used is important in achieving these goals.
Two key tools that we will use are the Consumer Pathway and the Brand
Media Strategy Wheel
©
. These are important tools to help us develop and
evaluate brand media strategies and help us with decisions in
communications planning.
THE CONSUMER PATHWAY
The Consumer Pathway is an important strategic platform for building the
Brand Media Strategy. The Consumer Pathway, shown in 
figure 3.1
, is an
updated version of the traditional brand or purchase funnel. The funnel was
based on a marketing model that put capturing consumers through brand
awareness at the top of a funnel and then filtered consumers down through
various stages toward purchase.
In the modern media world, that model has been turned on its head.
Marketers know that the funnel model isn’t always efficient, and they have
developed different strategies for engaging consumers more directly at
different stages at which they can influence purchase.
We know from our own purchase habits that people can buy a product
without even being aware of the brand. An investor may buy a financial
product solely on the basis of her financial advisor’s recommendation and not
need to remember the product name. Google can put a brand straight 
into a
consumer’s active consideration, or even purchase, if he clicks a link while
searching online. Brands such as Starbucks have been built through user
experience and word of mouth. The coffee chain has only recently startingadvertising in paid mass media.
FIGURE 3.1
The Consumer Pathway comprises stages of brand influence: awareness of
a product or service, involvement, active consideration, purchase
(conversion), consumption (usage), relationship building and advocacy.
It is important to gain insight into the consumer at each stage. Every
product or service has the same basic stages, but brands within a category
will have different brand hurdles. Also, the consumer relationship with a
brand does not end with the purchase. It is important for planners to think
beyond the purchase and consider consumption and usage. Even that isn’t the
end of the story, however. Advocacy begins the cycle again when the
customer recommends the product or service to others.
The Consumer Pathway is the base of the marketing effort. In an ideal
world, the communications planner would be able to identify strategies and
tactics that would address each of the stages, but the real world has budgets.
In fact, a communications plan that claims to do everything is a sure sign of
insufficient clarity about what’s needed or an ineffective plan.
Through media, marketers are able, but can’t afford, to engage and target
consumers at every stage of the purchasing process.
Awareness:
 The first stage is awareness, when consumers discover that a
product or service may solve a problem they didn’t know they had. It could
be a new category, a new product, a new brand or a new or improvedfunction or role.
This stage centers on creating visibility and recognition. Driving awareness
for brands could be a significant outcome if the brand is new or there is a new
benefit or idea to communicate. However, simply driving awareness is no
guarantee of sales. Given that this is the most expensive to achieve in media
dollars, particularly for a mass audience, setting out awareness as a
communications goal is an important strategic decision.
Involvement:
 As consumers become more familiar with and gain more
interest in the product or service, they get involved. This is the “just looking”
stage, when the customer is finding out if the product or service is right and
the customer is therefore open to persuasion. At this point the consumer
needs experiences and information about the product. “This brand (or
product) is like X, for people who need Y.”
Active Consideration:
 Once engaged, consumers need to know more. They
are doing their homework, they’re perhaps asking for samples and seeking to
customize. This stage is about getting the brand on the short list. Ultimately,
it’s about increasing brand preference and purchase intent. Active
consideration means the consumer is making comparative investigations.
“Why is A better than B?”
Purchase Conversion:
 The moment the consumer decides to buy a specific
product or service but hasn’t paid for it is the moment when the planner has
to convert the decision to a purchase. It is the point of commitment.
Consumption (Usage):
 The act of consuming, or using, the product or
service is the customer experience. It is the point at which consumers
discover whether the product or service delivers what it promised and they’re
deciding whether they like it.
Relationship Building:
 From a business perspective, relationship building
is about selling another one by encouraging repurchase or cross-selling. It is
about forming a bond with consumers and reaffirming that they made the
right choice. It’s important to understand the promise, the contract with the
customer, that was made and to deliver more than was promised.
Advocacy:
 Current customers speak out in support of your brand in the
advocacy stage. It is the creating and enabling of word of mouth and
recommendation.
In the mass media era a more conventional Brand Media Strategy would
involve using media to collect consumers at the top of the funnel, to buildawareness. This is still a valid strategy for a lot of brands, but in the digital
era more stock is put in driving relevance and involvement, later stages in the
consumer pathway. Google and ecommerce websites are driving
consideration and purchase. Facebook, Twitter and other media sites give
existing consumers a greater voice in the final stage of advocacy.
Media companies have become adept at leveraging their content across
media platforms that affect the different stages of the Consumer Pathway.
Understanding where the stages of Brand Media Strategy intersect with the
Consumer Pathway is the next stage in helping the marketer reach the
consumer.
THE BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY WHEEL
The wheel shown in 
figure 3.2
 displays the chief issues a planner needs to
address in the Brand Media Strategy. The first issue is understanding the
communications challenge—establishing communication goals and defining
their key performance indicators (KPIs). Then comes discovery, uncovering
the target audience insight, which leads to understanding moments of
receptivity. Campaign architecture is next. The Brand Media Strategy
requires creating a communications platform that works in synergy with
creative and involves touch-point recommendations. Finally, it is about the
brand or campaign idea and its amplification, followed by integrated
execution and measurement.
FIGURE 3.2The rest of the book covers how we address these communications issues
of the Brand Media Strategy Wheel:
Communication goals/KPIs
Chapter 4—Focusing on Outcomes,
Not Outputs
Chapter 12—Measurement and
Metrics
Target analysis
Chapter 5—Insight over Analysis
Moments of receptivity
Chapter 8—Unlocking Moments of
Receptivity
Central communication / creative
platform
Chapter 7—Conducting the OrchestraCampaign architecture
Chapter 9—Touch Point Selection
Idea amplification
Chapter 6—1 + 1 = 3
Chapter 10—Digitizing the Brand
Media Strategy
Activating the plan
Chapter 11—Execution Is the X-FactorCHAPTER 4
FOCUSING ON OUTCOMES,
NOT OUTPUTS
SETTING THE BRAND MEDIA 
STRATEGY COMMUNICATION GOALS
A
 clearly articulated, inspiring and measurable communication goal is the
cornerstone of a successful Brand Media Strategy. That’s why this chapter
may well be the most important in the book.
Having viewed many advertising campaigns, either at my own agency,
Optimedia, or as a judge at award competitions, I have a few observations:
All too often, the focus is on the tactics, the “how we did it” part, and
planners are unable to clearly articulate the Brand Media Strategy. I have
noticed that in award submissions or the trade press, the emphasis is more on
how the plan was executed, particularly its creativity or innovation. Agencies
lack insight into how a communications strategy directly contributed to the
business outcome. And while they report impressive post-campaign metrics,
they often omit a clear statement of the communication goals that should
have been established at the outset.
Because advertising is multifaceted, encompassing many media,
disciplines and programs, you can’t lose sight of its fundamental role: to
create a marketing return on investment (ROI). This chapter is about
establishing such accountability at the outset.
MARKETERS UNDER GROWING PRESSURE TO SHOW RETURN ON INVESTMENT
ROI metrics have always been the sine qua non for marketers. The poor
economic climate in 2008 and the subsequent recession and the growth of
more accountable digital media have put executives under much greater
pressure to show ROI for their programs. The need to perform is underscored
by the short tenure of most chief marketing officers: on average 28.4 months,
according to a January 2009 survey by recruitment specialist Spencer Stuart.
1
Lorrie Foster of The Conference Board, marketing and management
consultants, observes, “In the past, marketing awareness and brand-building
activities were enough to define marketing’s mission and role in a company,
and to justify its budget.... But the focus of marketing has evolved toward
more strategic, value-added activities that can be quantified and linked to
corporate goals. New approaches, methodologies and tools, and technologies
are making it possible to link marketing investments directly to revenues and
profits, holding marketing executives accountable for achieving expected
results.”
2
THE IMPORTANCE OF SETTING
COMMUNICATION GOALS
In 
Profitable Marketing Communications—A Guide to Marketing Return on
Investment,
 I explored why campaigns fail to create value for their
companies.
3
 There are two main reasons: First, there is not a clear
understanding of the goals or the key performance indicators (KPIs) at the
outset of the campaign. Second, there is no process for consistently
evaluating progress, and so campaigns lack sufficient focus and consistency.
Most marketers and agencies do a very good job at validating their work,
but the measurement is too often used to justify activity, rather than drive the
effort. Marketing consultancy CMG Partners, Durham, North Carolina,
conducted a study of four hundred top business executives. The study found
that only a quarter thought their marketing was effective. All 
this goes to
underline the importance of setting communication goals at the start of the
process. And what’s critical is to ensure that these goals are commercial,actionable and measurable.
OUTCOMES VERSUS OUTPUTS: WHAT’S
THE DIFFERENCE?
One of the key foundations of the Brand Media Strategy is setting
communication goals that are based on outcomes and not on outputs.
Reach (coverage), frequency, impressions, gross rating points (GRPs) and
cost per response are everyday media metrics that are easy to measure.
Because they’re easy, communications planners tend to overuse them to
justify recommendations. These outputs are often used rather than
checkpoints on the path of campaign management, for example, “our
objective is to maximize reach and frequency” or “our goal is to lower the
cost per response.” Over-reliance on these outputs risks chief marketing
officers not approving budgets, because although measurable, these outputs
don’t explain how the communications strategy will help drive the marketing
ROI.
Most media metrics were designed to be used as a guide for effectiveness
of trading or pricing terms. They were more relevant when the goal was
advertising awareness and in a world where advertising plans were driven by
one or two principal media. Today, media programs typically consist of four
to ten different media channels.
START WITH THE WHY
Joe Marchese, president of social vibe, wrote in MediaPost, “It’s as if the
new social media reality is forcing marketers and agencies to reevaluate the
reasons for advertising in the first place.”
4
 One of the biggest challenges to
marketers is not measurement but getting chief executive officers and chief
financial officers to buy into ad campaigns.
A good way to start the communications planning process is to ask a very
basic question: Why advertise? Often this isn’t asked. But if a company’s
objective is to improve profitability, then I can almost guarantee you 
thatcutting
 advertising will improve a company’s profitability within a financial
year! Marketing budgets generally range from 2 percent to 20 percent of a
company’s expenses, which means in any year (good or bad) a chief financial
officer is going to question the value of advertising. We must therefore be
able to explain its value before embarking on planning.
Asking the Who, How, Where and When questions is all very well, but the
most important is Why. I’ve found that agencies are good at recommending
and developing solutions and plans but not as good at building the case for
advertising itself.
Media agencies talk about engagement and awareness, and they sell
eyeballs or media platforms. Creative agencies talk about how to build brands
and reputation, and they sell ideas. Digital agencies focus on response and
interaction. But all of us in advertising are guilty of discussing features rather
than the key benefit, which is marketing ROI.
Sergio Zyman, the former Coca-Cola chief marketing officer who helped
boost its worldwide annual sales volume from 9 billion to 15 billion cases,
famously defined marketing success as “sell[ing] more stuff to more people
more often for more money more efficiently.”
5
Let’s break this down.
Selling more stuff to more people: Marketing needs to attract new
customers to the brand. Advertising can help by opening new markets,
promoting new products, driving in more foot traffic or increasing the rate of
trial.
Selling more often: Advertising persuades people to buy more often.
Reminding people when they are returning to the market to buy is as
important as informing them of a new product or feature. We’ll cover the
theory of recency later in this chapter.
Selling for more money: Advertising has always been about selling, but
there are alternatives that can help companies sell more. Price cuts and
promotions can move product. For example, if Apple were to discount
iPhones by 50 percent, the tech giant could sell a lot more, and probably
without bothering to advertise the discount. To be able to get more for a
product relies almost entirely on differentiation, and that’s where branding
comes in. 
People will pay more for Nike iDs, Apple iMacs or BMWs, even
though they might perform no better than similar products, because they are
perceived as being different and better.Selling more efficiently: Advertising offers the ability to talk to a larger
audience cost effectively. If marketers could have fifteen minutes one-on-one
with every potential customer, they would be very persuasive. Advertising
helps companies scale a sales pitch to a broad audience.
TRANSLATING BUSINESS GOALS 
INTO COMMUNICATION GOALS
Communication goals involve understanding how the communications will
drive business goals. It is important not to confuse the two. “Increase sales” is
not a communication goal. “Increase market share growth” is not a
communication goal. They are business goals—the end game. Simply stating
that we need to grow sales by X isn’t particularly helpful in shaping the
Brand Media Strategy. No, the role of the communications planner is to
translate business goals into something that steers media, creative, PR and
digital specialist teams as they perform their communications tasks.
Effective communication goals encompass two key qualities. First, they
need to have a 
direct line of sight
 between the communications and the
business outcomes. Before we can say, “Here is what we are doing” or “This
is who we are targeting” or “This is where we are advertising,” we need to be
able to explain in simple terms how the communications is going to directly
translate to the marketing or business goal. For a chief marketing officer or
company board to understand how the Brand Media Strategy is going to help
sell more stuff, it needs to be in well-articulated commercial terms. Second,
the communication goal needs to inspire ideas and creative ways to meet the
goal. In this world of ROI and accountability, we have to remember that
communications is still a creative task of influencing people. The Brand
Media Strategy needs a communication goal that helps the teams responsible
for developing and executing the communications identify relevant,
influential and penetrating platforms and activation in media.
When my media agency was planning a Denny’s advertising campaign for
2009, Nelson Marchioli, the chief executive officer of Denny’s, told us that
getting an existing customer to make a repeat visit would increase annual
sales 10 percent. And getting a lapsed customer (one who had not been to a
Denny’s in six months or more) to return would increase sales by 11 percent.We made our communication goal to “get people to come back to Denny’s
one more time.” That short and simple phrase stimulated a lot of
communications ideas. It made us, the media agency, think about how to get
people to reappraise the brand. More importantly, it generated ideas that very
directly affected guest counts, such as the free Grand Slam breakfast
advertised during the Super Bowl and the innovative use of independent
music artists that made late-night visits to Denny’s attractive.
Developing communication goals comprises four steps:
• Break down the business goals into specifics.
• Identify how and where media can help.
• Quantify what success will look like.
• Prioritize and socialize the goals.
BREAK DOWN THE BUSINESS GOALS INTO
SPECIFICS
It is important to define the business goals as specifically as possible. There’s
a lot packed into Sergio Zyman’s “sell more stuff, to more people, more
often, for more money, more efficiently.” The question that you need to ask
is, “Where will most of the business growth come from?”
Does a retailer want to increase foot traffic into stores, increase the average
basket size or bring new customers into the franchise? Perhaps the client
wants to expand distribution channels or increase frequency of purchase. Or
does the company want to launch a new product or change how consumers
perceive a product? Maybe the brand wants to encourage or increase trial.
Clients may not immediately tell you their goal. Maybe they’re too busy or
they don’t know you need to know it. If so, prompt them to tell you! If you
don’t know where you’re going, it’s hard to tell someone else how to get
there.
Unfortunately, none of us always has ideal, picture-perfect client briefs. A
good communications planner works with what’s available: Do some
homework. Develop a point of view on what you think the goal should be.
Talk to the other managers in the marketing or sales teams. Have a meetingwith the other agency partners. Ask your chief executive officer, who might
have discussed the brief with a senior member of the client. Then run your
thoughts by the client before you start the planning process. Most people
have an easier time telling you what they do or don’t want when you present
them with options.
USING THE CONSUMER PATHWAY
The Consumer Pathway provides an excellent way to frame the media
communication goal (see 
figure 4.1
). Is it a goal that requires an awareness
solution? Is this a campaign that needs to change or build perceptions within
a particular customer group (that is, involvement)? Does the brand have
satisfactory awareness but needs to convert awareness to more sales? For
Denny’s, almost everyone was aware of the brand and had a pretty clear
perception of it. But they had most likely visited years ago and were unaware
of the significant improvements Denny’s had made in their menu and
restaurants in the past few years. The challenge was getting people to try the
new Denny’s.
FIGURE 4.1
In addition, classifying the communication goal as a stage of the Consumer
Pathway pinpoints where and how the communications will drive consumers
to purchase and answers the “Why advertise” question.IDENTIFY HOW AND WHERE MEDIA CAN
HELP
Brands have several marketing strategies available. In some cases they will
be media led, and in other cases media is less likely to be a driver. For
example, customer service or the customer experience is invariably an
important factor in almost all service brands. For one of my agency’s
cosmetics brand clients, training make-up consultants or upgrading store
beauty counters is a critical marketing priority but not likely to involve a
media solution.
BUILDING AWARENESS
Launch a product, communicate a benefit or tell of an
event or offer
While I advocate in 
chapter 2
 that marketers drive involvement and
relevancy, building awareness is still important for many brands. In the mass
media age, driving awareness was the default and generic communication
goal for advertising. The Brand Media Strategy largely concentrated on
generating awareness of the creative through mass media.
If awareness is the goal, the media strategy should concentrate on
effective-frequency levels. 
Effective frequency
 is essentially the number of
times a person is exposed to an advertising message before responding.
Studies have found that from one to five or more exposures are necessary,
depending on factors such as the size of the print ad or the length of the
commercial, the complexity of the message or the competitive clutter.
Today, planners tend to use awareness-tracking data or models to set ideal
frequency levels or they use media weights to project the awareness levels
generated by advertising. Once frequency levels are established, media
planners and buyers seek to maximize the plan’s reach, or coverage of the
target audience, as efficiently as possible.
INVOLVEMENTIncrease emotional engagement before purchase
If the objective is to build the brand or drive brand reappraisal, then the
communication goal will be in the involvement stage of the Consumer
Pathway. Increasing brand involvement also increases awareness.
Typical goals here might include the following:
• Increase consumer understanding of the brand’s strengths or its unique
selling point.
• Increase the brand’s appeal to target X.
• Influence consumers to see brand X as the most reliable.
McDonald’s has almost ubiquitous awareness and has become a
destination for family dining, a place to take your kids. When they promoted
their McCafe’s, the challenge was less to create awareness than to get
consumers thinking of them as a destination for lattes. They developed a
campaign that aimed to demonstrate that they offered lattes without the
pretentiousness of a Starbucks. This included creating the website
unsnobbycoffee.com.
ACTIVE CONSIDERATION
Shift up the order of consideration by facilitating
favorable comparison
Conversion of brand awareness or interest into preference occurs in the
active-consideration stage. This might include putting a brand in with its
consideration set or providing information or opinion to help the shopper
consider the brand more favorably.
Lexus in Europe discovered that their conversion of test drives to sales was
significantly higher than that of Mercedes Benz, BMW or Audi. They shifted
their communication goal away from a branding or awareness goal to one of
getting more potential customers into show rooms for test drives. This
communication goal resulted in their moving away from traditional 
brand
advertising in business and lifestyle magazines. Instead, the Brand Media
Strategy involved online advertising and partnering with five-star hotels,
airports and premium vacation spots to provide test-drive information andopportunities for test drives. In addition to differentiating their media
approach from competitors that outspent them, they dramatically increased
the overall ROI.
PURCHASE
Convert intent into action at the point of purchase
Goals that focus on conversion of intent into action could include using
media that drive pricing or trial, such as ecommerce or cost-per-acquisition
media.
From awareness to reminder advertising
The emphasis on awareness-building advertising and the need to deliver
effective frequency shifted in the nineties to reminder advertising, based on
the concept of recency. One of the catalysts for this change was the
breakthrough book 
How Advertising Works,
 by John Philip Jones, a professor
at Syracuse University.
6
The idea was that well-known brands of consumer packaged goods such as
Coca-Cola or Tide don’t need to build awareness; they already have it. The
goal of the advertising should be 
reminding
 the consumer to buy the product
at the point closest to the place of purchase. Recency theory was supported
by exhaustive research and academic analysis. I recall that this book shifted
the paradigm of Brand Media Strategy. Clients such as Procter & Gamble and
Coca-Cola globally moved from awareness-driving to reminder-based tactics.
As a result, recency planning became a Brand Media Strategy that
encouraged continuous advertising, since people are shopping every day and
week of the year. Recency planning is less concerned with building brand
equity than reinforcing the proposition and converting that awareness and
brand knowledge to purchase.
This study still has a lot of validity for many established media brands.
And despite new and emerging media, the principle of reminding consumers
of your brand and placing it close to the shopping occasion, either in time or
physical location, remains an effective strategy.
For example, Nestlé’s Buitoni knew their customers were professional,
working women wanting to pick up a meal on their way home. They targetedadvertising for their chilled pasta to the end of the workday at out-of-home
sites, point-of-sale locations and websites.
CONSUMPTION AND RELATIONSHIP
BUILDING
The consumption and relationship-building stages often didn’t involve media
solutions in the past. However, media’s definition is expanding, and smart
agencies have used media to influence consumers even at these stages.
Customer-relationship-management marketing programs that incorporate
email marketing or other media partners have been known to reinforce the
relationship with a brand.
Coors Light cleverly used packaging to promote the user experience. They
introduced a cold-activated beer can to the market; it turned blue when it
reached 44 degrees Fahrenheit.
Tony Hsieh, the chief executive officer of online shoe store Zappos.com, at
the Association of National Advertisers Masters of Marketing conference in
2008 related how the company had very little media budget, so it emphasized
salesperson training and customer-service interaction as the primary medium
to build positive word of mouth and loyalty.
ADVOCACY
Increase recommendation
Buzz, or word-of-mouth recommendation, is increasingly important in this
Facebook era. This was well demonstrated when candidate Obama shifted
from the conventional political advertising strategy of targeting undecided
voters to getting his advocates to persuade undecided voters.
Figure 4.2
 shows a beauty care example of areas to explore for
communication goals across the Consumer Pathway.
FIGURE 4.2QUANTIFY WHAT SUCCESS WILL LOOK
LIKE
To define success and prioritize potential goals, you need to know where the
client stands on their existing measures.
Start with overall sales and market share. The chief executive officer, chief
marketing officer or head of sales will have these figures because their job
depends on them. Their bonus might even be attached to the figures. They
will be hugely interested if you can tell them how you’re going to improve it.
Then you need to drill down into the defined communication goals and
establish their KPIs.
Measures for awareness, brand equity or active consideration will likely
already exist, either through customer tracking or consumer attitude and
usage studies. Digital data such as search inquiries, website traffic or socialmedia tracking can provide useful measures. If those aren’t available, then
recommending some sort of tracking is in order. 
Figure 4.3
 shows typical
data sources for tracking campaign goals against the stages of the Consumer
Pathway.
FIGURE 4.3
HOW DO YOU QUANTIFY THE GOAL?
Now the hard part is figuring out the increase the client expects according to
the KPIs. Marketers might not have defined the increase, but knowing the
goal of the task is critical in deciding whether the Brand Media Strategy will
work and in determining the budget.
Those benchmarks will tell you if the budget is sufficient or if the
objectives are unachievable. If benchmarks don’t exist, then you will have to
make estimates based on past experience or other categories. In fact, for 70
percent of campaigns this is usually the case. Set a target and benchmark for
future planning periods. Then ask, What revenue will this generate if this
succeeds?
CASE STUDY: NEW STEEL
The American Iron and Steel Institute developed an advertising
campaign to promote steel as a source of raw material. The consortium
set the objective to make steel the “material of choice” for thepackaging, car manufacture, construction, housing and appliance
industries.
An initial investment of $20 million a year defined the terms of
success and introduced surrogate measures. The consortium asked
itself, “What actions or outcomes will need to occur to make it worth
the investment?”
Here, they drew on the experience and expertise of teams that had
implemented similar campaigns, and consulted previous case studies.
They also set methods and models on which strategy and measurement
would be based, and built frequent and direct interaction into the
process, with people driving strategy and execution.
A research consultant made recommendations about the
methodology. By meeting with key executives, the right expectations
were set.
The campaign’s goals were articulated in measurable terms so that
everyone involved could buy into what the campaign was trying to
achieve. The metrics were set based on significant improvement
against the current market value and agreed with the stakeholders.
They included the following:
• Awareness had to increase from 10 percent to 25 percent.
• Favorability had to move from the benchmark score of 58 to at
least 70.
• To claim “material of choice,” the thermometer for steel would
need to move from last to first place versus its competitors.
• The positive to negative comments ratio had to move from 2:3 to
6:1.
7
PRIORITIZE AND SOCIALIZE THE GOALS
One of the biggest factors in campaign failures is insufficient budget to
deliver the goals. Trying to do too much with too little budget is a recipe for
disaster. It comes from an unwillingness to make hard choices in setting the
communication goals.A SINGLE GOAL IS BEST
Having too many objectives ensures a lack of clarity. I really do subscribe to
Napoleon’s axiom that “one bad general is worth two good ones,” or one goal
is always better than two. Having too many goals creates a lack of
accountability and clarity. I always worry when a marketer says, “Our goal is
to drive sales, create buzz, drive awareness, build consideration and grow the
brand.” I try to discourage clients from tracking and targeting a dozen
metrics. Juggling so many metrics dilutes goals. Several goals will be
partially achieved, but the most important one will not be fully achieved.
Select a primary goal, one that can be consistently tracked across all
efforts. With that one goal in mind you can create measurable objectives and
keep all tactics focused on them. When you achieve those objectives, you’re
in a good position to prove your worth and defend your budget.
PRIORITIZING GOALS
When you can’t have just one primary goal, which is often the case, list the
goals. By each one note what metric you would use to judge it. How would
improving those metrics change things? Rank the goals in terms of what’s
important and which would make the biggest difference in terms of sales.
Which would be most likely to drive the primary business goal? There is no
need for absolute accuracy as this exercise is only to indicate a direction.
Then suppose you invested 90 percent, 75 percent or 50 percent of the budget
—how does that affect the goal? Move to the second goal in your 
ranking.
This time, suppose you spent 50 percent, 33 percent or 15 percent of the
budget. What effect would that have on the goal?
Repeat for each potential goal.
BRANDING THE GOAL
When I was a planner working on Procter & Gamble campaigns, I recall, the
company was great at marketing their marketing: coming up with a catchy
phrase to describe a goal. For example, Procter & Gamble talked about
“winning at the two moments of truth.” Those two moments are when theconsumer is about to buy and use the product.
There’s merit in branding a communication goal. It makes it more
memorable and inspirational. It helps everyone from the chief executive
officer to the frontline sales and customer-service teams grasp the concept.
Be sure to market the goal inside and outside the company.
The goal should ideally describe an action that involves the consumer.
Wal-Mart’s chief marketing officer, Stephen Quinn, says that his company’s
goal is to help deliver true value to customers.
8
 The company’s winning
marketing campaign in 2009 was “Give people ideas to save money.” At
Coca-Cola the goal for one brand team was to convince young men that Coke
Zero tastes like regular Coke. Similarly, at computer giant HP, the goal was
to make personal computers cool again. A single rallying cry will inspire
solutions, and there’s no need to keep it secret. If everyone knows what your
strategy is, then they can help you execute it.
QUESTIONS IN SETTING THE
COMMUNICATION GOALS
1. Does the communication goal have a clear line of sight to the business
goal?
2. What stages of the Consumer Pathway does the goal target?
3. What is the primary goal?
4. Does the goal inspire the communications?CHAPTER 5
INSIGHT OVER ANALYSIS
FINDING A WAY IN FOR 
THE BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY
Data is not information, information is not knowledge, knowledge is
not understanding, understanding is not wisdom.
—Cliff Stoll and Gary Schubert
1
THE ROLE OF CONSUMER INSIGHT IN 
DEVELOPING THE BRAND MEDIA
STRATEGY
I
n the media world we are awash with statistics. We love the sanctuary of
data. It’s safe. It’s predictable. But does it tell us anything new?
Demographics, psychographics, audience figures distract from the
importance of personalizing marketing. Communication should be about
focusing on people rather than consumers. 
People
 are individuals, new
moms, an office worker on her lunch hour or a young family buying their
first new car. They’re not a number on a spreadsheet.
As a communications planner, it’s crucial to be consumer facing rather
than media facing. Remember, media planning is about reaching the right
people at the right places; communications planning is about influencing
people. And an important part of influencing is to understand how the group
you are trying to connect with thinks, behaves and lives their lives. And yes,of course, how they consume media and respond to communications.
Analyzing audience surveys or syndicated media or product reports alone
won’t give you those answers. Yes, they can tell you how many people are
watching this or reading that. But clues to how they might respond better to
different communication strategies? Much less likely. Media surveys
commoditize consumers into common audience demographic groups. So a
ratings point on the History Channel or ESPN is treated exactly the same
despite being very different programming attracting viewers with different
mind-sets.
Using the same syndicated data that all your competitors have will lead to
the same strategies and solutions, hardly the formula for creating distinct and
penetrating campaigns. Using the same research that others use encourages
premium pricing, as advertisers in a category chase the same positions and
the same titles or television shows. The old way of doing things assumes that
media works the same way for every brand. This dictates that advertisers
compete on share of voice by outspending competitors.
For a communications planner, having insight about your target is what
differentiates your plan. To have insight, the communications planner needs
to be the consumer’s best friend.
FROM WHERE TO HOW
Developing insights is the key to unlocking a way in for the Brand Media
Strategy, insights into not just which media or marketing communication
touch points to advertise in, but also how to use those media.
Syndicated media audience surveys from the likes of Nielsen, Arbitron,
TNS and comScore provide extensive data on which media audiences spend
time where. They do exactly what they are designed to do, which is to
establish the scale of target audiences. Mass media strategies to maximize
reach and frequency use this audience data to establish awareness. In the shift
from the mass media era to today’s of targeting your audience, consumer
insight 
is the key to connecting to your audience by using a broader selection
of touch points to communicate.
Digital data from performance marketing campaigns has added more
dimension to traditional media research. For example, Google’s tools andweb tracking have allowed richer insight into the consumer’s decision-
making process and better understanding of consumers’ reactions to ad
messaging and their post-campaign buying habits. Thanks to social listening,
we can get consumers’ immediate feedback to develop the all-important
insight.
As shown in 
figure 5.1
, insight has facilitated the shift from media
planning to communications planning.
ACCOUNT PLANNING ESTABLISHED 
INSIGHT IN ADVERTISING
Agency account planning is very much the forebear to communications
planning.
FIGURE 5.1
Account planning was invented in the United Kingdom by Stanley Pollitt
in 1965. He was a founding partner of Boase Massimi Pollitt (BMP, now
BMP DDB) and established account planning by bringing in a researcher to
work as an equal partner with the account manager in briefing the creative
departments. In 1968 the London office of J. Walter Thompson established
an account planning department. Account planning was exported to the
United States in 1982, when Jay Chiat set up an account planning team. Chiat
Day went on to become one of the most successful agencies in the eighties,
growing its billings from fifty million dollars to seven hundred million
dollars in ten years. Many US creative shops followed suit.
In the nineties, account planning grew exponentially and today has become
a mainstay function in creative agencies. Chris Cowpe, owner of the Caffeine
Partnership, a management consultancy, and former chief executive officer of
BMP DDB in London, observes, “To be truly effective, advertising must be
both distinctive and relevant, and planning helps on both counts.”
2
The primary responsibility of account planners is to understand the target
audience and to be its ambassador throughout the ad development process.
Insights have become an important element in developing creative work.
They help creative agencies decide what to say in advertising and help the
agency creative people develop ideas and ads that connect with their targets.
CONSUMER INSIGHT: THE ACCOUNT
PLANNER 
VERSUS THE COMMUNICATIONS PLANNER
We’ve often debated at Optimedia, “What is the difference between the
consumer insights of the creative agency account planners and those of the
media agency communications planner?” Often the line between them blurs.
Both approach gathering insight in similar ways. They’re looking for
qualitative research techniques that provide an unstructured environment and
opportunities for revealing insights into the more emotional aspects of a
brand. They both use traditional one-on-one approaches such as interviews
and focus groups as well as more creative approaches such as accompanied
shopping, word associations, use of visual prompts, video montages,projective techniques and consumer diaries. Both types of planners may also
seek quantitative, behavioral and attitudinal data from long-term studies to
uncover social and cultural changes. They use primary and secondary
research sources such as published market reports, usage and attitude surveys
and awareness-tracking studies.
Derek Morris, chief operating officer for VivaKi UK, who has run both
communications planning and account planning departments, said to me once
that creative agencies are generally much better at developing insights than
their media agency planning counterparts: “They’ve been doing it longer,
have more resources and [have] built more time into their planning process.”
Media agency planners would do well to learn from them.
The difference between the two, however, is that account planning is
looking at insight to help the creative teams determine what to say. They
want to understand what’s going on in consumers’ lives so they can say,
“This is what the brand stands for” or “This is why it’s different” and “This is
why consumers should choose it.” A communications planner is focused on
insight that can help determine how and where to say those things. The key
question to keep asking when developing the Brand Media Strategy is, How
are people going to be more engaged with the communications?
In illustration of the difference between account planning insight and
communications planning insight, Chris Pyne, my agency’s former New
York head of planning, cites interviews he and the creative agency’s account
planning director for L’Oréal conducted with beauty editors from Hearst
Magazines. The purpose was to better understand how they could develop
communications for Garnier beauty products. The creative agency account
planner asked the editors, “What do you see as the difference between French
and American women when it comes to beauty products?” while Chris asked,
“What are you doing to get people to read or engage with your editorial?”
Contrast these questions with what a traditional media planner might have
asked: “Who reads the magazine?” The communications 
planner’s and the
account planning director’s questions created valuable insight into how to
communicate.
Account planning and communications planning roles can and should be a
team effort, often with much crossover. The client might ask whether they are
paying twice for both, but if you don’t have crossover, you don’t get
integration. The enemy of integration is silos in which people keep to theirown spaces.
Sometimes an account planner’s consumer work can set the agenda for the
media strategy. For example, the global campaign conducted by the bank
HSBC uncovered the importance that international business people place on
local market knowledge. The campaign developed by Lowe & Partners
Worldwide promoted HSBC as “the world’s local bank,” by depicting the
differences in countries’ interpretations of certain topics. The original launch
ad, “Football,” displayed versions of footballs from the United States,
England and Australia. Our agency planned this campaign with HSBC and
Lowe, and we translated the creative campaign into the now famous
international airport program. We reinforced the idea of local knowledge by
placing ads inside flight boarding walkways, where international passengers
would view them. This component of the media campaign proved hugely
successful.
Insights into media use can be very important and influential in the
creative strategy. For example, the planning agency that developed
Unilever’s campaign for Dove discovered that 80 percent of women feel
worse about themselves after reading a women’s magazine. From that they
developed the “Campaign for Real Beauty” and advertising that depicted real
women of all sizes, shapes and colors.
That’s where communications is becoming more interesting and the reason
why there’s a need for more collaboration among the planning teams at the
different agency disciplines. Where I’ve found communications planning to
really work well is when it informs or adds to the creative insight process.
Media, digital and creative agencies tend to want to maintain their
separation. Sometimes battles over turf, fees and egos get in the way of
collaboration. 
But I’ve always found that most communications planners and
account planners care less about politics and more about the work. They want
to be collaborative and are more open to working in tandem. We had a
consumer-packaged-goods client with an interesting process for facilitating
collaboration. The brand chairs a meeting at which creative, media and digital
planners co-develop a campaign strategy. Their only rule is that no one in
account management is allowed to participate!
Memo to chief marketing officers and agency account management: Put all
the planners together in one room and you will get a better and more
insightful product.A MORE COMPLEX AND VARIED
CONSUMER
Peter Francese, a demographics trends analyst, has projected what the 2010
census will tell us about US consumers. “The concept of an ‘average
American’ is gone, probably forever,” he writes. “The average American has
been replaced by a complex, multidimensional society that defies simplistic
labeling.”
3
The message to marketers is clear: No single demographic, or even handful
of demographics, neatly defines the nation. There is no such thing as “the
average American consumer.” Francese highlights that the 2010 census will
show that the classic American family—married couple[s] with children—
will account for only 22 percent of households.
Francese projects that the most widespread type of US household is a
married couple without children, followed closely by single-person
households. The 2010 census gave Americans fourteen choices to define
household relationships. Mr. Francese says this will “enable the Census
Bureau to count, not only traditional families, but also the number and
growth of blended families, single-parent families and multigenerational
families, as well as multiple families doubling up in one household.”
4
 That
presents boundless opportunities for marketers and media to develop
strategies for how they target and segment households.
MICROTRENDING
Mark Penn is the chief executive officer of the global communications firm
Burson-Marsteller and president of Penn, Schoen and Berland, a market
research firm. He has advised both former president Bill Clinton and
Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton in her presidential run, as well as
former British prime minister Tony Blair and former Microsoft chief
executive officer Bill Gates. As President Clinton’s pollster in his 1996
reelection campaign, Penn identified the microtrend of soccer moms and their
importance to the campaign.
Penn argues that small groups of people who share an intense choice orpreference that is often counterintuitive have been undercounted or missed by
companies, marketers, policymakers and others. A microtrend can be created
by as few as three million people, or about 1 percent of the US population.
Even if that group doesn’t grow, it can still have enormous impact on
society.
5
The importance of connecting with these groups is huge. One group
identified by Penn is moms over forty-five who play computer games. They
are the fastest-growing group of gamers but hardly a group normally targeted
by gaming companies. Nintendo targeted this group in its launch of the
interactive Wii. They set up Wii parties for the “alpha moms,” a target
segment of socially connected households in several major markets, and ran
print advertorials illustrating how playing Wii could improve a mom’s family
time.
6
The internet, more dynamic customer data and tightly targeted long-tail
media have helped to make it more feasible and economical to identify and
market to these microtargets. Microtargeting through digital advertising
networks gives brands the ability to focus on their markets with specific
messaging, helping marketers mine user data to find the specific content
viewed and create behavioral profiles. Newer ways of communicating, such
as addressable television and internet radio, open microtargeting across all
media. And we’re starting to see personally addressed billboards that respond
to mobile phone signals. Remember the scene from the film 
Minority
 
Report,
in which Tom Cruise is greeted with personally targeted ads? That doesn’t
seem so futuristic anymore.
Penn explains that people should care about microtrends “because they are
the new driving force behind our society and our future. Our society is
blessed with unprecedented choices and people are expressing those choices
in ways that create new markets, new affinity groups, and new movements.
And if you are relying on conventional wisdom to find them, you will be left
behind because CW [conventional wisdom] is a lagging indicator not a
leading one.”
7
COMING UP WITH INSIGHTS
Developing insights can be a challenge for planners. There are as manytechniques to develop insights as there are planners. Let me try to open this
black box a little.
WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR?
Look for clues about when, where and how consumers can be influenced, and
have relevant, motivating, valuable brand experience. We are trying to build
strategic platforms or big ideas to communicate based on consumer insight.
THE INSIGHT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
Consumer insights can come to you while in a supermarket aisle, as part of a
chance conversation with a customer service manager, or from a newspaper
article. Agencies use many techniques to gather observations. Techniques
come in and out of vogue. For example, I am definitely seeing a movement
away from the traditional focus group. Observation techniques such as
ethnographic studies and online monitoring have become the order of the
day. Since insights can come from anywhere, you need to start by casting the
net wide. The skill is to ask probing and thoughtful questions. There are a ton
of sources and techniques to trawl.
The Brand Media Strategy Insight Development Process (
figure 5.2
) is a
six-stage process that my agency uses to develop hypotheses to test, quantify
and validate. The hypotheses are developed out of points of view that come
from conversations, observations and discovery. Coming up with a
hypothesis and then testing it is a proven approach. It’s very difficult to
directly ask consumers what they want; they aren’t marketing experts. As
legendary marketer and Apple chief executive officer Steve Jobs once said,
“A lot of times, people don’t know what they want until you show it to
them.”
8
FIGURE 5.2QUESTIONS THAT CAN UNCOVER BRAND
MEDIA INSIGHTS
The insight process has five important questions to ask.
What types of contexts make the messaging more
relevant to consumers?
At Optimedia, we refer to this as the 
receptivity insight:
 the context or media
environments that help the communications be more influential or effective in
conveying the brand message.
Which media experiences influence branding and which
drive behavior?
Different combinations of touch points or media impact consumers
differently. Newspaper and radio can be strong at driving response. Search
can drive traffic. Video helps to influence the brand. They all bring value and
options for a planner. Gaining insight into their impact in relation to the
communication goals is important for a planner to determine.
What marketing efforts are our customers noticing? Do
they attribute them to the correct brands?
Insight into the brand category and how the brands use communications tells
you how the Brand Media Strategy can differentiate the brand.What motivates people to be brand evangelists or share
virally with other consumers?
Creating brand conversations, discussed in 
chapter 6
, relies on finding
cultural factors, elements in the brand category and characteristics of the
brand sharers that give the communications more legs.
What’s the propensity that propels my customers toward
my brand or category?
Most insights center on the consumer, but we need to know how the insights
relate to the specific brand category and customers we target.
APPROACHES ON GATHERING INSIGHT
Of the techniques listed here, many I learned from creative shops, some from
clients and design agencies and some we at Optimedia developed ourselves.
Some simple things can be done from your desk. Better still is getting out
and talking to people. Being interested in people is a prerequisite to being a
communications planner. There are quantitative ways of gathering insights
from surveys, trackers, household panels and product tests.
Qualitative methods might involve examining perceptions or emotions, doing
ethnographic research or simply observing what people do.
CAST THE NET WIDE
Insights don’t have to be centered only on the consumer. They can be about
products, or the cultural environment or the market in general (
figure 5.3
).
It’s important to keep in mind not only the Consumer Pathway but also
current media trends. Are customers now paying for media by subscription?
If so, how does that affect the acceptance of advertising? Look at
consumption rituals and the motivations behind them. What is the attachment
consumers have to certain products?
FIGURE 5.3Russell Evans and Kamal Tahir suggest that the best insights arise from a
healthy information ecosystem with technology that facilitates a high level of
interoperability. A lot of published data, such as syndicated market audits,
customer and retail data and trends reports, gives enormous insight.
Cultural trends can create brand communication opportunities for brands.
The famous YouTube video of the Filipino prisoners who re-created Michael
Jackson’s “Thriller” music video sparked imitations. T-Mobile’s agency
leaped in by filming a group dance video at London’s Liverpool Station that
became an online advertising sensation.
TALK TO EXPERTS
Before
 you talk to consumers, speak to people who know the business. Forexample, tap the people who work for a trade body or association, editors of
trade or consumer publications, frontline salespeople and account managers,
suppliers to the brand, bloggers on the subject or retailers. British ad agency
HHCL, working for the UK Automobile Association, spoke to association
phone operators and found that members talked about how friendly the AA
repairmen were.
Tap into the collective knowledge inside the client’s company. Draw on
the experience and judgment of people in the business by interviewing the
client company’s sales force, service departments and retailers who deal with
the end customers. Retailers think about the business all day. They see what
customers are actually doing, rather than what they say. They observe why
people don’t buy the product. They can also steer you in a direction to probe
further.
LOOK AT WHAT PEOPLE DO, NOT WHAT
THEY SAY
Observation is a powerful technique for developing consumer understanding.
Here are a handful of helpful approaches.
Michael Harvey, global consumer planning director at beverage giant
Diageo, offers this advice: “Observing consumer behaviour in the on and off-
trade: getting out and watching people in-situ is free and a great source of
insight.”
9
HIT THE STREETS
Nike used street teams to listen to urban tastemakers under the guidance of
urban marketer Come Chantrel. Chantrel took the techniques he had used for
marketing and pre-testing music at Loud Records and put them to work for
the sneaker company on the street, with resounding success.
Nike is still using this process. Having failed in the skateboard sneaker
market with a flashy ad campaign, Nike succeeded by listening to a panel of
respected skaters. Now, it sells the shoe line only in independent skate shops,
advertises only in skateboard magazines and offers sponsorships to carefully
chosen skaters. By listening before it speaks, it has achieved the delicate artof being cool without trying too hard.
JOURNALING
Tom Neveril, president of Storybrand Consulting, a market intelligence firm
in Santa Monica, California, advocates journaling.
He asks interviewees to fill in calendar pages for every half hour of their
activities and their train of thought during those times. He explains that the
entries should be made near the time of the experience and aimed at capturing
the memories of the customer experience, like car shopping. He dubs this
approach “Outlook calendar journaling.” Neveril also suggests conducting
ethnographic research, in which people are observed in their natural
environment going about their everyday activities, whether brushing their
teeth or cleaning their kitchen or visiting a car dealership.
“Whether you gather recalled stories, journals or observations of the ‘here
and now,’ you will encounter apparent hypocrisy. That’s OK,” writes
Neveril. “Contradictions can be very revealing. But don’t bother pointing it
out to the interviewee. That will only cause them to withdraw. And giving
someone a reality check would upset the natural order and meaning that
they’ve created in their lives. And if you want to get to know the real person,
you must make them comfortable in their sometimes irrational skin. So if you
want to know how your customers will behave in the future, don’t ask for
more of their opinions. Just take a look at their behavior.”
10
DIGITAL INSIGHTS CAN BE POWERFUL
Using Search to Develop Planning Strategy
My experience is that search data provides an insightful source of consumer
behavior for planners.
Keyword data results open up unexpected avenues of thinking because the
results are based on actual consumer behavior rather than our assumptions.
For example, surveying search patterns on Google tells us when in the
holiday retail season consumers start researching items such as perfume. This
gives us insight into the right time to plan the scheduling of the advertising.
When customers research products, they are more receptive to thecommunications.
Keyword data suffers none of the downsides of conventional research such
as research effect, because all of the behavior is natural and results can be
manipulated and furthered to meet your needs. The results can be constantly
updated, without continually commissioning new rounds of research.
Keywords as the Stimulus for the Planning Strategy
When used appropriately, search tools are a strategic weapon for brands and
marketers. Because search is at the bottom of the buying funnel, it provides
valuable insight into the effectiveness of other brand-building channels. You
can better understand the efficiencies of TV, print, sponsorships and other
activities by analyzing how changes in spending in those channels are
reflected in search behaviors.
Our search team at Optimedia analyzed a paid-search campaign of one of
our luxury clients and came across an interesting insight. Although 
we used
different combinations of branded search phrases, such as “engagement
rings,” “watches” and “jewelry,” we found that once people clicked through
to the brand’s website, they would check out nearly all the product lines. This
led us to consider whether the client should continue to support product
advertising or focus on promoting the brand or the product range.
Listening Online
One of the best types of consumer research that you can do at your desk is
tracking conversations online to understand what people are saying and
thinking about a brand or category.
Jason Kilar, the chief executive officer of Hulu, says that he sometimes
checks Twitter twenty times a day. There are twenty-four hundred
Hulurelated tweets a day. “It’s a transparent engine,” he observes. “I’ve
always said that our brand is what people say about us when we’re not in the
room and this is the best tool for hearing what people are saying.”
11
Beauty giant L’Oréal conducted research that involved listening to what
women were saying to each other about hair coloring. It found that women
don’t talk about vitamin B12 strengtheners with their friends. They’d rather
talk about “What my hair will look like in that color.” That insight led
L’Oréal to create the swatch flip pad, in which women pull a small tuft ofhair through the pad to see what their hair color looks like in different
L’Oréal shades. Over 85 percent of the women who received the swatch flip
pad talked about it with five or more friends.
12
BMW’s Mini division hired listening vendor MotiveQuest to mine online
conversation data and found that Mini owners “view their cars as a blank
canvas onto which they could project their personality.”
13
 The firm then
worked with the agency Butler, Stern, Shine & Partners, Sausalito,
California, to develop a campaign that included personalized messages to
drivers via digital billboards based on digital identification chips in their cars.
MotiveQuest then used its Online Promoter Score methodology to track how
many people recommended the brand to others online. They found that the
score could predict sales impact one month out.
MEDIA CONSUMER INSIGHTS
I believe that insights derived from how consumers are using media can drive
incredibly influential communications. We’ve talked to editors of women’s
magazines to understand how they address women about today’s fashion and
beauty. We scour the 
Wall Street Journal
 or the 
Financial Times
 to better
understand what’s keeping chief executive officers up at night. Similarly,
Wired.com has rich insight into whether new products have support from
tech opinion leaders.
How the Millennial generation interacts with social media provides a
source for ideas of how brands can interact with them. For example, they
spend a lot of time on sites such as Facebook, which have become important
social currency for young women. To take advantage of that insight,
cosmetics giant Estee Lauder photographed in-store makeovers that young
women could post to their profile pages on social network sites.
Social media insights reveal how consumers interact with brands, other
consumers and social media. Burger King conducted a campaign based on a
social insight: as a collection of digital friendships grew, each friend was less
valuable. Their tagline was “Friendship is strong but the Whopper is
stronger,” and the campaign rewarded customers for axing friends from
social networks.
MTV revamps its schedule from top to bottom every few years, as the
MTV generation is constantly evolving. The MTV generation, onceGeneration X, has shifted to Generation Y. At a program presentation MTV
made to advertisers and agencies, the company told advertisers, “MTV
doesn’t try to reflect the latest trends; they are trying to anticipate them.”
14
Therefore its programs—irreverent reality dramas, documentaries covering
social issues such as cyber bullying, twenty-something directors reporting on
authentic stories—capture a consumer hugely interesting to advertisers.
WHICH TARGET DO WE FOCUS ON?
The question for many planners is which type of user to focus on: a current
user or a heavy user, a potential user or an influential user, a purchaser or a
gatekeeper. There’s no single answer here, because every category, brand and
campaign requires something different.
Often the brand manager will take the lead and have ideas on whom to
target. Brand managers likely have their own data and insights to share.
That’s a good place to start. But it never hurts to challenge the target.
Mass media thinking leans toward 
maximizing audience reach
 in the hopes
of generating more sales. But specific brands aren’t and never will be bought
by everyone, far from it, so this strategy leads to inefficient spending.
Consumer-packaged-goods marketing tends to target the household
shopper. This group is broad, usually too broad, making it more difficult to
gain a penetrating or discerning insight.
An adage in our business says that 80 percent of a brand is bought by 20
percent of the public, but a study released in 2008 documented that a much
smaller number accounted for the vast majority of sales for the average
packaged-goods brand.
15
 A survey of 1,364 consumer-packaged-goods
brands in 23,000 stores and 54 million homes found that only 2.5 percent, or
one in forty people, account for 80 percent of the average brand’s sales.
These are the loyal customers who return time and again to buy the products
they favor—the core customers. Using existing proprietary research and a
little arithmetic, it is easy to identify the size or character of the core group
for any brand. Repeat purchase from existing high-volume customers is an
important strategy.
Trying to target everyone is unlikely to bring success. Chase one primary
audience and maybe a secondary audience. Ask, What is the 20 percent, or 10percent, that represents the biggest chunk of profitable business? Then ask,
Which part of the consumer pathway are we trying to shift? Is this campaign
about awareness or getting on the shopping list? Some brands have had
success focusing on the 20 percent of the customer base that represents the
heaviest user. For Denny’s we focused on the breakfast superfan; for sports
drink Lucozade Sport they targeted the serious athlete.
Decide whether the campaign is intended to support the brand or reposition
the brand. Are there factors inhibiting the brand’s growth? Quantify 
the
group of users that has the greatest impact on sales. Ask yourself which target
will be more influenced by advertising/communications. When I worked on
the Coca-Cola account, most of the drink was sold to household shoppers
who purchased it in two-liter bottles at supermarkets. But Coke focused their
media on teens because they figured they couldn’t afford to target everyone.
They knew that being relevant to teens was more important in establishing
long-term brand loyalty and value.
GATHERING AND FILTERING INSIGHTS
It’s relatively easy to have many insights. It’s much harder to have one or two
really powerful ones.
So you collect and collate a stack of cultural trends, media trends, category
trends, attitudes, usage and communications receptivity insights. The next
step is to filter and screen them. Stick them on a wall—literally. And then
subject them to the following questions, tossing aside the ones that fail to
meet the test. It’s a brutal but telling process.
Is the insight fresh or bold or new?
Is the insight something that makes everybody think differently about the
brand or how to communicate? If it does, then it will help differentiate the
brand strategy and be more competitive.
Dove’s “Campaign for Real Beauty” uncovered the insight that women
were tired of fake images of beauty. They wanted to take good care of the
body they had, make the most of the “real me.” This went well beyond
women’s views of functional product use and into emotional territory.
Amplifying this perspective of beauty hadn’t ever been articulated in thecategory.
Is the insight a discovery about your consumer that
opens the door for your brand?
Many so-called insights in marketing are really observations. They don’t
open the door to an opportunity, because they don’t go deep enough. To get 
a
true nugget of insight, you need to dig deeper and keep asking Why, like an
inquisitive toddler, till you hit gold. While working on a campaign for a bath
oil product for Unilever, Mindshare planners found that American women
preferred a quick morning shower and European women preferred to unwind
with a bath at night. If Unilever could persuade more American women to
take some time for themselves at the end of the day, they could sell more
Dove Cream Oil.
Can it travel?
A truly good insight has the ability to be executed in many different media. If
you find it difficult to translate the idea into an immediate media campaign,
then it probably isn’t going to fly. A great insight should allow multiple
executions, or at least a starting point for the communications plan. Take
Folgers Coffee, for example. We used to all think that the ability to brew a
good cup of coffee for our annoyingly picky friends was an effective measure
of our self-worth. But then the people at Folgers uncovered a simple,
obvious, but nevertheless earth-shattering, insight: coffee is mostly about
waking up, and we wake up to the smell of the coffee before we take a sip.
This insight drove dozens of different activation ideas and helped take the
business from a 17 percent market share to 36 percent. Their current tag:
“Coffee that matches your morning mood.”
Does the insight influence product use or purchase?
The insight must have relevance to what’s happening in people’s lives and it
must connect to a product. The insight with our client T-Mobile was that 68
percent of all mobile phone calls were made to five people, so they developed
a product that gave unlimited calls to five people, which we helped to
promote with the line “Who’s in your fave five?”Does the insight tell how to make the messaging more
engaging?
Message placement can make the messaging more engaging. For example,
television coverage of cycling often includes aerial shots. Nike thought these
were a media opportunity and chalked the roads with messages of 
support.
The messages got the attention of riders, including Lance Armstrong, and of
television viewers when the messages were caught on camera by helicopters.
TESTING THE INSIGHT
Once you have three to four insights that can be translated into a hypothesis
about ways to communicate, test them. This is where quantitative research
comes in. Which insight has the most resonance? What is the scale of the
insight; how many consumers respond to it? Test it across different markets,
so you have more than a Northeast or West Coast perspective, and then ask,
How differentiating is it?
QUESTIONS TO ASK IN THE INSIGHT
GATHERING STAGE
1. What places can you look for insights?
2. How can insights help you decide how to communicate to consumers?
3. What questions need to be asked?
4. Whom do we target?
5. Can this insight help us influence the consumer to purchase?CHAPTER 6
1 + 1 = 3
SPARKING CONSUMER BRAND 
CONVERSATIONS THROUGH MEDIA
THE POWER OF FREE
I
ronically, as a media agency whose business model largely depends on
buying media, my agency has invested millions of dollars in trying to
understand and measure the value of nonpaid media. We understand that
advertising is just one contributor to building brands. There are plenty of
others. Today, the relevance and importance of word of mouth has a greater
than ever proportion of the mix.
Brand Media Strategy in the mass media age used to be about managing
your paid media communications. Thanks to Facebook, Google and any
number of other digital methods of sharing information, earned media (also
referred to as free media) and content creation have become integral parts of
the communications mix and strategy.
Prompting and influencing consumer conversations can build new brands
and promote existing ones. Everyone in the marketing business, whether in
politics or packaged goods, is taking note. Thinking outside the box of
traditional mass media is a given in this business, and one of the areas 
where
that thinking is useful is in generating consumer conversations to amplify the
brand. But the choice is not between paid or earned media. Advertising and
word of mouth can drive each other and enhance the overall effect. Thischapter is dedicated to promoting such a view; hence the title, 1 + 1 = 3.
The ZenithOptimedia Touchpoints ROI Tracker is a database our agency
network built from consumer interviews to evaluate the influence different
marketing communication channels have on brand purchase. Its data covers
145 categories in 37 countries. One of the most revealing findings of this
research was that purchase is influenced most strongly by friends and family,
followed by aftersales service, colleague recommendations and specialist
recommendations.
For those wondering how much traditional media influences purchasing,
figure 6.1
 shows that television advertising ranked sixteenth and print
advertising twentieth.
When the ad world was driven by the mass media, word-of-mouth or
marketing PR was a separate line item on the marketing plan. However, word
of mouth has such great influence in brand decision making that we have to
consider how media can drive it.
WORD OF MOUTH DRIVES SALES
Tremor, a word-of-mouth organization formed by Procter & Gamble, found
three reasons why consumer advocacy is important to driving sales.
1
1. Word of mouth instills confidence: Many recommendations come from
people you know, which reduces the emotional risk of following a
recommendation.
2. A personal stake: Nothing creates loyalty like advocacy. It’s a lesson
straight from cognitive psychology. It means that the simple act of
recommending a product gives the recommender a personal stake in its
success and more reason to remain a loyal user—and continued
advocate.
3. Increased perceived value: It’s a simple equation. A person who
advocates on behalf of a product becomes more appreciative of the
product. This strengthening of perceived value translates into increased
trial and loyalty.
FIGURE 6.1Similarly, word of mouth drives awareness. A survey from Kantar Media,
formerly TNS Media Intelligence, showed that an advertising campaign’s
awareness among those who had generated or received brand word of mouth
was 200 percent higher than among those who had not generated 
any word of
mouth. As more and more brands crowd into the marketplace, consumers
must navigate myriad choices and advertising message clutter. They turn to
the internet for advice and insight.
WORD OF MOUSE
To understand the increasing importance of word of mouth in the media mix,
you have to understand the effect the internet is having on personalrecommendation. Mainstream adoption of the internet has increasingly
enabled word of mouth’s role in brand decisions.
Thanks to Google and myriad other online venues, “word of mouse” has
real scale. With search, consumers can find content and information more
easily and more efficiently than ever, and the web is alive with millions of
conversations and comments on brands disseminated via social media. On
Facebook alone, twenty-five billion pieces of content (web links, news
stories, blog posts, notes and photos) are shared every month. There are over
one hundred million videos on YouTube alone. Video content, much of it on
brands, is being created and disseminated by consumers, and the prospects
for going viral excite marketers.
THE POWER OF USER RATINGS
Those millions of web users aren’t just listening to friends; they’re relying on
total strangers to help them make brand choices. Product ratings have
enormous sway over brand choice. Think about how many people use
TripAdvisor to help them select a hotel in a city or even a particular room.
The Hilton San Francisco offers guests who provide feedback to TripAdvisor
free Starbucks cards, a gesture they hope will prompt a positive response. In
fact, the travel industry has been turned on its head by user-generated
content. Traditional standards, such as what constitutes a four-star hotel, are
now determined by the public. Professional guidebooks are passé.
Marketing expert Seth Godin points out, “For the first time in history, the
graffiti on the wall has more power than the official version coming 
from an
organization (even yours).”
2
 What other people say is more important than
what companies say. Companies can provide information on their products,
but Amazon’s users will leave their own feedback. Target and Best Buy have
thrown open the door for consumers to share their thoughts in forums.
Consumers even provide advice on how to get the most out of these
companies’ products—crowd sourcing at its best. Restaurant-review
publisher Zagats was one of the first companies to harness user-generated
content and share it through its annually produced books.
The amplification of the consumer voice, independent of either the media
filter or the company PR department, has led to fierce internal debate at somecompanies about how much to let go, how much free rein to give users to
have their say. Frito-Lay’s Doritos believed the answer was to involve
customers, who in turn sent great ideas that were later turned into a Super
Bowl commercial.
Frank Rose in an article in the 
Wall Street Journal
 described it as “the
Internet … arm[ing] the consumer against the mindless blather of corporate
messaging attempts.”
3
 Bloggers aren’t paid to fill space; they’re passionate
about their topics, and they drive an honest dialogue. In some ways they have
flipped the purchase funnel. Consumers can join in any web conversation
about brands simply by Googling the topic.
Seth Godin observed that Google has sliced and diced information about
the world into tiny bits. Very few people visit a website home page anymore.
They walk in the back door, the page that Google has sent them to. By
atomizing the world, Google destroyed the end-to-end solution offered by
most organizations, replacing it with a pick-and-choose, component-based
solution. In short, they have democratized product information.
4
ADVERTISING PROMOTES WORD OF
MOUTH
Research by the Keller Fay Group found that a stunning 3.3 billion word-of-
mouth brand impressions take place in the United States each day.
5
 Notably,
65 percent of brand references are positive and 8 percent negative. Looking at
that statistic from a marketer’s perspective, it’s hard to see any 
downside in
promoting word of mouth online. The risk is low and the upside is high.
According to Keller Fay’s statistics, 57 percent rated word of mouth as
credible or believable and 49 percent were likely to pass on information.
Advertising in traditional media has a huge role in driving word of mouth.
The company found that 22 percent of daily conversations about brands, or
716 million, involves someone talking about what they’d seen or heard in
paid media. In fact, the group says this is a conservative estimate of
advertising’s role because it counts only conversations in which ads were
specifically mentioned. So it would not account for occasions when a
consumer was indirectly or unconsciously motivated by an ad in a
conversation about a product or service.These findings are important, because in most research I’ve found that
consumers don’t like to admit that they’re influenced by advertising. Much of
the enthusiasm for word of mouth, as a communication discipline that can be
molded, stems from its being more likely to be viewed as authentic and
stimulated by real experience. That in itself is more valuable than paid
commercial messaging.
With 22 percent of word of mouth driven by advertising and 13 percent
driven by editorial content, we see that the media is playing a bigger role in
driving word of mouth.
6
WHO ARE THE INFLUENCERS?
One question marketers and agencies must ask is, Who are the influencers?
The Word of Mouth Marketing Association (WOMMA) identified five broad
categories of influencers (
figure 6.2
).
7
BUSINESS DECISION MAKERS AND
OPINION LEADERS
The viewpoint of those in formal positions of authority—political leaders or
business elite, the so-called C suite, or C level—carries weight, if not final
decision making, particularly on B2B products or services. But their
influence also extends to credibility outside their own organizations.
FIGURE 6.2RECOGNIZED EXPERTS AND ANALYSTS
Experts include academics, industry commentators and technical experts,
people whose jobs or reputations in a specialist field put them in a position to
influence others. Seth Godin is my guru on many things marketing.
MEDIA ELITE
Journalists, media commentators, even talk show hosts who have an audience
in traditional, new or social media are the media elite. Oprah Winfrey, with
her superpowers in selling books or safe driving or anything else she wants,
epitomizes the type.
CULTURAL ELITE
Celebrities, trendsetters or fashionistas influence through their connections to
pop culture and societal trends. This group is followed by early adopters and
by the media. They need not necessarily be experts in a field, but they havegeneral influence; one such is Michelle Obama.
SOCIALLY CONNECTED
Malcolm Gladwell called them mavens: everyday influencers among our
family and friends—the most influential touch point.
8
 They have more power
than Oprah or Michelle because of their sheer number. They are researchers
who are always on the lookout for new information and ideas. They volunteer
their opinions about products and services they are passionate about. They
are the social oil of any group, the ones with five-hundredplus friends on
Facebook who constantly socialize off- and online.
A study by ICOM, a division of direct marketing agency Epsilon, found
that there is no universal influencer and that consumers are influencers
strictly within product categories rather than across all categories. In addition,
few commonalities exist within demographics for influencers.
9
Each of the groups of influencers has a different role and level of
importance among individual brand briefs. Each requires a different strategy.
The first step is to identify and prioritize the important groups in any
influencer outreach, and what you want to achieve with them, before
determining tactics. We go into specifics later in this chapter in “Generating
Brand Conversation Tactics.”
EARLY ADOPTERS
When it comes to generating positive word of mouth, early adopters of new
products are influential. The early adopters sway the “early majority,” a
group defined by social scientist Everett Rogers in 
Diffusion of Innovations.
10
The early majority represents 34 percent of consumers and is the group most
essential for driving product sales into mainstream volume levels. According
to an 
Advertising Age
 white paper, “Thanks to the rise of social media, early
adopters have the potential to have greater influence over products they buy
and try.”
11
Taly Weiss, founder and chief executive officer of Trendspotting.com
Research, observed that early adopters, in the last five years, have a stage toinfluence others from. She says, “Social media gave them screen power.
Early social media users have grown to be the important influencers, and
their influence is far beyond technology.”
12
Google has exploited early adopters when developing new products such
as Google Voice and Google Wave. A limited number of identified early
adopters are invited by Google to test beta versions of a product. Word
spreads to a growing and connected tech community, who feel they are part
of an exclusive club.
Creating conversations among influencers and early adopters brings a high
level of involvement for new and existing brands. Opinions of friends and
family, and even those of strangers, carry more weight than company-
provided information, as they are seen as independent and authentic. Social
media enables spreading these opinions and discussions across a wider
audience. Google and other search engines have given consumers the ability
to solicit those opinions, making word of mouth more penetrating. All of this
at internet speed. Building consumer conversations into the Brand Media
Strategy has become a crucial element to delivering the full arsenal of paid
and unpaid media communications.
TACTICS FOR GENERATING BRAND
CONVERSATION
The job of the communications planner in conjunction with the marketer is to
find ways to tap into those influencers and early adopters. The key tactics to
keep in mind are the following:
• 
Start by listening.
• Talk to the talkers.
• Conversations start with an idea.
• Make it worthwhile to share.
• Amplify the conversation in paid media.
• Budget for production and ideas.
• Measure sensibly.START BY LISTENING
As a kid I used to watch a famous British television talk show host, Michael
Parkinson. He had the most engaging interviews with guests. He was
renowned for not talking but listening, and he seemed to always get his
guests to reveal innermost thoughts and feelings, creating fascinating
conversations. During the seventies he attracted former big-name Hollywood
stars such as Jimmy Stewart, John Wayne and Mickey Rooney. He didn’t
invite them to talk about a movie but to simply chat. In the March 4, 2006,
episode, Tony Blair, the first prime minister in office to be interviewed on the
show, told of his wife’s father asking him if he could light a marijuana joint.
The most effective way to start a conversation is to listen. Listening can
provide insight into pop culture, provide unedited thoughts about brands and
what people think, in real time. There are many ways to listen. A good place
for a planner to start is to set up a Google Alert for your brand and key
business terms. You might want to also set up alerts to track the competition.
Then analyze conversations. What are people saying? Who’s saying it, how
often and where and in which communities? Are views positive or negative?
Search engines have a hard time picking up commentary on chat boards, so
it’s important to look for forums in such places as Chow.com if you’re in the
restaurant business or Edmunds.com if you’re working on an automotive
brand. Join Facebook Groups to hear what people are saying about your
client’s brand. Search for URLs at Delicious.com, a site that shows who is
linking to whom and where else they’re going. Search.twitter.com is a place
that lets you scan Twitter in real time for conversations happening around
specific keywords.
A plethora of social listening tools automate brand mentions and rank them
by volume, influence and sentiment. Many of them are free. We detail a
number of these in 
chapter 12
, “Measurement and Metrics.”
Managing Negative Word of Mouth Online
One of the advantages of listening to the conversation online is the ability to
respond.
Pepsi experienced some of the pitfalls of the online medium when an ad
appeared in Germany that featured the last calorie of a drink committing
suicide. The agency that made the ad had wanted to submit it for an awardsprogram but never got Pepsi’s final sign-off on the ad, so the agency ran the
ad just once in a niche arts magazine in Germany. Despite the agency’s
caution, the copy still turned up on the web, causing immediate uproar.
“Immediately we jumped in,” says Bonin Bough, director of global social
media at Pepsi. “We were very clear with the public that the ad will never run
again, and here’s how it got out; this is what the issue was.”
13
The marketing team also responded individually to all the consumers who
were offended and thus helped offset damage. Taking such a transparent,
honest approach can even provide “an opportunity to change a badvocate,
into a potential advocate,” says Bough, as long as communications are
authentic and sincere.
14
Domino’s Pizza also had damage control to do after a fake video by
renegade employees leaked onto YouTube. Company chief executive officer
Patrick Doyle responded within twenty-four hours with his own video on
YouTube.
Twitter’s Trending Topics offers a way to monitor the zeitgeist and
respond. When someone complains about your brand on the site, a marketer
can listen or offer to help the complainer. When Matthew Caldecutt vented
his frustrations with AT&T’s service on his Twitter feed, AT&T wrote back
to him and helped him get a better deal on his service. Caldecutt followed up
with a tweet that said the company’s rapid response had “turned his ill will
into goodwill.”
15
TALK TO THE TALKERS
Engage Your True Fans
Marketing blogger Seth Godin talks about the shift in the conversation from
how many to whom. Similarly, the president of the UK’s Word of Mouth
Marketing Association, Molly Flatt, says, “Your biggest spending customer
may not necessarily be your most valuable. It’s the one that recommends you
the most that is a real asset to your business.”
16
 And as President Obama can
attest, getting fans to convert their peers can turn a campaign into a success.
True word of mouth is most effective when it’s generated by indepen dent,
peer-to-peer contact. This is the kind of behavior that brands should foster,
although it demands an ethical rigor, creativity and abdication of control thatcan feel very frightening. Forrester Research concluded that only 16 percent
of consumers trust corporate blogs, while 60 percent trust consumer product
ratings and reviews.
17
Employees Are an Advertising Medium
Sergio Zyman suggests that employees are forms of advertising. “There are
plenty of times when a TV commercial is the best thing, but there are also a
ton of other ways to advertise that don’t involve hiring a frustrated and
expensive Hollywood director,” writes Zyman. “Your packaging, the way
you treat your employees, the way they treat your customers, how your
receptionist answers the phone, how your delivery people are dressed.
Whether you care to admit it or not, all of these are advertising.”
18
In an era of web transparency, how your employees think and talk about
your company has become even more crucial. Mike Kust, CMO for Carlson
Marketing, noted the example of a large commercial bank that had a different
message for employees and for its customers. The bank provided employees
with incentives to work quicker and more efficiently, while its advertising
stressed the warmth and care and extra time it gave its customers. “The whole
project ended up a failure,” he said.
19
Eric Ryan, founder of the company that makes the cleaning product
Method, says an employee is a spokesperson. “We blur the lines between
who we are and who we serve,” he says.
20
 Think of your human resources
director as a marketing director.
Pepsi recognized the importance of bringing its employees along,
launching “invertising” for its “Refresh Everything” campaign, aimed at
employees. The company placed posters, floor and elevator decals and
placards in the head office in Purchase, New York. The beverage giant
conducted ten webinars for its employees and bottlers that introduced the new
messaging. The company also explained the plans in the company newsletter
and on its intranet.
CASE STUDY: 
THE DARK KNIGHT
—
ENGAGING YOUR TRUE FANS
Warner Bros. showed a lot of deft in creating buzz behind 
The DarkKnight
 film by launching its viral marketing campaign online. The
campaign launched a year before the release. They developed an
elaborate Batman universe that entailed a series of interactive
experiences, competitions and story builds, including more than thirty
different 
Dark Knight
 websites. 
Dark Knight
 fans who went to
WhySoSerious.com found themselves invited to a scavenger-hunt
challenge with instructions that sent them to bakeries in 25 different
US cities. After asking for an order left for “Robin Banks” (“robbing
banks”), they were given a cake with a phone number written on it.
Inside the cake was an evidence bag that contained a cellphone and a
Joker playing card with more clues.
There was a website of the fictional newspaper 
The Gotham Times,
 a
site for Gotham City’s district attorney, Harvey Dent, suitably defaced
by the Joker, and even a site for the subway map of Gotham City.
These sites were not promoted through traditional media channels.
They released information about them, to allow true fans to search for
them and let their friends know. The film opened with a record number
of screens and a record box office of $158.4 million on opening
weekend in the United States.
21
The campaign delivered some impressive numbers helped by the
buzz driven by this effort: 50 million Google searches for “The Dark
Knight.”
22
 There were 55,000 videos on YouTube tagged “The Dark
Knight,” with some receiving over 4 million views and generating
hundreds of thousands of comments. There were 106,299 blog posts on
the launch day of the film. More than 4 million websites referred to
“The Dark Knight,” ranging from film critics to social networks and
new forums. This was a unique campaign that truly engaged the fans
and drove a massive outcome.
CONVERSATIONS START WITH AN IDEA
Whether you are developing campaigns that drive conversations in social or
in traditional media, you need to start with an idea, a hook, something that is
worth talking about and sharing. This isn’t just about a media plan.
Developing consumer-driven communications absolutely relies oncollaborating and partnering ideas with PR and creative or digital agencies.
The more progressive ad agencies are building buzz as a central part of
how they develop ad campaigns. One agency that seems to have turned this
into an art form is Droga5. In 2006 they created a video for the clothing
company Ecko depicting a shadowy figure breaking into Andrews Air Force
Base and spray painting the words “Still Free” on the side of Air Force One.
The ad was a viral sensation. In 2008 Droga5 released “Bike Hero,” an ad for
Activision’s popular game Guitar Hero. The ad was widely praised and
blogged across the internet when it was realized who its creators were.
Sometimes a creative advertising idea might have a word-of-mouth
element to it. In other cases a word-of-mouth idea might be originated for the
brand. To develop brand conversation ideas, planners need to do the
following:
• Look for insights that could trigger effective consumer advocacy or
conversations about the brand or campaign. These could come from
observations of what consumers think of the brand or category in
particular or from the culture in general.
• Brainstorm a single message around something that is relevant and
differentiating. Is there an idea that will surprise consumers or challenge
their current thinking about the brand? What is the psychological, social
or cultural tension associated with this idea? What makes your target
person tense about the idea? Then test the idea by asking whether she
would want to share it with those she knows.
After some of these concepts have been outlined, then advertising can
work to fuel a discussion, such as that prompted by Dove’s “Real Beauty”
campaign: “What does it mean to be beautiful?” Your ideas need to prompt a
positive discussion around your brand.
FOSTER CHICKENS—SAY NO TO
PLUMPING
Foster Farms, in Livingston, California, launched an online marketing
campaign that caught my eye.
23
 The company sells high-quality chicken in
supermarkets. Faced with the effect of lower-priced store brands on theirsales, they came up with a brilliant idea that challenged their current
approach to purchase consideration by bringing to light the practices of
lower-priced competitor products. They did this by creating an issue-based
campaign to “Say no to plumping.”
Plumping,
 a word invented by Foster Farms, describes the practice, largely
unknown to consumers, of filling chickens with saltwater to make them
heavier. The heavier the chicken, the more you pay. Foster Farms wanted to
explain why its chickens were worth the money.
Foster Farms, together with design consultancy Welikesmall and ad
agency Goodby, Silverstein & Partners, San Francisco, California, designed a
website to discuss the evils of the practice. A YouTube ad spot shows a shady
surgeon injecting chicken characters who don’t understand what’s going on.
The antiplumping campaign has its own website, Twitter address and
Facebook page. The idea sparked so much interest that even California
senator Barbara Boxer got involved to suggest that producers label chickens
that have been injected with saltwater.
24
Another technique is to create an event worth talking about, and publish,
broadcast and promote it in paid and earned media platforms to help drive
conversations. John Woodward, in charge of global planning at Publicis,
advocates creating what he calls “contagious ideas that change the
conversation.”
25
For New Zealand beer Speights, their idea was to sponsor an event and
then PR and promote it. The agency built a Speights ale house on a ship that
made a ten-week voyage to London, where it then served expat Kiwis who
missed their favorite drink. Footage of the voyage was sent to websites, 
the
media and television. The huge media interest generated PR with a value of
millions of dollars over several months, a value that was many times the
brand’s original promotional budget.
MAKE IT WORTH THEIR WHILE TO SHARE
Every PR person knows that giving a journalist an exclusive—a piece of
information, a story or access—will most likely lead to a sense of excitement
and a desire to share.
Potato snack Pringles, a Procter & Gamble product, launched a campaignwith this idea in mind. Their approach was to share a new product with a
group of people who might then go out and spread the word. Pringles
distributed a first-to-taste party pack that was sent to networked mothers in
advance of a traditional media launch. It invited snack food influencers to
have their friends taste and rate the new Rice Infusion brand of Pringles. This
produced a flurry of conversations about the product, both on- and offline.
Bloggers love recognition, so give them access to your brands. To bring
these influencers into the tent, it’s critical to have them interact with the
product, rate it and then talk about it, both positively and negatively.
Consumer electronics company Panasonic invited influential bloggers on a
trip to the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nevada, where they
mingled with Panasonic’s chief executive officer and marketing people. They
didn’t insist that anyone write about the product, but they did receive plenty
of buzz in the end.
Our UK office, working with mobile phone operator O2, gave college
students prizes to promote the mobile phone company’s unlimited use for a
flat rate plan. The big prize was an end-of-term party for the winner’s entire
university. Some 250 student brand ambassadors were appointed to spread
the word face to face and through their social networks. The student
awareness of the rate plan doubled, going from 21 percent to 43 percent. The
phone company also showed an average increase of 77 percent over all brand
attributes among students for the campaign period.
Similarly, Pepsi’s Refresh project taps into consumers’ deep desire to do
good and to be connected to each other while doing so. “Refresh” aims to
give away millions of dollars to good causes. Those looking for cash to
support their initiatives are required to launch a political-like campaign
within their on- and offline social networks to get people to vote for their
initiative.
In July 2010, Pepsi’s project, at 
www.refresheverything.com
, had 1,086
pitches from consumers in categories such as health, arts, food, the planet,
neighborhood and education.
26
 Voters could support anything from free
crock pots and recipes for the underprivileged to Kindle classrooms for those
wanting to learn English.
The YouTube Effect
YouTube has helped agencies to create viral communications for their clients.In the 2008 Effie Awards, YouTube featured in fifty-five of the ninety-four
winning campaigns.
27
Creating desirable content is the key to having that content shared. But
there are also clever strategies to exploit YouTube’s ubiquity and mass reach.
Gaming-console maker Nintendo wanted to persuade a broader family
audience to play and bought the YouTube home page to premiere its ad. That
resulted in “one million click-throughs in three days,” according to
Nintendo.
28
AMPLIFY THE CONVERSATION IN PAID
MEDIA
As mentioned earlier, according to Keller Fay, at least 22 percent of word-of-
mouth conversations about brands are generated by advertising. And many of
those conversations are positive to the brand. Building in paid media
strategies that fuel brand conversations is more essential than ever.
Airline JetBlue is a classic example of how to build a brand on word of
mouth. Approximately 70 percent of their customers fly with the airline
because someone has recommended JetBlue. The company wanted to
amplify the voices of those satisfied customers and set up a story booth.
Customers were asked to share their story in person in the booth or online.
The JetBlue 
booth was taken to eleven cities, and over 109,000 people
stopped in to talk. The company collected over one thousand video stories
and over twelve hundred emails. The stories from the booth formed the basis
for a television ad campaign and a twenty-minute video shown on planes and
in crew member areas to help drive the culture.
The outcome was that travelers gave greater consideration to JetBlue when
making flight plans than to rivals such as Southwest, 26 percent versus 23
percent, respectively, for the two airlines. The company’s revenue, passenger
and miles were up 25 percent.
29
Super Bowl Has Become the PR Bowl
Ed Keller, chief executive officer of Keller Fay Group, firmly believes that
the Super Bowl generates substantially more word of mouth for advertisers
than anything else out there. “We generally see that brands which advertise inthe Super Bowl are rewarded with a 15% increase in Word of Mouth. … This
translates into more than 100 million incremental conversations for
advertised brands in the week after the game than the average weekly Word
of Mouth they were realizing previously.” Keller figures that a word-ofmouth
conversation is worth about fifty cents to a marketer and that there’s a social
value being generated that goes beyond the impact of the ad itself.
30
This came to life for me when my agency worked with Denny’s. In an
effort to gain retrial and increase brand consideration, they developed a
promotion to invite America to have a Denny’s Grand Slam breakfast free of
charge.
On Super Bowl Sunday we timed the release of our in-game spot, digital
campaign and brand website takeover to launch simultaneously. Denny’s
became the most talked about restaurant in America in less than forty hours.
The campaign delivered incredible buzz. It was the second-mostsearched
word on Super Bowl Sunday and the number-one tweeted subject on Twitter
that day.
Denny’s leveraged news and trade media on the Monday after the big
game. Over two thousand television stations and five hundred newspapers
covered our story. Thousands of websites and over ten thousand blogs 
helped
propagate Denny’s advertising message all over Facebook, YouTube and
Twitter.
The campaign generated fifty million dollars in free media exposure as the
press and television picked up the feel-good story of a free Denny’s breakfast
in the midst of a gloomy recession. It drove significant consideration and
retrial.
Leveraging Specialist Word-of-Mouth and Media
Partners to Amplify Brand Conversations
Sometimes media companies can really help drive word of mouth and interest
for a brand. To dramatically boost sales of Garnier Nutritioniste Eye Rollers,
my agency focused on using media partners to speak to key influencers and
drive product recommendation.
The program built word of mouth in a few ways but most directly through
a partnership with SheSpeaks, a network of over fifty thousand female
opinion drivers who were invited to participate in sampling and share their
experience with others.To begin, we invited two thousand SheSpeaks panelists within the Eye
Roller’s target age group of twenty-five to thirty-five years old to participate
in the test. The panelists took part in an online survey to enroll in the Eye
Roller program. Once enrolled, program participants were sent a sample of
the Eye Roller, along with access to an online microsite with detailed product
information and online coupons for panelists to use and pass along. The
women provided feedback and participated in an interactive discussion about
the Eye Roller in a discussion forum. At the end of the program, participants
were invited to take an evaluation survey to provide feedback about the Eye
Roller and to share their experiences with others about the product. Women-
targeted magazines such as 
Cookie, Allure
 and 
Self
 were also asked to share
the product with their most active readers and asked to discuss their
experience through online forums.
Of the magazine readers who tried the product, 86 percent said they were
likely to recommend the product. Those reached through the She Speaks
program increased purchase intent 174 percent. The outcome was
unprecedented. The Garnier Nutritioniste Eye Roller sold over one million
products in the first six months of the program, and those sales helped move
the entire Garnier Nutritioniste franchise into the top five skincare companies
in 2008.
BUDGET FOR PRODUCTION AND IDEAS
Traditionally, word-of-mouth campaigns are funded from marketing, public
relations, promotions, events or digital budgets. Rarely are they part of the
media plan’s budget, such is the lack of integration that still besets our
industry. Marketing PR is someone else’s responsibility. But that way of
thinking is being challenged by the media agencies.
Word-of-mouth programs are not a media buy, but they can and should be
incorporated into the communications plan. The cost is primarily in
development of the creative ideas, project management of the campaign and
various production or technology areas in the case of social media programs.
If you have an idea or recommendation for a word-of-mouth program, the
best way to make it possible is to include a provision in the media budget.
Even though that budget may not be placed with paid media vendors, the
outcome is about creating brand exposure and influence.MEASURE SENSIBLY
Be careful about measuring word of mouth, because it can’t be treated the
same way other media metrics are. Word of mouth is about influencing others
rather than being a traditional headcount.
Some metrics are used as basic benchmarks of word of mouth. Many of
them are collected through social media monitoring or general market
surveys. The general metrics measured will include page views, volume of
posts, people reached, comments on posts, sentiment shifts and number of
fans. These are useful reference points to quantify reach and fine-tune the
tactics. But in the end many effective social media tactics are the most
difficult to measure quantitatively. Measuring the holistic key performance
indicators 
(KPIs) of the Brand Media Strategy is the end game. We will cover
this in 
chapter 12
.
QUESTIONS WHEN DEVELOPING 
BRAND CONVERSATION TACTICS
1. What communication goals do you want to achieve?
2. Who are the most important influencers for this brand or campaign?
3. Will the idea surprise consumers or challenge their current thinking
about the brand?
4. What will make them want to share it?
5. What touch points will reach and amplify the idea best?CHAPTER 7
CONDUCTING 
THE ORCHESTRA
MAKING INTEGRATION REAL
O
ne of the toughest acts to pull off in marketing is integration. It’s the
ultimate goal for all campaigns, because it’s critical to ensuring a more
complete consumer experience. But integration is hard to achieve. Only 25
percent of advertisers report that they are doing integrated marketing “very
well” or “excellent,” down from 33 percent in 2006.
1
Integration is difficult for a lot of reasons. Agencies are splintered into
specialist fields: creative, media and digital, but other channels from shopper
marketing to sponsorship are also part of the marketing communications mix.
Agencies don’t have financial incentives to work together. As agencies
naturally strive to preserve their fees, this works against integration. And in
this era of accountability, agencies and measurement want to distill the
performance of individual pieces of the marketing communications puzzle.
This chapter covers two ideas:
1. What it takes to make integration work on the agency side
2. How to make the Brand Media Strategy come together so consumers
receive a holistic brand experience
MAKING MUSIC IN COMMUNICATIONSAlthough never much of a music buff, my interest swelled when my two sons
started playing in their middle school band. Attending my boys’ concerts,
I’ve noticed that music has some lessons for us about integration in the
advertising business.
An orchestra is made up of different specialists: percussion, woodwind,
brass and strings. In our case, advertising has an ensemble of creative, media,
digital, PR and other agencies. Each section in its own right is special, but
playing together in harmony creates an amazing performance. Everyone plays
to the same music and in the same meter, but each instrument has its own
arrangement. If all the instruments played the same tune at the same time, the
performance would be flat, one dimensional. If each section were to play its
own tune, it would be cacophony. Each instrument has its moment to shine,
but the overall vision of the arrangement is the hero, not led by or defaulting
to any single instrument. I wonder how harmonious the multiple agencies
working together on a campaign sound to the client?
RETHINKING INTEGRATION
Working together in harmony, the most rudimentary point of integration, is
often violated, most painfully when digital elements are added as an
afterthought.
Gone are the days when creative solely drove everything; so too are the
days when media led the campaign. And digital ruling it all isn’t the answer
either. Everyone has to come together, play their part.
There’s a growing need for better integration given the increase in media
usage. Among entries to the Institute of Practitioners in Advertising
Effectiveness Awards, television remains the dominant medium, used in
twenty-two of the twenty-three winners.
2
 That’s unsurprising, given
television’s still unrivalled ability to bring reach and impact for mass-market
brands. What is changing is the way television is blended with other
channels. 
Last year’s winners used on average six different media channels;
in 2004, four; in 1990, two. The number of available channels has exploded,
and there is clearly a corresponding cultural shift from using a single channel
or a single marketing discipline toward a blending of many tools. Media-led
solutions are increasingly evident. As agencies evolve, so too does campaigndevelopment. Clients demand a more synthesized approach. 
Figure 7.1
illustrates the shifts agencies are making to bring about a more integrated
approach to a Brand Media Strategy.
In the mass media era, the modus operandi at many ad agencies was first to
crack the creative idea. Media plans were developed in parallel, but little
could be finalized until the creative was determined. That creative idea
usually came in the form of either a thirty-second television ad or a print ad.
It was assumed that these media would carry the campaign to most of the
target consumers.
Once sign-off by the client was obtained, the creative teams would develop
other media executions—radio, digital display and below-the-line tactics such
as direct marketing and point of sale. There would be room for some creative
media ideas, perhaps ads printed on tomatoes or zany out-of-home executions
for the purposes of award entries. Digital usually took 
another path, often
through another agency and another manager in the client company. It would
be unkind and inaccurate to say this happened all the time, but it would
equally be untrue to say it happened only occasionally. The better agency
teams wouldn’t let that happen, but for many, deadlines, pragmatism and
legacy practices caused the process to fall back on bad habits.
FIGURE 7.1
Rob Feakins, chief creative officer and president at Publicis, New York,illustrates the new order. While working on a new business assignment, he
charged several teams in his creative department to come up with a
campaign. Before the teams presented their ideas to him, he called me and
asked if I could talk him through the communications plan. I was intrigued;
rarely does creative express much interest in the media plan. I asked him why
he needed this. He said the relative importance of different media would help
him judge the potential campaign concepts better. Knowing whether out-of-
home or print or television advertising was going to be the principal channel
would help him decide which idea to back.
Clearly, a shift is taking place. With a need for media-neutral strategies, we
can’t assume that television will always be the lead medium. Today, it makes
more sense to start with understanding how and where we would connect
with the target consumer and how we should use the media before we
determine what to say. However, I don’t think that this is a one-way process.
A good Brand Media Strategy needs to be validated and challenged by those
responsible for executing it. Media and creative is a partnership.
THE BIG TELEVISION IDEA VERSUS 
THE BIG COMMUNICATIONS IDEA
The big television idea in advertising has lost ground to small, smartly
placed, relevant impressions. Media’s long tail requires that we look at not
just mass audience but a broader combination of touch points. Single media
campaigns these days are rare, because planners need to deploy several media
to deliver sufficient reach. Often heavy online users will be light television
viewers and vice versa, so each medium needs to promote the campaign 
as if
it was the primary one. In 
chapter 2
, I described in the New Media Playbook
section the importance of using communication to create involvement and
relevancy. Central to that is considering how each medium is consumed and
the different relationships and experiences that consumers have with each
medium, and then exploiting those qualities. For example, when Activision
promoted Guitar Hero 5, its television commercial, which played heavily in
football programming, was designed to stand out among the heavy football
and male-skewed commercials; its social media programs contained a lot of
fan participation and interaction; and its teaser campaign on YouTube hadvery little branding and more risqué humor that encouraged viral pass-on.
As communications agencies, we want to avoid the matching-luggage
syndrome or the “let’s replicate the print into banners and TV into radio”
urge. That’s why a campaign needs a strategic platform or a big
communications idea to help bring the campaign together.
At Optimedia, we call this the central communicating idea, or CCI. I’ve
heard different agencies describe it as the brand or big idea, or the strategic or
connections platform. Its purpose is to ensure that all the communications
across the multiple channels are on message, appropriate to the target and
strategic. The CCI allows us to anchor and integrate the Brand Media
Strategy and the media activations.
The CCI should inspire creativity. It is not the creative tagline or the ad,
but it can incorporate or leverage the creative idea. It is channel agnostic and
allows multiple tactics and executions to be activated. It should lead the
briefing process for activation opportunities across the different marketing
communications disciplines. We develop the CCI in collaboration with
different specialists—creative, digital, direct, broadcast, print, out-of-home
and emerging media in a series of workshops.
Axe body spray’s CCI is “The magic promise of mating game success.”
This idea straddles the advertising, different media executions and marketing
touch points. The television ads sell this idea in thirty seconds. It was
expanded with a branded television series about young men’s quests to win
women. Another addition to this was the playful Axe mating-game tool kit,
which users could access online. The idea was masterfully executed with
creativity and by exploiting individual media’s different strengths but all
selling the same broad idea. That’s the orchestra effect in advertising.
THE BIG IDEA DRIVES INTEGRATION
The CCI should open the door to many tactics and be able to travel across
many media platforms in multiple countries. It ensures all marketing
communications work together in harmony. It calls for thinking
collaboratively and connecting all agencies to provide integrated, focused
communications execution. Once you have a CCI then work with the partners
to develop media solutions and tactics.IS THE CENTRAL COMMUNICATING IDEA
THE ACTUAL CREATIVE IDEA?
The CCI should in most cases be interchangeable with the creative idea or
core brand idea.
The obvious place to start is with the campaign’s creative idea. The role of
the Brand Media Strategy could be to amplify that idea across all media
effectively. I’m not the kind of planner who thinks that media insights and
ideas have to be developed separately from the creative process. Leveraging
the creative idea is a powerful and proven strategy that delivers integration.
Rather than describe a solution as integrated, we should think of it as
unifying a concept that brings a lot of different ideas, tactics and executions
together in a meaningful, cohesive way. The Pepsi MAX “Wake Up People!”
campaign highlights this superbly.
DEVELOP A CENTRAL COMMUNICATIONS
IDEA FIRST, THEN THE CREATIVE
The CCI is developed from a consumer insight or truth that is relevant to the
target audience we want to influence. Ideally, the direction helps determine
how you use media to differentiate the brand from the competition.
CASE STUDY: PEPSI “WAKE UP PEOPLE!”
3
The challenge was to introduce a diet cola, Diet Pepsi MAX, into an
already overcrowded marketplace, containing some 150 energy drinks.
The objective was to maximize and repeat trial over an initial four-
month launch period. The campaign idea was to wake up tired
consumers, who were identified by their yawns. The idea behind this
campaign launch for an energy drink containing double the caffeine
and ginseng was to deliver energy to the masses.
The highly contagious, inappropriate yawn was used as a visual
device across a fully integrated television, radio, out-of-home, internet
and PR guerrilla campaign. The central communicating idea was “Stopthe yawn.”
The campaign to “Stop the yawn” began a national crusade against
afternoon slumps and daily exhaustion. Television drove awareness of
the advertising creative, which featured yawns getting people into
trouble. Diet Pepsi MAX ambassadors set up Wake-up stations in
malls, festivals, offices, tourist attractions and commuter locations in
major cities around the United States.
The events targeted busy commuters and shoppers throughout their
day. They created minigames that reinforced the idea. For example,
Whack-a-Yawn, a take on the classic Whack-a-Mole carnival game,
allowed consumers to hammer their yawns away with a mallet shaped
like a Diet Pepsi MAX can. In Stop-the-Yawn video game arcades,
consumers used MAX water guns to squirt yawns away. These
activities became major sampling events, with more than five hundred
thousand samples handed out. Consumers also had the chance to view
the latest television ads.
The campaign resulted in a greater number of household trials than
did any other launch by Pepsi or rival Coke in the previous eighteen
months. Brand awareness and persuasion were 17 percent higher than
the category norms.
Sometimes the CCI can lead the communications campaign and shape the
creative approach. The Mars Galaxy Chocolate UK campaign is a great
example of this.
CASE STUDY: MARS GALAXY CHOCOLATE, UK
4
Galaxy sought to become part of the indulgence rituals that enrich
women’s lives.
The insight: that millions of women entered a richly imaginative
world when reading books. Sixty percent of women indulge their
passion for reading every week. And reading books was an
increasingly common pastime among women. Chocolate and reading
were guilty pleasures that went hand in hand, so the marketerattempted to create relationships to exploit that partnership.
Galaxy, over a three-year period, developed a relationship with
women via the indulgence of reading. The strategy started as 15
percent of the activation budget and has developed into the mainstay of
brand communications, inviting women to “unwind with a good book.”
Galaxy built partnerships with publishers and with UK television
presenters Richard and Judy, who had a talk show featuring book
selections. Galaxy also worked with retailers such as supermarkets and
bookstores. The deals with publishers meant that around 26 million
books carried the Galaxy brand on the front cover. Galaxy sponsored
book clubs, the product appeared inside and on the covers of books,
and ads were adjacent to book displays.
Galaxy also sponsored the British Book Awards, in which the public
votes. As a result of the campaign, in a tough sales environment
Galaxy won its biggest market share in 2008: 17.9 percent. Galaxy
enjoyed a 38 percent rise in sales over the previous year, compared to
an 8 percent rise for rival Cadbury’s Dairy Milk.
We will explore how to develop CCIs in 
chapter 11
, “Execution Is the X-
Factor.”
FULL-SERVICE AGENCIES VERSUS 
INDEPENDENT SPECIALIST AGENCIES
In reality, very few if any truly full-service agencies exist today. The industry
has evolved to the point that agencies can’t possibly provide everything. It’s
impossible to have creative, media planning and buying, website
development, online advertising, online search, events, PR, social media,
packaging and shopper marketing under the same roof.
Usually, agencies provide central integrated thinking and services but
bring in specialist discipline partners to support and implement the programs.
Some specialist partners are managed or owned within their agency’s holding
company groups. Many times they are independent firms or separately
appointed by the clients. Whatever the structure, what’s absolutely necessaryis the ability to collaborate with different departments and specialist teams.
Some of these teams will have their own distinct culture or may even be
competitors. An environment that unifies the teams is an important ingredient
for succeeding.
BRINGING MEDIA BACK INTO THE
AGENCY
This has been a source of debate in the industry. Creative agencies are
missing the input of media, particularly communications planning. However,
simply putting media back in the agency proves to be a challenge.
First, the media fifteen years ago was not as complicated as it is now.
Today, a media Renaissance man or woman is rare. Such a person needs to
not only be smart, have great relationships with media vendors and be able to
work with creatives but also have strong strategic and consumer insight, have
flair, be conversant with all the digital and emerging channels and have a
strong aptitude for data analysis. It’s rare to find all that in one person. The
communications planner today relies on a team of specialists whom they can
access and collaborate with.
A number of creative agencies have added communications planning to
their offerings. Some have succeeded, while others have struggled to make it
work. The ability for media to have a voice and influence has rested largely
on the personality of the planner and on the commitment by the agency
management to listen and respond to communications planning in largely
account-management or creative-driven cultures.
We created Optimedia Inside to place communications planners into
Publicis, to work with their clients. It became complementary to the account
planning and creative development process but had the full support of the
same research tools, data and specialist-channel expertise that we had back at
the media agency mother ship.
COLLABORATION AND INTEGRATION
APPROACHES
I am going to cite a few UK examples here because UK agencies seem totackle collaboration and integration better. This isn’t a slight on the United
States or other regions, just my personal observation. Unbundled agencies
and communications planning agencies have been operating in the United
Kingdom longer than in many other markets, but in general, I also see a
greater emphasis on planning and collaboration.
The biggest advertiser in the United Kingdom is the government, whose
advertising is principally managed by the Central Office of Information
(COI), a central marketing and advertising body that supports government
departments in managing information campaigns in areas such as health,
education, benefits, rights and welfare.
The COI has a unique model for collaboration: it matches up teams,
placing creative and media agencies together to pitch for government
business. The media agencies manage communications planning, and media
buying is handled by a separate agency of record. The COI argues that they
want to put the best-in-class agencies together, and it puts the onus on the
agencies to partner effectively if they want to win the account.
Even if an agency holding company has all the necessary expertise, what’s
needed in the new communications world are great collaborative skills and
shared beliefs and a common culture. In other words, they must need and
want to work together. Clients should look for an agency with clearly defined
roles and incentives for people to work together along with openness to each
company’s ideas and opinions.
Speaking at the American Advertising Federation 2009 annual meeting,
Tracy Benson, senior director of marketing and digital at Best Buy, said, “We
need to talk about our brands, across a number of touch points.”
5
 To adjust to
such integration, she said, the first requirement is “a shift in mind-set of every
agency employee. There can be no boundaries.” An integrated marketing
program must focus on “what’s best for the brand, not for me as a media
specialist. You need to get creative and PR teams thinking that way.”
From the agency perspective, Sarah Personette, vice president at Publicis
Groupe’s MediaVest Worldwide, says integration depends on three simple
words: “Check your ego.”
DEVELOPING T-SHAPED PEOPLE
T-shaped people combine a depth of knowledge in one marketing disciplinewith a breadth of understanding in the wider spectrum of disciplines. They
know how each discipline can be blended with others to deliver one
integrated campaign.
Ideal blends of skill sets include creative people who have an appreciation
of media, digital executives who have an understanding of how branding
works and media people willing to explore nontraditional solutions.
CHI & Partners managing partners Sarah Golding and Neil Goodlad claim
that agencies need to be rich in creative and planning talent and media
buying.
6
 There’s no place for tired preconceptions and complacencies in a
participative world. People have to have confidence in new media. They need
to learn the necessary new skills.
CONTENT ON MULTIPLE PLATFORMS
As media companies branch out by putting content on different platforms to
maximize their audience potential, an agency’s Brand Media Strategy needs
to leverage that into opportunity.
Different platforms communicate differently, deliver different
communication experiences. Creative that is developed for, rather than
adapted to, the medium is going to be more relevant to how consumers
interact and use that medium. For example, MasterCard’s “Priceless”
campaign uses television to build on the emotion of what 
priceless
 can mean
at a very human level. In 2009 MasterCard’s 
www.priceless.com
 provided
great consumer-facing applications that supported the brand proposition.
These include the MasterCard Gift Finder, Priceless Pointers and tools and
tips for better handling credit and finances. The company created a mobile
Priceless Picks application, which recognizes your location and presents a
three-dimensional map of Priceless picks: recommended restaurants, bars,
museums and popular items on sale.
MULTIMEDIA STRATEGY, MULTICHANNEL
STRATEGYA multimedia strategy focuses on different advertising solutions. A
multichannel strategy encompasses several more drivers for marketing, for
example, advertising to drive the brand, direct marketing to drive response,
point of sale and packaging to drive purchase.
Traditional boundaries of media are being pushed beyond advertising as
clients look for broader advice on their marketing plan. Google is as much an
ecommerce driver as it is a brand tool. Social media is as much about driving
PR as driving the brand. Mobile and online are as much coupon distribution
tools as they are advertising tools.
Sponsorship on television and radio are comparable to sponsorship of
events. As media seeks to increase experiences, agencies are going outside
traditional media venues to promote brands.
NONMEDIA CHANNELS
Specialist marketing channels, such as content providers and sponsorship, are
working with media agencies to target traditional media budgets, and 
clients
want the rigor of evaluation and measurement of media platforms to be
applied to other marketing channel decisions.
This is stretching communications planning into an area that many
planners are less comfortable in, the area of nonmedia advertising channels.
Nonmedia channels have budgets that are often double the traditional media
budget.
BRINGING IT BACK TOGETHER—LIKE AN
ORCHESTRA
Two key roles bring the orchestra together: those of the composer and the
conductor. The composer is really the owner of the strategy. In advertising,
strategy is a joint effort. There’s the marketing plan, the brand idea, the Brand
Media Strategy and the digital program. At the end of the day, the client has
final say on how it pieces together.
Then there is the conductor. Who fills the role of conductor in a marketingcampaign is largely dependent on the attitude of the client. Mark Ritson,
associate professor of marketing at Melbourne Business School in Australia
and a vocal spokesperson on branding globally, says that only the brand
manager or client can fill this role.
7
 The conductor role often defaults to the
agencies. Traditionally, the creative agency has lead. However, I have seen
very successful examples of the lead role being performed by the digital
agency, the communications planning agency or the PR agency.
When I worked with Procter & Gamble, the strategic lead person was often
the brand manager, who worked with his or her marketing service partners.
Other clients have had in place an integrated marketing team, whose role is to
coordinate and steer the outputs of the different agencies.
What’s important is to have clear rules of engagement, a spirit of
collaboration and a focus on the work. One example of how I’ve seen it work
brilliantly is when our UK agency worked with mobile network company O2,
which espoused all these qualities and epitomized them with their internal
mantra “It only works if it all works.”
CASE STUDY: O2 FORMULA FOR INTEGRATION
Our agency worked with an incredible client and a superb creative
agency, VCCP, alongside digital shop Agency Republic and PR firm
Jackie Cooper. This union represented true marketing communications
integration.
O2 was one of the most celebrated integrated-brand marketing
stories in the United Kingdom in the 2000s. The agency team helped
transform the former British Telecom cell phone division into a power
brand that differentiated itself in one of the highest-spending and most
competitive categories. They grew their business from number four to
number one in the market.
They knew they wanted to build their brand, but their budget needed
to support both their product and promotional initiatives. The challenge
for O2 was how to be successful on both counts simultaneously. The
solution was to ensure complete strategic integration.
INDEPENDENT, SPECIALIST AGENCIESCOLLABORATING
The client encouraged us to work together as one team and selected
agency partners and teams that shared the same values, culture and
passion for their brand. We all got on and had respect for each other. A
lot of credit went to O2’s creative agency, VCCP, which always
wanted to be inclusive and integrated in media. Integrating O2’s
communications would be a major weapon in competing against
higher-spending rivals. Integration became a necessity to be efficient
and competitive.
The project began with the client chairing communications teams
that included senior management from the creative, media, digital and
PR agencies, who would steer their communications. This encouraged
senior agency leaders to focus on the business.
BIG COMMUNICATION IDEAS
O2 took a very brand-centric approach to communicating their
initiatives.
Rather than just being a provider of mobile technology or becoming
a mobile visionary, O2 set out to become a brand that enabled the
customer to do more things. They wanted to portray a brand that
existed solely to provide the customer more ways to work, play and
communicate.
This central idea of “enablement” and the company’s attitude of
emphasizing fresh thinking led to a kind of can-do mantra and the
creation of a set of values: bold, open, trusted and clear. That was how
the communications team was expected to work.
COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING AHEAD
OF CREATIVE EXECUTION
O2 was a retail business that was very focused on monthly
performance numbers such as new acquisitions and churn, or the
number of people who leave the service.The campaign needed to work to reinforce the brand, but most
importantly it needed to work as a promotion to drive those statistics in
the right direction. O2’s campaign was never about advertising, but
about an idea. They maximized the effectiveness of communications
by integrating all the elements so that the brand idea could be carried
through to each aspect of the marketing. All the agency partners had
opportunities to develop multimedia executions.
O2’s marketing worked because the company started with a brand
idea, rather than a creative execution. That brand idea was driven by a
consumer insight that helped drive communications planning. For
example, when promoting free texting between 7 P.M. and 8 P.M. for
new customers, they developed the promotion around the brand idea of
happy hour. This manifested in different media tactics, including taxi
cab advertising with O2-branded cabs offering free rides between 7
P.M. and 8 P.M. and happy hour promotions in bars and pubs.
COORDINATING A MULTICHANNEL
STRATEGY
The brand idea and the can-do attitude informed and shaped everything
from product positioning to advertising and sponsorship, from staff
conferences to trade launches. It also enabled the business to use what
typically would be short-term initiatives to fuel long-term brand
growth.
Other brands in the UK phone market appeared more remote from
their day-to-day product offering. Rivals established an image and a
personality through their brand with product offerings, such as bonus
airtime and new service plans. But they were used in a tactical way, to
drive short-term sales.
O2 had neither the time nor the resources to adopt such a parallel
approach. Rather than treating products as technical gizmos, or tariffs
as tactical one-off promotions, O2’s communications wrapped the
whole company in the brand idea. This was intended not only to create
consumer-focused propositions that were of genuine interest and
relevance but also to drive positive associations with the brand.
O2 also understood that putting out messaging, product support orpromotions across different touch points in the same period added to
confusion and misappropriation, and it competed for attention and
mind space. The company was very disciplined in running a single
campaign in all media.
CONSISTENT BRAND LOOK
The cell phone company has benefited enormously from the
efficiencies of a very complete visual integration across all
communication channels, from television to print to online and in-
store. The distinctive blue visual branding and the O2 bubbles and
neonlike campaign elements were evident in all communication touch
points.
QUESTIONS TO ASK TO 
FACILITATE COMMUNICATION
INTEGRATION
1. Does the campaign have a central communicating idea?
2. Can this campaign travel across multiple touch points?
3. Is there a spirit of collaboration among the agency teams?
4. Are there clear rules of engagement with the agencies?
5. Do I have T-shaped skills? If not, in what areas do I need to develop my
skills?CHAPTER 8
UNLOCKING MOMENTS 
OF RECEPTIVITY
HOW MEDIA CONTEXT HELPS
ADVERTISING
DELIVER MORE RELEVANT
COMMUNICATIONS
I
n the late nineties, I worked as a media planner at Saatchi & Saatchi on the
agency’s prized Procter & Gamble account. At the time, I recall, our Saatchi
& Saatchi New York office recommended a media strategy that proved to be
a breakthrough for Tide laundry detergent.
Tide, like many brands in the Procter & Gamble portfolio back then, was
primarily a television advertiser. The brand targeted the household shopper,
and television efficiently delivered strong reach to the target. The problem
was that the brand was beginning to plateau. The agency team took a brave
step in recommending a switch in strategy.
The idea was to make Tide advertising more relevant to its audience by
placing it at the point of dirt. The company shifted more of its budget to out-
of-home media, and Tide ads appeared on so-called dirty media: on the back
of buses above the tail pipe, in train stations, in playgrounds and at
agricultural exhibitions in rural areas. Tide ads appeared on paper napkins in
diners and in a variety of external city locations—each with customized
creative messages. For example, they placed an ad on bus shelters near icecream stores that said, “When your popsicle suddenly becomes just a sip....”
The idea was to make people think of the product when they encountered a
dirty environment. Sales of Tide grew 9 percent in markets where the
campaign ran.
The role of a relevant location—coupled with relevant messaging—is a
powerful idea. It was a very deliberate choice of creativity above coverage,
impact over efficiency. I refer to this as receptivity planning—that is,
identifying the moments or places consumers will be more receptive to the
messaging. It’s becoming an increasingly prominent component of Brand
Media Strategy.
Receptivity planning has utility beyond outdoor advertising. Technology
platforms are quickly bringing this planning into this decade. We’re seeing
placement of, for example, online advertising based on content and well-
placed links with relevant search terms. We are seeing increased
opportunities for location-based advertising on mobile media and addressable
advertising on television.
We will explore receptivity tactics in more depth in this chapter.
DRIVING INCREASED ENGAGEMENT
As I’ve noted in the preceding chapters, the job of communications planning
is to influence, not just reach, people. In the ad business we’re obsessed with
engagement. Some agencies have established engagement planning
departments. It’s advertising’s equivalent of Sir Lancelot’s Holy Grail. The
problem is that it’s hard to define, hard to measure and something of a catch-
all term. But engagement isn’t something new. Creative directors will tell you
that the purpose of an ad has always been to engage its audience. As I see it,
four main factors influence marketing communications engagement.
THE BRAND OFFER OR BRAND ITSELF
A Sony flat-screen television on sale for 75 percent off will certainly get
attention. On the other hand, a new product launch from Apple in itself
creates 
instant interest. Well before anyone saw or touched an iPad, the buzz
was deafening.THE APPEAL AND IMPACT OF THE
MESSAGE ITSELF
The craft and delivery of the creative execution can make a brand famous and
get people interested. British chocolate company Cadbury fielded an ad
campaign of a gorilla playing the drums to a Phil Collins song, “In the Air
Tonight.” It became a viral sensation, gaining over ten million plays on
YouTube and resulting in seventy Facebook sites. The video was popular
because it was different and unexpected and, in a sea of communications
clutter, it engaged. Consumers talked about it and bought the company’s
chocolate bars.
THE MIND-SET OF THE CONSUMER
Consumers who are already looking for a product or service will be more
engaged in what the advertiser is saying. If you’re planning a vacation to
Australia, you notice any ad or article featuring the outback or Sydney
Harbor Bridge. The consumer’s own lifestyle and interests stimulate interest.
We know that NASCAR fans have a strong propensity toward brands that
sponsor its cars or drivers.
THE CONTEXT OF THE MESSAGE: HOW AND WHEN IS IT
DELIVERED?
The context or environment the ad message appears in has a strong influence
on the level of engagement. Primarily, this is about relevance: relevance to
the message, relevance to the product or relevance to the consumer.
Clearly, the client, the creative agency and the media teams all play a role
in determining engagement. From a media communications perspective, we
center on the last two factors: the mind-set of the consumer and the context of
how and when the message is delivered.
Should the communications planner have a say in the creative work itself?
I say let the creative people get on with creative. They have a tough job. In
this business, everyone—up to and including the chairman’s spouse—is
allowed to have an opinion on the ads. One of our principal roles ascommunications planners is to make that messaging work better and harder.
Communications planners can’t determine the creative but they can deliver
receptivity; the right viewers, mind-set, context. Don Gloeckler, Procter &
Gamble’s chief researcher in North America, observes, “I am less able to
influence engagement than I am able to influence receptivity.”
1
 Engagement
is an outcome of receptivity. The best communications planner knows how to
exploit media that seeks out the most receptive consumer.
WHAT DO WE MEAN BY RECEPTIVITY?
Receptivity is about shifting from 
delivering
 messages to understanding how
they are 
received.
 It is about focusing on context: finding the most relevant
places to match the media with the message, the consumer with the brand.
Receptivity is concerned with using media to drive brand and message
involvement. Most importantly, it concerns generating deeper impressions,
not just gross impressions.
IT’S NEVER BEEN ABOUT REACHING
EVERYONE
Brand Media Strategies that concentrate on mass-audience reach as the
principal driver of generating more sales are no longer effective. That
approach is expensive and unreliable.
To give an idea of how blunt traditional broad targeting can be, let’s look
at auto giant Toyota, an extensive media advertiser. Sales of its bestselling
Camry at the peak of the market had annual US sales of 400,000 to 450,000
cars. Typically, an agency might plan and buy for a demographic of men and
women aged twenty-five to fifty-four with a household income above
seventy-five thousand dollars. That target demographic accounts for 
some
fifty-seven million. So in this case, less than 1 percent of the people targeted
were in the market to buy.
Reaching fewer people more efficiently is one of the principles guiding our
approach to receptivity planning.RECEPTIVITY PLANNING IS NOT PUTTING
ADS NEXT TO RELEVANT CONTENT
Some people may think receptivity is about running ads for food products in
the cooking section of women’s magazines or placing car ads on automotive
websites such as Edmunds.com. That isn’t what’s meant. These environments
are valid places to advertise, but they are established venues. They are also
where a lot of your competitors are, which makes it incredibly difficult to
compete for attention. Today’s communications planners exploit media
receptivity tactics to help their clients stand out.
FIVE RECEPTIVITY TACTICS
Five tactics in receptivity planning have proved to be effective uses of media.
They are effective because they add to the messaging and branding impact of
the communication. The case studies that follow illustrate how the planners
developed the following tactics:
• Contextual planning
• Situational advertising
• Leveraging of target passion points
• Branding inside content
• Tapping into consumers’ relationship with media
CONTEXTUAL PLANNING
The former Carat chief executive officer David Verklin used to speak of the
“moment of aperture,” or the moment when consumers are in the right 
mind-
set to think about the product category. For instance, people without an
umbrella on a rainy day are greeted as they leave the train station by umbrella
sales guys.
We need to tap into media environments and content that reflect those
moments. The media environments should be chosen on the basis of a
receptivity insight about targeted consumers and how they may interact withthat media.
Contextual advertising requires the advertiser to offer a message in a place
that works. For example, consider the Hispanic market. The Hispanic
population is growing ten times as fast as the general market. Of that
population, 73 percent speak Spanish at home. One comment in a focus
group that really brought it home to me was “When I see an ad in Spanish, I
feel those brands are talking to me.”
2
 Ads in the right context will always
cause more receptivity.
One case that superbly illustrates how a receptivity insight translated to a
contextual planning approach is the campaign Optimedia did for Ambien CR.
CASE STUDY: ADVERTISING AT
THE POINT OF NEED: AMBIEN CR
Sanofi-Aventis, the maker of sleep-aid Ambien, was facing new
competition as its brand was going generic. The company needed a
marketing plan to launch its new formulation, Ambien CR, a
controlled-release sleep-aid. It promised “A good night’s sleep from
start to finish.” Its lead competitor, Sepracor’s Lunesta, was planning
to spend some two hundred million dollars on a media marketing blitz,
more than double Ambien CR’s annual budget.
As Ambien CR’s media agency, we undertook insight work to
develop the Brand Media Strategy. For the advertising to resonate, it
needed to work at both a creative and a media environment level.
Agency research uncovered two insights about people who suffer
from insomnia. The first was an emotional one: sufferers know they
don’t get enough sleep, but they tend to tough it out. It is not until they
are suffering from stress that they become more receptive to messaging
from products like Ambien CR. That insight was important as it helped
lead to another contextual revelation.
The agency asked, “What kind of relationship do insomniacs have
with various media when they are under stress?” The answer was
striking. Insomnia sufferers have a very different relationship with all
kinds of media when they are under stress. They actively seek outmedia to help keep them occupied and calm them down. They watch
late-night and early-morning television more than nonsufferers. They
are more likely to be up watching television or surfing the web on
Sunday nights, before the start of the workweek. They are more likely
to be visiting travel websites, looking for a getaway. Sufferers tend to
watch television to relax and use the web to keep occupied.
We reasoned that if we could tap into media at the moments of
stress, consumers would be more receptive to the advertising messages.
This simple question about context gave us plenty of clues about when
to advertise, where to advertise and how to advertise. Ambien CR
combined television and online in a complementary way; television
built awareness of the benefit and online gave the detailed explanation
of how it worked and distributed a coupon special offer.
Late night and early morning became important times to advertise, in
particular Sunday night and Monday morning. Sufferers were most
likely thinking about their upcoming working week, a moment of
stress. We ran a heavy concentration of Ambien CR commercials
during the “morning papers” segment in CNN’s now-defunct show
News Night with Aaron Brown.
The media plan also called for targeting business travelers who
experience time-zone changes.
On daylight saving weekend, when the clocks shift forward an hour,
people lose an hour of sleep, and the media gives extra attention to
insomnia. Ambien CR sponsored a CBS “Healthwatch” feature about
time changes and sleep awareness.
Without focusing on media context, it would have been very easy to
do just a demographic analysis of insomnia sufferers and run media
based on where those demographic audiences could be reached.
Ambien CR would have missed a huge opportunity to send highly
targeted messages when and where their potential buyers were most
engaged with the specific media being used.
In the end, we came up with a plan for Ambien CR that met its
volume objectives and cost half of what its new competitor spent. This
campaign’s receptivity strategy allowed it to cut through.SITUATIONAL ADVERTISING (BASED ON
TACTICAL TIMING)
Situational advertising leverages the right occasion or the right time period
for a message to connect most effectively. Similar to contextual planning,
situational advertising taps into the consumer’s mind-set to increase the
receptivity of the messaging. However, in this case, the timing of the
messaging is particularly tactical. Running advertising at certain times of day
on different media allows the planner to maximize receptivity.
Citroen C5 in the United Kingdom wanted to increase brand consideration
among fleet users. Analysis showed that these people had little free time and
that they spent most of their work and leisure time in the car.
The planning team used IPA TouchPoints, a database of the mood of
consumers across media and time of day. They were able to determine the
times of day that drivers would be most alert for running ads about product
and functionality. The same research showed that drivers were most relaxed
later in the evening. The team ran emotional brand-led ads on television to
capitalize on that mind-set.
3
What about Online Receptivity?
The UK-based Internet Advertising Bureau set out to discover when users
were most receptive to ad messaging online. The study found that early
evening was the best time of day for all age groups and that younger
audiences paid more attention as the day progressed. Older age groups
peaked between 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 P.M. and between 2:00 P.M. and 6:00
P.M.
4
 The respondents said the best time to reach them with messages was
during ecommerce activity, such as researching the best deals or shopping
online.
Capturing Occasions and Events to Enhance Receptivity
IKEA stores in the Washington, D.C., area developed a colorful campaign
that captured imaginations on a historic occasion. See the case study on page
136, “Furnishing the White House.”LEVERAGING OF TARGET PASSION POINTS
Advertisers can connect to consumers by relating to their passions and
interests. Sometimes those passion points are directly related to the brand,
sometimes not. Advertisers might create an identity for a brand by
association with certain lifestyle activities. Citizen Watches, for instance,
espouses tradition and precision and has thus associated itself with the US
Open tennis championship for many years.
Another alternative for advertisers is to attach ads to content the consumer
is passionate about and create a relationship around that special interest. The
US Army used Microsoft’s Xbox video game Halo 3 to increase brand
consideration by creating a brand experience that expanded on current
perceptions of a soldier to reflect an aspirational branch of the military. The
ads were aimed at reinforcing the army as a high-tech and cutting-edge
profession and extolling the experience, the teamwork and the training.
This is a great example of an advertiser targeting potential recruits through
their passions, the largest of which is gaming. The campaign shifted attitudes
and perceptions about the service, with 43 percent of gamers recalling the
Army sponsorship and leaving with a more positive opinion of the Army.
5
CASE STUDY: IKEA—FURNISHING THE WHITE
HOUSE
The furniture retailer IKEA created an ambitious out-of-home ad
campaign that focused on a certain high-profile presidential family that
had just moved from Chicago to Washington, D.C. They played up the
theme of Barack Obama and his family having to furnish their new
home in the White House.
They built a display of the White House’s Oval Office fitted with
IKEA furniture at Union Station, Washington, D.C.’s main train hub.
The display was intended to drive customers to two nearby IKEA
stores in College Park, Maryland, and Woodbridge, Virginia. The
integrated campaign included billboards carrying the IKEA “Embrace
Change ’09” slogan on local buses and trains and encouraging homeowners to change their furniture. IKEA created a mock motorcade,
including the presidential limo, that featured IKEA furniture tied on the
vehicles’ roofs and was prominently driven around the area.
The 
www.embracechange09.com
 website included a place where
customers could design their own Oval Office with a drag-and-drop
tool and a fifteen-hundred-dollar gift card giveaway to a lucky visitor
who visited the site.
The campaign received national attention from the country’s media,
starved for stories around the inauguration. IKEA public relations
director Marty Marston said that IKEA had seized a good branding
opportunity: “[Obama’s] notion of change and his commitment to
fiscal responsibility match the Ikea philosophy of affordable home
furnishings for all.”
6
Similarly, our client Toyota’s Scion has a brand proposition that promotes
being a leading cultural lifestyle brand for Generation Y. The Brand Media
Strategy is to influence the influencers and target the opinion formers who
can drive brand credibility through their networks and communities. Their
approach is to let other brands make a sell through traditional 
mainstream
media, while Scion establishes credibility with their influencers through
passionate media venues.
Rather than simply advertise, we use media to build content that entertains
and immerses those influencers. The experience has to be authentic and
interesting. Our strategy is to make the brand part of the content experience.
We found those opinion formers online at passion sites that helped
influence the wider pop culture world. Those sites during this campaign
included two music-themed destinations, 
www.metalinsider.com
 and
www.dubstep.com
 (a dance music site), and a video game site, gamespy.com.
We steered clear of buying anything on Yahoo! or E! or even on MTV.com.
The campaign engaged thirty thousand cultural opinion formers in various art
forms: film, digital design and music. The campaign reached a further
twenty-five million people who visited, interacted and clicked through to the
custom-branded content on special-interest publisher sites.
To promote its flat-panel televisions, consumer electronics manufacturer
LG used Condé Nast Media Group magazines to tap into their target’spassion for film and cinematography. One installment featured film director
Edward Zwick (
Glory, The Last Samurai
) in a four-page insert in
Architectural Digest, Vanity Fair, Vogue
 and 
GQ.
 The customized feature
showed Zwick on a desert movie set looking at an LG flat-panel television
and included his thoughts on cinematography and landscapes. The online
portion contained dedicated LG websites on Condé Nast properties, including
style.com, concierge.com and wired.com, that featured video interviews with
Zwick as well as a behind-the-scenes tour of his Santa Monica, California,
office. The focus on Zwick and his experience, not the LG equipment, creates
a more emotional link to the LG brand. LG’s partnership was noteworthy in
that it made Condé Nast both the creator and sole distributor of the ad—a
great example of a publisher going beyond just selling traditional media
space.
BRANDING INSIDE CONTENT
Product and Brand Placement
Product and brand placement is an effective way of generating increased
receptivity. Product placement, product integration and program sponsorship,
all under the umbrella term 
branded entertainment,
 have become much more
prominent and much more tactical, particularly in the United States. That
growth in use has been fueled by a couple of important developments in the
industry. One is the motivation by broadcasters and content providers to
defray or subsidize production costs amid more fragmented audiences.
Another is the growth of DVRs, now in 35 percent of US households with
televisions, which has caused media buyers and sellers to develop
“TiVobuster” tactics. Product placement is now opening up in Europe, which
in the past largely restricted the appearance of commercial messaging in
television programming.
Put simply, branded entertainment works. Sony product placements were
all over the 2006 remake of the James Bond movie 
Casino Royale.
 All
characters used Sony VAIO laptops, and a Blu-ray disc is prominent at one
point. The characters use Sony Ericsson cell phones, Sony GPS devices and
Sony Bravia television sets. Bond uses a Cybershot camera to take photos.
Product placement in movies is big business. In 
Iron Man,
 the main
character’s alter ego, Tony Stark, scarfs a Burger King cheeseburger. GeorgeClooney flies American Airlines in 
Up in the Air.
Apple Inc. in the week before launching its iPad orchestrated an entire
episode of ABC’s 
Modern Family
 consisting of Claire and Phil Dunphy’s
plight of trying to buy the iPad on the first day it goes on sale. A viewer can
spot placements on television any night of the week. None of these
appearances happen by chance. They are carefully placed by advertisers and
producers as part of commercial ad buys or production sponsorships as ways
to engage a receptive audience already locked into a show.
Some pundits cry foul, suggesting that advertisers are crossing the line.
There are some egregious examples—some think NBC’s 
The Restaurant
crossed the line with its close-ups of American Express cards, making
advertiser participation a little too obvious. On the whole, advertisers,
agencies and program makers want the brand to appear in content in a way
that is positive and tasteful. My experience in working with television
executives is that viewers themselves provide strong checks and balances that
prevent marketers from going too far. If you do something that viewers react
to negatively, 
you’ll see a post online or a blog almost immediately. No brand
manager or media buyer wants to be responsible for negative feedback.
Product placement is becoming ever more sophisticated. With tongue in
cheek, Tina Fey parodies the entire business in an episode of NBC’s 
30 Rock.
Here’s the scene: “Are you all right?” Liz [Lemon, played by Tina Fey] asks
boss Jack [Donaghy, played by Alec Baldwin]. “Never mind,” Jack replies,
glancing at his phone and heading for the door. “These Verizon Wireless
phones are just so popular, I accidentally grabbed one belonging to an
acquaintance.” “Well, sure,” Liz replies. “’Cause that Verizon Wireless
service is just unbeatable! If I saw a phone like that on TV, I’d be like,
‘Where is my nearest retailer so I can get one—?’” Fey stares at the camera
with a tight grin. “Can we have our money now?”
7
This practice of product placement has quickly shifted online. Advertisers
are partnering with the digital studio units of big networks or their marketing
departments to have them create short-form online content. One example is
Sprint, which worked with 
Desperate Housewives
 creator Marc Cherry to
market the show and insert itself into a new online soap opera of mini-
episodes penned by Cherry. The writer says he took his inspiration from
Taster’s Choice commercials, which were formed like mini-soap series.
8TAPPING INTO CONSUMERS’
RELATIONSHIP WITH MEDIA
Americans spend on average nine hours a day with media. It’s become a
enormous part of their lives and hugely influences social and cultural fashion.
Observing how media is consumed helps us be smarter about how to give
messaging real impact. That’s the theme of our final receptivity tactic:
increasing the relevance of the brand by tapping into the crossroads of media
and culture to deliver highly relevant brand communications.
The first case study that follows is one of my personal favorite campaigns.
It’s about how British phone company Orange advertises at the movies. It’s a
campaign about gaining acceptance from consumers and about how an
advertiser can be welcomed on some occasions by making a positive
contribution to the media experience.
The second case revolves around how Toyota tapped into insights of how
YouTube was being used and exploited this insight wonderfully for Corolla.
CASE STUDY: ORANGE CINEMA PROMOTION
9
Phone company Orange created a cinema campaign that one
newspaper reviewer described as being better than the movies that
followed.
10
Mother, the agency that conceived the campaign, discovered as
much as possible about cinema culture by talking to the audience first
as moviegoers, not as consumers of mobile services. The agency came
up with a few interesting findings: Since moviegoers had paid to be
entertained, they expected to be rewarded by the entire experience,
including the ads and the trailers. Because they had this mind-set, they
felt that deliberate brand and product placement in movies ruined their
experience and was embarrassing to brands. Inside the cinema, mobile
phones were unwelcome. If someone else’s phone went off, it was
annoying, and if you were that someone else, it was mortifying.
To demonstrate self-awareness—that Orange understood all these
things—the company created a fictitious Board of Orange, which hadcompany executives sit behind a desk adjudicating marketing pitches
and movie ideas in a comedic series featuring film directors and actors
including the likes of Spike Lee, Carrie Fisher, Ewan McGregor and
Sigourney Weaver. Their characters personified all the ruinous
influences that brands and marketing have had on the cinema
experience.
While it was a risky marketing effort, it showed cultural intelligence.
The dialogue was laced with movie references to show how deeply
Orange was involved in movie culture. They made the obligatory “turn
off your phone” message more entertaining. They created Orange
Wednesdays, when Orange customers could take a friend to the cinema
for free.
The results proved that the Orange cinema spots delivered
significant brand recognition and talkability. Of all the
communications channels that Orange invests in, cinema continues to
have the most positive impact on the brand.
CASE STUDY: TOYOTA LAUGHS IT UP WITH
YOUTUBE
11
For the launch of the 2008 model Corolla, Toyota was trying to reach
young adults in their late teens and early twenties. Marketers know that
this group is hard to reach at the best of times, and the emergence of
digital media has made this job is even tougher.
As one of America’s top-spending brands on television, Toyota
knows that television viewing by this demographic group has been
falling in recent years. One solution has been to shift more money for
youth-oriented products to online advertising and events. Yet the
problem with advertising strategies that “push” the message over to the
web is the tremendous number of sites available to youth. The audience
is highly fragmented and many sites don’t lend themselves to the kind
of relevant, noninterruptive messaging that a younger audience values.
Toyota and its agency, Saatchi & Saatchi LA, solved this problemwith a combination of consumer insight, contextual insight and good
old-fashioned media planning basics. The first insight was clear: to
reach a young audience, a brand needed to be on the web. Whether
web or television, Toyota needed to find a broad-reach channel.
On the web, few sites offer the kind of reach necessary to fulfill that
goal. While Facebook and YouTube were sites that might work, they
were not the kind of sites that could accommodate interruptive
advertising. The key was to find a way to work with such broad-reach
sites to enhance the user experience instead of detracting from it. This
was particularly important for Corolla, a car with a boring heritage, but
one that now offered a model perfectly styled and priced for young
people. That’s where the contextual insights came in.
Saatchi & Saatchi LA’s executive communications director, John
Lisko, set his team to the task. They quickly came up with a simple,
powerful contextual insight: the content people seek out on YouTube is
very different from television. On YouTube they were looking at
predominantly short and funny films. With this thought in mind, the
team realized that they could do a lot more than just push a digital
advertisement on YouTube. They could use the site as a medium to
pull in consumers, offering young viewers a chance to see the best-of-
the-best of funny short clips and a chance get involved in the comedy
content that they loved. Out of this insight, two YouTube-Toyota
Corolla initiatives were born: “Best in Jest” and “Sketchies,” both
powered by YouTube and custom designed for Toyota
“Best in Jest,” launched in March of 2008, is a repository for the
funniest videos of the week. It is sponsored by Corolla and features
funny videos of the Corolla brand for those who wish to view them.
The “Best in Jest” collection adds value to the YouTube experience,
allowing people to see the funniest videos quickly without having to
find them via countless hours of searching.
“Sketchies” is a site where the viewing community can submit short
comedy sketch videos to be judged for cash and prizes. The videos had
to include a road trip (for obvious reasons) and a musical instrument
(just for fun). “Best in Jest” and “Sketchies” allowed Corolla to be
relevant as an advertiser on YouTube because they understood the
context and made the most of it for YouTube users.The results were outstanding. Saatchi & Saatchi LA reported that the
campaign resulted in a significant increase in brand favorability and
purchase consideration among respondents who had visited the sites.
One of the most impressive statistics was the result that 55 percent of
visitors to the “Sketchies” contest said they would consider purchasing
a Corolla.
Saatchi’s Lisko attributes the success to the power of the original
media insight: “This campaign was the difference between advertising
on YouTube and creating a new YouTube experience that was relevant
to a young audience and a perfect fit for Corolla. Corolla was adding
value, not taking away. Working with new media is about
understanding three things: context, context, and context. When media
insights get a seat at the creative table amazing things can happen.”
Exploiting media context and media environments can amplify the creative
messaging to deliver more relevant and involved brand communications.
Uncovering moments of receptivity is a key tactic for driving engagement.
These five receptivity tactics have proved to be a powerful means of
delivering highly effective brand media strategies.
QUESTIONS TO ASK TO FIND WAYS 
TO EXPLOIT RECEPTIVITY IN MEDIA
1. What insights do we have of how audiences are using individual media
vehicles or touch points and what do they tell us about how to
communicate better to them?
2. Put yourself in the target consumer’s shoes. What factors would make
the messaging more relevant or interesting to him or her?
3. If you’re in the market for a product, in which media would you actively
look for information and ideas about the product category?
4. In what places, occasions or times would the consumer most likely be
more open to finding out more about this product category?
5. What places would be less appropriate to advertise in terms of
receptivity?CHAPTER 9
TOUCH POINT SELECTION
DETERMINING THE RIGHT 
MEDIA CHANNEL MIX
THINK LIKE AN INVESTMENT FUND
MANAGER
C
ommunications planners are, in effect, investment managers. We manage
large sums of money. We advise our clients where to invest. We analyze
which media are going to give better returns. And we recommend a strategy
of how best to do it. In the case of an advertiser, those returns are defined by
the communication goals.
Fund managers first determine which broad sectors to invest in. They look
at the fundamentals, the macro factors—which areas show potential, which
are less risky and which to discount. Then there is stock picking, our
equivalent of media planning. Media planners take the budget and determine
the best options to buy.
An investment manager once told me that 65 percent of an investment
portfolio’s returns are determined by going into the right sectors and markets.
The balance of the return comes from stock picking. Media works the same
way.
INVESTING IN THE RIGHT TOUCH POINTSAn important element of the Brand Media Strategy is integrating the brand
communications across the different touch points in a way that best exploits
the target consumer’s relationship with each of the channels. As we’ll see
later in this chapter, Italian pasta maker Buitoni saw better results from its
marketing by using touch points that stimulated a last-minute buy at the
supermarket. For the delivery company UPS, in explaining its offering, video
presented the most effective tool.
The job of the communications planner is to first consider 
all
 possible
touch points. Next we refine the selection of these touch points by deciding
which will achieve maximum synergy with the message.
It is through this process that we determine the combination of media
exposure and consumer experiences. Creating the best marketing integration
comes from embracing true media neutrality, evaluating the metrics of each
channel and then activating tactics that deliver the communication goals. This
is a blend of science and art. But it’s also driven by a need to make the right
choices and trade-offs to ensure the Brand Media Strategy is focused and
sells.
This chapter will explain how to identify the core touch points and
determine how they work together.
IN MARKETING, WE’RE ALL CHANNEL
BIASED
Every executive has his or her own bias about which media works best—
from the creative director who’s sold award-winning television campaigns his
entire career to the digital-savvy account planner who favors social media
solutions over traditional media campaigns. Big media agencies are
sometimes accused of favoring mass media over niche ones. The digital
agency will always be pitching for a bigger share of the budget, and so on.
Clients are the same. Procter & Gamble continues to spend the vast
majority of its budget on television advertising. Some clients, in contrast,
show a distinct bias against traditional media, challenging the agency to
explore the next bright and shiny thing. The onus on the communications
planner is to be the umpire.THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING MEDIA
NEUTRAL
Being media neutral shifts the thinking from share of voice to share of mind.
Everything can be a medium. Every medium can project the brand, from a
television ad to direct mail, from a conversation with a sales assistant to the
product’s packaging.
Owned media
 is media that incorporates a company’s own content,
packaging, point of sale and people who come into contact with consumers.
This includes the trucks that transport the product and the product
demonstrators inside supermarkets. 
Earned media
 is PR, buzz,
recommendation and advice prompted by influencers and consumers.
Paid, earned and owned media all contribute to brand and purchase
influence. Each media form works differently, which needs to be taken into
consideration when planning how to use them. 
Figure 9.1
 describes each of
the three media.
RIGHT MEDIA FOR THE RIGHT JOB
Different media create different experiences, and some are better suited to
certain communication goals. A study evaluated which were the key mass
media on the basis of how budgets were allocated by primary marketing
objectives.
1
 It found what we instinctively know to be true. Television is
more suited to the brand objective of creating awareness. Magazines are
better for promoting consideration. Newspapers and the internet are more
used in driving traffic or purchase intent (see 
figure 9.2
).
FIGURE 9.1FIGURE 9.2CASE STUDY: PICKWICK AFTERNOON SPIRIT—
ANALYZING THE MEDIA MIX
Sara Lee International developed a campaign for their tea brand
Pickwick. A new variant, Pickwick Afternoon Spirit, was an herbal
blend based on natural ingredients (including peppermint, chamomile
and licorice), which was launched over a fifteen-week campaign in the
Netherlands between December 2004 and April 2005. The three chief
objectives for the advertising campaign were to increase unaided
product awareness, proposition awareness and purchase intent.
The media mix for this campaign consisted of television (43%), print
with sampling (48%) and online (8%). Daphne Communication
Management executed cross-media research via a weekly online
questionnaire measuring the impact of this campaign against theidentified metrics.
It’s rare to see such well-defined forensics of a media mix. So I’ve
included the findings to give the reader more awareness of how each
medium influenced the effectiveness of the overall campaign.
The campaign was a success, as illustrated by the campaign results:
Product awareness increased 36 percent. Purchase intent increased 35
percent. Proposition awareness increased 20 percent.
2
TELEVISION
Television was effective at generating awareness about the new
product introduction. The largest build-up of awareness was achieved
during the first television flight. It, however, did not communicate the
product proposition of Pickwick Afternoon Spirit.
PRINT
The print campaign on its own was not as effective as the other media
at driving any of the campaign metrics. This was largely attributed to
the creative execution. However, in the case of consumers who were
exposed to either the television or online and print, awareness and
purchase intent increased significantly. Thanks to samples, print
achieved product trial but a high level of frequency was needed.
ONLINE
Online was by far the most cost-effective medium. It made an
especially large contribution on cognitive elements such as brand
knowledge. It also played well in tandem with print and television.
Daphne concluded that spreading the internet campaign over many
weeks to reach a larger audience with a low contact frequency helped
the brand.
CONCLUSIONS AND INSIGHTSAwareness of brand and proposition of Pickwick Afternoon Spirit rose
significantly thanks to a positive transfer of message in television
commercials and online. At the start of the campaign there was a less
obvious transfer of message in print advertisements. However, there
was a large increase of buying intention and buying behavior during
the campaign.
OVERALL LEARNING
Different media offered different benefits: Television drove awareness
and brand metrics. Magazines prompted response and action. Online
drove brand familiarity. The combined media mix drove brand
measures. Creativity in each medium is still a strong factor in value of
communication. The impact of frequency is harder to judge and is
different by media.
TOUCH POINT SELECTION CRITERIA
A number of tools are available to steer and measure the decision making.
But selecting touch points requires making judgments to anticipate how
individual campaigns need to be communicated. We must constantly evaluate
how the selected touch points leverage the campaign’s creative messaging
and the use of media.
At this part of the planning stage, putting the money in the right buckets is
more important than execution. This stage takes a first pass at effectiveness
evaluation and determining the broad tactical use of media. Once these are
known, then the specifics of how to implement each medium are developed.
So, for example, step one is to select television, determine the budget and set
the primary television goals. In step two, the planner and broadcast team
determine which stations, time periods and activation tactics will be
employed to meet the goals and to maximize efficiency.
THREE INPUTS BEHIND TOUCH POINTSELECTION
Three inputs determine the selection process: data, consumer insight and
communication needs (
figure 9.3
). These three inputs provide complementary
or contradictory forces in making selection decisions. For example, response
data may prove that search is a more targeted medium for delivering
acquisitions, but if there is a brand problem with consideration, television
might be a better choice.
Touch point selection calls for making trade-offs based on what the
campaign needs to do and therefore what is more important. Each campaign
is going to be a balance of these three factors.
DATA-LED DECISION MAKING
Investment decisions need to be supported by good data. Many clients want
to see analytic rigor and fact-based recommendations. The communications
planning world draws on three main sources: market-mix (or econometric)
modeling, performance marketing and media audience-based data. The
different levels and degrees of robustness of the data, as well as stability of
variables in future planned marketing, dictate the level of confidence in these
sources.
FIGURE 9.3MARKET-MIX MODELING
Market-mix, or econometric, modeling has been used by marketers since the
seventies. It’s the gold standard, particularly for high-spending, regular-
purchase products. Market-mix modeling gives specific measurement on
which media delivers better return on investment (ROI) to sales. It helps
determine and fine-tune the channel or media mix. The communications
planner uses modeling to shift dollars toward the more efficient media and
places that deliver higher ROI. The approach tends to work best when
marketers’ conditions are stable and there is consistent spending that provides
lots of data points.
PERFORMANCE MARKETING
Data-based planning helps determine the consumer’s response to advertising.This is most obvious in direct response campaigns that prompt consumers to
visit a site or dial a number. Performance marketing provides very specific
data such as click-through rates or the level of audience interaction.
Performance metrics are rapidly becoming the most significant media
currency. Capturing behavior gives a richer understanding of the engagement
and value to an advertiser. It also provides more real-time data for targeting,
testing, adjusting and improving the response of the media plan. This
responsiveness has greatly increased media’s ability to deliver greater
accountability.
Performance marketing is most significant in digital and direct response
media, but it will fast move into other media forms. For example, mobile
media such as Apple’s iPads, interactive television and social media
platforms are used as direct response media.
REACH AND FREQUENCY
Reach and frequency remain standard measures of a media outlet’s breadth of
impact. 
Reach
 measures the coverage that each channel delivers; 
frequency
 is
how often a person is exposed to an advertising message. They continue to be
universal means to gauge the delivery of the message and therefore potential
influence on awareness, involvement and consideration goals.
EFFECTIVENESS, EFFICIENCY, SCALE
Optimedia’s head of analytics, Rudy Grahn, describes what planners need to
consider in selecting touch points: “You need to be evaluating effectiveness,
efficiency and scale.”
3
Effectiveness
 refers to judging the media’s ability to influence the
consumer or create a response. So the emphasis is on the level of exposure,
engagement of the impressions or, in the case of online, the click-through rate
or cost of sales. Different research techniques have their own ways to define
effectiveness, but usually an almost limitless number of different
methodologies and currencies quantify a medium’s potential engagement or
quality of exposure. We elaborate on this further in 
chapter 12
,“Measurement and Metrics.”
Efficiency
 refers to the relative cost effectiveness of the media: the cost per
thousand (CPM) impressions, cost per click or cost per sale. Efficiency is
fairly simple to measure once effectiveness is quantified.
Scale,
 the third factor, refers to the overall communication or marketing
goals. If a company wants to sell one million units, then the most cost-
effective or efficient medium may not be sufficient. To break that point down
a little further: Online may be the most cost-efficient medium to acquire
customers. Creating awareness through television may not be as efficient and
may require significant initial ad-production costs and be less measurable.
However, television may ensure achieving critical mass in the product trial
and take-up. That’s one big reason why major advertisers aren’t putting 100
percent of their budget into online even if the data suggests this is more cost
effective. Advertisers need a combination of media to achieve their goals.
CONSUMER-INSIGHT-LED TOUCH POINT
SELECTION
Chapter 7
 discusses the central communicating idea, developed from
consumer insight and guiding touch point selection and use.
Receptivity is also an important input in determining touch point selection.
Chapter 8
 showed how we could select media by exploiting receptivity of the
messaging through use of context-based insights.
A third area of insight comes from employing cross-media studies.
CROSS-MEDIA STUDIES
Surveys such as MRI and Simmonds in the United States; or TGI, which
operates in sixty-seven countries internationally; or EGM in Latin American
countries are syndicated single-source research databases that combine media
consumption with product and brand usage and consumer attitudes. They
allow some cross-media comparisons to use in touch point selection.
Development of different research techniques provides better science tosupport the judgment of the communications planner. Here is a selection of
some of the more progressive tools.
IPA TOUCHPOINTS INITIATIVE
The IPA TouchPoints Initiative was created and designed for UK
communications agencies. I sat on the IPA Media Futures Group that
sponsored this industry-wide initiative, but much of the credit goes to Lynne
Robinson, research director at the IPA, for spearheading this study.
Its primary objective is to give communication strategists insight into how
people are using the increasingly wide range of media available to them and
how this usage fits into their lifestyles. IPA TouchPoints was designed as a
stand-alone survey that allows integration of other media research currencies
and surveys. It measures all media usage, including television, print, radio,
internet, social networking, search and mobile phone usage. It also looks at
retail activity, what people are doing and their mood. For example, sports
betting company Coral used the database to determine that readers of the
Mail on Sunday
 read the paper while also watching sports on television. Thus
Coral knew this combination of media would be extremely relevant and
consumers highly receptive to its advertising message.
The study provides cross-media data to help intermedia decision making. It
collects the data on PDAs, allowing live reporting of consumer habits rather
than the inconsistent diary method. This very successful format is being
adopted in several other countries, including a planned rollout in the United
States.
MEDIADNA
MediaDNA is a system developed initially in the United Kingdom and was
conceived by Frank Harrison, global head of strategic resources at Zenith
Optimedia. It later became an industry-wide tool. The system selects media
brands according to their brand personality. A planner could select a
magazine or a television show on the basis of whether it was perceived as
innovative or intelligent. Defining brand personalities enables media and
brand matchmaking for brands that want to use media vehicles to develop or
reinforce certain brand qualities. For instance, 
Cosmopolitan
 might be seenby readers as “confident” or “brash,” qualities that might pair well with a
cosmetics brand hoping to own those same attributes.
SELECTING TOUCH POINTS BASED 
ON COMMUNICATIONS ROLE
THE CONSUMER PATHWAY
The main questions to ask when determining the communications role are:
What stage of the Consumer Pathway are we trying to target? How will we
amplify the central communicating idea? And how will this create
differentiation?
Figure 9.4
 gives a visual estimation of different media and their relative
impact at different stages of the Consumer Pathway. I say estimation because
these are only generalizations based on common use. This estimation helps
determine the different role each touch point needs to play in the overall
campaign. Going back to Pickwick Afternoon Spirit, television’s role was to
generate awareness. Online’s was to drive knowledge that would aid
consideration. Magazine’s role was to deliver trial and use. Each medium
needs to have a specific and defined role to play in the overall
communications plan.
The Buitoni case illustrates our touch-point strategy of selecting media by
clearly defining their communication roles. It shows how we combined
consumer insight with the communication goal to formulate a touch-point
strategy. We first had to increase involvement by amplifying the creative idea
through a very specific media selection, and then we drove active
consideration by tapping into touch points that influenced the shopper close
to the time of purchase.
FIGURE 9.4CREATING DIFFERENTIATION AND CUT-
THROUGH
The Brand Media Strategy must take into account the competitive context.
If every car company advertises in the same car magazines, on the same
websites and in the same Super Bowl, because “that’s where car drivers are,”
their ads won’t be effective. The Brand Media Strategy should look different
from its rivals. And that’s why, for communications planning, exceptions are
often the rule. So while there are established places and best-practice uses of
media (for example, television for awareness, newspapers for retail, onlinefor information), a planner needs to balance that with thinking outside the
box in order to break through.
A great example, and one of my favorite media campaigns, was the long-
running outdoor advertising campaign of the 
Economist.
 The billboard ads,
with simple white type on a red background resembling the 
Economist
’s
masthead, contained humorous headlines, such as “I don’t read the 
Economist
—management trainee, aged 42.”
CASE STUDY: BUITONI CHILLED PASTA—
A RECIPE FOR TOUCH POINT SELECTION
Nestlé’s Buitoni chilled pasta product had the marketing challenge of
reviving sagging sales.
The target audience was professional, working, affluent women with
an annual household income above $75,000. The customer lived in a
metro city on the West or East Coast and likely lived in a two-adult
household.
The company wanted to market its chilled pasta as a premium
product, but its media plan didn’t reflect that. Buitoni needed to 
act
premium and reflect that in their speech and the decisions about where
ads would appear.
The central communicating idea was to elevate the brand with the
phrase “Buitoni: The Italian art of food.” Previous campaigns had
followed category conventions too closely—meaning they chose
women’s food magazines. The television they were using, food shows
and shows targeting women, wasn’t forcing brand reappraisal. The
campaign needed to recognize the target’s busy working lifestyle and
specific shopping habits and let those be the key criteria for
determining the touch-point selection. While food environments
remained relevant, they could not be relied on to change behavior. The
brand had to get beyond traditional ideas of where pasta advertising
belongs in determining the change.
The product had low household penetration, and the client stated that
the main aim was to stimulate trial. Past media campaigns had centeredon maximizing awareness and reach. However, given that chilled pasta
is an unplanned just-in-time purchase and that the target shops two to
three times per week, our communications planner argued for more
frequency. Instead of setting the standard frequency goal of three or
more times (that is, hitting consumers with advertising an optimal three
times), the campaign was analyzed on frequency levels of nine or more
times. Additionally, given the just-in-time purchase habit, there was a
need to be present at the point of purchase.
Daytime online, out-of-home media and in-store touch points all
played a much more significant role in the media plan. To amplify the
“the Italian art of food” platform, we developed the campaign to look
like an art form. The out-of-home element of the campaign featured a
subway art gallery: one hundred framed “masterpieces” of Buitoni
dishes hung on the walls at New York’s Union Square subway. Buitoni
handed out gallery guides at the station and made audio tours available
on cell phones. The combination of touch points closer to purchase and
amplifying the creative idea was responsible for increasing sales
immediately. Product purchase grew 19 percent in the advertised
markets.
When promoting a magazine to business readers, the data would have sent
the 
Economist
 to advertise in the obvious spaces, for example, other business
magazines, financial pages of newspapers, possibly in airports, in-flight areas
and hotels—exactly where the 
Economist
’s competitors advertised. The
Economist
 opted instead for a broad outdoor campaign that stood out and
delivered the message creatively and with absolute consistency. The
differentiation of their strategies made sure there was clear space and
distinctiveness in their media campaigns. This campaign consistently
delivered increased subscription growth for the 
Economist.
INFLUENCE AND CLUTTER
One analysis I like to use to help steer touch-point selection is the influence-
clutter analysis. Plotting media on a grid ranking influence (which could be
reach, engagement, audience appeal or whatever measure a planner decides isimportant) and clutter (concentration of advertising by category) gives a good
opportunity to develop a touch-point selection strategy.
Figure 9.5
 shows an influence-clutter analysis for a brand in the
automotive category. It ranks a medium by its influence, in this case media
composition, or the concentration of the brand’s prime target audience each
medium draws. It also tracks each medium in terms of level of competitor
spending. Media fall into four quadrants (see 
figure 9.6
).
The influence-clutter analysis identifies, selects and determines how to
exploit touch points on the basis of what’s happening in the category.
In this example, cable television and business publications are influential
but heavily used by all the competition. We recommended lifestyle
publications to this client, which were as influential as business publications
but had the benefit of having few or no competitors in them. This gave the
brand plan some clear space to help them stand out.
FIGURE 9.5
FIGURE 9.6
OTHER FACTORS A PLANNER NEEDS TO
CONSIDER
CREATIVE INPUT
Touch-point selection should be initially led by the communications planners,
but as with most things in the communications process, the final plan is a
collaborative effort. Importantly, the initial recommendation draws from data
and insights into how the media channels interact and reach their audiences.
Then the Brand Media Strategy is fine-tuned and developed by the
communications planner alongside the creative and account planners.
USE OF NONTRADITIONAL MEDIA
Much of our discussion on touch points has centered on mass media or digital
media, but they’re not the only options. Some brands have ignored media
advertising altogether.A good example of a brand that built itself without the help of traditional
media is Red Bull. The energy drink has turned experiential media 
into an art
form. The brand avoided traditional media, instead sponsoring alternative
events such as the Red Bull Flugtag, an air show event. I was in Paris
recently with other agency colleagues. Red Bull had just been launched in the
French market after having been banned from being sold there. A bar’s
television ran a continuous video of the multiple extreme sports events that
Red Bull is involved with. It made for compelling content that kept us glued
to the screen. It was an incredibly effective example of owned media playing
a strong role at a key distribution venue.
FEWER, BIGGER, BETTER
The growing list of touch points available leads to planners often trying to
incorporate just too many touch points within a plan.
Too many media outlets dilute the messaging and impact the budget as
production costs increase. Spreading a campaign thinly across media makes it
harder to cut through and reduces frequency, which is important for
effectiveness. It also reduces leverage with media vendors. My advice is to be
more strategic and make an active decision about which media will make the
biggest difference.
Selecting touch points is a process that requires the plan to be focused and
the planner to make good trade-offs. Touch-point selection should be
deliberate, to pinpoint the right ones.
DEFINING THE ROLE OF TOUCH POINTS 
IN THE COMMUNICATIONS STRATEGY
Once the touch points have been identified, the next stage is to clearly
articulate their role. This guides the specialist activation teams in developing
better tactical solutions in media.
Different touch points can perform multiple potential roles in the Brand
Media Strategy. A medium can perform many tasks. Take television as an
example. Television is strongly suited for efficiently and effectivelygenerating awareness of new products or a new brand feature. It can increase
brand involvement through sponsorship, build familiarity through product
placement or drive more product understanding through advertising spots.
Television can increase brand consideration by promoting a competitive
claim, sending consumers to a website for more information or boosting foot
traffic to a store with a special promotion. Television can also directly sell a
product through long-form telemarketing response campaigns. And we all
know that if an ad hits the screen during the Super Bowl, it can drive word of
mouth or get people to go online. Online, print, radio, out-of-home, mobile
and nontraditional media can all play numerous roles for brands. For the
Brand Media Strategy to work, the planner needs to specify how to activate
each touch point.
The UPS “Whiteboard” campaign demonstrates this point nicely.
4
 The
creative involves a spokesperson simply writing on a whiteboard. The brand
used television to create launch-level brand awareness with high reach and
frequency. It was a very visual campaign. They wanted to amplify the
whiteboard device, so they featured sportscasters using a whiteboard to
explain complicated plays on television, and financial analysts using a
whiteboard to analyze the market, and television networks creating animated
whiteboard introductions and summaries of programs.
Online video was the strongest platform for the “Whiteboard” idea to
demonstrate the brand campaign, and online search was used to drive traffic
and customers to their website.
In print, UPS needed to get to core business customers but also to amplify
the creative idea. The video component of “Whiteboard” has a strong
revelation moment when the solution provided by UPS is unveiled to the
consumer. To achieve the same feeling of revelation in print, they took
alternate space such as bookend units in the 
Wall Street Journal,
 flap pages in
the small-business magazine 
Inc.
 and consecutive half-page spreads in
BusinessWeek.
They selected very targeted, high-reach, out-of-home vehicles designed to
surprise their business targets by communicating to them in ways UPS had
not in years past. They included train and bus station sites in New York City
and three-dimensional billboards on commuter arteries.
The results of the Brand Media Strategy were very positive. Awareness not
only grew but also eroded much more slowly than expected once the flightwas over, showing the impact of these tactics. Site traffic exceeded UPS’s
expectations, with thousands of actions taken on the site.
QUESTIONS TO ASK WHEN 
MAKING TOUCH POINT SELECTIONS
1. Does the mix have the right balance between reach, engagement and
efficiency?
2. Do the recommended touch points amplify the central communicating
idea?
3. How do the touch point selections differentiate compared with the
competition?
4. Are there clearly defined communication roles for each touch point?CHAPTER 10
DIGITIZING THE 
BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY
NOT JUST ANOTHER MEDIUM
I
’ve talked to several media agency chief executive officers who subscribe to
the view that digital media is just another medium, and like television or
magazines, it should be planned and managed in the same way.
I couldn’t disagree more. Digital championed by the likes of Google and
Facebook has changed the rules, setting up our new media playbook.
Digital isn’t one medium, it is many media, and the list is ever expanding.
A key difference between digital and other media is that innovation is the
very essence of the medium. The DNA of digital media companies is that
they are in a constant state of reinvention. This is a young industry, and its
leaders seem obsessed with breaking convention. If only other media shared
that trait.
The evidence for the perpetual state of change of digital media marketing
is plain. The internet metamorphosed from essentially a direct response
advertising medium of banners, email marketing and search to what it has
become today. It is preeminent as an ecommerce platform—think of the
ubiquity of Amazon and eBay. It is a social media facilitator on both PC 
and
mobile devices. It threatens to be television’s most direct competitor. All this
in just fifteen years!
Digital media, as a brand and marketing communications channel, has
opened up the stages of the Consumer Pathway that other media weren’t as
effective at influencing. This has given more dimension and utility to BrandMedia Strategies.
WHY SHOULD DIGITAL HAVE ITS OWN
CHAPTER?
So if one of the rules of the new media playbook is to be media neutral, why
single out digital? Because digital expands brand communications. It brings
interactivity and opportunity to personalize communication. But it is a
medium still underutilized despite its potential.
Increasingly inventive digital tactics are being employed. This chapter is
designed to inspire readers to explore and exploit digital options.
Online will become the second-biggest advertising medium in the world by
2012.
1
 Digital’s potential is being realized by marketers, but not fully.
Needham & Co. media analyst Laura Martin notes, “Audience migration has
decoupled from monetization.” She points out that people spend 15 percent
of their time with the web, which receives only 8 percent of the dollars.
2
ONLINE CAN INCREASE BRAND MEDIA
INFLUENCE
Online’s value as a brand medium has taken on more prominence.
Communications planners exploit tactics that deliver more engaged
communications, fuel brand conversations and target more relevant messages
to audiences. We cover these more specifically later in this chapter.
We also explore how digital complements other mass media opportunities,
for example, used in tandem with a Super Bowl promotion. We look at how
the likes of Facebook, Twitter and YouTube have become extensions to the
traditional media solutions. And we also illustrate how online content has
become much more than advertising.
THE EARLY CHALLENGES OF DIGITALINTEGRATION
It has often been a struggle to integrate digital with general advertising. This
is in part due to the digital marketing community’s origins. Digital agencies
grew up as independent specialists outside the mainstream creative shops.
Initially, this happened in part because the mainstream agencies were slow to
engage digital. The internet in the late 1990s was largely viewed as a direct
response medium rather than a branding medium—the lifeblood of ad
agencies. It did not help that ad agencies, where creative is king, were largely
low-tech organizations.
Entrepreneurs backed with venture capitalist funding seized the initiative
from the established ad agencies and jumped into new media. This breed of
digital agency was very different from that of your typical ad shop. These
agencies were analytic, entrepreneurial, tech savvy and motivated to turn the
establishment on its head. This difference was replicated on the client side.
Whether client or agency, the division was probably driven by a lack of
comfort with digital by the general practitioners. But it was also partly that
digital managers wanted to preserve their sovereignty and independence from
the nondigital managers. When I ran my own digital agency, I have to admit
that I was guilty of digital snobbery, all too ready to claim that the traditional
agencies and clients didn’t get it. We were online and they were offline. We
were new media; they were traditional media.
But of course, the desire of digital executives to get a seat at the top table
and infiltrate the bigger brand budgets, along with the financial crisis that
began in 2008, brought an end to this separatist culture. The agency holding
companies began to acquire digital agencies. The integration and cross-
pollination of skills and organizations was a logical move but not without
challenges. Some deep-seated cultural differences remain.
AGENCIES DIGITIZING
At Optimedia we embarked on our own digitization program. This involved
several steps.
We encouraged the communications planners to learn on the job by taking
an active daily interest in this discipline. We asked planners and buyersacross all disciplines to subscribe to some of the excellent email newsletters
available on the subject. We stepped up digital-training sessions, webinars,
lunch-and-learn programs and workshops. We more clearly defined the role
of communications planners. We redefined the responsibilities of the senior
agency planners and client leads, asking them to take more ownership in
digital. We encouraged a more collaborative rather than controlling approach
with the digital team. We built digital into our communications planning
process and reorganized to integrate working practices between planning,
buying and digital. Most importantly, we challenged the senior agency
management themselves to upskill in digital. Finally, we celebrated smart
integrated work in our internal awards program.
When Publicis Groupe acquired Digitas I was impressed with how
determined Digitas chief executive officer David Kenny was to break down
the walls and how quickly he inserted Digitas personnel into the rest of the
company. VivaKi, the unit that sits atop all Publicis Groupe media and digital
agencies, facilitates integration and doubles as a research and development
unit charged with fostering digital innovation inside and outside the
company.
A DIGITAL MANIFESTO
The vision at our agency was to become an organization that delivered truly
integrated media communications solutions. We developed a manifesto for
delivering integrated digital strategies for our clients. The manifesto laid out
our expectations of the understanding, expertise and responsibilities required
and invoked a spirit of partnership between the communications planning and
digital teams. We wanted to foster two-way communication, respect for each
other’s crafts and collaboration.
Below is an extract from that manifesto.
COMMUNICATIONS PLANNER RESPONSIBILITIES
• Should be adept at articulating to clients digital’s role and a
budget mix rationale within the overall communication plan, andhow that will deliver against the business challenge
• Should be familiar [with] and able to explain broadly the key
digital strategies of the plan
• Should be aware of the digital strategies taking place in their
clients’ category
• Should be up-to-date on latest digital metrics and trends,
particularly their application to clients’ potential media plans,
specifically online display, search, online video and social media
• Keep themselves apprised of new and emerging technologies
• Manage integrated communication flow charts and budgets
• Be able to effectively brief and inspire great digital work
• The communications planner and the digital planner should jointly
develop the overall digital strategy.
DIGITAL PLANNERS NEED TO:
• Expect strong briefs and return strong work
• Share the digital tactics strategy with communications planners
before issuing the RFP to vendors with ample time to be explained
and aligned
• Accept the communications planner view of the overall plan and
input into the digital plans
• Help update communications planners on digital category
innovations
• Keep the communications planning lead well informed (i.e., no
surprises) if communicating with the general client
• Review campaign performance with communications planners,
but it should be incumbent upon the communications planner to
evaluate overall media campaign performance.
We developed and wrote this manifesto a few years ago. It remains as
relevant today as it was then.WHAT SHOULD WE BE DOING ON
FACEBOOK?
“How should we be exploiting mobile commerce?” “Are we looking into
Four Square yet?” Often clients throw these questions, and the Facebook
question, at a planner. When the latest new thing surfaces, companies want to
know if they should get on board. Many times, the client’s chief executive
officer reads an article in the 
Wall Street Journal
 and fires off an email to his
or her marketing team asking, “Are we doing this?”
This happens every day in our business. It’s easy to default to digital
tactics or individual digital channels. Another trap that agency people fall into
is the scattergun approach. Digital people (and I was one of them once upon a
time) are prone to believe that digital can solve 
all
 marketing needs. As a
digital planner or account director, it is ingrained that one of your primary
roles is to sell the channel. The evangelism goes something like this: “Digital
can help you drive response, it can help you to create buzz, it can build
awareness, it can help create brand engagement.”
When I ran my digital firm, I would meet with a marketing director and tell
him we could solve 90 percent of all his marketing problems on the internet
—and that was back in 1999! Before Google AdWords and Facebook
existed. Before broadband, online video or dynamic mobile internet. For
credibility with general marketing clients, digital planners need to ensure they
are balanced in their recommendations of channel use.
START WITH THE STRATEGY, NOT THE
TACTICS
The best way to respond to eager clients and avoid the scattergun approach is
to ask, “What is your Brand Media Strategy?” And then, “What digital media
or tactics address your strategy?”
For digital to be integrated and effective it needs to be part of an overall
communications strategy. Digital can’t do everything, all the time. So not
only does communications planning need to integrate digital, but digital
needs to be integrated into the Brand Media Strategy.Develop the Brand Media Strategy first and make digital the first step. The
Brand Media Strategy allows the agency team to guide and filter the tactics,
but my advice is to prioritize digital options.
DIGITAL AS A SUPPORT MEDIUM
In many cases, the planner or brand manager may decide it makes sense for
other media to lead a campaign. For example, television could be the best
choice for driving awareness or launching a product or event. In the fashion
market, print remains the key influencing medium to drive opinion and
trends. In both cases, digital’s role becomes support.
The question must therefore be, What can digital add? The brand strategy
needs digital to supplement, not duplicate, other media. Remember, the skill
of the communications planner is 
integration,
 not replication.
There’s no point in digital trying to build awareness if television can do it
more quickly and cost efficiently. Digital may add audiences not reached by
the television buy, but sometimes it makes sense to add more stations and
ratings on the television plan.
SOCIAL MEDIA AS A BRANDING TOOL
We’ve discussed the influence Facebook, MySpace, LinkedIn, Twitter and
other social media have had in the digital space and branding. There’s a lot of
experimentation in social media, as few standard advertising models for it
exist and aren’t ever likely to. In many cases, social media strategies are
predominantly idea driven. They are often highly orchestrated by the clients
themselves, creative PR and digital agencies and are judged on different
success criteria than performance marketing campaigns. But the
communications planner can and needs to play a role.
Here are five tips on what I’ve seen that works well when developing
social media campaigns.
People want to hear from real people. 
As far as social media is
concerned, users gravitate toward transparency. People would rather hear
from real people. Putting a face on social media really helps. Tony Hsieh, thechief executive officer of online shoe store Zappos.com, personally tweets
and has some 1.7 million followers on Twitter.
3
Best Buy’s Twelpforce has real employees dispensing advice via Facebook
and YouTube. This is a great example of mobilizing the workforce to
emphasize their point of difference with competitors such as Wal-Mart and
Amazon: their people and their customer service.
Great content is king of the social media world too. 
The adage of
television advertising is that people love watching animals and kids. Two
YouTube sensations, Cadbury’s drum-playing gorilla and Evian’s roller-
skating babies, seem to back this up.
Social media starts with an idea. It can come from a clever insight. Think
Burger King’s campaign on Facebook in which it rewarded customers with a
free Whopper if they unfriended people. The idea drew on the high number
of unwanted friend requests on the social media site.
At the moment, the best social ideas are coming from the creative (digital
and nondigital) agency teams and for this reason: they are more likely to be
the initiators of social media solutions. However, I believe the media agency
is equally able to develop these ideas.
Seed and amplify the content.
 If a brand can generate content
professionally, or even take advantage of user-generated content, the skill of
the media team is in promoting the content, particularly among influencers.
Seeding and amplifying might involve placing it in appropriate paid locations
or promoting it through other media outlets or generating participation. For
example, HBO’s 
True Blood
 promoted its minisodes, three- to four-minute
original-content episodes shot and written by creator Allan Ball, on Yahoo!
TV before placing them on its Facebook fan page and HBO.com.
Another strategy is encouraging the online community to create content
and share it. To encourage teenagers to stop smoking, the American Legacy
Foundation used social networks to create advocates to share facts about
cigarettes. For example, chemicals in cigarettes are also found in hair
removal cream, which prompted the creation of a “hair mail” widget. Targets
were set for the spread of viral films and website traffic.
Use social media websites as a brand destination; utilize insights of the
community and technology to make a more relevant and involved
experience. 
As people spend more time on social networking sites, such as
MySpace and Facebook, marketers can supplement and in some cases replacetheir own branded websites by channeling social media sites as a brand
destination. They do this to connect with consumers in an environment that
consumers are more likely to visit. Starbucks, for instance, is deeply
immersed in the Facebook experience. The coffee giant launched a Facebook
app that allows customers to manage their Starbucks cards.
As with any marketing campaign, it is vital to understand the target
audience and the role that social media plays in their lives and online
behavior.
Of course, personal data is highly visible in social networks. USA
Network, a cable channel owned by NBC Universal, promoted its detective
drama 
In Plain Sight
 with that in mind. The series is about a witness
protection program, and USA Network developed a Facebook widget that
gave users a series of clues about a particular Facebook friend by gradually
revealing the friend’s personal information; the idea was to guess the identity
of the friend.
Swedish furniture maker IKEA used one of Facebook’s most popular
functions, photo tagging—in which users are notified when they are
identified in an uploaded photo—to promote the opening of a new store in
Malmo, Sweden. The company created a Facebook profile for the store
manager and posted photos of the IKEA showrooms. Whoever was first to
tag his name and the items in the pictures won them. The idea was an
interesting way to encourage people to tell their friends about the deals.
Focus less on measurement and more on what the brand is attempting
to achieve.
 While online campaigns offer marketers the ability to reap an
abundance of data and metrics, the focus should be first on developing good
ideas that resonate with consumers and then on building out the campaign to
deliver the communication goals and brand strategy. Then seek to maximize
the visibility and reach of the campaign.
This is still a relatively young medium. Trying to overmeasure too early in
a medium that is still evolving may stunt its potential. I asked Jeff Hayzlett,
then chief marketing officer of Kodak, a fairly progressive company in terms
of social media, how he was measuring it. He dismissed measuring social
media, saying, “I measure my sales, brand recall and intent. That’s what’s
important to me.”
4EMPLOYING DIGITAL TACTICS
One of the principal roles of an online strategy is to identify the Consumer
Pathway stage the communications are meant to address. To illustrate how
digital has been particularly effective, see 
figure 10.1
 for examples of how
digital addressed a brand media communications need at different stages of
the Consumer Pathway. Some examples that follow show how digital played
a meaningful role in the communications. This is by no means an exhaustive
list, but my goal is to inspire ideas for campaigns you’re planning.
Given the astonishing pace of change in the digital world, I’m sure these
will be outdated in no time. That’s what makes this discipline so exciting.
FIGURE 10.1
GENERATING AWARENESS
Premium Placements across High-Reach Portals
Online isn’t necessarily the first medium that planners will think of when it
comes to generating awareness. Television and newspapers are probably seenas lead media for that stage. However, the reach that online can now deliver
is impressive. When GM launched its new Chevy Malibu in 2008, they
bought a massive campaign of banners and embedded interactive ads on the
home pages of Yahoo! MSN and AOL that extended across fifty high-traffic
sites, including Weather.com, Amazon, Oprah.com and nytimes.com, as well
as the main automotive sites. They 
roadblocked,
 or simultaneously displayed
ads, on the major search engines. GM estimated that they delivered some 960
million impressions and reached nearly 90 percent of all US online users that
day.
This strategy can be employed in niche markets and audiences, such as
comic enthusiasts, Christian travelers or specialist B2B consumers, who can
now be found and followed online with targeting technologies.
Amplify and Integrate with an Offline Campaign
Of course, no digital campaign runs completely isolated from other media. In
many cases it complements or even amplifies an offline campaign. And no
better example of that was the Doritos “Crash the Party” campaign for the
2008 Super Bowl. Doritos created a competition to come up with a Super
Bowl ad. The prize was one million dollars if the ad earned the number-one
spot on the USA Today Super Bowl Ad Meter. Brothers Dave and Joe
Herbert won the prize. This became a phenomenal campaign that generated
huge buzz for Doritos. The online component of this campaign included
promotion of the competition and a site where the public could vote for their
favorite ad, the winner becoming the Super Bowl ad. Very clever and
definitely fitting into the “wish I had done that” category.
Seed Word of Mouth
One of digital’s strong points is the ability to drive word-of-mouth
communications. Online advertising’s power to have consumers spread brand
marketing messages is huge if a strong idea is developed. One example I
really like is the campaign for the Karen Clifford Skin Cancer Society in the
United Kingdom.
Awareness of skin cancer and its causes is very low in the United
Kingdom, especially among youth. Research by the Teenage Cancer Trust
found that 41 percent of teens never used sunblock and that 50 percent were
not concerned about skin cancer.
5The Karen Clifford Skin Cancer Charity, known as Skcin, wanted to
develop a campaign that would actively engage cynical teens. The idea was
to communicate the dangers of skin cancer and, importantly, provide
guidance to help avoid it. The vehicle was the creation of an elaborate hoax: a
California-based company had developed technology allowing you to get a
tan via your computer screen while viewing a website,
www.computertan.com
.
The campaign fooled users into visiting its site with the offer of free online
tanning sessions. This was achieved through a program of newspaper, online
and some out-of-home advertising. This was coordinated with a PR campaign
and seeding on this program through key blogs.
When visitors first see the website, it shows tanning lamps for twenty
seconds, but then the hoax is revealed. Images depicting the ravaging effects
of skin cancer appear on the screen along with the number of people who die
each day. Then the user is introduced to the nonprofit behind the campaign,
Skcin.
It became an online phenomenon and notched over one million hits to the
site within three months.
6
Viral Campaigns
In the world of viral media, creativity seriously counts. Most viral ad
campaigns I know of have been created by the creative teams at the agency—
you don’t need to pay a media agency to upload a video to YouTube.
However, with some twenty-four hours of video being uploaded every
minute, the chances of being a viral success are pretty low. But it’s a prize
worth aiming for. The beauty of viral campaigns is that viewers find the
content entertaining and amusing. The best viral campaigns some wouldn’t
even call advertising.
Brands such as Dove, Cadbury, Samsung, T-Mobile, Evian, Old Spice and
blender retailer Blendtec have had much success with viral campaigns.
Blendtec’s legendary “Will It Blend?” campaign now totals over eighty
individual executions in different media. The ad shows a man in a lab coat
blending an oddball assortment of products, including an Apple iPhone.
Campaigns such as Old Spice’s spot featuring the model Isaiah Mustafa
and Cadbury’s “Gorilla on the Drums” benefited from the thirty-secondversions running as television spots. There are strategies to seed video into
locations that can improve the chances of success, but as I said, creativity
really rules the roost here.
BUILDING INVOLVEMENT
Building brand involvement as explained in 
chapter 3
 moves beyond
awareness to create experiences or occasions that make consumers more
familiar with or favorable to brands.
Create brand experiences that reinforce the brand proposition. This can be
done multiple ways in digital. One approach is to create more interaction and
be more relevant to the consumer. Another is extending the television
creative. Liberty Insurance did both of those with the following campaign.
Liberty Mutual Insurance
Insurance is one of the most competitive fields out there. The big guns Geico,
Allstate, Progressive and State Farm spend millions on television ad
campaigns.
Liberty Mutual took a completely different tack, choosing to associate
itself with the idea of social responsibility. The multiplatform social
awareness campaign was called “The responsibility project.” The seeds of the
campaign began with a television ad showing people doing good deeds like
sharing an umbrella or letting someone else into a car parking spot.
Each person on the receiving end of a random act of kindness performs his or
her own, creating a chain reaction. The spot was called “What Goes Around.”
As Hill Holliday’s executive vice president and chief media officer Baba
Shetty said, the agency had to build on the concept in social media as the
concept evolved. “The audience loved that spot, which presented a world-
view of people doing the right thing,” he added.
7
On the Responsibility Project website, people could post videos and write
about people doing kind things such as changing a tire for a stranger. When
the site was launched, searching on “responsibility” showed the site’s ranking
as high as 6 out of some 247 million possible results. The website attracted
1.4 million unique visitors in its first nine months. The best result of all was
that the company’s consumer brand tracking showed an incredible 18 percentincrease in people’s appraisal of Liberty Mutual. The campaign’s success
underscores the power of social media to unleash people’s natural inclination
to do good and share the positive.
What made it work was the ease with which the elements of the campaign
could be located and shared. “All the online pieces had been there for a while,
but the scale of this campaign would not have been possible even a couple of
years ago,” says Shetty.
8
Amplifying an Experiential Event
Another tactic I’ve seen done well by a number of brands is taking
experiential marketing activities and amplifying them virally.
In the past, sponsored events were experienced only by those who
attended. And stunts were employed in the hope of securing PR. The internet
has helped create owned media content that can be discovered and distributed
to a wider audience more economically.
T-Mobile in the UK staged such an event at London’s Liverpool Street
station. Employing 350 dancers to spontaneously break out into a dance
routine, they filmed them and the reaction of hundreds of commuters and
then uploaded the footage onto YouTube, drip feeding it over the subsequent
weeks.
People picked up on it and began filming their own dance routines and
sharing them with their friends through their social media networks.
T-Mobile’s agency aggregated the best, worst and oddest clips of dancing
onto T-Mobile’s YouTube branded channel.
The video has been watched more than sixteen million times and has
generated twelve thousand comments. The popularity of the campaign with
consumers translated into strong sales. Handset sales increased 22 percent
during launch week.
9
INCREASING ACTIVE CONSIDERATION
Using Online Search to Increase Active Consideration
What do you want consumers to do as a result of seeing your advertising?
Ideally, they purchase the product or put the brand on their shopping list. Butmore commonly, a brand wants to prompt consumers’ consideration and
research of the product, possibly by visiting the website or checking out
reviews, articles or comparison sites. And that’s where online search is one of
the most powerful media in increasing active consideration. Search facilitates
getting brands on the shopping list and guides the decision-making process
for the purchase. Paid search is widely used for ecommerce or to drive traffic
to websites, but using search at a campaign level is increasingly common.
One of the reasons for this is that consumers are multitasking with media.
Sixty percent of Americans go online while watching television.
10
 Television
advertising is the single biggest driver of search (see 
figure 10.2
).
11
We know from working with our pharmaceutical clients that one of the
most desirable outcomes of consumers’ seeing their advertising is for
consumers to go on the internet to search for information about a health
condition or a drug. The sheer size of the television-viewing audience and the
curiosity that a thirty-second television ad engenders makes it the premiere
channel for driving viewers to perform a search engine query.
Word of mouth, on the other hand, is not a mass advertising channel,
although it can have large numbers. We discussed in 
chapter 6
 how creating
FIGURE 10.2conversations was an important Brand Media Strategy. Supporting those
efforts with paid search is an important part of capturing and converting the
response.
Why Paid Search?
My observation is that many clients probably underinvest in paid search. It’s
easy to think that if consumers can find their site via unpaid, or natural,
search, why bother with paid? Because paid search adds value in several
levels.
It Helps Build the Brand
Paid search increases brand awareness and brand intent. Research by Google
and MetrixLab revealed that the combination of exposure to paid 
search anda resultant click on a link increased campaign awareness by 20 percent and
branding measures by 19 percent. And because paid search marketers pay
only for the click, consumer exposure to the branding, which does not get
clicked, is a bonus.
12
Paid and Natural Searches Deliver Different Users
Cast the widest net. Research suggests that consumers arriving via paid
search are further down the Consumer Pathway. Paid search visitors are 61
percent more likely to make a purchase than via natural search and to gather
information and to look for deals.
13
Prevent Poaching Traffic
Web measurement firm Hitwise suggests that leading ecommerce brands lose
one in seven potential visitors to competitive brand search.
14
Branded Destination Sites
Websites, microsites or brand presence on social media sites are all tools that
aid active brand consideration. Most often, the role of the media team is to
drive users to the website. However, being a communications planner in my
book gives you permission to have a point of view on all the elements of the
communications mix, including the brand destination site.
When reviewing a brand’s site and its effectiveness, I always ask myself
four questions:
Does it extend your brand?
 Does it have a point of view, a personality, a
differentiated proposition? How does it help project the brand attributes and
qualities?
Does it answer your prospects’ most asked questions?
 Remember, the
website is primarily for driving consideration or ecommerce. Therefore it
needs to address questions potential customers might ask, to convince them
of the brand.
Does it help you grow your prospects or contact list?
 Does the website
help encourage further interaction? Does it encourage you to provide details
for further contact?
Does it convert your prospects into customers?
 Lastly, does it move
consideration to the next stage of the Consumer Pathway?DRIVING PURCHASE
Online performance marketing through search, online display, affiliate
programs or ad networks is the bread and butter of a digital media planning
and buyer team. Optimizing and executing digital direct response programs
are where the digital rubber hits the road. The focus of these media
campaigns is primarily based on cost per click or cost per acquisition results.
This is where digital teams bring a level of accountability and return on
investment that few other channels can match.
Electronic coupon, or ecoupon, distribution is becoming a more popular
means of distributing discounts or gift incentives to customers. The benefit
over paper versions is the cost efficiency as well as the ability to put the
coupons with the right offers in customers’ hands. These can be pushed to
customers via email or promoted or accessed via specific sites.
Mobile commerce, or m-commerce, also offers opportunities to drive sales.
In August 2009 Pizza Hut launched an app that allowed consumers to order
home delivery via their iPhone. Within just two weeks it had one hundred
thousand downloads from the App Store. Customers use the app to order
Pizza Hut menu items directly from their mobile devices using an intuitive
touch screen interface. One feature I thought was fun was the exploding pizza
when an overeager pizza customer adds too many toppings. Toppings go
flying across the screen and a message tells the customer to use fewer
toppings. Pizza Hut also gives consumers a way to pass the time as they wait
for their order with a game called Pizza Hut Racer.
CONSUMPTION
Digital can even drive consumption or enhance the customer experience.
MyStarbucksIdea is a platform that encourages customers to share, discuss
and vote on new ideas. Integrating social media components into print 
ads,
they invite consumers to create their own media and spread the brand’s story
through Twitter, Facebook and other channels.
Starbucks used this site to help launch Starbucks instant coffee. The
company staged a two-week, cross-country road trip with comedienne Erin
Foley and Starbucks resident tweeter Brad Nelson. A film crew trailed the
fourteen-state road trip and produced a series of quirky websites about cartravel and caffeine. It helped to establish credibility in the market and drove
trial. On the Facebook page alone there were more than 240,000 requests for
samples.
15
Nike, as discussed in 
chapter 2
, is a brand that has not just developed a
digital strategy but built brands and products for a digital world. One great
example of how they did this was Nike+. R/GA chief Bob Greenberg
explains, “Brands need to break away from the mentality of the ‘campaign
idea’ and conceive ideas rooted in utility and value.”
16
 The Nike agency
advocates technology that enables companies to build systems and
applications that blur the line between product and marketing.
People track and share their runs on a Nike+ social networking web
interface. Nike’s Human Race recruits and connects participants and sets up
city and country challenges. A Nike+ app allows runners to personalize
copies of a Human Race commemorative book with their own photos.
In 2008 an incredible 780,000 runners in 30 countries participated in the
race, and the publicity was largely accomplished without paid media. Nike’s
Ballers Network is a Facebook app that basketball players use to find pick-up
games and manage their leagues.
For Nike Sparq R/GA created more than sixty training videos dedicated to
football, basketball, soccer and women’s sports. The product’s market share
has gone from 48 percent in the United States in 2006 to 61 percent in 2008.
RELATIONSHIP BUILDING
Online has been used numerous ways to maintain a dialogue and relationship
with customers. The most common is customer-relationship-management, 
or
eCRM, programs, which rely heavily on building a customer information
database and consistent communications via email. I work with a retail client
that built a customer database in little more than twelve months and has
added literally tens of millions of dollars to their bottom line, first by
establishing a relationship and then by providing customized and timely
offers.
Social networks, forums, groups and blogs have been infiltrated by eCRM.
Just about every brand now has fan pages on Facebook and a Twitter address.
Of course, not every brand has millions of fans or followers. The mostimportant need for these sites is content. Whether created by the brand or
fans, content needs to be useful, entertaining and regularly updated. The other
important aspect is recruitment of fans. I’ve seen fan sites that were heavily
promoted through press releases, but they have only three hundred to four
hundred fans, which for some companies is about the size of the marketing
department! Promoting and recruiting fans is a must.
One great example of promotion of a brand community site is Visa’s
launch of its Go Biz program aimed at small-business owners. The digital
campaign focused on how Visa Business helps businesses manage their
finances better than using checks. The campaign includes professionally shot
webumentaries of real businesspeople telling their story via
www.visa.com/gobiz
 and discussing issues such as managing their financial
matters. The videos were also posted on YouTube. The website invites users
to join Visa’s Business Network, a social network of over one hundred
thousand members.
17
 The network provided giveaways of one-hundred-dollar
Facebook ad credits and seventy-five-dollar Yahoo! Search Marketing credits
to its members. Other media included online banners on Entrepreneur, MSN,
Yahoo! and AOL.com; national network radio; and trade print advertising.
AMPLIFYING ADVOCACY
Word of mouth is well covered in 
chapter 6
, where we explored how digital
and social media fuels brand conversations.
OBAMA 2008—A BREAKTHROUGH FOR
DIGITAL MEDIA
Digital provides communication solutions to drive the Brand Media Strategy
across the spectrum of the Consumer Pathway, from awareness to advocacy.
Importantly, even though they are highly creative and highly effective, these
communication solutions must also have a clear role as part of the overall
Brand Media Strategy. This requires digital to address specific brand needs
on the Consumer Pathway. Solutions can cross the spectrum of digital media,
from search to social, from en masse to one-on-one. Digital as a channelcontinues to be an opportunity to innovate and use technology and ideas to
create interactive experiences.
I’ve made a few references to Barack Obama’s presidential campaign in
this book. Obama’s campaign was a significant mark in the marketing
industry. Senator Obama’s campaign received recognition by 
Advertising
Age,
 being awarded its top marketing campaign of 2008. It was a campaign
that employed digital in several areas: website, social media, mobile and
email. It scaled personalized marketing through digital. It was a campaign
that changed the game and helped transform the way the industry thought
about digital marketing. For these reasons, it’s worth concluding this chapter
with a case study of the campaign.
CASE STUDY: OBAMA’S SOCIAL MEDIA STRATEGY:
YES WE CAN
In January 2009, America inaugurated its first African American
president. It was the culmination of the most fascinating political
marketing campaign in decades.
The nation’s so-called first tech president had a group of dedicated
staffers who understood how to use online networks and Facebook-
style tools to recruit, energize and engage volunteers. Of course, that
didn’t mean abandoning the bullhorn of traditional media to address
voters 
with the wider message. The campaign, after all, made a media
buy in Super Bowl 2008 to promote a spot called “Join.”
Political campaigns had traditionally focused on using television
advertising to target undecided voters and to respond quickly to
attacks. But Obama’s social media strategy always linked the
marketing to action: a call to get actively involved in the campaign, to
fundraise, to vote. “We were starting from scratch. We knew we had to
get millions of people involved to have any chance of winning the
election,” said David Plouffe, the campaign manager.
18
“This campaign could not have been run 10 years ago,” said senior
campaign strategist Jim Margolis, who works at ad agency GMMB. “It
was fueled by the Internet and it was fueled by people’s involvement
and activism.”
19
 The Obama campaign team’s new media strategiestook political marketing to new levels, employing Facebook, Twitter,
personalized email communications and texting to leverage his
supporter base to persuade voters.
I analyzed the Obama and Clinton campaigns in an article for
Advertising Age.
20
 Obama scored more positively in his use of social
media when countering his opponent, Hillary Clinton, who did better in
traditional media with such negative efforts as the “3:00 A.M.phone
call” ad campaign, which raised the question of Obama’s readiness for
office.
Although Obama had more money in his war chest, his team
continued to portray Obama as the underdog. When Hillary Clinton
lent her own campaign five million dollars, the Obama team responded
by sending out an email to his million-plus supporters the next day.
That email solicitation read, “We need to match this quickly, can you
help?” Within twenty-four hours respondents had donated $8 million.
When it came to social media, Obama far outranked Clinton. At the
start of her campaign, Clinton was featured heavily on blogs and was
an early proponent of YouTube. Clinton produced a spot set in a New
Jersey diner that was a spoof of the series finale of 
The Sopranos.
However, 
Obama decisively won the battle for the user-generated
media channel. Nearly three times as many videos were uploaded by
the Obama camp as the Clinton camp, with ten times more views. The
viral impact of the “I Got a Crush … on Obama” video by Obama Girl
generated more than sixteen and a half million views on YouTube.
21
Obama could also count on one million Facebook and MySpace
friends.
The Obama camp had a greater understanding of the power of the
relative newcomer Twitter to deliver focus group comment in real
time. As my 
Ad Age
 article pointed out back in June 2008, Barack
Obama had 33,069 followers on Twitter while Hillary Clinton had
4,019.
22
 But the big difference was not in their respective numbers of
followers but in the people 
they
 followed: Obama’s camp followed
33,000 people on Twitter (enabling them to hear what people were
saying about the campaign and the issues); Clinton’s camp didn’t
follow anybody. As Twitter has grown, so has Obama’s volume of
followers. The official BarackObama Twitter feedtwitter.com/BARACKOBAMA had 4.2 million people signed up as of
June 2010.
The Obama campaign’s ability to create personal relationships via
mass-marketing techniques characterized his Brand Media Strategy.
The employment of digital media channels—notably his website, use
of social media and email marketing—helped gain younger voters’
support and proved effective in fundraising, a critical factor in
sustaining a heavy marketing effort.
The campaign set up a website called MyBarackObama, which
provided organizers with the kind of information they might need:
legal data about financial contributions, downloadable voter
registration forms and forums for separate groups to share best
practices and organize events. It also had a rapid response area, where
anyone could fact-check statements made by candidates or media
outlets.
When the campaign concluded, the website had hosted some two
million profiles and four hundred thousand blogs, and had raised some
thirty million dollars via seventy thousand pages.
MyBarackObama.com
still exists and is operated by Organizing for America as a way to
further grassroots activity and effect political change.
The campaign didn’t employ social media for its own sake but to
achieve goals such as fund-raising, creation of email distribution lists,
advance work and, most importantly, establishment of a nationwide
organization.
Pete Snyder, cofounder of New Media Strategies, a company that
creates online word-of-mouth marketing for major corporations, says,
“They made online the central nervous system for their organization;
smart brands are going to start doing this. The ripple effect will be felt
for years to come.”
23
The campaign was a turning point for the industry as it illustrated the
value of making digital central to communications. It was integral in
driving pledges but also in terms of its widespread influence. Digital
did not live out there on its own; it was fully integrated into a broader
mainstream media campaign.QUESTIONS TO ASK FOR A BRAND MEDIA
STRATEGY’S USE OF DIGITAL
1. What stage of the Consumer Pathway is digital media addressing?
2. What and where can digital add to the campaign?
3. How do the digital tactics integrate with other elements in the plan?
4. How should you measure the performance of digital?CHAPTER 11
EXECUTION IS 
THE X-FACTOR
BRINGING THE BRAND MEDIA 
STRATEGY TO LIFE
T
he most important part of a strategy is executing it. A good strategy with
great tactics is always going to beat a great strategy with poor tactics.
Consumers don’t experience strategy; they see and hear the brand through
media. They view a television spot, content on the internet or a billboard on
the highway, and they respond accordingly.
There’s no room in the communications planner’s world for fluffy ideas
and theory. And while it’s important to have a clearly identified outcome and
a focused plan, what’s crucial is how the Brand Media Strategy is activated in
the media world. To punctuate this point, at Optimedia we adopted the
mantra “Strategy, brilliantly executed,” because we believe and know that
you can’t separate the two.
This chapter is dedicated to bringing the strategy to life. It explains how
we execute strategies through media solutions and how to bring the activation
ideas to life.
GETTING THE BEST WORK 
FROM YOUR MEDIA PARTNERS
At one point in my career, I left the media agency world to start a digitalmarketing venture, and I found myself in the role of selling to and performing
services for media agencies for the first time. To be honest, it was a bit of a
shock to the system. The agencies we worked with supplied terrible briefs.
There was little or no information or insight into the clients’ business goals.
No agency ever shared the brand’s communications strategy or even
indicated there was one. There were no key performance indicators; there was
no communication of desired outcomes of the campaigns. There was little
openness to adopting a different angle. The agencies just wanted a response
to standard requests for proposals (RFPs).
And they wanted it yesterday—actually, last week. Most importantly, they
wanted it at the lowest cost per thousand or cost per click possible.
If I had a dime for every time an agency planner or buyer said, “Can you
bring us some innovative, never-been-done-before ideas,” I could retire!
I developed a renewed respect for the professionalism of the women and
men in the media sales community; they are better people than I. In the end,
our sales director wisely started excluding me from meetings with media
agencies. He told me it wasn’t good for business to be telling agencies what
they should or shouldn’t be doing, even if I was right.
Many times the proposals went nowhere. In fact, a media vendor I recently
spoke to told me that positive responses to RFPs happened less than 5 percent
of the time. All those rejected RFPs seem such an unnecessary waste of time
and resources for everyone.
By and large, agencies got the work they deserved. Maybe every once in a
while they got something great, but they usually ended up with a cut-and-
paste solution—hardly the ingredient for brilliant, award-winning, market-
moving results. It was a shame because, as an outside vendor, we had the
ability to help them do some amazing things.
FROM STRATEGY TO ACTIVATION
Once the Brand Media Strategy is developed, the next step is to translate it
into an insightful brief for the activation teams—potential partners that are a
source of ideas or assets that can help implement brand communications in
paid, earned or owned media forms.
They include the specialist buying teams at the agency for broadcast, printand out-of-home media as well as digital planners and buyers who operate
across channels such as display, search, social media and mobile.
Specialist marketing channel experts and partners can also include event
marketing, branded entertainment, custom content producers, stunt or live
activations and below-the-line efforts such as marketing PR and shopper
marketing.
Media companies are part of a communications planner’s activation team,
as are the client’s nominated agency partners, or internal integrated marketing
teams. Those can include creative, digital, PR and marketing activation
people.
THE BRIEFING: GARBAGE IN, GARBAGE
OUT
We’ve all heard that well-worn cliché “garbage in, garbage out.” Well, the
reason it’s a cliché is because people keep using it. They keep using it
because so often it’s true.
The briefing provides the fuel for good ideas to take off. Too often,
briefings are seen as a chore to get off the task list as expediently as possible.
A briefing should be a source of inspiration and opportunity. It’s the fun part
of our business: a venue to create and innovate. But great work isn’t a
random exercise in ideation. It should be an important and well-orchestrated
function at the agency.
The briefing to the activation teams should be wide enough to solicit a
suitcase full of ideas but narrow enough to set out clear expectations of where
to play and how to win.
Great communication ideas and brand media thinking come from
collaboration and being disciplined about organizing people. Everyone can
bring great ideas to the table and most people want to contribute.
ACTIVATION IS A TWO-STEP PROCESS
Decide on the big idea, or central communicating idea, that anchors the plan.This allows the planner to develop the media activations. Does this integrate
the communications across multiple media channels? For instance, Pepsi’s
2008 “Wake-up” campaign used the concept of “Stop the yawn” as its central
communicating idea.
Develop tactical programs with the activation teams that expand and
support the central communicating idea.
 This involves developing ideas with
the execution teams, as well as developing RFPs to brief partners. This
includes work with digital and social media partners, branded entertainment
companies or experiential marketing companies to develop events or content.
For example, Pepsi set up “Stop the Yawn” video game arcades, and
consumers used Pepsi-branded Max water guns to squirt the yawns away as
part of its “Wake-up” campaign.
DEVELOPING THE CENTRAL
COMMUNICATING IDEA
The big idea is developed out of the consumer insight work, which we
discussed in 
chapter 5
.
There’s no one right answer for how to establish the central
communicating idea. Here’s a list of steps that I’ve found useful:
COME UP WITH MULTIPLE ALTERNATIVE IDEAS
It’s easy to become married to just one idea and stick with it. But you need to
have alternatives so you can leave an idea behind if it isn’t strong enough or
it’s not executable or it’s just unaffordable.
Having alternative ideas is the best way of testing the quality of the first
idea, because more often than not, the first idea is not the best. I’ve seen it
happen often: agencies get stuck on an idea, and their effort goes to selling
the idea rather than testing its efficacy.
DON’T STOP AT THE A-HA MOMENTAn idea is never fully baked at the start. Look at ways to fine-tune it, evolve
it, torture test it. Make the idea bigger. I used to think that great creative ideas
just happened in a moment of inspiration. Roger MacDonnell, a creative
director who ran one of the first creative agencies I worked at, convinced me
that great creativity comes from hard work and determination to continuously
make the idea better.
GET EVERYONE TO OWN THE IDEA
I know there’s a school of thought that says ideas are best if kept pure and
unsullied by others. But an idea becomes more powerful if it doesn’t belong
to just one person. The team has to own it. A good test of an idea is when
everyone wants to claim it.
That requires the planner to be open to everyone’s views of how to
improve the idea by letting different parties add to it. The communications
process needs to be a collaborative team effort.
REALLY SELL THE IDEA
A great idea only ever happens if a client buys it. This is where creative
agencies do a brilliant job. They don’t toss out ideas to clients randomly.
They put care and attention into crafting and presenting an idea. They
produce impressive storyboards and mood tapes to help sell that idea. They
treat it and present it as if it’s the most important thing in the world. You’re
asking client representatives to stake their company’s money on it and
possibly their jobs, so make them feel they’re betting on a sure thing.
It has to work across multiple platforms. Great ideas need to cross into
multiple media, particularly digital, so don’t let the origin of the idea limit its
use.
TESTING THE CENTRAL COMMUNICATING
IDEA
Once you develop several candidates for the central communicating idea, youneed to test them. We need to apply the filters shown in 
figure 11.1
 to judge
whether an idea works.
The first filter is to determine if the idea is strategic. Does the central
communicating idea address the communication objective? Will it enhance
the desirable brand attributes, brand point of view, positioning? Does it
capture or work off a target audience insight? Will consumers care? Dove’s
“Campaign for Real Beauty” lived up to the brand’s global objective “to be
the preferred beauty brand of women who want to make the most of their
natural beauty.”
1
 They saw this campaign as an opportunity to champion real
women. Dove asked, What’s the best way to get on their side? And Dove
argued 
their
 case.
FIGURE 11.1
Will the idea be influential when it’s executed? Most importantly, will it
cut through the clutter of the category? Is it unexpected? Will it get attention?Surprises hold attention and interest. Is it counterintuitive? Is it something
concrete that will help people understand and remember? The “Campaign for
Real Beauty” worked well because it displaced the category convention of
promoting 
unattainable
 beauty. The campaign celebrated the real beauty that
comes in women of all sizes, shapes and colors. Dove’s agencies chose to
celebrate natural beauty, letting each woman make the most of the real her.
No more models!
A third filter is simplicity. Is the idea focused, clear and simple to execute?
Does it help people understand and remember? Define the core message in
one simple and profound sentence. For Dove’s “Campaign for Real Beauty,”
it was “to help make more women beautiful every day.”
Is the idea ownable? Can you tell a story around the idea? Dove occupies
the lucrative everyday premium slot in the skin and hair care category. This
gave them permission to talk about beauty across a range of products. They
could stick up for the everyday woman. Was the campaign idea unique? Yes
—it broke new ground, and as a result got women around the world talking.
Finally, can it drive an emotional response? Can it connect with and be
relevant to its audience? Dove’s campaign played off the insight of “I’m tired
of fake images of beauty. I want to take good care of the body I’ve got,
making the most of the real me.”
Once the central communicating idea has been run through these filters and
is established, the second part of the activation process is to develop tactical
programs with activation teams that expand and drive the central
communicating idea. This involves developing RFPs to brief vendors, digital
agencies, social media partners, branded entertainment companies and
experiential marketing companies to develop programs and events.
One valuable means to develop these tactical programs is brainstorming.
FACILITATING IDEAS THROUGH
BRAINSTORMING
If the strategy and insights are the fuel for ideas, then brainstorming is the
combustion engine that sparks those ideas.
Brainstorming was popularized by an advertising guy, Alex Osborn, the“O” in BBDO.
2
 Brainstorming is an important tool for generating ideas. Even
more, it’s a core task in an agency. I’ve always believed that the best part of
advertising is coming up with ideas. I suspect that’s what attracts a lot of
young people to our profession. Brainstorming brings together two other
important aspects of the agency business—collaboration and having fun.
Hence, it’s a process I like to encourage planners and buyers to participate in.
Anyone can participate, whatever the department. Even the most
inexperienced or junior employee can come up with ideas. In fact, they are
more likely to be better at it than most chief executive officers and senior
managers, who tend to be more problem solvers and whose jobs revolve
around managing order.
Instead, first-year planners or buyers are more likely to be creative and in
tune with technology, and they’re also heavy consumers of media and in
touch with popular culture. They are more often the very consumers we
chase.
HOW TO BRAINSTORM
Getting the most out of a brainstorming session starts with a good facilitator.
A facilitator’s job is to chair the meeting rather than have the ideas. A
facilitator motivates and encourages creative thinking and keeps things
moving.
Encourage participation and fun. Hey, it beats doing Excel spreadsheets
and pivot tables for an hour or so! Keep it upbeat. Evaluating or criticizing
ideas is a no-no. There will be plenty of time later to filter the ideas. It’s also
important to put everyone on equal footing; no one in a brainstorming session
is more senior than the other participants.
Put together a diverse team. The team should include people with different
strengths, life and work experiences and craft skills. Ideally, have people 
who
don’t work on the client’s business, and even better try to include at least one
person who doesn’t work in the agency. Keep the tone upbeat, enthusiastic
and creative. An optimum number for a brainstorming session is between six
and ten people.
Focus on the quantity of ideas first. Quantity breeds quality. The more
ideas, the higher the chance of moving off the obvious and current referencepoints to something new and never been done.
To create, the team needs a comfortable space. Have colorful cushions,
rooms with lots of light, food and drink. Make sure to have a large bulletin
board on a wall for attaching ideas and insights. This isn’t a scientific
process; it’s an organic one.
Write it all down. Ideas should be submitted as headlines. Keep the ideas
visible; perhaps capture them on flip charts or sticky notes. Circulate the
notes after the meeting, in case the participants have ideas the next day.
Encourage idea building. Stretch what is discussed as far as possible to
improve and sharpen the concepts. Encourage people to see how an idea
could grow. Use comments like “That’s a great idea; can anyone think of
how we could build out that thought further?”
HARVESTING FOR GOOD IDEAS
An increasingly popular alternative to brainstorming is crowd sourcing. This
involves throwing a question out on the web for the masses to solve.
Over the years it’s become clearer to me that people from outside the
agency or agency business offer a lot of value to creative exercises. Outsiders
bring new perspectives and compensate for the blind spots of the target group
(the fish is the last to notice the water). Diversity always pays.
Two obvious places to crowd-source ideas are Twitter and Facebook. Ask
friends or followers for ideas.
I met some people at a conference who managed a website called
OpenAd.net, which is a professional site that marketers and agencies use. The
site accesses around 11,000 freelance creatives from around the world and
offers to come up with fresh ideas for marketers and agencies. Clients 
can
create a pitch online. If ideas are accepted, the originators and the site are
paid.
THE INTEGRATED ACTIVATION BRIEF
The Brand Media Strategy is the foundation for the integrated activation brief(
figure 11.2
). The brief should provide core product and brand information
and relevant consumer insights. The briefing explains what the
communications plan needs to achieve. It also sets out the business and
communication goals of the plan and the Consumer Pathway stages that the
communications are to target.
FIGURE 11.2
The briefing details the central communicating idea, or overall strategic
platform, and any viewpoint established on receptivity. It includes the
potential role of each touch point in driving the communications: for
instance, “We need television to get people to visit the website to find out
more information.”
The briefing defines the metrics for judging the plan and any initial tactics
that the planning team has brainstormed. These are used as a guideline for
further ideation or development. It also suggests the initial budget, which issubject to further refinement. And lastly, the briefing includes the timing of
each element of the campaign.
THE INITIAL BRIEFING EXCHANGE
Activation ideas begin with an initial briefing exchange. This is a meeting
between the planning and activation teams, who use the time to dissect, tear
apart and re-create the brief, if necessary. We use it to torture test the central
communicating idea. Does the team think it can play out across different
media channels? The team checks whether the budget parameters make
sense.
At this stage it’s ideal to get a provisional sign-off on the strategy and
touch-point recommendations from the client before doing specific briefing
for activations and tactics. Develop a synergistic RFP that can be applied
across different media partners and vendors, then list the initial partners to
decide what platforms will be used.
Explain the requirements of the activation plan to the vendors; set
expectations and a timetable for a response. Ask for initial ideas and package
the proposal. Review the ideas and share the review with the entire team.
Identify the best: the ideas that can work on a variety of media platforms.
Judge the ideas against the strategy, the potential impact and coverage needs.
Focus time, energy and budget on the handful of ideas that really break
through. Finally, present the recommendations to the client and get sign-off
so you can move on developing the idea platform in more depth.
CHALLENGES IN ACTIVATING THE BRAND
MEDIA STRATEGY
Sometimes planners develop a communications strategy that the activation
teams can’t execute on. The Brand Media Strategy looks good on paper; it
dovetails nicely with a powerful insight and the client really loves and agrees
to the approach. But activation teams are left scratching their heads because
they can’t translate the strategy into something real.One case I recall that illustrates this was when our agency, Optimedia,
pitched the Payless ShoeSource account, the country’s largest specialist shoe
retailer. We developed an initial strategy that would leverage the retailer’s
goal of emotionally connecting with consumers through the democratization
of fashion. A core insight we developed when we pitched this (in early April
2008, well before the recession’s effects were felt) was that many women
enjoy bragging about frugality. We saw an opportunity in getting new
customers into the franchise by having customer fans be advocates.
One peripheral initiative Payless was implementing was
www.ILoveShoes.com
. Payless ShoeSource had acquired the URL but hadn’t
marketed it extensively. The web address featured in some of their print and
point-of-sale materials. We decided that we were on to something and wanted
to make “I love shoes” much more front and center with their media
communications. So we came up with the central communicating idea of
“Share the love.”
Chris Pyne, our strategic planning director, and I loved it. We gave it the
overnight test and loved it even more. We then briefed the idea to the
broadcast, print and digital teams and asked them to come up with ideas to
blow this idea out.
Conceptually, the idea worked nicely, and maybe because as chief
executive I had given my seal of approval, the teams tried to be enthusiastic
about it. They came back with some initial ideas, but they struggled to light it
up. After about a week of seeing what came back, we killed it and found an
alternative idea that worked much better in execution. It was a lesson that
illustrated the importance of making sure that strategy can be executed. The
happy ending was that we did win the pitch.
DEVELOPING MEDIA 
AND
 MESSAGE
Some of the best ideas come from media vendors. Because they are content
creators, they know how to create what their audiences want to see and
what’s sticky. As we discussed in 
chapter 2
, with the media business revenue
model under pressure, media companies want to use their resources as ways
to attract advertising revenues and market share by leveraging content. There
are plenty of examples. AOL chief executive Tim Armstrong has positionedAOL as a content company first; investing resources in developing custom
content for advertisers is a big part of their offering to marketers.
Time Warner set up its own division to handle custom specific marketing
programs. NBC Universal has gone beyond its traditional role of broadcaster
to marketing partner by establishing a creative department that helps produce
brand marketing creative assets.
Media agencies are developing content too. WPP has Mindshare
Entertainment, Starcom MediaVest Group has Liquid Thread, and our own
agency launched its branded content division called NewCast.
INTERRUPTION VERSUS DISRUPTION
To some extent I agree that communication needs to be more relevant,
sympathetic and entertaining to the consumer. But let’s not forget that
advertising is still advertising. The fact is that commercial breaks interrupt
your television programs and your morning radio and compete for space on
your msn.com home page. It has become very popular to advocate that
advertising needs to move past the interruption model into one of permission.
In my view, there’s nothing wrong with disrupting the attention of the
consumer. Standing out is a prerequisite of executing a communications plan.
The difference between a campaign that is ignored and one that gets noticed
is an ad that is executed in a compelling and creative way. Ideally, that ad
must involve and engage, and that’s why the execution is so important. The
role of the activation team is to push the envelope further.
Executing campaigns and promoting brands is a skill that’s always in a
state of flux. Ten years ago, the notion of television presenters having any
connection to advertised brands would have been frowned upon, and even
scorned. Now we watch MSNBC 
Morning Joe
 hosts drink Starbucks coffee
and talk show hosts Jimmy Kimmel or Ellen DeGeneres perform live
commercials. The Mark Burnett reality show 
Survivor,
 aired on CBS, broke
ground in the world of brand integration when it wove in everything from
Pontiacs to Doritos and Bud Light as prizes for those marooned on a desert
island with little to eat.
Great execution strategies have a few things in common: They blur the line
between content and advertising. They use technology. They’re interactiveand they create experiences and participation.
BLURRING THE LINE BETWEEN CONTENT
AND ADVERTISING
One effective tactic in media is blending the advertising and content through
program partnerships. Here are two examples of this from Turbo-Tax and
NBC Universal and from HP and MTV Networks.
CASE STUDY: TURBOTAX AND NBC UNIVERSAL
In January 2010, NBC Universal executed the second year of
promotions for TurboTax by featuring talent from the network’s
shows. The deal involved six NBC networks and featured actors from
prime-time shows. For example, a cast member from 
Community
 talks
about a deductible business lunch and a cast member from 
Ghost
Hunters
 talks about tax advice while on a ghost hunt. The ad spots also
aired in sports programming and at other times of day.
Mike Pilot, president of sales and marketing for NBC Universal,
stated, “We know that connecting a client’s brand to the equity of our
content and our platforms sends engagement scores through the roof.”
He cites research the network undertook to evaluate viewer response to
these program promotions.
3
CASE STUDY: HP AND MTV NETWORKS
In the world of computers, there’s Apple and there’s everybody else.
PCs were for office workers in suits and ties, while Apple Macs were
for creative types. HP was very much the Johnny-come-lately to the
style party.
In terms of technology, a Mac can’t do anything more than a PC.
What largely sets it apart is branding and design.If HP wanted to ensure future business, it needed to target today the
business leaders and style icons of tomorrow. The challenge their
agency team faced was to make the PC cool again.
So how could HP make people perceive it as a cool, creative brand?
Telling young people that HP had changed, that it had suddenly
become stylish and desirable, wouldn’t convince them. HP had to show
them. The agency had to create a platform, an alternative reality if you
will, that would show cool, creative and early adopters (the
demographic many young people look to as trendsetters) that using
HP’s equipment could produce great creative work.
They partnered with MTV to show Millennials that the brand was
relevant and accessible. The result was a multimedia reality show
called 
Engine Room,
 in which sixteen of the most talented students
from around the world competed in series of creative challenges, all
using HP equipment.
First they needed candidates. The global campaign kicked off with
an intensive television ad burst in North America, Latin America,
Europe and Asia. The campaign asked people to submit their
portfolios. A viral seeding strategy got under way with partners posting
details of the campaign on relevant blogs and forums. Universities and
design schools were targeted with posters to attract budding digital
artists. Over two thousand applicants, from over 110 countries,
competed for the sixteen coveted places in the competition.
4
 These
seven creative challenges, ranging from animation, filmmaking and
sound mixing to web and graphic design, would showcase the power
and style of HP’s new product range.
The young artists now had a worldwide stage, and they received
mentorship and critiques from a wide range of industry leaders,
including iconic musicians, Hollywood directors, pioneering graphic
designers and the Guggenheim Museum’s chief curator.
5
 The final
challenge asked MTV viewers to enter the 
Engine Room
 notebook
design contest to create their own HP special-edition notebook for
2009. The competition invited artists from around the world to submit
their best designs for a chance to have their art appear on the next
special-edition HP notebook.
The campaign changed young people’s attitudes toward HP. In aproprietary global study, research showed that after viewers watched
MTV’s 
Engine Room
 the message of creativity was so strong that more
young people associated HP with the sentiment “can do creative things
on their PCs” than they did with Apple. (HP got 58 percent of the vote
versus 51 percent for rival Apple.)
6
The 
Engine Room
 site was bombarded. Almost eight hundred
thousand unique visitors came to the site. The content-seeding strategy
on blogs was so relevant that the links achieved a whopping 12 percent
click-through rate, the number of links clicked divided by the number
of link impressions.
7
TECHNOLOGY: TURNING ADVERTISING
INTO A UTILITY
Innovative use of technology can often be the difference between what stands
out and what fades into the background.
Moxie Interactive and 20th Century Fox Studios personalized promotions
for their 2008 holiday movie 
Marley & Me
 by creating a website that invited
consumers to have the main character in the movie, the dog Marley, fetch
holiday gift ideas from various websites. At the center of the site is a search
box that has Marley delivering on gift suggestions, while another allows
visitors to buy tickets.
CASE STUDY: CREATING IRRESISTIBLE
EXPERIENCES
I’ve long admired how Unilever was able to transform itself from a
predominantly television brand marketer to one that consistently shows
imagination and deft in becoming an experience-led brand marketer
across their brand portfolio. Nowhere is that more evident than with
grooming brand Axe (or Lynx as it is known in the UK, Ireland and
Australia).Launching its new body spray fragrance “Dark Temptation” in 2008,
they worked off insight work they had undertaken with women across
13 different countries. They unearthed a universal international truth
that women find chocolate irresistible. They developed a central
communicating idea of “irresistible as chocolate.” This platform
became the central idea to execute experiences across its markets. The
creative agency developed this into a core idea of a chocolate man
featured in the advertising.
The media agency Mindshare developed an international campaign
creating experiences around the brief of “irresistible as chocolate.” For
example, in France 200,000 guys received “chocolate nibbles & licks”
from girls on social networking site Skyrock.com. In the UK, they
challenged British guys to test their pick-up skills by asking out
women armed with just a bar of chocolate. In Brazil, they created an
interactive online video game “The Dark Temptation,” which involved
a chocolate man being chased by women. And in India, the brand
created a chocolate fashion show attended by the fashion press and
celebrities.
Nick Waters, leader of Mindshare EMEA, said: “Axe Dark
Temptation is a wonderful example of taking a strong central idea and
adapting it to resonate locally across the region.”
8
Axe’s Dark Temptation was the fourth-most-successful launch in the
company’s twenty-five-year history, surpassing all major global and
European sales goals.
9
Another great example of using online to develop consumer experiences
was that of 20th Century Fox using digital to drive experiences around 
The
Simpsons Movie
 to activate interest and attendance.
CASE STUDY: 
THE SIMPSONS MOVIE
—
BLURRING MEDIA AND REALITY
There is no more hotly contested market than the box office. New
bigbudget movies from Hollywood’s largest production companiesslug it out every week to see which movies will have a big opening
weekend and which will be also-rans. Being number one for an
opening weekend can be the difference between making one hundred
million dollars and losing one hundred million dollars. Few movies
survive long after a weak opening. 
The Simpsons Movie
 had one
advantage: a big preexisting base of loyal fans. Yet the franchise was
almost twenty years old, and it had no guarantee that its popular thirty-
minute format would entice fans to pay eight dollars to watch a full-
length movie.
Relying on advertising that focused on the popularity of the show or
its characters to drive ticket sales would be a mistake, 20th Century
Fox Studios realized. Had they done that, a simple television campaign
on high-rated shows would have given them all the reach they needed
to get the word out. Instead, they took advantage of the special
opportunities created by emerging media. Their goal was to create a
level of involvement with 
The Simpsons
 that went way beyond
awareness of a new movie launch. By carefully manipulating the
contextual opportunities presented by both digital and experiential
media, Fox made the launch of 
The Simpsons Movie
 less like a typical
movie launch and more like a cultural event.
For starters, Fox created fun television commercials and an engaging
website. The site had lots of cool stuff, from the usual (for example,
computer wallpapers and screen savers) to some silly yet surprisingly
addictive games, complete with lots of “D’oh” and “Aye Carumba!”
sound 
effects. It had a virtual tour of Springfield and a tool that let you
create your own 
Simpsons
 avatar—just the sort of thing to get
Simpsons
 fans engaged. But understanding context often means
understanding that the people you want to reach will not necessarily go
to your site. So Fox created a cross-promotion on Burger King’s site
where people could submit a photo and “Simpsonize” themselves. This
was a viral application that was fun to do and share whether you were a
Simpsons
 fanatic or not. Where the campaign really shined, however,
was in its use of the web and the real world to turn context on its head.
Three ideas from the campaign are outstanding examples of
reinventing the way people relate to media in its broadest sense. The
first was an online contest that pitted fourteen different American cities
named Springfield for the honor of being named 
the
 Springfield ofSimpsons
 fame, giving the winner the right to hold the movie’s
premiere. The contest got the populations of these cities engaged and
became a public relations extravaganza, with the contest and results
covered by sponsor 
USA Today
 and news organizations around the
country. When little Springfield, Vermont, beat the likes of sizable
Springfield, Illinois, the residents of the winning town were described
by 
USA Today
 as being in a 
Simpsons
 “frenzy.”
10
The second idea was an online campaign in partnership with JetBlue
Airways. As one might expect, different Simpsons became
spokespersons for different JetBlue destinations. But the campaign
started to bend reality by having the show’s corporate mogul
Montgomery Burns take over the JetBlue chairman’s blog. The
hijacked blog led off as follows: “Hi I’m Montgomery Burns, Here’s
my newest attempt at robbing a man of his livelihood. I have
temporarily taken over David Neeleman’s blog as I believe I have
more efficient ways to run this airline. I could crush him like an ant.”
The third, and perhaps most spectacular, contextual idea was a joint
promotion with 7-Eleven. Eleven 7-Eleven stores around America
were physically transformed into Kwik-E-Marts (patterned after the
show’s convenience store helmed by Apu Nahasapeemapetilon),
complete with loads of 
Simpsons
-based products. All of the signage
inside and out was changed. For people on the street or anyone
stopping by for their morning cup of coffee, the world was just a little
bit different. The line between fantasy and reality had been crossed.
They not only knew there was a movie coming out but were deeply
engaged in the 
Simpsons
 experience. People didn’t have to be
Simpsons
 fanatics to be caught up in the amusement and to feel that life
would be a little more fun if they went to the movie.
Fox’s creativity in challenging the usual uses of media, and even
reality, led to tremendous results. The film earned seventy-four million
dollars for its opening weekend. It was the third-highest nonsequel
opening of all time. Had this animated movie, with its quirky sense of
humor, looked at media in the traditional way, or even used digital
media in a noncreative way, there is a good chance that only 
Simpsons
fans would have shown up.QUESTIONS TO ASK ABOUT EXECUTING
THE BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY
1. From the executions, can you guess what the big idea is?
2. How does this strategy differentiate the product from competitors’
products in the category?
3. Does the media plan amplify the creative campaign?
4. Does this campaign stand out, disrupt?CHAPTER 12
MEASUREMENT AND METRICS
MAKING THE BRAND MEDIA 
STRATEGY ACCOUNTABLE
In a world that is drowning in data, knowing what to ignore is as
important as knowing what to consider.... Over-reliance on metrics is
stifling marketing. Justifying marketing’s value only through metrics
results in an over-emphasis on metrics... the numbing by numbers....
Do not use metrics to justify; use metrics to guide continuous
improvement.
—Larry Light, former global chief marketing officer,
McDonald’s, now chief executive officer, Arcature
1
EMBRACING MEASUREMENT
I
 face a tough challenge with this chapter: how to make measurement and
metrics interesting enough for a planner to want to read it!
Return-on-investment (ROI) numbers for many communications planners
is a bit like going to the dentist: something you need to check in with
regularly but not something you look forward to. But measuring effectiveness
for the Brand Media Strategy is more than just a box-ticking exercise 
or a
cosmetic procedure like teeth whitening. It’s the very core of
communications planning.
One of the most fundamental points of communications planning is 
not
whether the campaign sold more product or grew market share. It’s aboutunderstanding where and how the elements of the communications plan
actually drove the final outcome. Of course, we know that many factors out
of the planner’s control significantly affect sales—pricing, the product,
distribution and competitive factors, not to mention the creative work. But in
this era of Google advertising precision and accountability, it’s not enough to
say “Media’s done its job, we achieved the ratings or delivered the
advertising to the right audience.”
In this new media world of marketing science and communications
accountability there has to be a willingness for higher responsibility to know
what worked. We need to be able to answer the hard questions. There has to
be a stronger work ethic behind learning how to improve and optimize plan
performance. And I aim to show you how to achieve that with this chapter.
THE NUMBERS TELL THE STORY
I’m a huge fan of professional basketball. I love the athleticism and skill of a
LeBron James dunk and the drama and anticipation that builds when the
coach calls a time-out for the final play of the game with just seconds left on
the clock. It’s pure magic. But what really fascinates me is viewing TNT’s 
T-
Mobile Half Time Show,
 where the TV commentators pore over the stats to
explain how the game has unfolded and what each team needs to do to win
the game.
Former All Star player and television analyst Charles Barkley will
comment, “The Celtics have forced six turnovers in the first half; Miami
needs to look after the basketball if they are to get back into this game.”
Former Rockets player Kenny Smith will observe, “The difference between
Houston and Dallas tonight is the outside shooting. Houston is shooting 64
percent versus Dallas 23 percent. The Mavs are going to have to defend the
Rockets more aggressively and look for easier shots inside the paint.”
Similarly, it’s the marketing statistics that tell the nonstop, ever evolving
action in advertising. More importantly, they give very good direction as to
how to win the Brand Media Strategy game. Just like sports coaches, a
communications planner needs a strategy to win, and that involves making
the adjustments needed to improve the outcome.ADVERTISING CAUSE AND EFFECT JUST
GOT HARDER
Proving advertising cause and effect has become a much more challenging
issue in today’s digital media world. On the one hand, everything is more
measurable, but on the other hand, according to Frank Harrison,
ZenithOptimedia’s worldwide director of strategic resources, “In just a few
years, the volume of influences on consumer purchase decisions has grown
hugely, both those within and outside of the brand managers’ control.”
2
Media’s long tail is making it more difficult to be as effective,
fragmentation is splitting the audience, and consumers are subject to a much
more complex decision-making process. All have an effect on the business
and marketing environment. It is harder today to understand what works and
what doesn’t. “In US companies, both large and small, the goal of achieving
true, demonstrable accountability for the marketing function, if it is
considered at all, is one that has proven elusive for years.”
3
 And while
companies’ senior management and finance departments are demanding that
marketing provide them with a higher level of accountability, only 14 percent
of senior marketers felt confident in forecasts of how marketing activities
would affect sales.
4
METRICS MUST BE DRIVEN BY
OBJECTIVES AND TARGETS
Research is big business in the United States, where around $8.6 billion is
spent trying to figure out consumption and media habits.
5
The problem in media isn’t that we don’t have enough data; it’s that there
is too much. The communications industry, particularly the part that deals
with measuring media, is overloaded with metrics. There are tracking 
studies,
competitive reporting, consumer segmentation, product usage and attitudinal
studies, media currencies, online surveys, copy testing and econometric
modeling, in addition to literally billions of data points now being collected
in digital media.There are numerous audience surveys for each medium. Television alone is
tracked by Nielsen, TiVo, Rentrak and Kantar Media, among many others.
Pay-television companies are researching set-top boxes that could offer
precision targeting from individual household data. And the recession has
accentuated the desire to add to this data pile. It’s easy to lose track or be
overwhelmed.
In some cases research is used simply to justify the job. Many times its
proof of measurability is used as a surrogate for accountability. Of course
there is a need to measure success, but research should be about influencing
decision making. The trick is reading and tracking only the data that helps
make better decisions.
The role of research is twofold: steer and track the strategy, and develop
and optimize the tactics.
STEER AND TRACK THE BRAND MEDIA
STRATEGY
Before surrounding yourself with data and research, start with a definition of
what success looks like. 
Chapter 4
, “Focusing on Outcomes, Not Outputs,”
deals with this in great detail. Marketers want to see how the Brand Media
Strategy is driving clear outcomes and communications effectiveness.
As pointed out in 
chapter 4
, communication goals need to be established at
the outset. They need to align with appropriate stages of the Consumer
Pathway and demonstrate a clear line of sight to how the communications
will influence the business outcome. The key performance indicators (KPIs)
should quantify the communication goals and help determine what and how
effective the Brand Media Strategy is.
Focus on a few metrics, ideally just the most significant one. KPIs should
measure the collective impact of media and message. Measurement should
not try to determine media’s success separate from creative’s. Both 
need to
work to drive the overall communications. Nor is it about measuring the
individual effectiveness of each medium. The communications planner drives
the holistic impact of the entire plan.
One of Optimedia’s retail-based client’s goals was centered on drivingacquisition. Their brand awareness levels weren’t high, but we assessed that
brand consideration was the core issue. Only one in five switchers would
consider the brand. We measured individual components of the client’s media
program, but the overriding focus was on shifting consideration. We made
significant adjustments in the media mix and the messaging. Budget was
shifted into newspapers and magazines, while the client honed their online
program toward consideration-based offers. Traditional measures of coverage
and efficiency actually fell slightly, but consideration increased by nearly 50
percent, and acquisitions improved.
The Consumer Pathway provides the foundation for setting the
communication goals and establishing the KPIs, used to evaluate a
communications campaign. The KPIs for each stage of the Consumer
Pathway warrant different strategies and tactics and different measurement.
Some example KPIs are shown in 
figure 12.1
.
Marketing research departments tend to measure all the different stages of
the Consumer Pathway, but focusing on one or two KPIs will deliver a more
focused communications effort and increase the likelihood of success. The
best campaigns, I’ve noticed, come with a clear and single-minded goal and
metric.
THE CAMPAIGN MEASUREMENT PROCESS
DETERMINE OBJECTIVES AND SUCCESS CRITERIA
The purpose here is to define the quantifiable goal along the Consumer
Pathway, either one or a combination of the following: awareness,
involvement, active consideration and intent, trial, purchase, loyalty and
advocacy. Specify explicit success targets for the goals (for example, increase
product awareness X percent from the current level).
FIGURE 12.1For the Denny’s Super Bowl Grand Slam Giveaway, our communication
goal was to get people to come back to Denny’s one more time. The KPI was
guest-count traffic.
IDENTIFY LEARNING OBJECTIVES AND ANALYSISAPPROACH
Measurement is an ongoing process of building knowledge and experience to
aid future planning.
Three months before the Denny’s Super Bowl promotion, we had tested
different media tactics with the client. We tested two key variables: First, we
targeted what we called the “breakfast super fan,” as opposed to the more
general target. Second, the client bought television ad time in college football
play-off games leading into the holiday season. We saw positive increases in
guest counts when this activity was coordinated with an offer.
IDENTIFY METRICS AND DATA SOURCES
Marrying the metrics to the goals and tactics involves identifying metrics and
data sources. I suggest breaking metrics into two groups: tracking, to gauge
response, and diagnostics, to determine improvement opportunities. Then
identify data sources and reporting requirements to implement measurement
tracking.
We had several business metrics for Denny’s, such as guest counts on the
promotion day and for the six weeks after the Grand Slam giveaway
promotion. The client set the expectation of a positive marketing ROI for
these periods. Secondary communication goals included visits to the website
and, in particular, using the restaurant locator function on the website. We
tracked the audience reach of the Super Bowl spot and the cost effectiveness
of the buy relative to other advertisers, and we tracked the favorability of the
commercial itself to the audience.
DEFINE MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING PLAN
Eventually, there is a requirement to build a consolidated measurement plan
outlining objectives, metrics, methodology, data infrastructure, test design
and recommended reporting and the analysis schedule. If applicable, this
could also include measurement tool assessment.
In addition to the business metrics, we included all media data sources that
tracked the Denny’s promotion: television audience ratings and reach, buzzvia Search, Twitter and blogs, and established targets for paid search.
COMMUNICATE MEASUREMENT PLAN
Communicate guidelines of data reporting requirements to all necessary
stakeholders.
For Denny’s media reach, estimates were established up front so as to get
approval of the plan. Measurement reporting such as overnight ratings and
online metrics were sent to senior executives the day after the Super Bowl
spot ran.
COLLECT DATA, INTERPRET AND ANALYZE RESULTS
Be descriptive: what is happening? Be diagnostic: why is it happening? Ask:
how can we improve performance?
When the Denny’s campaign launched, we saw a huge number of news
stories about the campaign. We measured the reach and value of the PR in
addition to the media campaign itself. When the campaign ended, the team
analyzed the results and saw an opportunity to extend it beyond the six-week
run of the promotion by building a database for future campaigns to extend
and remarket to customers.
MARKETING AND PROCESS OPTIMIZATION
Create and reestablish baseline and benchmark metrics. Refine the marketing
strategy and redefine learning priorities. After year one, we had the data and
experience of the previous year’s campaign and were then able to set more
specific target and ROI goals for year two.
Figure 12.2
 illustrates the process.
FIGURE 12.2USING ONLINE DATA TO TRACK
CAMPAIGN PERFORMANCE
Probably one of the most efficient ways to collect campaign data is through
online measurement. I’ve found that online data is useful for more than
measuring online campaigns or evaluating direct response campaigns. While
not a replacement for brand or sales tracking, online metrics can indicate how
the entire media communications effort is performing.
If the communications goal is to drive active consideration, then measuring
who is visiting the branded website and what they do once they get there
yields valuable insight. For example, are they requesting more information or
downloading content? If the goal is to raise awareness for a product or
service, as is the case in much pharmaceutical consumer-based advertising, itcan be measured by how often the drug or generic medical condition is
searched for. If the goal is to drive advocacy, 
measuring blogs, tweets,
conversations, postings and product reviews is a useful method to gauge
impact.
While these by no means offer boardroom-proof evidence of marketing
ROI, they can provide planners real-time and dynamic indicators of consumer
response to a campaign.
ONLINE MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Google Analytics and the brand website’s webmaster can provide sound data
on search inquiries and traffic and behavior. Many online tools mea sure and
quantify the level of blogs, posts, social media conversations and Tweets.
Most of them are free. Here is a selection of some that I’ve found useful.
Google Insights:
 With Google Insights for search, you can compare search
volume patterns across specific regions, categories, time frames and
properties. It provides the most commonly searched keywords around a term
as well as keywords rising in search popularity.
HowSociable:
 HowSociable measures brand visibility across the social
web. It tracks a brand across thirty-two social media metrics and provides a
visibility that can be used to compare one brand to another.
Social Mention:
 Social Mention is a social media search platform that
aggregates user-generated content from across the internet into a single
stream of information. It allows you to easily track what people are saying
about you, your company, a new product or any topic across the web’s social
media landscape in real time.
Twitalyzer:
 Twitalyzer is a cool site that evaluates the activity of any brand
in Twitter and reports on relative strength, signal-to-noise ratio, favor,
passion, clout and other useful measures of success in social media.
Twitrratr:
 With Twitrratr you can distinguish negative from positive
tweets surrounding a brand, product, person or topic. Twitter search results
are cross-referenced against positive and negative keyword lists and the
results are displayed accordingly.
Wordle:
 Wordle is a program for generating “word clouds” from text thatyou provide. The clouds give greater prominence to words that appear more
frequently in the source text. You can tweak your clouds with different fonts,
layouts and color schemes.
AWARENESS, WHAT SORT OF
AWARENESS?
Speaking at the Measure Up conference I attended in March 2010, Kevin
Clancy, chief executive officer of Copernicus Marketing Consultancy, said
there are twenty-five different awareness metrics that range from unaided
advertising to specific message registration.
6
 The skill is determining which
awareness level to focus on, which are related to the category or the
communication goal.
One test is to ask the consumer to name the first brand that comes to mind
when mentioning a particular category (top-of-mind awareness). It is
generally a good barometer for brand preference and market share. Another
test is that of unaided advertising awareness. Clancy claims that general
awareness is about twice the brand’s share of voice, and it is partially related
to the volume of advertising but has more to do with how established the
brand is. Then there is also specific advertising message awareness, which
involves asking, “Have you seen or heard any advertising for XXX in the
past thirty days that uses the slogan ‘YYY’?” This measurement is highly
sensitive to changes in advertising.
MARKET-MIX MODELING
Essentially, market-mix, or econometric, modeling isolates individual
marketing or media variables to determine their effect on sales. Companies
such as Procter & Gamble, Johnson & Johnson and Reckitt Benckiser are
strong advocates of this work, and many advertisers in financial services,
telecoms and retail regularly undertake analytics. It’s used to help direct
media mixes and used to measure ROI. For example, with television it can
help brands identify the best times of day, channels, days of the week, spot
lengths and effectiveness of different creative.From a planning perspective, market-mix modeling is the gold standard as
it evaluates the effectiveness and efficiency of media options based on a true
return on investment. However, it is costly to implement and so for many
clients is not an option.
ALL THE SCIENCE CANNOT REPLACE HUMANS
Econometric modeling only improves what you have done in the past. It
relies on data collected over numerous past campaigns. So if you’ve only
ever advertised on television, it won’t provide data on other media. For
companies like Reckitt Benckiser, which know that television is the principal
driver of repeat sales, that’s not an issue. However, if there is a need for
change in a brand or marketing strategy, or a new product or category is
being launched, then it is less helpful.
Econometric modeling can measure only short-term impacts on sales. This
form of tracking works efficiently for fast-moving consumer goods or
retailers. It’s more difficult to use for big-ticket items or highly involved
purchases such as automobiles, for business products or in major brand
efforts to change perceptions.
As marketers require more certainty and measurability in their strategies,
modeling techniques are improving.
DEVELOP AND OPTIMIZE THE TACTICS
Planners have numerous metrics to deploy to develop and fine-tune the media
plan. And just as in the basketball analogy, tracking individual player
statistics can help them improve their game.
These metrics are important for improving the quality of selection and
optimizing the efficiency of the media budget. They provide comparisons for
planning trade-offs and making buying decisions.
MEDIA PLANNING CURRENCIESMedia planning currencies include impressions, gross rating points, reach and
frequency, page views and unique views, to name a few. They are used to
report the size of the audience exposed via media panels.
Each medium is measured differently. Print readership is measured
through independently verified surveys; television and radio audiences are
determined by people meters or diaries; out-of-home audiences are tracked
through traffic surveys. Complicating it all are the different definitions of
what constitutes an impression in each media category.
Media currencies are used to quantify and support the media planning of
campaigns and negotiate trading terms with media based on the size of the
audience. They track individual media vehicles to help make decisions on
station, title or site selection and various positions to secure.
REACH AND FREQUENCY
Reach quantifies the coverage of the target audience a medium delivers.
Usually, it only measures a single medium’s reach, but agencies have
developed models to estimate the combined coverage of multiple media
types.
Frequency determines the intensity of the advertising. The higher the
frequency, the more persuasive and more visible the campaign is.
SHARE OF VOICE
In marketing there is a common assumption that high share of voice is an
important measure of media competitiveness. According to Ipsos ASI, which
tracks marketing performance via its Brand*Graph database, share of voice
has a positive correlation with advertising recall and impact.
7
 However, this
correlation is less influential in driving recall than other factors such as
creative quality, high reach, scheduling of advertising and avoiding wear-out
of creative.
The impact of advertising creative is often more important than share of
voice, so the communications planner needs to consider this in the planning
process. Investing in strong copy is an important consideration. The planner
needs to ask how strong the creative is and, in particular, how it meets thebrand objectives.
Reach, frequency and share of voice are measures that quantify the scale of
media presence but lack an evaluative assessment of receptivity or attention
to the communications. They are estimates of potential exposures or
impressions but not the “depth” of impressions. Planning in media is a bit
like buying fish at a fish market. You weigh the fish but also check its
quality, hence the growing development of engagement metrics.
ENGAGEMENT METRICS
Planners interested in increasing communications influence and involvement
are studying engagement metrics. However, 
engagement
 isn’t universally
defined; there is no standard currency despite many attempts to measure it.
The Advertising Research Foundation employed a task force that found
over fifty different research studies and methodologies that measured media
engagement.
8
 Studies measure time spent viewing particular media,
brainwave activity in response to stimuli and impact of media environments
on advertising recall and purchase intent. Often these are sponsored by
individual media owners, pushing the merits of their medium. Of course, the
sponsors of such studies have an agenda, but I try to keep an open mind. If a
media company has deeper insights into their particular consumer, then a
study they sponsor is worth considering.
Nielsen IAG aims to quantify how closely viewers are paying attention to
television shows and commercials. It surveys a panel of television viewers
each night on how well they recall the details of programs, sponsorships,
branded integrations, product placements and ads they’ve seen in the past
twenty-four hours. Nielsen IAG co-chief executive officer Alan Gould claims
the service helps advertisers “make smarter decisions” about which 
programs
and ads are performing best. “We’ll see advertisers buying TV spots
increasingly on the basis of how engaged the audience is, not just how big it
is,” he says.
9
METRICS IN YOUR FUTURELittle advancement in media can take place without commonly agreed upon
measurement standards. The business models of tomorrow are being decided
in meetings today.
The world of television product placement and integration did not take off
en masse until Nielsen acquired IAG and began to provide marketers with
metrics to help evaluate what is seen and discussed on-screen. The global
recession brought renewed vigor for addressable advertising advancements,
which aim to deliver customized targeted television ads to individual
households on the basis of profile data, for example, the proverbial cat food
ads to cat owners. Such developments are set to reinvent the media landscape
for marketers who want greater precision in directing ad dollars at their
target.
Cable and satellite companies are moving closer to delivering the scale
necessary for marketers to give them a second look. The two biggest satellite
providers in the market, DirecTV and Dish, are now working together to
provide interactive television channels that allow the consumer to pull down
more information on products advertised through requests for information.
Google, Facebook and Twitter want users to disclose their location so
Madison Avenue can at the very least serve up ads to those in a specific
geographic market. Once mobile video advertising becomes more
measurable, targeting by simple geography will seem old hat.
Meanwhile, Google continues its march into the television advertising
business with its support of new tech companies such as Invidi, which slices
and dices audiences to deliver more precise ad messages.
What’s clear is that measurement for the communications planner takes on
greater proportions as technology facilitates gathering more and better access
to data and as marketers evince increased interest in greater visibility 
of ROI.
The planner needs to keep in mind that measurement isn’t about reporting
and justification. It is about making better decisions and adjustments that
steer the strategy and tactics.
QUESTIONS ON INCORPORATING METRICS
AND MEASUREMENT 1. Are the KPIs aligned to the communication goals?
2. What are the one or two most important metrics for this campaign?
3. Do we have established benchmarks to set meaningful goals?
4. How can the data help me steer or change the plan?FURTHER READING
Kellogg on Advertising and Media
Bobby Calder and Philip Kotler 
Wiley, 2008
How Disruption Brought Order: The Story of a Winning Strategy in the
World of Advertising
Jean-Marie Dru 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007
From Prime Time to My Time—Audience Measurement in the Digital Age
Andrew Green 
WARC, 2010
Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die
Chip Heath and Dan Heath 
Random House, 2007
The Global Brand
Nigel Hollis 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2008
How Advertising Works: The Role of Research
John Philip Jones 
Sage, 1998
Virtual Worlds: Rewiring Your Emotional Future
Jack Myers Myers Publishing, 2007
Microtrends: The Small Forces behind Tomorrow’s Big Changes
Mark Penn and E. Kinney Zalesne 
Twelve, 2009
The Online Advertising Playbook: Proven Strategies and Tested Tactics from
the Advertising Research Foundation
Joe Plummer, Steve Rappaport, Taddy Hall and Robert Barocci 
Wiley, 2007
Lovemarks
Kevin Roberts 
Powerhouse Books, 2004
Space Race: An Inside View of the Future of Communications Planning
Jim Taylor 
Wiley, 2005
Profitable Marketing Communications: A Guide to Marketing Return on
Investment
Antony Young and Lucy Aitken 
Kogan Page, 2007NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1.
 ZenithOptimedia Worldwide Advertising Spending Forecasts, April 2010.
CHAPTER 1: GOOGLE AND FACEBOOK
1.
ComScore and Kelsey Group, “Online consumer-generated reviews have significant impact on
offline purchase behavior,” News release, November 29, 2007,
www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/
.
2.
Kenneth Hein, “Teen Talk Is, Like, Totally Branded,” 
Brandweek
, August 6, 2007,
http://www.brandweek.com/bw/esearch/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003621840
.
3.
John Battelle, 
The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and
Transformed Our Culture
 (New York: Penguin, Portfolio, 2005), 4.
4.
David A. Vise and Mark Malseed, 
The Google Story
 (New York: Bantam Dell, 2005), 118.
5.
Paul Bond Sr., interview by Maria Bartiromo, “Inside the Mind of Google,” 
Original
, CNBC,
December 3, 2009.
6.
Ken Auletta, 
Googled: The End of the World as We Know It
 (Boston: Penguin, 2009).
7.
“comScore Reports Global Search Market Growth of 46 Percent in 2009,” ComScore,
http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2010/1/Global_Search_Market_Grows_46_Percent_in_2009
8.
Eric Schmidt, CEO Google Inc. (speaking at Atmosphere, Google’s conference for chief
information officers, Mountain View, CA, April 12, 2010).
9.
Heather Dougherty, Director, Research at Hitwise, “Facebook Reaches Top Ranking in US,”
Hitwise.com, March 15, 2010.
10.
Garry Pierre-Pierre, “Social networks keep Haitian people informed and comforted,” 
Haitian
Times
, January 19, 2010.
11.
Kirkpatrick, 
The Facebook Effect: The Inside Story of the Company That Is Connecting the World
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2010), 210.
12.
Brian Morrissey, “Success Factors for Brands on Facebook,” Adweek.com, October 12, 2009.
13.
Facebook.com/cocacola, July 17, 2010.
14.
Facebook.com/starbucks, July 17, 2010.
CHAPTER 2: THE NEW MEDIA PLAYBOOK
1.
“Nike Inc.” Encyclopedia Britannica, EB.com.
2.
Louise Story, “The New Advertising Outlet: Your Life,” 
New York Times
, October 14, 2007.
3.
“Video: NIKE’s classic ‘Ronaldinho: Touch of Gold’—(over 28 million views on YouTube),”
www.BallHype.com
, April 18, 2009,http://ballhype.com/video/video_nike_classic_ronaldinho_touch_of_gold_over_28/
.
4.
Hidalgo, “Nike Marketing: Letting the Consumer Decide,” (Association of National Advertisers’
Masters of Marketing conference, Orlando, FL, October 13, 2008).
5.
Chris Anderson, 
The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of More
 (New York:
Hyperion, 2006).
6.
Olek, “The World Cup Brand Winner: Adidas or Nike?” HBR.org, July 9, 2010.
7.
Louise Story, “The New Advertising Outlet: Your Life,” 
New York Times
, October 14, 2007.
8.
“BIGresearch Releases 11th Simultaneous Media Survey: More People Multitasking Media Than
Ever; Videos on Cell Phones Fastest Growing New Media, Web Radio Grows, TV’s Influence to
Purchase Declines,” Internet Wire, January 22, 2008.
9.
Nielsen TV Audience Measurement, Nielsen Company, qtd. in “TV Ratings: 1986-1987,”
ClassicTVHits.com, 
http://www.classictvhits.com/tvratings/1985.htm
.
10.
Three Screen Report, Q1 2010, Nielsen Company.
11.
David C. Court, Jonathon W. Gordon, and Jesko Perrey, “Boosting returns on marketing
investment,” 
McKinsey Quarterly
 no. 2, 2005.
12.
“Synovate In:fact global study on media and advertising,” conducted in September 2009,
surveying 8,600 respondents across 11 markets—Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Hong Kong,
India, the Netherlands, Spain, Taiwan, the UK and the US, 
www.BallHype.com
.
13.
Christopher Heine, “WPP to Leverage Kantar Data for Media Planning,” ClickZ, December 15,
2009.
14.
Ragnhild Kjetland, “Playboy Surfers Targeted for VW Polos in Web Video Ads,” 
Bloomberg
,
February 5, 2010.
15.
Ibid.
16.
Ibid.
17.
Survey by Cision and Don Bates of the George Washington University Graduate School of
Political Management. Sent to 9,100 editors/journalists in the fall of 2009, published January 20,
2010.
18.
Shop: How Shoppers Decide
, Netpop Research, February 2008.
19.
Report prepared by Carleen Hawn, Susanna Hamner and Erick Schonfeld, 
How to Succeed in
2007
, Business 2.0 Magazine, February 28, 2007.
20.
“Fifth ANA/Forrester Survey Measures Marketers’ Attitudes toward TV/Video Advertising,”
Association of National Advertisers and Forrester Research, February 8, 2010.
21.
Donaton, 
Madison and Vine
 (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005).
22.
Lev Grossman, “Time’s Person of the Year: You,” Time, December 13, 2006.
23.
Reported by Steve McClellan, “SMG, Comcast: Addressable System Cuts Ad Skipping,”
Adweek
, February 19, 2010.
CHAPTER 3: A SHIFT FROM MEDIA PLANNING TO
COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
1.
Steven J. Heyer, Keynote remarks as COO, Coca-Cola Co. (Advertising Age’s Madison + Vine
conference, Beverly Hills Hotel, Beverly Hills, CA, February 5, 2003).
2.
Taylor, 
Space Race
 (Chichester, West Sussex, England: Wiley, 2005), 4.
3.
Matthew Creamer, “Bring Out the Account Planners,” 
Advertising Age
, April 17, 2006.
4.
Michael E. Porter, “What Is Strategy?” 
HBROnPoint
, February 2000.
5.
“Marketers Strive to Become Visionaries, yet ANA/Prophet Study Indicates Most Perform
at Tactical Levels,” 
State of Marketing Survey: The Shift
, ANA/Prophet, November 10,
2009, 
http://www.ana.net/news/content/1969
.CHAPTER 4: FOCUSING ON OUTCOMES, NOT OUTPUTS
1.
Jennifer Rooney, “CMO’s Stuck Around Even Longer in ’08,” 
Advertising Age
, January 30, 2009.
2.
“Marketing Execs Struggle to Show ROI,” The Conference Board,
http://www.marketingcharts.com/interactive/marketing-execs-struggle-to-show-roi-7634/
.
3.
Antony Young and Lucy Aitken, 
Profitable Marketing Communications
 (London: Kogan Page,
2007).
4.
Marchese, “Why Advertise at All?” 
Mediapost
, June 30, 2009.
5.
“The End of Marketing as We Know It,” Zyman Group, LLC,
http://www.zyman.com/ourThinking_institute.asp
.
6.
John Philip Jones, How 
Advertising Works
 (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998).
7.
Young and Aitken, 72-74.
8.
Quinn, “Customer Centric Marketing,” (ANA Masters of Marketing Annual Conference,
Phoenix, Arizona, November 6, 2009).
CHAPTER 5: INSIGHT OVER ANALYSIS
1.
First attributed to Cliff Stoll and Gary Schubert, in Mark R. Keeler, 
Nothing to Hide: Privacy in
the 21st Century
 (Lincoln, NE: iUniverse Inc., 2006), 112.
2.
Jon Steel, 
Truth, Lies and Advertising: The Art of Account Planning
 (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 1998), 36.
3.
Peter Francese, “America 2010: What the 2010 Census Means for Marketers and Advertiser,”
Advertising Age
, October 11, 2009.
4.
Bradley Johnson, “New U.S. Census to Reveal Major Shift: No More Joe Consumer” 
Advertising
Age
, October 12, 2009.
5.
Mark Penn and E. Kinney Zalesne, 
Microtrends: The Small Forces behind Tomorrow’s Big
Changes
 (New York: Twelve, 2009).
6.
Nintendo, “Wii Would Like to Play.” Gold winner, New Product, Effie Awards 2008,
http://www.effie.org/winners/showcase/2008/2331
.
7.
“A Conversation with Mark Penn,” 
www.microtrending.com/conversation.php
.
8.
“Steve Jobs: There’s Sanity Returning,” 
BusinessWeek
, May 25, 1998.
9.
Michael Harvey, “Will Client Insight Functions Survive the Recession?” 
Market Leader
, October
2009, 54-55.
10.
Tom Neveril, CMO Strategy, “Behavior Defines Consumers,” 
Advertising Age
, July 16, 2007.
11.
Chuck Salter, “Can Hulu Save Traditional TV?” 
Fast Company
, November 2009.
12.
Advokator, “What We Do: Discovery,” 
http://www.quocom.biz/adv-wwd.htm
.
13.
Jack Neff, “ARF: Consumer Opinions Online Still Seen as Curse, Not Gift,” 
Advertising Age
,
January 11, 2010.
14.
MTV 2010/2011 Upfront presentation (Hammerstein Ballroom, New York City, February 2,
2010).
15.
Catalina Marketing’s Pointer Media Network and the CMO Council, 
Discovering the Pivotal
Point Consumer
, December 2008.
CHAPTER 6: 1 + 1 = 3
1.
TREMOR website, “Why does consumer advocacy drive your business?”
http://www.tremor.com/driving-business-with-consumer-advocacy/why-does-consumer-
advocacy-drive-your-business/
.
2.
Godin, Meatball Sundae: 
Is Your Marketing Out of Sync?
 (New York: Penguin, Portfolio, 2008),79.
3.
Frank Rose, “Let the Seller Beware,” 
Wall Street Journal
, December 20, 2006.
4.
Godin, 119.
5.
Keller Fay Group, TalkTrack survey, August 2007-September 2008.
6.
Keller, Measure Up Conference (Conrad Hilton, Chicago, March 12, 2010).
7.
Fay, Cakim, Carpenter, Hershberger, O’Driscoll, Rabasca, Selvas and Suckernek WOMMA
Influencer Handbook: The Who, What, When, Where, How and Why of Influencer Marketing
(Chicago: WOMMA, December 2008).
8.
Gladwell, 
The Tipping Point
 (Boston: Back Bay Books, 2002), 61.
9.
ICOM, a division of Epsilon Targeting, Influencer study 2007-2009, released March 2010.
10.
Rogers, 
Diffusion of Innovations
, (New York: Free Press, 2003) 5th ed.
11.
Rich, “Shiny New Things: What Digital Adopters Want, How to Reach Them, and Why Every
Marketer Should Pay Attention,” Advertising Age White Paper, March 15, 2010, 5.
12.
Ibid.
13.
Bough, “Social Analysis—Real-Time Insights for Your Brand,” Ad:Tech, New York, November
5, 2009.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Ibid.
16.
Tylee, “How Brands Are Making Conversations,” 
Campaign
, February 26, 2010.
17.
North America Technographics Media & Marketing online survey Q2, 2008. Forrester Research,
December 3, 2008.
18.
Zyman, 
The End of Advertising as We Know It
 (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2002), 9.
19.
Hein, “Incentive Marketing: Employees can help to make or break a new campaign, so why not
market to them first?” 
Brandweek
, February 16, 2009.
20.
Ryan, Method’s “Method for Green Growth,” Association of National Advertisers, Masters of
Marketing Conference, November 7, 2009.
21.
“The Dark Night,” 
http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=darkknight.htm
.
22.
Maymann, “The Dark Knight Batman movie and attention planning for viral campaigns,” Warc
Exclusive, October 2008.
23.
Foster Farms’ “Say No to Plumping,” New York American Marketing Association, Gold, North
America Effies 2010, Goodby, Silverstein, & Partners,
http://www.effie.org/winners/showcase/2010/4344
.
24.
Ibid.; Juliana Barbassa, “Chicken producers debate whether poultry injected with salt, water
should qualify as ‘natural,’” 
Washington Examiner
, July 30, 2010,
http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/breaking/chicken-producers-debate-natural-label-
99609209.html#ixzz0vyjFuM00
.
25.
Case provided to the author by Publicis Worldwide.
26.
Pepsi Refresh Project, 
http://www.refresheverything.com
.
27.
James, “American Idols: YouTube and other media trends from some of the 2008 US Effie
winners,” WARC online, September 2008.
28.
Ibid.
29.
JetBlue Airways “Amplification” 2007 Effie Award Winner,
http://www.effie.org/winners/showcase/2007/1617
, 2007.
30.
Keller, “Super Bowl Sunday—What Drives Word of Mouth Success for Advertisers?”
Media bizbloggers.com, February 3, 2010, 
http://www.jackmyers.com/commentary/media-
businessbloggers/83378382.html
.CHAPTER 7: CONDUCTING THE ORCHESTRA
1.
Association of National Advertisers, “Integrated Marketing Study” (New York: 2008).
2.
Advertising Works 17, IPA Effectiveness Awards (London: WARC, March 2009).
3.
“Pepsi—Wake Up People,” Effie Worldwide, New York, Beverages—Non-Alcohol, Effie
Awards 2008, 
http://www.effie.org/winners/showcase/2008/2643
.
4.
Mediacom UK, Partners in Indulgence, Mars UK,
http://www.creamglobal.com/search/17798/16963/partners-in-indulgence/
.
5.
Geoffrey Precourt, “21st Century Integration: From Theory to Practice” (WARC, August 2009).
6.
Golding, “Losing It All,” 
Campaign
, Integration Essays, December 3, 2009.
7.
Ritson, “The industry’s ideal handyman is proving to be an elusive entity,” 
Marketing
,
November 21, 2002.
CHAPTER 8: UNLOCKING MOMENTS OF RECEPTIVITY
1.
Abbey Klaassen, “Stop with the Engagement Already, It’s about Receptivity,” 
Advertising Age
,
November 29, 2006.
2.
Graciela Eleta, “The Transformation of America: Playing to Win in a Multicultural Nation”
(Focus Group comments included in the presentation, 4A Transformation conference, San
Francisco, March 2, 2010).
3.
Citroen C5, OMD UK, Case Study, 
http://www.ipa.co.uk/Content/TouchPoints-Site-Citroen-C5-
OMD-UK-Case-Study
.
4.
IAB UK survey conducted by Lightspeed Research’s UK online panel between 28 November and
8 December 2008.
5.
US Army Xbox Halo 3 (New York American Marketing Association, Brand Experience, Effie
Awards 2009).
6.
Elaine Wong, “Ikea Builds Own Oval Office for Obama,” 
Brandweek
, January 12, 2009.
7.
Emily Nussbaum, “What Tina Fey Would Do for a SoyJoy,” 
New York Magazine
, October 5,
2008.
8.
Ausiello, “ABC plots groundbreaking ‘Housewives’ spin-off,” EW.com, September 7, 2009.
9.
“Orange Gold Spots—Don’t Let a Mobile Phone Ruin Your Movie,” Account Planning Group
(UK), Creative Strategy Awards, 2009.
10.
Ryan Gilbey, “Orange’s cinematic ads that are actually worth watching,” 
The Guardian
, April 6,
2009, 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2009/apr/06/orange-film-board-adverts
.
11.
B. Sheehan and A. Young, “Convergence, Contradiction and Collaboration,” in 
Handbook of
Research on Digital Media and Advertising: User Generated Content Consumption
, ed.
Matthew S. Eastin, Terry Daugherty and Neal M. Burns (Austin, TX: IGI Global, 2010),
275-299.
CHAPTER 9: TOUCH POINT SELECTION
1.
Bain/IAB 2009 Marketer survey; Bain Media 3.0 Study, 2009, included in a presentation to IAB
members, “Building Brands Online: An Interactive Advertising Action Plan,” November 12,
2009.
2.
Kamp, Boon and Bruin, “Sara Lee International Case Study,” Cross Media Effectiveness Research
—ESOMAR Best Research Paper Award, June 2005.
3.
Personal conversation with the author.
4.
New York American Marketing Association, Gold, Delivery Products and Services, The
Martin Agency, Effie Awards 2008.CHAPTER 10: DIGITIZING THE BRAND MEDIA STRATEGY
1.
ZenithOptimedia, Worldwide Advertising Spending Forecasts, July 2010.
2.
Laura Martin, “Advertising Wars—Who Wins?” 
Needham Insights
, Needham & Company, April
6, 2010.
3.
Twitter.com as of July 5, 2010.
4.
Hayzlett conversation with author, May 17, 2010.
5.
Skcin—computertan.com, Account Planning Group (UK) Creative Strategy Awards, 2009.
6.
Ibid.
7.
Brunelli, “The AdWeek Media Plan of the Year 2009,” 
Adweek
, June 14, 2009.
8.
Ibid.
9.
Cream
, 
http://peoplesaward.creamglobal.com/casestudy.cfm?i=67
.
10.
Nielsen, “Three Screen Report,” Fourth quarter, 2009.
11.
iProspect Offline Channel Influence on Online Search Behavior Study, August 2007.
12.
Presentation by Angela O’Connell, head of cross-media research at Google Europe, and Lucas
Hulsebos, media research director at MetrixLab, Re:think 2009, The 55th annual convention of
the Advertising Research Foundation (New York, March 30-April 1, 2009).
13.
Report titled “SEO vs. PPC—The Final Round” by Engine Ready of a study undertaken between
July 1, 2008, through June 30, 2009.
14.
Brian Quinton, “Should You Buy Your Brand?” 
Direct
, Nov. 30, 2006,
http://multichannelmerchant.com/ecommerce/buy_your-brand_11302006/index.html
.
15.
T. L. Stanley, “Edelman: PR Agency of the Year ’09,” 
Adweek
, Feb. 22, 2010.
16.
Bob Greenberg, “A Platform for Life,” Adweek, September 14, 2009.
17.
The Visa Business Network, 
http://www.visabusinessnetwork.com/networking/feature_me#
.
18.
Ellie Parpis, “Marketer of the Year ’09: David Plouffe,” 
Brandweek
, September 14, 2009.
19.
Ibid.
20.
Young, “Hillary vs. Barack: Who Had the Smartest Media Strategy?” 
Advertising Age
, June 4,
2008.
21.
Jennifer Fermino, “‘Obama Girl’ now falling out of love,” 
New York Post
, January 27, 2010.
22.
Young.
23.
Peter Snyder, “Practically Radical” (BIF-5 Collaborative Innovation Summit, Providence,
RI, October 7-8, 2009).
CHAPTER 11: EXECUTION IS THE X-FACTOR
1.
Nicolette Robinson, Haruna McWilliams, Felix Bullinger and Clay Schouest, “Dove’s Big Ideal:
From Real Curves to Growth Curves” (IPA Effectiveness Awards, Institute of Practitioners in
Advertising, London, 2008).
2.
Creative Education Foundation, 
http://www.creativeeducationfoundation.org/?
page_id=289#brainstorming
.
3.
Wayne Friedman, “NBCU Airs Integrated Turbo Tax Campaign,” 
Media Daily News
, January 19,
2010.
4.
Susan Twombly, “Engine Room series from HP & MTV revs up the world’s most creative
minds,” 
http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/newsroom/feature_stories/2008/08engineroom.html
.
5.
Richard Tedesco, “MTV, HP Tool ‘Engine Room’ for TV and
Web,”Promomagazine.com,September 12, 2008,
http://promomagazine.com/entertainmentmarketing/news/mtv_hp_engine_room_0912/index.html
.
6.
Global research study conducted by ZenithOptimedia/MTV7.
Ibid.
8.
“Mindshare and Unilever triumph at Valencia Festival of Media Awards,” April 21, 2009,
http://www.mindshareworld.com/who-we-are/news/@valencia-2009
.
9.
Mediacom UK, “Axe Dark Temptation Localisation Strategy,”
www.creamglobal.com/search/17798/15546/axe-dark-temptation-localisation-strategy/
.
10.
Marisol Bello, “A ‘Simpsons’ frenzy in Springfield, Vt.,” 
USA Today
, July 10, 2007.
CHAPTER 12: MEASUREMENT AND METRICS
1.
Light, “Transforming the Marketing Enterprise” (4A Transformation Conference, San Francisco,
March 3, 2010).
2.
Harrison, “Effective marketing accountability requires a mix of art and science,” 
Admap
, June
2009.
3.
Association of National Advertisers, Marketing Accountability Study, April 2008.
4.
Ibid.
5.
“Honomichl Top 50,” 
Marketing News
, June 30, 2010.
6.
Kevin Clancy, Presentation (Measure Up Conference, Conrad Hilton, Chicago, IL, March 12,
2010).
7.
John Hallward, “‘Make Measurable What Is Not So’: Consumer Mix Modeling for the Evolving
Media World,” 
Journal of Advertising Research
 48, no. 3 (September 2008): 339-351.
8.
Plummer, Cook, Diforio, Sokolyanskaya and Ovchinnikova, “Measures of Engagement”
Advertising Research Foundation
,White Paper, June 2006.
9.
“Nielsen brings ad engagement research service to UK,” February 24, 2010, Research,
http://www.research-live.com/news/nielsen-brings-ad-engagement-research-service-to-
uk/4002146.article
.INDEX
7-Eleven, 
207
20th Century Fox Studios, 
204
, 
206
24
 (television series), 
24–5
30 Rock
 (television series), 
139
Activision, 
100
, 
113
Adidas, 
19
AdSense, 
11
Advertising Age
, 
18
, 
37
, 
94
, 
185–6
advocacy stage of brand influence, 
45–6
, 
59–60
, 
88
, 
184–5
AdWords, Google, 
1
, 
8–9
, 
170
Agency Republic, 
122
Allaire, Jeremy, 
27
Altimeter Group, 
15
Amazon, 
9
, 
91
, 
165
, 
172
, 
175
Ambien CR, 
132–4
American Express, 
138
American Idol
 (television program), 
20
American Iron and Steel Institute, 
62
American Legacy Foundation, 
172
Anderson, Chris, 
19
Android operating system, 
11
Apple, 
22
, 
74
, 
203–4
iMac, 
53
iPad, 
24
, 
128–9
, 
138
, 
153
iPod, 
18
, 
30
iPhone, 
52
, 
177
, 
182
iTunes, 
24
, 
30
Arbitron, 
66
Arcature, 
209
Armstrong, Lance, 
85
Armstrong, Tim, 
201
Army, U.S., 
135
Audi, 
53
, 
57
, 
80
Auletta, Ken, 
10
Automobile Association, UK, 
77
awareness:
levels of, 
219
stage of brand influence, 
45–6
, 
56–9
, 
156–8
, 
162–4strategies for generating, 
175–7
 
185
, 
213
Axe, 
3
, 
113–4
, 
205
Baldwin, Alec, 
139
Ball, Alan, 
172
Barkley, Charles, 
210
Battelle, John, 
9
Baudis, Christian, 
26
BBDO, 
196
BBH, 
37
Benson, Tracy, 
119
Best Buy, 
15
, 
91
, 
119
, 
172
big television idea, 
112–3
BIGresearch, 
20
Blair, Tony, 
72
, 
96
Blendtec, 
177
blogs and blogging, 
21–4
, 
30–1
, 
77
, 
90–1
, 
97–104
, 
139
, 
176
, 
184
, 
186–7
, 
203–7
, 
216
, 
218
BMW, 
53
, 
57
, 
80
Boase Massimi Pollitt, 
68
Boots, Paul Bond, 
9
Bough, Bonin, 
97
Boxer, Barbara, 
101
Boyle, Gerry, 
41–2
brainstorming, 
100
, 
195–9
brand destination sites, 
173
, 
181
brand influence, stages of:
advocacy, 
45–6
, 
59–60
, 
88
, 
184–5
awareness, 
45–6
, 
56–9
, 
156–8
, 
162–4
consumption, 
45–6
, 
59
, 
182–3
relationship building, 
45–6
, 
59
, 
183–4
Brand Media Strategy Insight Development Process, 
73–4
Brand Media Strategy Wheel, 
47–8
brand placement, 
24
, 
137–40
, 
163
, 
222–3
Brightcove, 
27
British Telecom, 
122
.
See also
 O2
Buitoni, 
59
, 
146
, 
156
, 
158–9
Burger King, 
29
, 
32
, 
81
, 
138
, 
172
, 
207
Burnett, Mark, 
33
, 
202
Burson-Marsteller, 
72
business goals, 
53–4
, 
63–4
, 
190
Butler, Stern, Shine & Partners, 
80
buzz, 
19
, 
59
, 
63
, 
99–100
, 
102
, 
104
, 
128
, 
147
, 
170
, 
175
, 
216
.
See also
 word of mouth marketing
Cadbury, 
116
, 
129
, 
172
, 
177
Caffeine Partnership, 
68Caldecutt, Matthew, 
97
Cannondale, 
23
Carat, 
36
, 
131
Carlson Marketing, 
98
Casino Royale
 (film), 
138
CBS, 
24
, 
33
, 
134
, 
202
central communicating idea (CCI), 
113–6
, 
125
, 
154–8
, 
164
, 
192–5
, 
199–200
, 
205
Central Office of Information (COI), UK, 
118
channel planning, 
37
, 
40
Cherry, Marc, 
139
Chevrolet, 
175
CHI & Partners, 
119
Chiat, Jay, 
68
Chiat Day, 
68
Chow.com
, 
96
Chuck
 (television series), 
32
Citizen Watches, 
135
Clancy, Kevin, 
219
Clift, Simon, 
17
Clinton, Bill, 
72
Clinton, Hillary, 
72
, 
186–7
Clooney, George, 
138
clutter, 
21
, 
56
, 
90
, 
129
, 
159–61
, 
195
CMG Partners, 
50–1
CNET Networks, 
24
Coca-Cola, 
xi
, 
15
, 
35
, 
43
, 
52
, 
58
, 
64
, 
83
, 
115
Colbert, Stephen, 
33
Collins, Phil, 
129
Comcast Spotlight, 
34
Come Chantrel, 
78
Comedy Central, 
33
communication goals, 
49–64
, 
75
, 
107
, 
145–7
, 
156
, 
173
, 
198
, 
212–5
, 
219
, 
224
communications planning functions, 
37
Community
 (television series), 
202
Compete, 
23
consumer insight:
account planning and, 
67–71
central communications idea and, 
114
, 
192
expertise in, 
40
integrated activation brief and, 
198
media strategy and, 
29–34
questions to uncover 
74–5
role of, 
65–6
techniques for, 
73–85
touch point selection and, 
151
, 
154
, 
156
Consumer Pathway, 
44–7
, 
55–7
, 
60–1
, 
64
, 
76
, 
82
, 
156
, 
166
, 
174
, 
181–2
, 
185
, 
188
, 
198
, 
212–3consumption stage of brand influence, 
45–6
, 
59
, 
182–3
context planning, 
37
Coors, 
59
Copernicus Marketing Consultancy, 
219
Coral, 
155
The Cosby Show
 (television series), 
20
Cowpe, Chris, 
68
Creamer, Matthew, 
37
Crispin Porter + Bogusky, 
32
cross-media studies, 
154–6
crowd sourcing, 
9
, 
197–8
Current TV, 
33
customer-relationship-management (eCRM), 
183–4
Daphne Communication Management, 
149–50
The Dark Knight
 (film), 
99
data planning, 
41
DeGeneres, Ellen, 
202
Delicious.com
, 
96
Denny’s, 
3
, 
54–5
, 
82
, 
104–5
, 
214–6
Desperate Housewives
 (television series), 
139
Diageo, 
78
Diffusion of Innovations
 (Rogers), 
94
Digg, 
23
digital integration, 
28
, 
167–88
.
See also
 integrated marketing
digital manifesto, 
168–70
digital proficiency, 
2
, 
39–40
Digitas, 
168
DiMarco, Stephen, 
23
Disney. 
See
 Walt Disney Co.
Domino’s Pizza, 
32
, 
97
Donaton, Scott, 
33
Doritos, 
33
, 
91
, 
175
, 
202
Dove, 
3
, 
70
, 
83–4
, 
100–1
, 
177
, 
194–5
.
See also
 Unilever
Doyle, Patrick, 
97
Drenik, Gary, 
20
Droga5, 
100
early adopters, 
93–5
, 
203
earned media, 
2
, 
30–1
, 
87–8
, 
101
, 
147–8
.
See also
 word of mouth marketing
Ecko, 
100
econometric (market-mix) modeling, 
151–3
, 
212
, 
219–20
The Economist
, 
157
, 
159
eCRM (customer-relationship-management), 
183–4Edmunds.com
, 
96
, 
131
effective frequency, 
56–8
Effie Awards, 
103
engagement metrics, 
222–3
engagement planning, 
37
, 
128–30
Ensemble, 
33
Epsilon, 
94
ESPN, 
18–9
, 
66
Estee Lauder, 
81
Evans, Russell, 
77
Evian, 
172
, 
177
Facebook:
ads, 
184
advocacy and, 
46
Best Buy and, 
172
Burger King and, 
172
Cadbury and, 
129
creation of, 
1–2
crowd sourcing and, 
197
customization and, 
34
Denny’s and, 
105
Foster Farms and, 
101
IKEA and, 
173
influence of, 
xii
, 
1–2
, 
7–8
, 
12–5
, 
20–1
, 
34
, 
43
, 
87
, 
90
, 
165
Millennial generation and, 
81
Nike and, 
17
, 
19
, 
183
Obama and, 
185–7
photo tagging, 
173
Starbucks and, 
173
, 
183
strategies for using, 
170
True Blood
 and, 
172
word of mouth marketing and, 
31
, 
59
Facebook Groups, 
96
Feakins, Rob, 
112
Fey, Tina, 
139
Financial Times
, 
81
Fisher, Carrie, 
140
Flatt, Molly, 
97–8
Foley, Erin, 
183
Folgers Coffee, 
84
Forrester Research, 
98
Foster, Lorrie, 
50
Foster Farms, 
101
Four Square, 
170
Francese, Peter, 
71
free media, 
87
, 
105
.See also
 earned media
Frito-Lay, 
91
.
See also
 Doritos
full-service vs. independent specialist agencies, 
117–9
Galaxy, 
116
Garnier, 
69
, 
105–6
Gates, Bill, 
72
General Motors (GM), 
175
Generation, Millennial, 
81
, 
203
Generation X, 
81
Generation Y, 
25
, 
81
, 
136
Ghost Hunters
 (television series), 
202
Gianinno, Susan, 
29
Gladwell, Malcolm, 
94
Gloeckler, Don, 
130
GMMB, 
186
goals:
branding the, 
64
business, 
53–4
, 
63–4
, 
190
communication, 
48–64
, 
75
, 
107
, 
145–7
, 
156
, 
173
, 
198
, 
212–5
, 
219
, 
224
prioritizing, 
63–4
Godin, Seth, 
90
, 
93
, 
97
Golding, Sarah, 
119
Goodby Silverstein & Partners, 
37
, 
101
Goodlad, Neil, 
119
Google:
consumer insight and, 
79
content customization of, 
34
Dark Knight
 searches, 
99
as early adopter, 
95
ecommerce and, 
120
Godin on, 
91
influence of, 
xii
, 
1–2
, 
7–1
2
, 
20
, 
31
, 
43
, 
46
, 
67
, 
165
, 
210
television advertising and, 
223
weighting ads model of, 
31
“word of mouse” and, 
90
Google AdWords, 
1
, 
8–9
, 
170
Google Alert, 
96
Google Analytics, 
218
Google Insights, 
218
Google TV, 
11
Google Voice, 
95
Google Wave, 
95
Googled: The End of the World as We Know It
 (Auletta), 
10
Gore, Al, 
33
Gould, Alan, 
222–3Grahn, Rudy, 
153
Greenberg, Bob, 
183
Guitar Hero, 
100
, 
113
Halo 
3
, 
135
Harrison, Frank, 
155
, 
211
Harry & David, 
35
Harvey, Michael, 
78
Hayzlett, Jeff, 
174
HBO, 
172
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 
64
, 
203–4
Heyer, Stephen, 
35
HHCL, 
77
Hicks, Jeff, 
32
Hidalgo, Joaquin, 
18
Hill Holliday, 
178
Hilton, 
90
HitWise, 
181
How Advertising Works
 (Jones), 
58
HowSociable, 
218
HSBC, 
70
Hsieh, Tony, 
59
, 
172
Hulu, 
2
, 
24–5
, 
34
, 
80
Human Race (Nike), 
18
, 
183
Hyundai, 
24–5
IKEA, 
135–6
, 
173
In Plain Sight
 (television series), 
173
influence-clutter analysis, 
159–61
.
See also
 clutter
Institute of Practitioners in Advertising Effectiveness Awards, 
110–1
InStyle
 magazine, 
9
integrated activation brief, 
198–9
integrated marketing, 
28
, 
37–40
, 
70
, 
109–25
, 
167–88
Internet Advertising Bureau, UK, 
135
IPA TouchPoints Initiative, 
134
, 
155
IPG, 
33
Ipsos ASI, 
221
Iron Man
 (film), 
138
J. Crew, 
32
J. Walter Thompson (JWT), 
37
, 
68
Jackie Cooper, 
122
James, LeBron, 
18
, 
210
JetBlue, 
103–4
, 
207
Jobs, 
74
Johnson & Johnson, 
36
, 
219Jones, John Philip, 
58
Jordan, Michael, 
18
JWT. 
See
 J. Walter Thompson
Kantar Media, 
89
, 
212
.
See also
 TNS Media Intelligence
Karen Clifford Skin Cancer Society, 
176
Keller Fay Group, 
91–2
, 
103–4
Keller, Ed, 
104
Kenny, David, 
168
key performance indicators (KPIs), 
48
, 
50
, 
60–1
, 
106–7
, 
190
, 
212–4
, 
224
keyword data, 
79–80
, 
218
Kilar, Jason, 
80
Kimmel, Jimmy, 
202
Kirkpatrick, David, 
13
Kodak, 
174
Kraft, 
33
Kust, Mike, 
98
L’Oréal, 
69
, 
80
.
See also
 Garnier
Lee, Spike, 
140
Leno, Jay, 
32
Lexus, 
57
Liberty Mutual, 
177–8
Light, Larry, 
209
linear media, 
20
liquid media, 
20
Liquid Thread, 
201
Lisko, John, 
141–2
Lucozade Sport, 
82
Lunesta, 
132
Lynx, 
205
.
See also
 Axe
MacDonnell, Roger, 
193
Mad Men
, 
xi
Marchese, Joe, 
51
Marchioli, Nelson, 
54
Margolis, Jim, 
186
market-mix (econometric) modeling, 
151–3
, 
212
, 
219–20
Marley & Me
 (film), 
204
Mars, 
116
Marston, Marty, 
136
Martin, Laura, 
166
mass media, 
1–2
, 
20
, 
25–6
, 
29
, 
34
, 
37–8
, 
45–6
, 
56
, 
66
, 
82
, 
87–88
, 
111
, 
146–7
, 
166
MasterCard, 
120McDonald’s, 
xi
, 
57
, 
209
McGregor, Ewan, 
140
The McKinsey Quarterly
, 
21
media neutrality, 
29–30
, 
40
, 
112
, 
146–7
, 
166
MediaDNA, 
155–6
Mercedes Benz, 
57
Method (cleaning product), 
98
MetrixLab, 
180
micromedia, 
30–1
Microsoft, 
9
, 
72
, 
135
microtrends, 
72–3
Millennial Generation, 
81
, 
203
Mindshare, 
33
, 
84
, 
201
, 
205
Minority Report
 (film), 
72–3
mobile commerce, 
170
, 
182
Modern Family
 (television series), 
138
Morning Joe
 (television program), 
202
Morris, Derek, 
41–2
, 
69
Mother (agency), 
140
MotiveQuest, 
80
Moxie Interactive, 
204
MSNBC, 
202
MTV, 
19–20
, 
28
, 
81
, 
137
, 
202–4
Mustafa, Isaiah, 
177
MySpace, 
13
, 
171
, 
173
, 
187
NBC Universal, 
2
, 
24
, 
32
, 
138–9
, 
173
, 
201–2
Needham & Co., 
166
Nelson, Brad, 
183
Nestlé, 
59
, 
158
.
See also
 Buitoni
Neveril, Tom, 
78–9
new media playbook, 
17–34
, 
113
, 
165–6
New York Times
, 
25
, 
30
NewCast, 
33
, 
201
News Corporation, 
2
, 
24–5
Nielsen IAG, 
13
, 
66
, 
222–3
Nike, 
xii
, 
17–9
, 
53
, 
78
, 
84–5
, 
183
Nintendo, 
72
, 
103
Nokia, 
xi
O2, 
102
, 
121–4
Obama, Barack, 
3
, 
13
, 
69–70
, 
98
, 
136
, 
185–8
Obama, Michelle, 
32
, 
93–4
, 
136
The Office
 (television series), 
24
Olander, Stefan, 
19
Old Spice, 
177online searches, 
9–12
, 
25
, 
31–2
, 
38
, 
45
, 
79–80
, 
95–6
, 
104
, 
128
, 
163
, 
175
, 
178–82
, 
217–8
.
See also
 Google; paid search; Yahoo!
OPEN planning approach, 
42
Openad.net
, 
197–8
Optimedia Inside, 
118
Optimedia US, 
24
, 
74–5
, 
79
, 
153
acquisition goals and, 
213
Ambien CR campaign, 
132–4
central communicating idea and, 
113
digitization program, 
167–8
gathering insight and, 
40
, 
68
, 
74–5
OPEN approach, 
42
Payless ShoeSource account, 
200
“Strategy, brilliantly executed” mantra, 
189
Young and, 
xi
, 
49
See also
 ZenithOptimedia Worldwide
Orange phone company, 
139–40
Osborn, Alex, 
196
out-of-home (OOH) advertising, 
24
, 
31
owned media, 
30
, 
147–8
, 
162
, 
178
, 
191
Owyang, Jeremiah, 
15
paid media, 
2
, 
87
, 
92
, 
95
, 
103
, 
106
, 
148
, 
183
paid search, 
9
, 
79
, 
179–81
, 
216
Panasonic, 
102
Parkinson, Michael, 
96
Payless ShoeSource, 
200
Penn, Mark, 
72–3
Penn, Schoen and Berland, 
72
People
 magazine, 
9
Pepsi, 
43
, 
97–8
, 
103
, 
114–5
, 
192
performance marketing, 
40–1
, 
67
, 
152–3
, 
171
, 
182
Personette, Sarah, 
119
Pickwick Afternoon Spirit tea, 
149–50
, 
156
Pilot, Mike, 
202
Pisani, Antonella, 
9
Pizza Hut, 
182
placement, product and brand, 
24
, 
137–40
, 
163
, 
222–3
playbook, new media, 
17–34
, 
113
, 
165–6
Plouffe, David, 
186
Pollitt, Stanley, 
68
Pringles, 
102
Procter & Gamble, 
xi
, 
36
, 
58
, 
64
, 
88
, 
102
, 
121
, 
127
, 
130
, 
146
, 
219
.
See also
 Tide
product placement, 
24
, 
137–40
, 
163
, 
222–3
Profitable Marketing Communications—A Guide to Marketing Return on Investment
 (Young and
Aitken), 
50Publicis Groupe, 
29
, 
34
, 
41
, 
101
, 
112
, 
118–9
, 
168
purchasing process, stages of, 
45–7
Pyne, Chris, 
69
, 
200
receptivity, 
48
, 
74
, 
83
, 
154
, 
199
, 
222
receptivity planning, 
127–43
Reckitt Benckiser, 
219–20
Red Bull, 
161–2
relationship building stage of brand influence, 
45–6
, 
59
, 
183–4
reminder advertising, 
58–9
Rentrak, 
212
requests for proposals (RFPs), 
169
, 
190
, 
192
, 
195
, 
199
The Restaurant
 (television program), 
138
return on investment (ROI), 
23
, 
27–8
, 
49–53
, 
58
, 
88
, 
152–3
, 
182
, 
209
, 
215–20
, 
223–4
Ritson, Mark, 
121
Robinson, Lynne, 
155
Rogers, Everett, 
94
Ronaldinho, 
18
Rooney, Mickey, 
96
Rose, Frank, 
91
Ryan, Eric, 
98
Saatchi & Saatchi, 
xi
, 
127
, 
141–2
Samsung, 
177
Sanofi-Aventis, 
132–4
Sara Lee International, 
149
.
See also
 Pickwick Afternoon Spirit tea
satellite television, 
223
Schmidt, Eric, 
11
Schubert, Gary, 
65
search. 
See
 online searches
The Search
 (Battelle), 
9
Search.twitter.com
, 
96
Sepracor, 
132
SheSpeaks, 
105
Shetty, Baba, 
178
The Simpsons Movie
, 
3
, 
206–8
situational advertising, 
131
, 
134–5
Skyrock.com
, 
205
smart phones, 
xii
, 
2
, 
14
, 
21
, 
24
, 
25
, 
30
.
See also
 Apple, iPhone.
Smith, Kenny, 
210
social listening tools, 
67
, 
96
social media, 
11–14
as a branding tool, 
171–4
early adopters and, 
94–5
integration and, 
182journalists and, 
31
as media elite, 
93
Millennial generation and, 
81
Obama and, 
3
, 
185–8
peer-to-peer connectivity of, 
8
smart phones and, 
21
, 
24
tracking, 
61
, 
106
, 
218
“word of mouse” and, 
90
See also
 blogs and blogging; Facebook; Twitter; YouTube
Social Mention, 
218
Sony, 
xi
, 
128
, 
138
The Sopranos
 (television series), 
186
Southwest Airlines, 
104
Speights, 
101–2
Starbucks, 
15
, 
45
, 
57
, 
90
, 
173
, 
182–3
, 
202
Starcom MediaVest Group, 
34
, 
201
steer and track strategy, 
151
, 
212
, 
217
Stewart, Jimmy, 
96
Stoll, Cliff, 
65
Storybrand Consulting, 
78
strategy, use of the term, 
39
Stuart, Spencer, 
50
Subway, 
32
Super Bowl advertising, 
33
, 
43
, 
54
, 
91
, 
104–5
, 
157
, 
163
, 
166
, 
175
, 
186
, 
214–6
Survivor
 (television program), 
33
, 
202
Tahir, Kamal, 
77
Target, 
91
, 
173
Taster’s Choice, 
139
Taylor, Jim, 
36
Tide, 
58
, 
127–8
Time Inc., 
8–9
Time
 magazine, 
33
Time Warner, 
8–9
, 
201
TiVo, 
22
, 
138
, 
212
T-Mobile, 
77
, 
84
, 
177–9
T-Mobile Half Time Show
 (television program), 
210
TNS Media Intelligence, 
66
, 
89
.
See also
 Kantar Media
Tobaccowalla, Rishad, 
24
Tonight Show
, 
32
touch points, 
4
, 
30
, 
39
, 
43
, 
66–7
, 
88–9
, 
107
, 
112–3
, 
119
, 
124–5
, 
143
, 
146
, 
151–64
Touchpoints ROI Tracker, ZenithOptimedia, 
88
Toyota, 
xi
, 
130
, 
136–7
, 
140–2
Tremor Media, 
26
Trendspotting.com
 Research, 
94–5
TripAdvisor, 
90True Blood
 (television series), 
172
T-shaped people, 
125
TurboTax, 
202
TV.com
, 
24
Twitalyzer, 
218
Twitrratr, 
218
Twitter, 
21
, 
25
, 
30
, 
46
, 
80
, 
96–7
, 
104–5
, 
166
, 
171–2
, 
183–4
, 
185–7
, 
197
, 
218
, 
223
Unilever, 
3
, 
17
, 
36
, 
70
, 
84
, 
205
.
See also
 Dove
Up in the Air
 (film), 
138
UPS, 
146
, 
163–4
USA Network, 
173
user ratings, online, 
90–1
VCCP, 
122
Verizon, 
139
Verklin, David, 
131–2
viral campaigns, 
29
, 
99–100
, 
103
, 
129
, 
173
, 
176–8
, 
187
, 
203
, 
207
Visa, 
184
VivaKi UK, 
24
, 
42
, 
69
, 
168
Volkswagen, 
26
Wall Street Journal
, 
81
, 
91
, 
163
, 
170
Walt Disney Co., 
2
, 
24
Warner Bros., 
99
Waters, Nick, 
205
Wayne, John, 
96
Weaver, Sigourney, 
140
Weiss, Taly, 
94–5
Welikesmall, 
101
Wikipedia, 
33
Winfrey, Oprah, 
93
Wired.com
, 
81
Woodward, John, 
101
“word of mouse,” 
90
word of mouth marketing:
advertising and, 
87–8
, 
91–2
, 
163
, 
179–80
advocacy and, 
46
, 
59
, 
184
early adopters and, 
94–5
Facebook and, 
2
influencers and, 
92–4
internet and, 
90–1
, 
175–6
media neutrality and, 
40
micromedia and, 
30–1
negative, 
96–7
Obama and, 
13
, 
188sales and, 
88–90
Starbucks and, 
45
tactics for, 
95–106
teens and, 
8
Zappos.com
 and, 
59
See also
 buzz
Word of Mouth Marketing Association (WOMMA), 
92
Wordle, 
219
WPP, 
201
Yahoo!, 
31
, 
137
, 
172
, 
175
, 
184
YouTube, 
21
, 
30
, 
33
, 
90
, 
103
, 
166
YouTube videos and ads:
Best Buy, 
172
Cadbury, 
129
The Dark Knight
 videos, 
99
Denny’s, 
105
Domino’s Pizza employees’ video, 
97
Filipino prisoners’ music video, 
77
Foster Farms, 
101
Guitar Hero 
5
, 
113
Nike, 
18
Nintendo, 
103
Toyota, 
140–2
TV.com
, 
24
Zagats, 
91
Zappos.com
, 
59
, 
172
ZenithOptimedia Worldwide, 
33
, 
42
, 
88
, 
155–6
, 
211
Zuckerberg, Mark, 
1
, 
13
Zyman, Sergio, 
52
, 
54
, 
98