 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Building Effective Email Marketing Campaigns  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for building an 
effective email marketing campaign .  
 
Read this brief 9 -page report to learn how to:  
 
 
 Identify the benefits & risks of email marketing   
 
 Build a business case for an email marketing initiative  
 
 Improve your delivery rates   
 
 Track key email metrics   
 
 Follow email marketing best pr actices  
 
 
 
Read this report and avoid the common mistakes and pitfalls of email 
marketing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Email Marketing Defined         3  
 
Benefits of Email Marketing       4  
 
Email Marketing Risks         5  
 
Email Delivery Best Practices        5 
 
Benchmarking & Metrics        7  
 
Email Marketing Best Practices       8  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Email Marketing Defined    
 
 
 
 
“E-mail marketing is a form of direct marketing that uses electronic mail  
as a means of communicating messages to an audience. This term 
usually refers to emails that are being sent over the internet and can 
include:  
 
 Sending e -mails with the purpose of enhancing the relationship of 
a merchant with its current or old customers and to encourage 
customer loyalty and repeat business.  
 
 Sending e -mails with the purpose of acquiring new customers or 
convincing old customers to buy something immediately.  
 
 Adding advertisements in e -mails sent by other companies to 
their customers.”  
 
                           Source – Wikipedia  
 
 
Other Important Definitions:  
 
 Unique Opens : A single open by a single user.  
 
 Unique Clicks : A single click by a single user.  
 
 Hard Bounces : A permanent failure due to a non -existent 
address or a blocking condition by the receiver that returns the 
email to the server that sent it.  
 
 Soft Bounces : A temporary failure due to a full mailbox or an 
unavailable server that returns the email to the server that sent 
it. 
 
 Open Rate : The total number of emails opened divided by the 
total number of emails delivered as a percentage.  
 
 Click Through Rate (CTR) : The percentage of those clicking on 
a link out of the total number who see the link.  
 
 Click To Open Rate (CTOR) : The ratio of unique clicks as a 
percentage of uniqu e opens.  
 
 Conversion Rate : The number or percentage of visitors who 
convert casual content views or website visits into desired 
actions.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Benefits of Email Marketing   
 
   
 
 
Many companies have been able to reduce their marketing costs by 
running effective email marketing campaigns. According to the Direct 
Marketing Association , email will deliver $45. 56 in sales for every 
dollar spent in 2008 . Although this indicates a steady decline in the ROI 
associated with email marketing in recent years, the tangible and 
intangible benefits of email marketing can’t be ignored.  
 
Most companies are using email marketing for the following reasons:  
 
 
 Lower Cost : Email marketing provides a very inexpensive way 
of communicating with your target audience.  
 
 Increased Sales : Not only can a permission based email 
campaign increase your sales conversion, but it can also help to 
generate repeat business and cross/up sell existing customers.  
 
 Faster Delivery : Email provides a faster medium than 
traditional forms of marketing (i.e. direct mail) because it 
reaches your audience almost immediately.  
 
 Build Relationships : Email allows you to make your customers 
happier by keeping them “in the loop.” It also provides the 
opportunity to raise brand awareness by reaching out to 
customers while positioning yourself as you would like to be seen 
in the market.  
 
 Go Green : Email is an environmentally friendly way of reaching 
out to prospects and customers.  
 
 Save Time : Emails are quick to create and allow for more 
frequent contact.  
 
 Measure Results : Email metrics are displayed almost 
immediately. By tracking and monitor campaigns, email 
marketers have the ability to improve and refine their strategy 
over time.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Email Marketing Risks  
Email Delivery Best Practices   
  
 
 
 
When it comes to email marketing you need to be aware of all the 
legislation restricting the use of email before beginning any campaign – 
regardless of your intentions. In the United States, the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) is authorized to enforce the C AN-SPAM Act. This act 
also gives the Department of Justice the authority to enforce criminal 
sanctions for the improper use of email. Click here for more information 
on the CAN -SPAM Act .  
 
The bottom line is that this law has 4 main provisions:  
 
 It bans false or misleading header  information  
 
 It prohibits deceptive subject  lines 
 
 It required that you give recipients an opt-out method  
 
 It requires that commercial email be identified  as an 
advertisement and include the sender's valid physical postal 
address.  
 
The penalties for not complying with this Act are severe and can include 
hefty fines. Not only can an illegal email marketing campaign hurt your 
company financially, SPAMMING can  also damage your brand, hurt 
relationships with customers/prospects, and make you appear 
desperate.  
 
 
 
   
 
 
As discussed above, email marketing can tarnish your brand if it’s n ot 
done correctly. Follow these  simple guidelines to ensure your next email 
marketing campaign will provide you with a solid ROI.  
 
 
 Send Email only when it’s Relevant : Send emails based on 
what you know about the recipient (i.e. where they are in the 
buying cycle, what content they have  requested, etc.). It is also 
important to make sure you show respect for recipient’s time by 
sending emails at the frequency the recipient asks for.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
 
 Establish Credibility : The consistency and timeliness of 
communication has an impact on your brand. By ma intaining 
consistent communication and delivering content that is valuable 
to the recipient you will improves your brand image and create 
longer customer relationships.  
 
 Include a Privacy Policy Link : Ensure that prospects and 
customers know what you plan  to do with their personal 
information by creating a privacy policy that is easily accessible.  
 
 Make Unsubscribe Easy : Make sure the unsubscribe link is 
easily noticeable, clearly defined and easy to use.  
 
 Have a Clear Call to Action : Don’t send an email u nless the 
required action is easy to understand and will provide value to 
the recipient.  
 
 Personalize the Email : Include the recipient’s  name and ensure 
the spelling is correct.  
 
 Monitor and Measure Campaigns : It is critical that metrics are 
identified wel l in advance and improvements are made over time.  
 
 Include both Plan Text and HTML : It is important that the 
formatting is done properly. Emails should be tested to ensure 
they can be seen properly on different screen sizes, with different 
browsers and on  Blackberry’s.  
 
 Subject Line should be Clear and Concise : As a general rule 
of thumb, try not to include a dollar sign, the word free, or 
multiple exclamation marks as they increase the likelihood of 
being identified as spam. Use a subject line that actua lly speaks 
to what is in the email.  
 
 Keep the Sender Consistent : Make sure the sender is well 
known and well respected. Use someone from the company 
instead of a generic email account.  
 
 Clean your List : Keep your list of subscribers clean by asking 
receivers to update their information on an ongoing basis.  
 
 Monitor and Classify your Bounces : This will help to ensure 
your lists are clean and up -to-date. A review of your bounces will 
also help you understand why emails are undeliverable (ISP, 
Domain, e tc.) and adjust your strategy accordingly.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Benchmarking & Met rics  
 Use Email Marketing as part of an Integrated Marketing 
Plan: Email alone will not allow you to achieve your desired end 
result. Read Demand Metric’s report on “ Integrating Lead 
Generation Campaigns ” for practical advice on how to use 
email as part of an integrated marketing plan.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
If you are interested in obtaining benchmarking data, Marketing Sherpa 
released an “Email Marketing Benchmarking Guide” in 2008. Although 
the metrics are a bit outdated (the study was conducted in October 
2007 – November 2007) the report contains real life  data as reported by 
1210 marketers. It also contains data from private, third -party and 
other research studies. Other sources of benchmarking information 
include eMarketer  and EmailLabs . 
 
Depending on your objectives, there are many metrics you can monitor. 
The most popular performance based metrics include:  
 
 Open rate  
 Click-through rate  
 Click to open rate  
 Bounce rate  
 Delivery rate  
 Unsubscribe rate  
 Referral rate  
 Subscriber retention  
 Number of orders, transactions, downloads or actions  
 Total revenue  
 Conversion rate  
 
 
If you would like more information on selecting the right metrics, 
contact Demand Metric  and schedule an appointment with one of our 
research analysts.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
Email Marketing Best Practices   
 
 
 
 
Consider these Best Practices for creating an effective email marketing 
campaign.  
 
1. Build a Business Case : use Demand Metric’s Business Case 
Template  to provide an opp ortunity overview and document 
objectives, requirements, scope, timelines, budget and 
benchmarks.  
 
2. Select the Right Vendor : It is critical that you evaluate vendors 
based on your business requirements. Demand Metric’s Email 
Marketing Vendor Evaluation Matrix  provides a structured 
approach to evaluating vendors and should be used as a 
customizable framework.  
 
3. Develop an Email Marketing Strategy : use our  Lead 
Generation Strategy Scorecard  to set your strategic 
objectives, initiatives, measures and targets.  
 
4. Build your Lists : read Demand Metric’s “ Creating  a 
Permission Based Marketing Campaign ” and follow the step -
by-step action plan for creating an effective list.  
 
5. Create the Content : Depending on the nature of your 
objectives, select content that is relevant and valuable to the 
recipient. It is also important to decide on the type and frequency 
of communication as well as the sender.  
 
6. Test the Solution : Test your email messages prior to sending 
out a major campaign. Send your email to different browsers to 
ensure it is being displayed correctly.  
 
7. Launch the Campaign : Split testing is extremely important 
during your first few email campaigns. By sending  2 different 
emails to the same list at the same time, you can determine:  
 
 Headline A vs. Headline B  
 Long email vs. Short Email  
 Single link vs. Two / three links  
 The effectiveness of putting the name in the headline  
 Hard sell vs. Presell  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
 
8. Monitor and  Review : Evaluate your program following every 
batch of email that is sent. Pay close attention to trends (i.e. 
Best time to Sent email) Report on improvements to key metrics 
and invest further in programs that are providing a quantifiable 
return on invest ment.  
 