PRAISE FOR 
BUILDING A STORYBRAND
“This is a seminal book built around an idea that will clarify, energize, and
transform your business. Donald Miller offers a specific, detailed, and useful
way to change the way you talk about the work you care about.”
—S
ETH
 G
ODIN
, 
AUTHOR OF
 
A
LL
 M
ARKETERS
 A
RE
 L
IARS
“Donald Miller ought to be working with your company just like he worked
with ours. We changed our website after learning his framework and the
results were fantastic. We noticed a difference right away. The StoryBrand
Framework works—and we are implementing it companywide. Read this
book!”
—K
EN
 B
LANCHARD
, 
CHIEF SPIRITUAL OFFICER OF
 T
HE
 K
EN
 B
LANCHARD
C
OMPANIES AND COAUTHOR OF
 
T
HE
 N
EW
 O
NE
 M
INUTE
 M
ANAGER
®
“Donald Miller will teach you a lot more than how to sell products; he will
teach you how to transform the lives of your customers. Your customers need
you to play a role in their lives, and this book will teach you how. If you want
your business to grow, read this book.”
—J
OHN
 C. M
AXWELL
, #1 
N
EW
 Y
ORK
 T
IMES
 
BESTSELLING AUTHOR
“This is the most important business/marketing book of the year. All
communicators know the power of Story. Donald Miller has captured the
process to make your marketing pierce the white noise of the most
overserved marketing generation in history. You 
have
 to read this book!”
—D
AVE
 R
AMSEY
, #1 
N
EW
 Y
ORK
 T
IMES
 
BESTSELLING AUTHOR
“Donald Miller reminds us that all good messaging begins and ends with
empathy. He knows that if you want to be seen, heard, and understood, the
first step is to listen. Get this book if you want to connect with people in a
profound way.”
—B
ILL
 H
ASLAM
, 
FORTY-NINTH GOVERNOR OF
 T
ENNESSEE“If you like making money, read this book. The StoryBrand Framework will
help you create sales messages that people listen and respond to. We use it all
the time and it works!”
—R
YAN
 D
EISS
, 
FOUNDER AND
 CEO 
OF
 D
IGITAL
M
ARKETER
“In only a few hours this book demystified lessons about branding that I’ve
spent my entire career trying to understand. The brilliant StoryBrand
Framework has now become the playbook for everything we do that is
marketing-related.”
—R
ORY
 V
ADEN
, 
COFOUNDER OF
 S
OUTHWESTERN
 C
ONSULTING AND
 
N
EW
Y
ORK
 T
IMES
 
BESTSELLING AUTHOR OF
 
T
AKE
 T
HE
 S
TAIRS
“I’ve been using Don Miller’s StoryBrand framework in my business for a
few years now. It’s the single best marketing tool I know. We use it on every
product we launch. I’ve had Don personally teach my company and clients
and I recommend him to everyone. Now, all these revolutionary insights are
easily accessible between these covers.”
—M
ICHAEL
 H
YATT
, 
N
EW
 Y
ORK
 T
IMES
 
BESTSELLING AUTHOR OF
 
P
LATFORM
:
G
ET
 N
OTICED IN A
 N
OISY
 W
ORLD© 2017 by Donald Miller
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopy, recording, scanning, or other—except for brief
quotations in critical reviews or articles, without the prior written permission
of the publisher.
Published by HarperCollins Leadership, an imprint of HarperCollins.
The author is represented by Ambassador Literary Agency, Nashville, TN.
Graphics designed by Kyle Reid.
Epub Edition September 2017 ISBN 9780718033330
ISBN 978-0-7180-3333-0 (eBook)
ISBN 978-1-4002-0183-9 (IE)
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017937432
ISBN 978-0-7180-3332-3
Printed in the United States of America
17  18  19  20  21   LSC   10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1Information about External Hyperlinks in this ebook
Please note that footnotes in this ebook may contain hyperlinks to external
websites as part of bibliographic citations. These hyperlinks have not been
activated by the publisher, who cannot verify the accuracy of these links
beyond the date of publication.This book is dedicated to:
Tim Schurrer and Kyle Reid
for believing in the framework from the beginning.
What I love most about StoryBrand is it
allowed us to become friends.
And also:
Betsy Miller
Avery Csorba
Koula Callahan
JJ Peterson
Chad Snavely
Suzanne Norman
You are living proof that when a group of friends sacrifice
together for a common good, they can become family
.CONTENTS
Introduction
SECTION 1: WHY MOST MARKETING IS A MONEY PIT
1.     The Key to Being Seen, Heard, and Understood
2.     The Secret Weapon That Will Grow Your Business
3.     The Simple SB7 Framework
SECTION 2: BUILDING YOUR STORYBRAND
4.     A Character
5.     Has a Problem
6.     And Meets a Guide
7.     Who Gives Them a Plan
8.     And Calls Them to Action
9.     That Helps Them Avoid Failure
10.   And Ends in a Success
11.   People Want Your Brand to Participate in Their Transformation
SECTION 3: IMPLEMENTING YOUR STORYBRAND BRANDSCRIPT
12.   Building a Better Website13.   Using StoryBrand to Transform Company Culture
The StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap
Afterword
Acknowledgments
Praise for the StoryBrand Framework
StoryBrand Resources
NotesINTRODUCTION
This is not a book about telling your company’s story. A book like that would
be a waste of time. Customers don’t generally care about your story; they
care about their own.
Your customer should be the hero of the story, not your brand. This is the
secret every phenomenally successful business understands.
What follows is a seven-part framework that will change the way you talk
about your business and perhaps the way you 
do
 business.
Each year we help more than three thousand businesses stop wasting
money on marketing and get their company growing by helping them clarify
their message. This framework will work for you, regardless of your industry.
To get the most out of this book, I encourage you to do three things:
1.
Read the book and understand the SB7 Framework.
2.
Filter your message through the framework.
3.
Clarify your message so more customers listen.
Marketing has changed. Businesses that invite their customers into a
heroic story grow. Businesses that don’t are forgotten.
May we all be richly rewarded for putting our customers’ stories above
our own.SECTION 1
WHY MOST MARKETING IS A
MONEY PI
TCHAPTER 1
THE KEY TO BEING SEEN, HEARD,
AND UNDERSTOOD
Most companies waste enormous amounts of money on marketing. We all
know how mind-numbing it is to spend precious dollars on a new marketing
effort that gets no results. When we see the reports, we wonder what went
wrong, or worse, whether our product is really as good as we thought it was.
But what if the problem wasn’t the product? What if the problem was the
way we talked about the product?
The problem is simple. The graphic artists and designers we’re hiring to
build our websites and brochures have degrees in design and know
everything about Photoshop, but how many of them have read a single book
about writing good sales copy? How many of them know how to clarify your
message so customers listen? And worse, these companies are glad to take
your money, regardless of whether you see results or not.
The fact is, pretty websites don’t sell things. Words sell things. And if we
haven’t clarified our message, our customers won’t listen.
If we pay a lot of money to a design agency without first clarifying our
message, we might as well be holding a bullhorn up to a monkey. The only
thing a potential customer will hear is noise.
Still, clarifying our message isn’t easy. I had one client say that when he
tried to do so, he felt like he was inside the bottle trying to read the label. I
understand. Before I started StoryBrand I was a writer and spent thousands of
hours staring at a blank computer screen, wondering what to say. That soul-
wrenching frustration led me to create a “communication framework” based
on the proven power of story, and I swear it was like discovering a secret
formula. The writing got easier and I sold millions of books. After using the
framework to create clear messages in my books, I used it to filter the
marketing collateral in my own small company. Once we got clear, wedoubled in revenue for four consecutive years. I now teach that framework to
more than three thousand businesses each year.
Once they get their message straight, our clients create quality websites,
incredible keynotes, e-mails that get opened, and sales letters people respond
to. Why? Because nobody will listen to you if your message isn’t clear, no
matter how expensive your marketing material may be.
At StoryBrand we’ve had clients double, triple, and even quadruple their
revenue after they got one thing straight—their message.
The StoryBrand Framework has been just as effective for billion-dollar
brands as it has for mom-and-pop businesses, and 
just as powerful for
American corporations as it has for those in Japan and Africa. Why? Because
the human brain, no matter what region of the world it comes from, is drawn
toward clarity and away from confusion.
The reality is we aren’t just in a race to get our products to market; we’re
also in a race to communicate why our customers need those products in their
lives. Even if we have the best product in the marketplace, we’ll lose to an
inferior product if our competitor’s offer is communicated more clearly.
So what’s your message? Can you say it easily? Is it simple, relevant, and
repeatable? Can your entire team repeat your company’s message in such a
way that it is compelling? Have new hires been given talking points they can
use to describe what the company offers and why every potential customer
should buy it?
How many sales are we missing out on because customers can’t figure out
what our offer is within five seconds of visiting our website?
WHY SO MANY BUSINESSES FAIL
To find out why so many marketing and branding attempts fail, I called my
friend Mike McHargue. Mike, often called “Science Mike” because he hosts
a successful podcast called 
Ask Science Mike
, spent fifteen years using
science-based methodologies to help companies figure out how their
customers think, specifically in the tech space. Sadly, he left advertising
when a client asked him to create an algorithm predicting the associated
buying habits of people with diabetes. Translation: they wanted him to sell
junk food to diabetics. Mike refused and left the 
industry. He’s a good man. I
called, though, because he still has incredible insight as to how marketing,story, and behavior all blend together.
At my request, Mike flew to Nashville to attend one of our workshops.
After two days learning the StoryBrand 7-Part Framework (hereafter called
the SB7 Framework), we sat on my back porch and I grilled him with
questions. Why does this formula work? What’s happening in the brains of
consumers as they encounter a message filtered through this formula? What’s
the science behind why brands like Apple and Coke, who intuitively use this
formula, dominate the marketplace?
“There’s a reason most marketing collateral doesn’t work,” Mike said,
putting his feet up on the coffee table. “Their marketing is too complicated.
The brain doesn’t know how to process the information. The more simple and
predictable the communication, the easier it is for the brain to digest. Story
helps because it is a sense-making mechanism. Essentially, story formulas
put everything in order so the brain doesn’t have to work to understand
what’s going on.”
Mike went on to explain that among the million things the brain is good at,
the overriding function of the brain is to help an individual survive and
thrive. Everything the human brain does, all day, involves helping that
person, and the people that person cares about, get ahead in life.
Mike asked if I remembered that old pyramid we learned about in high
school, Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. First, he reminded me, the
brain is tasked with setting up a system in which we can eat and drink and
survive physically. In our modern, first-world economy this means having a
job and a dependable income. Then the brain is concerned with safety, 
which
might entail having a roof over our heads and a sense of well-being and
power that keeps us from being vulnerable. After food and shelter are taken
care of, our brains start thinking about our relationships, which entail
everything from reproducing in a sexual relationship, to being nurtured in a
romantic relationship, to creating friendships (a tribe) who will stick by us in
case there are any social threats. Finally, the brain begins to concern itself
with greater psychological, physiological, or even spiritual needs that give us
a sense of meaning.
What Mike helped me understand is that, without us knowing it, human
beings are constantly scanning their environment (even advertising) for
information that is going to help them meet their primitive need to survive.
This means that when we ramble on and on about how we have the biggest
manufacturing plant on the West Coast, our customers don’t care. Why?Because that information isn’t helping them eat, drink, find a mate, fall in
love, build a tribe, experience a deeper sense of meaning, or stockpile
weapons in case barbarians start coming over the hill behind our cul-de-sac.
So what do customers do when we blast a bunch of noise at them? They
ignore us.
And so right there on my back porch, Mike defined two critical mistakes
brands make when they talk about their products and services.
Mistake Number One
The first mistake brands make is they fail to focus on the aspects of their
offer that will help people survive and thrive.
All great stories are about survival—either physical, emotional, relational,
or spiritual. A story about anything else won’t 
work to captivate an audience.
Nobody’s interested. This means that if we position our products and services
as anything but an aid in helping people survive, thrive, be accepted, find
love, achieve an aspirational identity, or bond with a tribe that will defend
them physically and socially, good luck selling anything to anybody. These
are the only things people care about. We can take that truth to the bank. Or
to bankruptcy court, should we choose to ignore it as an undeniable fact.
Mike said our brains are constantly sorting through information and so we
discard millions of unnecessary facts every day. If we were to spend an hour
in a giant ballroom, our brains would never think to count how many chairs
are in the room. Meanwhile, we would always know where the exits are.
Why? Because our brains don’t need to know how many chairs there are in
the room to survive, but knowing where the exits are would be helpful in case
there was a fire.
Without knowing it, the subconscious is always categorizing and
organizing information, and when we talk publicly about our company’s
random backstory or internal goals, we’re positioning ourselves as the chairs,
not the exits.
“But this poses a problem,” Mike continued. “Processing information
demands that the brain burn calories. And the burning of too many calories
acts against the brain’s primary job: to help us survive and thrive.”Mistake Number Two
The second mistake brands make is they cause their customers to burn too
many calories in an effort to understand their offer.
When having to process too much seemingly random 
information, people
begin to ignore the source of that useless information in an effort to conserve
calories. In other words, there’s a survival mechanism within our customers’
brain that is designed to tune us out should we ever start confusing them.
Imagine every time we talk about our products to potential customers, they
have to start running on a treadmill. Literally, they have to jog the whole time
we’re talking. How long do you think they’re going to pay attention? Not
long. And yet this is precisely what’s happening. When we start our elevator
pitch or keynote address, or when somebody visits our website, they’re
burning calories to process the information we’re sharing. And if we don’t
say something (and say something quickly) they can use to survive or thrive,
they will tune us out.
These two realities—the reality that people are looking for brands that can
help them survive and thrive, and the reality that communication must be
simple—explain why the SB7 Framework has helped so many businesses
increase their revenue. The key is to make your company’s message about
something that helps the customer survive and to do so in such a way that
they can understand it without burning too many calories.
STORY TO THE RESCUE
Mike agreed the most powerful tool we can use to organize information so
people don’t have to burn very many calories is story. As he said, story is a
sense-making device. It identifies a necessary ambition, defines challenges
that are battling to keep us from achieving that ambition, and provides a plan
to help us conquer those challenges. When we define the elements of a 
story
as it relates to our brand, we create a map customers can follow to engage our
products and services.
Still, when I talk about story to business leaders, they immediately put me
in a category with artists, thinking I want to introduce them to something
fanciful. But that’s not what I’m talking about. I’m talking about a concrete
formula we can use to garner attention from otherwise distracted customers.I’m talking about practical steps we can take to make sure people see us, hear
us, and understand exactly why they simply 
must
 engage our products.
THE FORMULA FOR CLEAR COMMUNICATION
Formulas are simply the summation of best practices, and the reason we like
them is because they work. We’ve been given great management formulas
like Ken Blanchard’s Situational Leadership and formulas we can use in
manufacturing like Six Sigma and Lean Manufacturing. But what about a
formula for communication? Why don’t we have a formula we can use to
effectively explain what our company offers the world?
The StoryBrand Framework is that formula. We know it works because
some form of this formula has been active for thousands of years to help
people tell stories. Talk about a summation of best practices. When it comes
to getting people to pay attention, this formula will be your most powerful
ally.
Once you know the formulas, you can predict the path most stories will
take. I’ve learned these formulas so well that my wife hates going to movies
with me because she knows at some point 
I’m going to elbow her and
whisper something like, “That guy’s going to die in thirty-one minutes.”
Story formulas reveal a well-worn path in the human brain, and if we want
to stay in business, we need to position our products along this path.
If you’re going to continue reading this book, I have to warn you, I’m
going to ruin movies for you. I mean, these things really are formulaic.
They’re predictable. And they’re predictable for a reason. Storytellers have
figured out how to keep an audience’s attention for hours.
The good news is these formulas work just as well at growing your
business as they do at entertaining an audience.
THE KEY IS CLARITY
The narrative coming out of a company (and for that matter inside a
company) must be clear. In a story, audiences must always know who the
hero is, what the hero wants, who the hero has to defeat to get what theywant, what tragic thing will happen if the hero doesn’t win, and what
wonderful thing will happen if they do. If an audience can’t answer these
basic questions, they’ll check out and the movie will lose millions at the box
office. If a screenwriter breaks these rules, they’ll likely never work again.
The same is true for the brand you represent. Our customers have
questions burning inside them, and if we aren’t answering those questions,
they’ll move on to another brand. If we haven’t identified what our customer
wants, what problem we are helping them solve, and what life will look like
after they engage our products and services, for example, we can forget about
thriving 
in the marketplace. Whether we’re writing a story or attempting to
sell products, our message must be clear. Always.
In fact, at StoryBrand we have a mantra: “If you confuse, you’ll lose.”
BUSINESS HAS AN ENEMY
Business has a fierce, insidious enemy that, if not identified and combated,
will contort our company into an unrecognizable mess. The enemy I’m
talking about is noise.
Noise has killed more ideas, products, and services than taxes, recessions,
lawsuits, climbing interest rates, and even inferior product design. I’m not
talking about the noise inside our business; I’m talking about the noise we
create
 as a business. What we often call marketing is really just clutter and
confusion sprayed all over our websites, e-mails, and commercials. And it’s
costing us millions.
Years ago, a StoryBrand client who attended one of our workshops pushed
back. “I don’t think this will work for me,” he said. “My business is too
diverse to reduce down to a simple message.” I asked him to explain.
“I have an industrial painting company with three different revenue
streams. In one division we powder-coat auto parts. In another we apply
sealant to concrete, and in another we have a sterilized painting process used
specifically in hospitals.”
His business was diverse, but nothing so complex that it couldn’t be
simplified so more people would hire him. I asked if I could put his website
on the giant television screen so the entire workshop could see it. His website
was thoughtful, but it didn’t 
make a great deal of sense from an outside
perspective (which is how every customer views your business).The man had hired a fine-arts painter to create a painting of his building
(was he selling a building?), and at first glance it looked like the website for
an Italian restaurant. The first question I had when I went to the website was,
“Do you serve free breadsticks?” There were a thousand links ranging from
contact information to FAQs to a timeline of the company’s history. There
were even links to the nonprofits the business supported. It was as though he
was answering a hundred questions his customers had never asked.
I asked the class to raise their hands if they thought his business would
grow if we wiped the website clean and simply featured an image of a guy in
a white lab coat painting something next to text that read, “We Paint All
Kinds of S#*%,” accompanied by a button in the middle of the page that said,
“Get a Quote.”
The entire class raised their hands.
Of course his business would grow. Why? Because he’d finally stopped
forcing clients to burn calories thinking about his life and business and
offered the one thing that would solve his customers’ problem: a painter.
What we think we are saying to our customers and what our customers
actually hear are two different things. And customers make buying decisions
not based on what we say but on what they hear.
STOP SAYING THAT
All experienced writers know the key to great writing isn’t in what they say;
it’s in what they don’t say. The more we cut out, 
the better the screenplay or
book. The mathematician and philosopher Blaise Pascal is often credited for
sending a long letter stating he simply didn’t have time to send a short one.
If we want to connect with customers, we have to stop blasting them with
noise.
The beautiful thing about clarifying our message using the SB7
Framework is it makes communicating easy. No longer will you sit in front
of a blank page wondering what to say on your website, in your elevator
pitch, in your e-mail blast, in your Facebook ads, or even on your television
or radio commercials.CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE
Whether we run a small company or a multibillion-dollar brand, confusing
our customers is costing us money. How many of our team members can’t
explain how we help our customers survive and thrive? How many people are
buying from our competition because they’ve communicated more clearly
than we have? How long will we last if we keep talking about aspects of our
products our customers don’t care about?
Things can be different.
To clarify our message we’re going to need a formula. A serious formula.
This formula needs to organize our thinking, reduce our marketing effort,
obliterate confusion, terrify the competition, and finally get our businesses
growing again.
Let’s learn about that formula now.CHAPTER 2
THE SECRET WEAPON THAT WILL
GROW YOUR BUSINESS
To help you grow your company, I’m going to guide you in simplifying your
message into soundbites that come from seven categories. Once you have
these seven messages down, any anxiety you experience talking about your
brand will subside and customers will be more attracted to what you offer.
We are going to figure out your customers’ story and place ourselves right
smack in the middle of it.
Story is atomic. It is perpetual energy and can power a city. Story is the
one thing that can hold a human being’s attention for hours.
Nobody can look away from a good story. In fact, neuroscientists claim
the average human being spends more than 30 percent of their time
daydreaming . . . 
unless
 they’re reading, 
listening to, or watching a story
unfold. Why? Because when we are engaged in a story, the story does the
daydreaming for us.
Story is the greatest weapon we have to combat noise, because it organizes
information in such a way that people are compelled to listen.
STORY MAKES MUSIC OUT OF NOISE
Living in Nashville I’ve learned quite a bit about the difference between
music and noise. Nearly half our friends here are musicians. I’m always
amazed at their talent. Hardly a dinner party goes by without somebody
grabbing a guitar.
I could summarize what I’ve learned about the difference between music
and noise by saying my friends make music and I make noise, but there’s
actually some complicated science involved.Technically speaking, music and noise are similar. Both are created by
traveling sound waves that rattle our eardrums. Music, however, is noise that
has been submitted to certain rules that allow the brain to engage on a
different level. If I played you a recording of a dump truck backing up, birds
chirping, and children laughing, you’d not remember those sounds the next
day. But if I played you a Beatles song, you’d likely be humming it for a
week.
There is an obvious difference between a well-choreographed piece of
music and the sound of a cat chasing a rat through a wind-chime factory,
which is the equivalent of the average corporate website, keynote speech, or
elevator pitch.
The brain remembers music and forgets about noise just like the brain
remembers some brands and forgets about others.
Story is similar to music. A good story takes a series of random events and
distills them into the essence of what really matters. There’s a reason the final
cut of a movie is called a final cut. Prior to the theatrical version, a film has
gone through rounds upon rounds of edits, omissions, revisions, and
deletions. Sometimes entire characters end up on the cutting-room floor.
Why? Because storytellers have filters to cut out the noise. If a character or
scene doesn’t serve the plot, it has to go.
When clients want to add a bunch of confusion to their marketing
message, I ask them to consider the ramifications of doing so if they were
writing a screenplay. I mean, what if 
The Bourne Identity
 were a movie about
a spy named Jason Bourne searching for his true identity but it also included
scenes of Bourne trying to lose weight, marry a girl, pass the bar exam, win
on 
Jeopardy
, and adopt a cat? The audience would lose interest. When
storytellers bombard people with too much information, the audience is
forced to burn too many calories organizing the data. As a result, they
daydream, walk out of the theater, or in the case of digital marketing, click to
another site without placing an order.
Why do so many brands create noise rather than music? It’s because they
don’t realize they are creating noise. They actually think people are interested
in the random information they’re doling out.
This is why we need a filter. The essence of branding is to create simple,
relevant messages we can repeat over and over so that we “brand” ourselves
into the public consciousness.STEVE JOBS AND THE MESSAGE OF APPLE
Apple grew much larger only after Steve Jobs began filtering his message
through the lens of story. Transformation in his thinking happened after
working with (and partially creating) the genius storytelling factory that is
Pixar. When Jobs came back to Apple after being surrounded by professional
storytellers, he realized story was everything.
Just think about the incredible transformation that took place in Steve’s
life and career after Pixar. In 1983, Apple launched their computer Lisa, the
last project Jobs worked on before he was let go. Jobs released Lisa with a
nine-page ad in the 
New York Times
 spelling out the computer’s technical
features. It was nine pages of geek talk nobody outside NASA was interested
in. The computer bombed.
When Jobs returned to the company after running Pixar, Apple became
customer-centric, compelling, and clear in their communication. The first
campaign he released went from nine pages in the 
New York Times
 to just
two words on billboards all over America: 
Think Different
.
When Apple began filtering their communication to make it simple and
relevant, they actually stopped featuring computers in most of their
advertising. Instead, they understood their customers were all living,
breathing heroes, and they tapped into their stories. They did this by (1)
identifying what their customers wanted (to be seen and heard), (2) defining
their customers’ challenge (that people didn’t recognize their hidden genius),
and (3) offering their customers a tool they could use to express themselves
(computers and smartphones). Each of these realizations 
are pillars in ancient
storytelling and critical for connecting with customers.
I’ll teach you about these three pillars and more in the coming chapters,
but for now just realize the time Apple spent clarifying the role they play in
their customers’ story is one of the primary factors responsible for their
growth.
Notice, though, the story of Apple isn’t about Apple; it’s about you.
You’re the hero in the story, and they play a role more like Q in the James
Bond movies. They are the guy you go see when you need a tool to help you
win the day.
Despite what acolytes of the cult of Mac may say, Apple likely doesn’t
make the best computers or phones. “Best” is subjective, of course. WhetherApple has the best technology, though, is debatable.
But it doesn’t matter. People don’t buy the best products; they buy the
products they can understand the fastest. Apple has inserted themselves into
their customers’ story like no other technology company, and as a result,
they’re not only the largest technology company, they’re in the top ten largest
companies period.
1
 If we want our companies to grow, we should borrow a
page from their playbook. We should clarify our message.
STORY CAN GROW YOUR BUSINESS
To better understand what Steve Jobs learned during his days at Pixar, let’s
take off our business hats for a few pages and pretend we’re learning about
story for the first time. Once you understand how story integrates with your
brand message, you’ll be 
able to create communication pieces (and even a
brand strategy) that engages more customers and grows your business. And if
you really get this down, people around the office will wonder how in the
world you became such a marketing genius.
After studying hundreds of movies, novels, plays, and musicals across
nearly every imaginable genre, and after having written eight books of my
own along with a nationally released screenplay, I’ve narrowed down the
necessary elements of a compelling story to seven basic plot points. If we
were writing a full screenplay, of course, we’d need more, but for purposes of
understanding and entering into our customers’ story, there are only seven.
Story in a Nutshell
Here is nearly every story you see or hear in a nutshell: A CHARACTER
who wants something encounters a PROBLEM before they can get it. At the
peak of their despair, a GUIDE steps into their lives, gives them a PLAN, and
CALLS THEM TO ACTION. That action helps them avoid FAILURE and
ends in a SUCCESS.
That’s really it. You’ll see some form of this structure in nearly every
movie you watch from here on out. These seven basic plot points are like
chords of music in the sense that you can use them to create an infinite
variety of narrative expression. Just like playing the guitar, with these sevenchords you can create any number of songs. Varying too far from these
chords, however, means you risk descending into noise.
Let’s look at how this simple framework plays out in a couple of familiar
stories. Once you can recognize the framework in stories, you’ll start to
understand exactly where the story of your brand is confusing customers by
not sticking to the formula.
In the first 
Hunger Games
 movie, Katniss Everdeen must compete in a
twisted fight-to-the-death tournament forced upon the people of Panem by an
evil, tyrannical government called the Capitol. The problem she faces is
obvious: she must kill or be killed. Katniss is overwhelmed, underprepared,
and outnumbered.
Along comes Haymitch, the brash, liquor-loving, grizzled winner of a
previous Hunger Games tournament. Haymitch assumes the role of Katniss’s
mentor, helping her hatch a plan to win over the public. This gains Katniss
more sponsors, thereby equipping her with more resources for the fight and
increasing her chances of winning.
Here is the first 
Hunger Games
 story laid out on the StoryBrand grid:In 
Star Wars: A New Hope
, our reluctant hero, Luke Skywalker,
experiences a devastating tragedy: his aunt and uncle are murdered at the
hands of the evil Empire. This sets a series of events in motion: Luke begins
the journey of becoming a Jedi Knight and destroys the Empire’s battle
station, the Death Star, which allows the Rebellion to live and fight another
day. Enter a guide, Obi-Wan Kenobi, a former Jedi Knight who once trained
Luke’s father.
Not every story works this way, but most do. Sometimes a writer will
bring in multiple guides or (usually to the story’s peril) leave the guide out,
but the formula holds up in almost every story you’ll encounter.
The fact that nearly every movie you go see at the theater includes these
seven elements means something. After thousands of years, storytellers theworld over have arrived at this formula as a means of best practices. Simply
put, this framework is the pinnacle of narrative communication. The further
we veer away from these seven elements, the harder it becomes for audiences
to engage. This is why indie films, which often 
break from the formula to
gain critical acclaim, fail miserably at the box office. Critics are hungry for
something different, yet the masses, who do not study movies professionally,
simply want accessible stories.
It seems true that some brands (as well as some screenwriters) break these
formulas and succeed all the same, but when you look closely, this is rarely
the case. Truly creative and brilliant marketers and screenwriters know how
to use the formula while still avoiding cliché. This, in my opinion, is what
makes them brilliant. When you get good at the SB7 Framework, hardly
anybody will notice you are using it.
The Three Crucial Questions
So how do we make the story our company is telling clear?
Remember, the greatest enemy our business faces is the same enemy that
good stories face: noise. At no point should we be able to pause a movie and
be unable to answer three questions:
1.
What does the hero want?
2.
Who or what is opposing the hero getting what she wants?
3.
What will the hero’s life look like if she does (or does not) get what
she wants?
If you’ve ever started daydreaming in a movie, it was likely because you
couldn’t answer one of these three questions, or worse, you didn’t care.
Here’s the kicker: if these three questions can’t be answered within the first
fifteen to twenty minutes, the story has already descended into noise and will
almost certainly fail at the box office.
At StoryBrand our Certified Guides have reviewed thousands of pages of
marketing copy that had nothing to do with the story of the customer. We tell
our clients the same thing my filmmaker friends told me when I was writing
screenplays: anything that doesn’t serve the plot has to go. Just because a
tagline sounds great or a picture on a website grabs the eye, that doesn’t meanit helps us enter into our customers’ story. In every line of copy we write,
we’re either serving the customer’s story or descending into confusion; we’re
either making music or making noise.
Nobody remembers a company that makes noise.
DOES YOUR MARKETING PASS THE GRUNT
TEST?
Just like there are three questions audiences must be able to answer to engage
in a story, there are three questions potential customers must answer if we
expect them to engage with our brand. And they should be able to answer
these questions within five seconds of looking at our website or marketing
material:
1.
What do you offer?
2.
How will it make my life better?
3.
What do I need to do to buy it?
At StoryBrand we call this 
passing the grunt test
. The critical question is
this: “Could a caveman look at your website and immediately grunt what you
offer?”
Imagine a guy wearing a bearskin T-shirt, sitting in a cave 
by a fire, with a
laptop across his lap. He’s looking at your website. Would he be able to grunt
an answer to the three questions posed above? If you were an aspirin
company, would he be able to grunt, “You sell headache medicine, me feel
better fast, me get it at Walgreens”? If not, you’re likely losing sales.
CLARITY PRODUCES RESULTS
One of our early clients, Kyle Shultz, was a fireman in Ohio who looked into
StoryBrand because he wanted to leave his job and pursue his passion of
teaching photography. He had recently launched an online photography
course aimed at parents. He’d worked hard to create terrific video trainingallowing moms everywhere to finally start using that basic camera they’d
placed in the junk drawer because they felt it was too complicated. Interest
was decent. In his first launch, he sold $25,000 worth of online courses. He
was ecstatic. Still, it wasn’t enough money for him to quit his job and pursue
teaching photography full-time.
When Kyle subscribed to the 
Building a StoryBrand
 podcast, he began to
wonder whether his message was too confusing. The night before his next
launch he bought our online course and edited his website using the SB7
Framework. In fact, he removed 90 percent of the text he’d previously used
on his sales page, and he also stopped using inside language like “f-stop” and
“depth of field.” Instead, he used phrases like “Take those great pictures
where the background is blurry.”
The next day Kyle sent a mass e-mail to the exact same e-mail list he’d
contacted only six months before and offered the course again. He wasn’t
expecting much because he’d already 
sold to this list, but to his surprise the
course sold another $103,000 worth of registrations.
The difference? He highlighted the aspects of his course that would help
parents survive and thrive (build stronger tribes, strengthen family
connections, and connect more deeply with life’s greater meaning), and he
did so in such a simple way (with fewer than three hundred words on his
sales page) that people didn’t have to burn calories to figure out what was in
it for them. Overnight he’d gone from a cluttered mess to the clear guide in
his customers’ story.
Today, Kyle has quit his day job and runs shultzphotoschool.com full-
time. Every day he gets e-mails from parents thanking him for helping them
feel great about the photographs they’re taking of their children.
WE NEED A FILTER
Alfred Hitchcock defined a good story as “life with the dull parts taken out.”
2
Good branding is the same. Our companies are complex, for sure, but a good
messaging filter will remove all the stuff that bores our customers and will
bear down on the aspects of our brand that will help them survive and thrive.
So how do we come up with these messages? It’s simple. We use the same
grid storytellers use in telling stories to map out the story of our customers,then we create clear and refined statements in the seven relevant categories of
their lives to position ourselves as their guides. When we do this, we become
the people who help them overcome their challenges and achieve the life they
want to live.
Once we begin filtering our message through the SB7 Framework and
using it as a communication filter, we will be able to repeat powerful
messages over and over that “brand” us into our customers’ story.
The SB7 Framework is simple, fun, and effective. And when you’re done,
your entire brand message is going to sit on a single sheet of paper. We call
this single sheet of paper (actually, it’s a free digital application I’m going to
introduce you to) the StoryBrand BrandScript.
Once you’ve finished the process, you’ll use your BrandScript to create all
manner of improved marketing material, and you’ll be more clearly
positioned in the marketplace. When customers finally understand how you
can help them live a wonderful story, your company will grow.
With that, let’s take a look at the StoryBrand Framework
.CHAPTER 3
THE SIMPLE SB7 FRAMEWORK
In the next section of this book, I’ll dive deep into the elements of the SB7
Framework, showing you how each important category of messaging makes
your brand inviting to customers. For now, though, let’s fly over the
framework so you can understand, in summary form, all that it can do to
simplify your marketing and messaging.
THE STORYBRAND FRAMEWORK
1. A Character
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 O
NE
: T
HE CUSTOMER IS THE HERO, NOT YOUR BRAND
.A major paradigm shift in the SB7 Framework 
is that the customer is the
hero of the story, not your brand. When we position our customer as the hero
and ourselves as the guide, we will be recognized as a trusted resource to help
them overcome their challenges.
Positioning the customer as the hero in the story is more than just good
manners; it’s also good business. Communication expert Nancy Duarte has
done extensive research on how to create powerful presentations. The
strategy she recommends to her clients is simple: when giving a speech,
position yourself as Yoda and your audience as Luke Skywalker.
1
 It’s a small
but powerful shift that honors the journey of the audience and positions us as
a leader providing wisdom, products, and services our audience needs in
order to thrive.
Once we identify who our customer is, we have to ask ourselves what they
want as it relates to our brand. The catalyst for any story is that the herowants something. The rest of the story is a journey about discovering whether
the hero will get what they want.
Unless we identify something our customer wants, they will never feel
invited into the story we are telling. As we explore the first element of the
StoryBrand Framework, I’ll show you why and how to invite customers into
a story that makes them want to pay attention to your brand.
2. Has a Problem
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 T
WO
: C
OMPANIES TEND TO SELL SOLUTIONS TO
EXTERNAL PROBLEMS, BUT CUSTOMERS BUY SOLUTIONS TO INTERNAL PROBLEMS
.
In its purest form, a story starts with a character who lives in peace andstability. Suddenly that stability is disrupted: a bomb goes off, someone is
kidnapped, or a disaster strikes. The hero then sets out on a journey to return
to the peaceful life they once enjoyed.
Customers are attracted to us for the same reason heroes are pulled into
stories: they want to solve a problem that has, in big or small ways, disrupted
their peaceful life. If we sell lawn-care products, they’re coming to us
because they’re embarrassed about their lawn or they simply don’t have time
to do the work. If we sell financial advice, they’re coming to us because
they’re worried about their retirement plan. It may not be as dramatic or sexy
as James Bond going to Q to grab the latest high-tech spy weapons, but the
premise is the same: our customers are in trouble and they need help.
By talking about the problems our customers face, we deepen their interest
in everything we offer.
What most brands miss, however, is that there are three levels of problems
a customer encounters. In stories, heroes encounter external, internal, and
philosophical problems. Why? Because these are the same three levels of
problems human beings face in their everyday lives. Almost all companies
try to sell solutions to external problems, but as we unfold the StoryBrand
Framework, you’ll see why customers are much more motivated to resolve
their inner frustrations.
In the second part of the StoryBrand Framework, we’ll look at the three
levels of problems our customers experience and create messages offering to
resolve those problems. Understanding and addressing the three levels of
problems our customers face will help us create a brand promise that will
connect with 
customers on a primitive level and at their deepest point of
need. This, in turn, will help us endear customers and create passionate brand
evangelists.
3. And Meets a Guide
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 T
HREE
: C
USTOMERS AREN
’
T LOOKING FOR ANOTHER
HERO; THEY
’
RE LOOKING FOR A GUIDE
.If heroes in a story could solve their own problems, they would never get
into trouble in the first place. That’s why storytellers, through the centuries,
have created another character to help the hero win. Depending on the scholar
you talk to, there are many names for this character, but the term we use at
StoryBrand is 
the guide.
In Tom Hooper’s Academy Award–winning film 
The King’s Speech
, King
George VI struggles to overcome a stutter. As Britain prepares for war
against Germany, the Brits look to their leader for confidence and direction.
Desperate, King George VI solicits the help of Lionel Logue, a dramatist
turned speech therapist, who gives him a plan, coaches him to competency,
and helps him transform into a powerful orator. This is the same service Obi-
Wan (and Yoda) offers Luke Skywalker in 
Star Wars
, Haymitch offers
Katniss in 
The Hunger Games
, and, to some degree, Bing Bong offers Joy in
Pixar’s 
Inside Out.It’s no accident that guides show up in almost every movie. Nearly every
human being is looking for a guide (or guides) to help them win the day.
Brands that position themselves as 
heroes
 unknowingly 
compete with their
potential customers. Every human being wakes up each morning and sees the
world through the lens of a protagonist. The world revolves around us,
regardless of how altruistic, generous, and selfless a person we may be. Each
day is, quite literally, about how 
we
 encounter our world. Potential customers
feel the same way about themselves. They are the center of their world.
When a brand comes along and positions itself as the hero, customers
remain distant. They hear us talking about how great our business is and start
wondering if we’re competing with them for scarce resources. Their
subconscious thought pattern goes like this: 
Oh, this is another hero, like me.
I wish I had more time to hear their story, but right now I’m busy looking for
a guide.
In the third part of the StoryBrand Framework, we’ll look at two mental
triggers that will help customers recognize us as the guide they’ve been
looking for.
4. Who Gives Them a Plan
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 F
OUR
: C
USTOMERS TRUST A GUIDE WHO HAS A PLAN
.At this point we’ve identified what the customer wants, defined three
levels of problems they’re encountering, and positioned ourselves as their
guide. And our customers love us for the effort. But they still aren’t going to
make a purchase. Why? Because we haven’t laid out a simple plan of action
they can take.
Making a purchase is a huge step, especially if our products or services are
expensive. What customers are looking for, then, is a clear path we’ve laid
out that takes away any confusion they 
might have about how to do business
with us. The StoryBrand tool we will use to create this path is called 
the plan
.
In almost every story, the guide gives the hero a plan, or a bit of
information, or a few steps they can use to get the job done. In the 
Star Wars
movies, Yoda tells Luke to trust the Force and then trains Luke on how to
wield this power. People are looking for a philosophy they can embody or a
series of steps they can take to solve their problems.In the fourth part of the StoryBrand Framework, we’ll look at two kinds of
plans: the agreement plan and the process plan. Each of these plans will earn
trust and offer our customers a clear path to stability, greatly increasing the
chance they will make a purchase.
5. And Calls Them to Action
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 F
IVE
: C
USTOMERS DO NOT TAKE ACTION UNLESS THEY
ARE CHALLENGED TO TAKE ACTION
.
In stories, characters don’t take action on their own. They must be
challenged. If we’re telling a story about a man who needs to lose thirty
pounds and suddenly decides to do it of his own volition, the audience willcheck out. Why? Because that’s not how life works. There needs to be a
reason. Our character has to run into a high school sweetheart who is now a
yoga instructor, or he needs to lose a bet, forcing him to run a marathon.
Characters only take action after they are challenged by an outside force.
This principle is true in story because it’s true in life. Human beings take
action when their story challenges them to do so.
You would be surprised how many companies don’t create obvious calls
to action for their customers. A call to action involves communicating a clear
and direct step our customer can take to overcome their challenge and return
to a peaceful life. Without clear calls to action, people will not engage our
brand.
In the fifth part of the StoryBrand Framework, I’ll show you two calls to
action that have worked for thousands of our clients. One call to action is
direct, asking the customer for a purchase or to schedule an appointment. The
other is a transitional call to action, furthering our relationship with the
customer. Once we begin using both kinds of calls to action in our
messaging, customers will understand exactly what we want them to do and
decide whether to let us play a role in their story. Until we call our customers
to action, they simply watch us, but when we call them to action (the right
way), they will engage.
6. That Helps Them Avoid Failure
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 S
IX
: E
VERY HUMAN BEING IS TRYING TO AVOID A
TRAGIC ENDING
.Stories live and die on a single question: What’s at stake? If nothing can
be gained or lost, nobody cares. Will the hero disarm the bomb, or will
people be killed? Will the guy get the girl, or will he be lonely and filled with
self-doubt? These are the kinds of questions in the minds of a story-hungry
audience.
If there is nothing at stake in a story, there is no story. Likewise, if there’s
nothing at stake in whether or not I buy your product, I’m not going to buy
your product. After all, why should I?
Simply put, we must show people the cost of 
not
 doing business with us.
In the eighties, the fast-food chain Wendy’s effectively asked America,
“Where’s the beef?” The implication was that their competitors weren’t using
enough meat. So what’s at stake for choosing another brand over Wendy’s?
We might get stuck with a wimpy sandwich. Likewise, Whole Foods has
built an enormous industry helping customers avoid the consequences ofoverly processed foods, and more recently Trader Joe’s has come along to
help customers avoid the consequences of Whole Foods’ prices.
Brands that help customers avoid some kind of negativity in life (and let
their customers know what that negativity is) engage customers for the same
reason good stories captivate an audience: they define what’s at stake.
In the sixth part of the StoryBrand Framework, I’ll help you identify
what’s at stake in your customers’ story as it relates to your brand. Before we
move on, though, it’s important to note that not all of the seven elements
should be used evenly in your communication. Think of the StoryBrand
Framework as a recipe for a loaf of bread. Failure is like salt: use too much
and you’ll ruin the flavor; leave it out and the recipe will taste bland.
Regardless, the point is this: your story needs stakes.
7. And Ends in a Success
S
TORY
B
RAND
 P
RINCIPLE
 S
EVEN
: N
EVER ASSUME PEOPLE UNDERSTAND HOW
YOUR BRAND CAN CHANGE THEIR LIVES
. T
ELL THEM
.We must tell our customers how great their life can look 
if they buy our
products and services. Ronald Reagan painted a picture of “a shining city on
a hill.”
2
 Bill Clinton offered to help us “build a bridge to the twenty-first
century.”
3
 During the dark and dreary Depression, Franklin Roosevelt used
the song “Happy Days Are Here Again” as his official campaign song.
4
Likewise, Apple provides tools that allow us to express ourselves and be
heard, Weight Watchers helps us lose weight and feel great, and Men’s
Wearhouse guarantees we will like the way we look.
Everybody wants to be taken somewhere. If we don’t tell people where
we’re taking them, they’ll engage another brand.
In the seventh part of the StoryBrand Framework, I’ll elaborate on what is
perhaps the most important element of your messaging strategy: offering a
vision for how great a customer’s life could be if they engage your products
or services.WHEN YOU FEEL CONFUSED, CLARIFY YOUR
MESSAGE
Right about now your head may be spinning. Even though there are only
seven parts to the framework, how do we narrow down our message so our
marketing material starts working again?
We’ve created a tool to simplify the process. This tool is going to reduce
the hassle of creating a clear message, save you time, entertain you as you
use it, and motivate you to create marketing material that works. As I
mentioned earlier, this tool is called the StoryBrand BrandScript, and it’s
going to become your new best friend.
You can create your StoryBrand BrandScript for free at
mystorybrand.com, and it looks like this:
In the next seven chapters, I’m going to walk you through these seven
elements and help you create your BrandScript. Once you’re done, you’ll no
longer feel confused about how to talk about your products and services, and
you’ll have messages that powerfully engage potential customers.The first project I’d like you to BrandScript is the one that represents your
overall brand. Next you’ll want to create a BrandScript for each division of
your company, and after that, each product within each division. If you like,
you can even create a BrandScript for each segment of your customer base.
The uses of a StoryBrand BrandScript are endless.
Again, to create a BrandScript you can save, edit, and come back to over
and over, go to mystorybrand.com. Because you bought this book, you get
free access. Your StoryBrand BrandScript will be a powerful resource
helping you organize and simplify your message, and you’ll use it again and
again. With the StoryBrand BrandScript tool, you will be able to see your
brand narrative on a single page, which, again, will translate into a clear
message you can use to grow your business.
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN
As you walk through the seven parts of the StoryBrand Framework, simply
follow these three steps:
1.
Read each of the next seven chapters.
2.
After you read each chapter, brainstorm potential messages you
might use to populate your BrandScript.
3.
Carefully look at your brainstorm and then decide on a specific
message to use in each section of your BrandScript.
Once you complete your BrandScript at mystorybrand.com, you will have
the basic messages to employ the SB7 Framework on your websites, in
keynotes, in elevator pitches, and in all manner of marketing and messaging
collateral. This means your messages will be simple, relevant, and repeatable.
And remember: simple, clear messages that are relevant to your customers
result in sales.
Every human being is already speaking the language of story, so when you
begin using the SB7 Framework, you’ll finally be speaking their language.
THE STAKES ARE HIGH
You’re going to be tempted to move ahead and skip thinking deliberately
about each of the seven parts of the framework. You’ve already got the
BrandScript, after all, so why not just fill it out?
Amateur screenwriters make the same mistake. They think they know how
a story works, so they start typing and a couple of months later can’t figure
out why their story is boring and unrelatable. I’ll tell you why. They had an
overview of the process but never bothered to learn the actual rules.
Each module of the SB7 Framework has set-in-stone rules you cannot
break—or else customers won’t find themselves in the story you’re telling
and will be much less likely to engage your brand.
Thousands of companies shut their doors every year, not because theydon’t have a great product, but because potential customers can’t figure out
how that product will make their lives better. If we don’t closely analyze each
element of our customers’ story, they’ll sense we don’t care and move on to a
competing brand that took the time to do the work.
Some of you are probably thinking it’s too late. I mean, if it’s printed in a
book, everybody else is probably doing it. But are they? How many people
read the first twenty pages of a book and then stop reading? I’d say most,
which means you’re already passing them. What would happen if you
committed to executing this process and your competitor didn’t? You’d win,
wouldn’t you? And how many people are actually going to put in the work
even if they do read the book? Believe me, human nature tends toward
complacency. Finish this process. Beat the competition. Clarify your
message. Grow your company. The competition may be more talented than
you are, but they will never outwork you if you don’t let them. That’s the one
thing you get to control.
In the next seven chapters, I’ll show you how to create a clear and
compelling message that will organize your thoughts, simplify your
marketing, and grow your company
.SECTION 2
BUILDING YOUR STORYBRAND
When you’re confused, create a StoryBrand
BrandScript
.CHAPTER 4
A CHARACTER
StoryBrand Principle One: The customer is the hero,
not your brand.
A story doesn’t really pick up until the hero needs to disarm a bomb, win
someone’s heart, defeat a villain, or fight for their emotional or physical
survival. A story starts with a hero who wants something. And then thequestion becomes: Will the hero get what she wants?
Before knowing what the hero wants, the audience has little interest in her
fate. This is why screenwriters have to define the character’s ambition within
the first nine or so minutes of a film getting started. Will the underdog get the
promotion? Will the runner finish the marathon? Will the team win the
championship? These are the questions that keep an audience engaged for
two hours.
As a brand it’s important to define something your customer wants,
because as soon as we define something our customer 
wants, we posit a story
question in the mind of the customer: 
Can this brand really help me get what
I want?
Recently a high-end resort hired us to help them clarify their message.
Like many companies, they were experiencing an identity crisis. Their
marketing collateral featured images of their restaurant, front desk, and staff.
It all looked nice, but unless they were trying to sell their buildings, they
weren’t exactly inviting customers into a story.
What their customers wanted most, actually, was a luxurious, restful
experience. After StoryBranding their resort, they changed the text on their
website from long stories about themselves (which positioned them as the
hero) to images of a warm bath, plush towels and robes, someone getting a
massage in the spa, and a looping clip of a back-porch rocking chair against
the backdrop of trees blowing in the wind along a golf course.
They replaced the text on their main page with short and powerful copy:
“Find the luxury and rest you’ve been looking for.” That became the mantra
for the entire staff. This phrase was posted on their office walls, and to this
day you can stop any team member from the sous chef to the groundskeeper
and they will tell you their customers are looking for two things: luxury and
rest. Defining exactly what their customer wanted brought clarity and
camaraderie to the staff. Each member of the staff then understood his or her
role in the story they were inviting their customers to engage in.
One university we worked with defined their customer’s desire as “a
hassle-free MBA you can complete after work.” A landscaping company
humorously defined their customer’s ambition as “a yard that looks better
than your neighbor’s.” A caterer we worked with in Los Angeles defined his
customer’s 
desire as “a mobile fine-dining experience in the environment of
your choice.”
When we identify something our customer wants and communicate itsimply, the story we are inviting them into is given definition and direction.
Here are some more examples from companies we’ve worked with:
Financial Advisor:
 “A Plan for Your Retirement”
College Alumni Association:
 “Leave a Meaningful Legacy”
Fine-Dining Restaurant:
 “A Meal Everybody Will Remember”
Real Estate Agent:
 “The Home You’ve Dreamed About”
Bookstore:
 “A Story to Get Lost In”
Breakfast Bars:
 “A Healthy Start to Your Day”
When you define something your customer wants, the customer is invited
to alter their story in your direction. If they see your brand as a trustworthy
and reliable guide, they will likely engage.
OPEN A STORY GAP
In story terms, identifying a potential desire for your customer opens what’s
sometimes called a story gap. The idea is that you place a gap between a
character and what they want. Moviegoers pay attention when there’s a story
gap because they wonder if and how that gap is going to be closed.
Jason Bourne is a spy who has amnesia, and we wonder if he’ll find
anyone to help him. When he meets a young woman named Marie, that gap
closes, only for another to open. Bourne and 
Marie have to flee the country.
When they escape, that gap closes for yet another one to open. The cycle
goes on and on, maintaining a taut grip on the audience’s attention up until
the finale.
To understand the power of a story gap is to understand what compels a
human brain toward a desire. Even classical music follows this formula.
Many classical sonatas can be broken into three sections: exposition,
development, and recapitulation. The final section, recapitulation, is simply
an altered version of the exposition that brings a sense of resolve. If that
doesn’t make sense, try singing “Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star” without
singing the final note on the word 
are
. It will bother you to no end.
We also see this at work in poetry. When our ears hear Lord Byron’s first
line “She walks in beauty, like the night,” a story gap has been opened. Weare waiting to hear a word that rhymes with 
night
 and closes the open gap in
our minds. Once we hear “Of cloudless climes and starry skies,” our minds
find a bit of resolution. Until the next line, that is.
The opening and closing of a story gap is a magnetic force that drives
much of human behavior. Arousal is the opening of a story gap and sexual
fulfillment brings its closing. Hunger is the opening of a story gap and a meal
ushers its closing. There is little action in life that can’t be explained by the
opening and closing of various story gaps.
When we fail to define something our customer wants, we fail to open a
story gap. When we don’t open a story gap in our customers’ mind, they have
no motivation to engage us, because there is no question that demands
resolution. Defining something our customer wants and featuring it in our
marketing materials will open a story gap.
PARE DOWN THE CUSTOMER’S AMBITION TO
A SINGLE FOCUS
A critical mistake many organizations make in defining something their
customers want is they don’t pare down that desire to a single focus. I’ve had
countless conversations with frustrated business leaders who push back at
this point and say, “Wait, we provide about twenty-seven things our
customers want. Can’t we mention all of them?”
The answer is no, at least not yet. Until we’ve defined a specific desire and
become known for helping people achieve it, we shouldn’t add too many
conflicting story gaps to our StoryBrand BrandScript.
This can be frustrating if your products and services fulfill many desires.
The reality of a diverse brand, though, brings the same challenge many
amateur screenwriters succumb to: they clutter the story by diluting their
hero’s desire with too many ambitions.
As you create a BrandScript for your overall brand, focus on one simple
desire and then, as you create campaigns for each division and maybe even
each product, you can identify more things your customer wants in the
subplots of your overall brand.
On the following page you’ll find a grid of what a diverse brand might
look like using the tool of various StoryBrand BrandScripts.At the highest level, the most important challenge for business leaders is to
define something simple and relevant their customers want and to become
known for delivering on that promise. Everything else is a subplot that, after
having delivered 
on the customer’s basic desire, will only serve to delight and
surprise them all the more.
CHOOSE A DESIRE RELEVANT TO THEIR
SURVIVAL
Once a brand defines what their customer wants, they are often guilty of
making the second mistake—what they’ve defined isn’t related to the
customer’s sense of survival. In their desire to cast a wide net, they define a
blob of a desire that is so vague, potential customers can’t figure out whythey need it in the first place.
A leadership expert recently asked for feedback on his brand. 
As I
reviewed his marketing material, I noticed he was making a critical mistake:
in defining what his customer wanted, he was vague.
The idea behind his brand is that he imparts knowledge to potential
leaders. He saw himself as a storehouse of leadership resources and wanted to
be the go-to guy for achieving excellence. In fact, his tagline was “Inhale
knowledge, exhale success.”
Seems clear enough, but is it? What does exhaling success even mean? He
was making potential customers burn too many mental calories to figure out
how he was going to help them survive and thrive.
I recommended he make an edit to his message. Instead of saying, “Inhale
knowledge, exhale success,” simply say, “Helping you become everyone’s
favorite leader.”
Becoming everyone’s favorite leader means the customer would be more
respected and better connected to a tribe, they’d have greater social and
career opportunities, and much more. Exhaling success sounded nice, but
thriving as the leader of a tribe is directly connected to survival. People will
always choose a story that helps them survive and thrive.
Fortunately, he liked the idea, mostly because that’s what he was already
doing. Defining something the customer wants and connecting it with the
customer’s desire for survival opened an enticing story gap.
What Does Survival Mean?
When I say 
survival
, I’m talking about that primitive desire we all have to
be safe, healthy, happy, and strong. Survival simply means we have the
economic and social resources to eat, drink, reproduce, and fend off foes.
So what kinds of desires fit under this definition? Well, too many to count,
but consider these examples:
Conserving financial resources
. In order to survive and thrive, your
customers may need to conserve resources. In simple terms, this means
they may need to save money. If your brand can help them save money,
you’ve tapped into a survival mechanism. Walmart has built their brand
on the promise of everyday low prices. Their tagline “Save Money. LiveBetter” further communicates savings and value and thus taps into a
basic function of survival, the conservation of resources.
Conserving time
. In developed countries, most of our customers have
thankfully moved beyond the hunter-gatherer stage of survival. They are
familiar, then, with the notion of opportunity costs. Can your
housecleaning service give your customers more time to work on other
things or more time to spend with family? Then they might be
interested.
Building social networks
. If our brand can help us find community, we’ve
tapped into yet another survival mechanism. We only think we’re being
nice when we bring our coworkers coffee, but what if we’re actually
being nice because our primitive brains want to make sure we are
connected to a tribe in case the bad guys come knocking at the door?
Add this to the fact that human beings have a strong desire to nurture
and be nurtured, and we’ve tapped into yet another survival mechanism.
Gaining status
. Luxury brands like Mercedes and Rolex 
don’t make much
practical sense in terms of survival, right? In fact, spending lots of
money buying a luxury car when a more common brand would do the
trick seems counter to our survival, doesn’t it? Not when you consider
the importance of status. Status, in any tribe, is a survival mechanism. It
projects a sense of abundance that may attract powerful allies, repel
potential foes (like a lion with a loud roar), and if we’re into shallow
companions, might even help us secure a mate. Rolex, Mercedes, Louis
Vuitton, and other luxury brands are truly selling more than just cars and
watches; they’re selling an identity associated with power, prestige, and
refinement.
Accumulating resources
. If the products and services you offer help
people make money or accumulate much-needed resources, that will
quickly translate into a person’s desire for survival. With more money,
our customers will have more opportunity to secure many of the other
survival resources they may need. Many StoryBrand clients run
business-to-business offerings (StoryBrand itself is a business-to-
business company), so offering increased productivity, increased
revenue, or decreased waste are powerful associations with the need for
a business (or an individual) to survive and thrive.
The innate desire to be generous
. None of the desires I’ve listed are evil.
They can all be taken too far, but the reality is we are designed tosurvive. Still, we should be comforted by the fact that nearly all human
beings have an enormous potential for generosity. Achieving an
aspirational identity of being sacrificial actually helps us survive (fends
off foes, decreases outside criticism, 
helps earn trust in our tribe, and so
on), but it also taps into something truly redemptive: we want other
people to survive too. Most people are not nearly as Darwinian in their
thinking as we’ve been led to believe. We are empathetic and caring
creatures who will gladly sacrifice for the well-being of others, often in
anonymity. The truth is we aren’t only interested in our own survival;
we’re interested in the survival of others. Especially those who have not
been given the opportunities we enjoy.
The desire for meaning
. Viktor Frankl was right when he contended with
Sigmund Freud, insinuating that the chief desire of man is not pleasure
but meaning. In fact, in his book 
Man’s Search for Meaning
, Frankl
argued convincingly that man was actually most tempted to distract
himself with pleasure when his life was void of meaning.
1
 So how do
we offer potential customers a sense of meaning? Not unlike giving our
customers the opportunity to be generous, we invite them to participate
in something greater than themselves. A movement. A cause to
champion. A valiant fight against a real villain, be that villain flesh and
blood or a harmful philosophy.
WHAT’S THE STORY QUESTION FOR YOUR
CUSTOMER?
When I offered my executive coach friend the tagline “Helping you become
the leader everybody loves,” his customers’ brains were able to translate that
message into multiple survival 
categories, including social networks, status,
the innate desire to be generous, the opportunity to gain resources, and even
the desire for deeper meaning.
In business, if we don’t communicate clearly, we shrink. When we’re
motivating a team, convincing shareholders, or engaging customers, we must
define a desire our customers have or we will have failed to open a story gap
and our audience will ignore us. Remember, customers want to know where
you can take them. Unless you identify something they want, it’s doubtfulthey will listen.
Imagine your customer is a hitchhiker. You pull over to give him a ride,
and the one burning question on his mind is simply 
Where are you going?
But as he approaches, you roll down the window and start talking about your
mission statement, or how your grandfather built this car with his bare hands,
or how your road-trip playlist is all 1980s alternative. This person doesn’t
care. All he wants to do is get to San Francisco with a flower in his hair!
The goal for our branding should be that every potential customer knows
exactly where we want to take them: a luxury resort where they can get some
rest, to become the leader everybody loves, or to save money and live better.
If you randomly asked a potential customer where your brand wants to
take them, would they be able to answer? Would they be able to repeat back
to you exactly what your brand offers? If not, your brand is suffering the cost
of confusion. You can fix this. Define a desire for your customer, and the
story you’re inviting customers into will have a powerful hook.
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN
•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript or
log in to your existing BrandScript.
•
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm what potential desires your
customers might have that you can fulfill.
•
Make a decision. Choose something your customer wants and fill in the
“character” module of your StoryBrand BrandScript.
•
Read the next chapter and repeat this process for the next section of your
BrandScript.Once you fill out the first module of your StoryBrand BrandScript, you’ll
be on your way to inviting customers into an incredible story. At this point,
they’re interested in you and what you offer. But what can we do to entice
them even further into a story? Let’s move on to 
part 2
 and find out!
You will be tempted to fill out the rest of your StoryBrand
BrandScript, but I encourage you to read the chapter associated
with each module to be sure you’re filling it out correctly. Once
you’ve completed your first BrandScript, section 3 of this book will
help you create simple, effective marketing tools.CHAPTER 5
HAS A PROBLEM
StoryBrand Principle Two: Companies tend to sell
solutions to external problems, but customers buy
solutions to internal problems.
Now that you’ve entered into your customers’ story, how do you increase
their interest in your brand? You borrow another play from the storyteller’splaybook; you start talking about the problems your customers face.
Identifying our customers’ problems deepens their interest in the story we
are telling. Every story is about somebody who is trying to solve a problem,
so when we identify our customers’ problems, they recognize us as a brand
that understands them.
The problem is the “hook” of a story, and if we don’t identify our
customers’ problems, the story we are telling will fall flat. As soon as the
conflict in a story is resolved, audiences stop paying attention. As the novelist
James Scott Bell says, “Readers want to fret.”
1
 It’s true in story and it’s true
in branding.
If Jason Bourne were to get a call thirty minutes into the first 
Bourne
Identity
 movie and a gentle, calming voice began to explain who Jason really
was, why he’d suffered amnesia, and that the government was offering him a
pension along with a house on the coast, then no one would keep watching.
The reason to pay attention would be gone.
It bears repeating. The more we talk about the problems our customers
experience, the more interest they will have in our brand.
HOW TO TALK ABOUT YOUR CUSTOMERS’
PROBLEMS
In the second module of the StoryBrand Framework, we’re going to look at
three elements of conflict that will increase customer interest, ratchet up
engagement, and give a greater depth of meaning to the story our brand is
telling.
First, though, let’s start with the root of where all this conflict is coming
from. I’m talking about one of the most dynamic, interesting characters in
any story: the villain.
Every Story Needs a Villain
The villain is the number one device storytellers use to give conflict a
clear point of focus.
Screenwriters and novelists know the stronger, more evil, more dastardly
the villain, the more sympathy we will have for the hero and the more theaudience will want them to win in the end. This translates into audience
engagement.
How sympathetic would Batman be without the Joker? 
Luke Skywalker
without Darth Vader? Harry Potter without Voldemort? Superman without
Kryptonite? (Let’s be honest, Lex Luthor isn’t that interesting of a bad guy.)
If we want our customers’ ears to perk up when we talk about our products
and services, we should position those products and services as weapons they
can use to defeat a villain. And the villain should be dastardly.
The villain doesn’t have to be a person, but without question it should
have personified characteristics. If we’re selling time-management software,
for instance, we might vilify the idea of 
distractions.
 Could we offer our
product as a weapon customers could use to stop distractions in their tracks?
Sounds kind of dramatic, right? And yet distractions are what’s deluding our
customers’ potential, wrecking their families, stealing their sanity, and
costing them enormous amounts of time and money. Distractions, then, make
for great little villains.
Now that I’ve pointed out the technique of vilifying our customers’
challenges, you’ll see it in television commercials all the time. Who knew
that those dust bunnies collecting along the baseboards of our houses move
around in animated, criminal gangs wearing leather jackets, coordinating
their devilish efforts to ruin our floors? Ah, that is until they meet their
match: the new mop from ACME Mop Company.
Advertisers personify the problems their customers face in order to capture
their imagination and give their frustrations a focal point. Fuzzy hairballs
with squeaky voices living in your drains, making nests, and clogging up the
pipes? Yellow globs of living, breathing, talking plaque vacationing between
your teeth? These are all personified versions of conflict. They’re all villains.
Here are four characteristics that make for a good villain on your
StoryBrand BrandScript:
1.
The villain should be a root source.
 Frustration, for example, is not a
villain; frustration is what a villain makes us feel. High taxes, rather, are
a good example of a villain.
2.
The villain should be relatable.
 When people hear us talk about the
villain, they should immediately recognize it as something they disdain.
3.
The villain should be singular.
 One villain is enough. A story with
too many villains falls apart for lack of clarity.4.
The villain should be real.
 Never go down the path of being a
fearmonger. There are plenty of actual villains out there to fight. Let’s
go after them on behalf of our customers.
Is there a villain in your customers’ story? Of course there is. What is the
chief source of conflict that your products and services defeat? Talk about
this villain. The more you talk about the villain, the more people will want a
tool to help them defeat the villain.
Later, when you’re creating your BrandScript, I’ll ask you to brainstorm
what kind of villain your customer faces. For now, though, let’s look closely
at the kinds of conflict this villain causes. Once we understand our
customers’ problems, we’ll have a better idea how to talk to them in such a
way that they engage.
The Three Levels of Conflict
A villain is the antagonist because the villain causes the hero serious
problems. That’s obvious. But what’s less obvious is that in a story, there are
three levels of problems that work together to capture a reader’s or a
moviegoer’s imagination.
The three levels of problems heroes (and customers) face are
External Problems
Internal Problems
Philosophical Problems
In a story, a villain initiates an external problem that causes the character
to experience an internal frustration that is, quite simply, philosophically
wrong. These are also the three levels of problems a customer hopes to solve
when they buy a product.
I know that sounds complicated, but let’s take a closer look at each level
of conflict so we know exactly which of our customers’ frustrations to talk
about as we clarify our message.
EXTERNAL PROBLEMS
In literature, a villain’s job is to wreak havoc on the hero, to place barriersbetween them and their desperate desire for stability. But ill intentions aren’t
enough. Something, that is, some 
thing
 (or things) must represent this barrier.
Enter the “external problem.”
In stories, the external problem is often a physical, tangible problem the
hero must overcome in order to save the day. The problem might manifest
itself as a ticking time bomb or a runaway bus, or maybe even a combination
of the two: a bomb on a 
bus that will go off if Keanu Reeves doesn’t keep the
speed above fifty miles per hour!
The external problem works like a prized chess piece set between the hero
and the villain, and each is trying to control the piece so they can win the
game.
For Billy Beane in the movie 
Moneyball
, the external problem is the need
to win baseball games. For Matthew Broderick in the movie 
WarGames
, it’s
a piece of rogue software that has taken over the American government’s
computer system and attempts to wage war against the Soviets.
But what does the existence of an external problem in a story have to do
with branding? Well, most of us are in the business of solving external
problems. We provide insurance or clothes or soccer balls. If we own a
restaurant, the external problem we solve is hunger. The external problem a
plumber fixes might be a leaky pipe, just like a pest-control guy might solve
the external problem of termites in the attic.
Brainstorming what external problems you solve will be the easiest part of
creating your StoryBrand BrandScript. It’s usually pretty obvious. But you’d
be wrong to think the reason people call you, walk through your door, or visit
your website is limited to the resolution of an external problem. Something
else is going on.
INTERNAL PROBLEMS
By limiting our marketing messages to only external problems, we neglect a
principle that is costing us thousands and potentially millions of dollars. That
principle is this: 
Companies tend to sell solutions to external problems, but
people buy solutions to internal problems.
The purpose of an external problem in a story is to manifest an internal
problem. If I wrote a movie about a guy who simply needed to disarm a
bomb, audiences would lose interest. What storytellers and screenwriters do,
then, is create a backstory of frustration in the hero’s life.
In the movie 
Moneyball
, for instance, Billy Beane failed in his playingcareer and so was filled with self-doubt about whether he could redeem
himself as a general manager. In 
Star Wars
, Luke Skywalker was told by his
uncle that he was too young to join the resistance, so he doubted his ability
until the very end.
In almost every story the hero struggles with the same question: 
Do I have
what it takes?
 This question can make them feel frustrated, incompetent, and
confused. The sense of self-doubt is what makes a movie about baseball
relatable to a soccer mom and a romantic comedy relatable to a truck-driving
husband.
What stories teach us is that people’s internal desire to resolve a
frustration is a greater motivator than their desire to solve an external
problem.
This is where most brands make a critical mistake. By assuming our
customers only want to resolve external problems, we fail to engage the
deeper story they’re actually living. The truth is, the external problems we
solve are causing frustrations in their lives and, just like in a story, it’s those
frustrations that are motivating them to call you.
After their near collapse, Apple didn’t find their footing until Steve Jobs
understood that people felt intimidated (internal problem) by computers and
wanted a simpler interface with technology. In one of the most powerful
advertising campaigns in history, Apple showed a simple, hip, fun character
who just wanted to take photos and listen to music and write books next 
to a
not-so-hip tech nerd who wanted to talk about the inner workings of his
operating system. The campaign positioned Apple Computers as the
company to go to if you wanted to enjoy life and express yourself but felt
intimidated by all the tech talk. What was the internal problem Apple
identified? It was the sense of intimidation most people felt about computers.
Apple started selling more than computers; they started selling a resolution to
the problem of customer intimidation. Understanding their customers’
internal problem is one of the reasons Apple achieved such growth and
created passionate brand evangelists.
The only reason our customers buy from us is because the external
problem we solve is frustrating them in some way. If we can identify that
frustration, put it into words, and offer to resolve it along with the original
external problem, something special happens. We bond with our customers
because we’ve positioned ourselves more deeply into their narrative.
For example, if we own a house-painting business, our customer’s externalproblem might be an unsightly home. The internal problem, however, may
involve a sense of embarrassment about having the ugliest home on the street.
Knowing this, our marketing could offer “Paint That Will Make Your
Neighbors Jealous.”
What Frustrations Do Our Products Resolve?
Recently, the rental-car company National got my business by
understanding my internal frustration. I used to rent from a company that got
on my nerves. Normally when I get off a plane I don’t feel like making small
talk. The staff at the company I used to rent cars from had a policy of
chitchatting with their customers. They even used a script. First they asked
whether I 
was in town for business or pleasure, then they asked about the
weather where I came from. On and on it went. I heard this script so many
times I started having fun beating them to their own talking points. I’d often
jump ahead on their script and ask the clerk, “Are you going to be able to
have a little downtime while you’re in town?” They’d just stare blankly at me
because I’d hijacked their line.
One day, though, I was watching television and a commercial came on for
National. It showed a guy walking through the rental office without talking to
anybody. The character talked about how he hated having to make
conversation with salespeople and how he loved walking straight to his car. I
immediately changed rental car companies and have been happy ever since.
Speaking of car companies, CarMax is a chain of used car dealerships that
aims most of their marketing collateral at the internal problem a customer
experiences when looking for a used car, namely having to interact with a
used-car salesman.
If you’ve ever walked onto a used-car lot, you know the feeling. It’s as
though you’re about to tangle with a professional wrestler.
Knowing their customers don’t want to haggle over prices or risk buying a
lemon, CarMax’s business strategy is aimed at you not having to feel lied to,
cheated, or worked over in your car-buying experience. To do this, they have
an agreement plan with their customers that ensures the price on the car is the
price you’ll pay and lets you know their salespeople aren’t compensated on
commission. They also highlight their quality certification and inspection
process that ensures every car they sell is reliable.
2
The external problem CarMax resolves is the need for a car, of course, butthey hardly advertise about cars at all. They focus 
on their customers’ internal
problems and, in doing so, entered one of the least-trusted industries in
America and created a $15 billion franchise.
3
Likewise, Starbucks exploded by not just offering customers a cup of
coffee but by giving them a comfortable, sophisticated environment in which
to relax. Customers felt good about themselves when they walked into a
Starbucks. Starbucks was delivering more value than just coffee; they were
delivering a sense of sophistication and enthusiasm about life. They were also
offering a place for people to meet in which they could experience affiliation
and belonging. Starbucks changed American culture from hanging out in
diners and bars to hanging out in a local, Italian-style coffee shop.
In understanding how their customers wanted to feel, Starbucks took a
product that Americans were used to paying fifty cents for (or drinking for
almost free at home or at work) and were able to charge three or four dollars
per cup. Starbucks customers are willing to pay more for their coffee because
they sense greater value with each cup.
Framing our products as a resolution to both external and internal
problems increases the perceived value (and I would argue, actual value) of
those products.
Later, I’ll guide you through a brainstorming exercise helping you identify
some of your customers’ internal problems, but before that, let’s look at a
third kind of problem our customers experience. This third level of problem
can take a story over the top, have audiences standing on their seats, and is
one of the main reasons a film will win Best Picture at the Academy Awards.
And it has the same kind of power when it comes to helping us turn
disinterested customers into brand fanatics.
PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS
The philosophical problem in a story is about something even larger than the
story itself. It’s about the question 
why
. Why does this story matter in the
overall epic of humanity?
Why is it important that Tommy Boy save his dad’s company? I’ll tell you
why, because the people trying to take Tommy Boy down are lying thieves.
This is a comedic story about honesty, family, integrity, and hard work versus
deception, greed, and trickery.
Why is it important that Hamlet avenge his father’s death? Because his
uncle is getting away with murder.Why is it important that Bridget Jones find love? Because the beauty and
worth of every person deserves to be recognized and cherished by another.
A philosophical problem can best be talked about using terms like 
ought
and 
shouldn’t
. “Bad people shouldn’t be allowed to win” or “People ought to
be treated fairly.”
In the movie 
The King’s Speech,
 the external problem is King George’s
stutter. This external problem manifests the internal frustration and self-doubt
the king struggles with. He simply doesn’t believe he has what it takes to lead
his country. Philosophically, though, the stakes are much greater. Because the
king must unify his people against the Nazis, the story takes on the
philosophical problem of good versus evil.
In 
Jerry Maguire
, the philosophical question revolves around whether
people are worth more than the money they can bring in. 
Romeo and Juliet
asks whether romantic love is more important than family squabbles and
tribal unrest.
What’s the Deeper Meaning?
People want to be involved in a story that is larger than 
themselves.
Brands that give customers a voice in a larger narrative add value to their
products by giving their customers a deeper sense of meaning.
After creating their BrandScript, a global consulting firm we worked with
began to talk about how everybody deserved to work for a great manager. A
pet-store owner who came to us hung a sign in her window that said, “Pets
deserve to eat healthy food too.” A fun-loving travel agent came to us and
adopted the seasonal line “Because this summer should be remembered
forever.”
Before music went digital, Tower Records promoted their chain of record
stores using the tagline “No music, no life.” Not only did the tagline help
them sell more than a billion dollars in records each year, but they sold
thousands of bumper stickers and T-shirts featuring the tagline to fans who
wanted to associate with the philosophical belief that music mattered.
Is there a deeper story your brand contributes to? Can your products be
positioned as tools your customers can use to fight back against something
that ought not be? If so, let’s include some philosophical stakes in our
messaging.The Perfect Brand Promise
If we really want to satisfy our customers, we can offer much more than
products or services; we can offer to resolve an external, internal, and
philosophical problem whenever they engage our business.
Storytellers use this formula to endear audiences all the time. When Luke
shoots the photon torpedo through the little hole in the Death Star, he actually
resolves the external problem 
of destroying the Death Star, the internal
problem that had him wondering whether he had what it took to be a Jedi,
and the philosophical problem of good versus evil, all with the press of a
button.
When these three levels of problems are resolved in one shot, the audience
experiences a sense of pleasure and relief, causing them to love the story.
This scene is often called the “climactic” or “obligatory” scene, and it is
arguably the most important scene in the movie because every other scene
builds toward it in some way.
The resolution of the hero’s external, internal, and philosophical problem
is the reason we cried when Woody and Buzz were reunited with Andy in
Toy Story
, and it’s why we felt so deeply when Private Ryan was rescued by
Captain John Miller.
This formula works because human beings experience three levels of
problems in their everyday lives. They aren’t just looking for a resolution to
one level of problem; they’re hoping for a resolution to all three.
If we really want our business to grow, we should position our products as
the resolution to an external, internal, and philosophical problem and frame
the “Buy Now” button as the action a customer must take to create closure in
their story.
Let’s look at how some successful brands we all know about have
positioned the purchasing of their products as the resolution to external,
internal, and philosophical problems:
TESLA MOTOR CARS:
Villain:
 Gas guzzling, inferior technology
External:
 I need a car.
Internal:
 I want to be an early adopter of new technology.
Philosophical:
 My choice of car ought to help save the environment.NESPRESSO HOME COFFEE MACHINES:
Villain:
 Coffee machines that make bad coffee
External:
 I want better-tasting coffee at home.
Internal:
 I want my home coffee machine to make me feel sophisticated.
Philosophical:
 I shouldn’t have to be a barista to make a gourmet coffee
at home.
EDWARD JONES FINANCIAL PLANNING:
Villain:
 Financial firms that don’t listen to their customers
External:
 I need investment help.
Internal:
 I’m confused about how to do this (especially with all the tech-
driven resources out there).
Philosophical:
 If I’m going to invest my money, I deserve an advisor who
will thoughtfully explain things in person.
WHAT CHALLENGES ARE YOU HELPING YOUR
CUSTOMER OVERCOME?
The idea of identifying a villain that is causing an internal, external, and
philosophical problem may seem daunting, but it will come to you if you
commit to working it out in a brainstorming session. But be careful. A large
problem most of our clients face is they want to include three villains and
seven external problems and four internal problems, and so on. But, as I’ve
already mentioned, stories are best when they are simple and clear. We are
going to have to make choices.
Is there a single villain your brand stands against? And what external
problem is that villain causing? How is that external problem making your
customers feel? And why is it unjust for people to have to suffer at the hands
of this villain?
These are the four questions we want to answer in the problem section of
our StoryBrand BrandScript, and when we do, the story our brand is telling
will take shape because our hero, the customer who wants something, is
being challenged. Will they win? Will their problems be resolved?
Perhaps. The thing is, they will have to engage your brand to find out.CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN
•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
•
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm all of the literal and metaphorical
villains your brand takes a stand against.
•
Brainstorm the external problems your brand resolves. Is there one that
seems to represent the widest swath of products?
•
Brainstorm the internal problem 
(frustration or doubt) your customers
are feeling as it relates to your brand. Is there one that stands out as a
universal experience for your customers?
•
Is your brand part of a larger, more important story? Is there a
philosophical wrong your brand stands against?
•
Once you finish your brainstorming session, make the four StoryBrand
BrandScript decisions that will allow you to fill out 
part 2
.CHAPTER 6
AND MEETS A GUIDE
StoryBrand Principle Three: Customers aren’t looking
for another hero; they’re looking for a guide.
Shakespeare was right—a person’s life is made up of many acts. As a book
writer, though, I prefer to see these acts as chapters. If you look back on your
life, you’ll likely see them too. There is the chapter when you grew up poorand the chapter when you began to understand the importance of
relationships. There is the chapter when you realized you were good at math
or sports, and there was the chapter when you left home to start out on your
own.
No two lives are the same, and yet we share common chapters. Every
human being is on a transformational journey.
It’s easy to recognize these chapters by their events, or what writer and
story scholar James Scott Bell calls “doorways of no return.”
1
 This might
have been our parents’ divorce, our first 
crush, a rejection from somebody we
loved, or having absolutely nailed the moonwalk when the crowd gathered
around us at the junior high dance.
In stories, events mark the beginnings and endings of our chapters. But if
we look closer, we will see something else or, more accurately, somebody
else.
The events that define our chapters are often instigated or interpreted by
mystical characters that help us along the way. In a story there are many
names for these characters, but I choose to call them 
guides
.
In his book 
The Seven Basic Plots
, Christopher Booker describes the
introduction of the guide into the story this way:
A hero or heroine falls under a dark spell which eventually traps them
in some wintry state, akin to a living death: physical or spiritual
imprisonment, sleep, sickness or some other form of enchantment. For
a long time they languish in this frozen condition. Then a miraculous
act of redemption takes place, focused on a particular figure who helps
to liberate the hero or heroine from imprisonment. From the depths of
darkness they are brought up into glorious light.
2
EVERY HERO IS LOOKING FOR A GUIDE
When I talk about a guide, I’m talking about our mother and father when they
sat us down to talk about integrity, or a football coach who helped us
understand the importance of working hard and believing we could
accomplish more than we ever thought possible. Guides might include the
authors of poems 
we’ve read, leaders who moved the world into newterritory, therapists who helped us make sense of our problems, and yes, even
brands that offered us encouragement and tools to help us overcome a
challenge.
If a hero solves her own problem in a story, the audience will tune out.
Why? Because we intuitively know if she could solve her own problem, she
wouldn’t have gotten into trouble in the first place. Storytellers use the guide
character to encourage the hero and equip them to win the day.
You’ve seen the guide in nearly every story you’ve read, listened to, or
watched: Frodo has Gandalf, Katniss has Haymitch, and Luke Skywalker has
Yoda. Hamlet was “guided” by his father’s ghost, and Romeo was taught the
ways of love by Juliet.
Just like in stories, human beings wake up every morning self-identifying
as a hero. They are troubled by internal, external, and philosophical conflicts,
and they know they can’t solve these problems on their own.
The fatal mistake some brands make, especially young brands who believe
they need to prove themselves, is they position themselves as the hero in the
story instead of the guide. As I’ve already mentioned, a brand that positions
itself as the hero is destined to lose.
The Fatal Mistake
The fatal ramifications of positioning our brand as the hero could be huge.
Consider the failure of the music streaming service Tidal. Never heard of it?
There’s a good reason. Rapper Jay Z founded the company with a personal
investment of a whopping $56 million with a mission to “get everyone to
respect music again.”
3
 Instead of being owned by music studios or tech
companies, Tidal would be owned by musicians, allowing them to cut out the
middleman and take their products directly to the market. As a result, the
artists would pocket more of the profits.
Sounds like a great plan. But Jay Z failed to consider the mistake of
positioning himself and other artists as the heroes. Were artists going to buy
music from each other? No. He needed to position the customer, not the
artist, as the hero.
In the months leading up to the launch of Tidal, Jay Z recruited sixteen
well-known musicians who agreed to release exclusive content on his
platform in exchange for a percentage of equity. In their multimillion-dollarrollout, the artists stood shoulder to shoulder at a press conference to explain
their mission. Predictably, this is where everything fell apart.
If only Jay Z, in other ways a virtual genius, had understood the age-old
rules of story, he might have avoided walking into a field of land mines.
“Water is free,” Jay Z quipped. “Music is $6 but no one wants to pay for
music.” He continued, somewhat confusingly, “You should drink free water
from the tap—it’s a beautiful thing. And if you want to hear the most
beautiful song, then support the artist.”
4
Social media, especially Twitter, eviscerated Jay Z and Tidal. Thousands
reminded him to check with the people who paid his bills to discover water
wasn’t actually free. Overnight, an artist who built his career speaking for the
people sounded entitled. The public became nauseated listening to a row of
famous, multimillionaire musicians guilt-trip them into paying more for their
music. The crucial mistake: Jay Z failed to answer the one question lingering
in the subconscious of every hero customer: 
How are you helping me win the
day?
 Tidal existed to help the artists win the day, not customers. And so it
failed.
Always position your customer as the hero and your brand as the guide.
Always. If you don’t, you will die.
The Story Is Not About Us
The larger point here is simple: the day we stop losing sleep over the
success of our business and start losing sleep over the success of our
customers is the day our business will start growing again.
If we are tempted to position our brand as the hero because heroes are
strong and capable and the center of attention, we should take a step back. In
stories, the hero is never the strongest character. Heroes are often ill-equipped
and filled with self-doubt. They don’t know if they have what it takes. They
are often reluctant, being thrown into the story rather than willingly engaging
the plot. The guide, however, has already “been there and done that” and has
conquered the hero’s challenge in their own backstory.
The guide, not the hero, is the one with the most authority. Still, the story
is rarely about the guide. The guide simply plays a role. The story must
always be focused on the hero, and if a storyteller (or business leader) forgets
this, the audience will get confused about who the story is really about andthey will lose interest. This is true in business, in politics, and even in your
own family. People are looking for a guide to help them, not another hero.
Those who realize the epic story of life is not about them but actually
about the people around them somehow win in the end. It’s counterintuitive,
but it’s true. In fact, leaders who think the story of life is all about them may
achieve temporary successes but are usually remembered in history’s
narrative as a villain.
THE TWO CHARACTERISTICS OF A GUIDE
We have seen hundreds if not thousands of businesses experience an increase
in customer engagement once they started positioning themselves as the
guide. After filtering their message through the StoryBrand Framework,
business leaders realize their websites, e-mail blasts, digital ads, television
commercials, and even their elevator pitches have been facing the wrong
direction. Simply turning our focus to the customer and offering them a
heroic role in a meaningful story is enough to radically change the way we
talk about, and even do, business.
So what do we have to do to be recognized as the guide in our customers’
lives?
The two things a brand must communicate to position themselves as the
guide are
Empathy
Authority
When Luke Skywalker meets Yoda, he encounters the perfect guide. Yoda
is the endearing character who understands Luke’s dilemma and
empathetically coaches him to use the Force. This empathy would go
nowhere, of course, were it not for Yoda’s authority as a Jedi himself. Yoda
understands Luke’s dilemma and has mastered the skills Luke must develop
if he is going to win the day.
The guide must have this precise one-two punch of empathy and authority
in order to move the hero and the story along. These are the characteristics
the hero is looking for, and when she senses them, she knows she’s found herguide.
Express Empathy
When Bill Clinton delivered his now-famous line “I feel your pain” in
1992, he did more than just clinch a victory over George H. W. Bush; he
positioned himself as the guide in the American voters’ story. A guide
expresses an understanding of the pain and frustration of their hero. In fact,
many pundits believe Clinton locked up the election during a town hall
debate in which Bush gave a rambling answer to a young woman when she
asked what the national debt meant to the average American. Clinton
countered Bush’s linear, cerebral answer by asking the woman if she knew
anybody who’d lost their job. He asked whether it pained her that she had
friends out of work, and when the woman said yes, he went on to explain
how the national debt is tied to the well-being of every American, even her
and her friends.
5
 That’s empathy.
When we empathize with our customers’ dilemma, we create a bond of
trust. People trust those who understand them, and they trust brands that
understand them too.
Oprah Winfrey, an undeniably successful guide to millions, once
explained the three things every human being wants most are to be seen,
heard, and understood. This is the essence of empathy.
Empathetic statements start with words like, “We understand how it feels
to . . .” or “Nobody should have to experience . . .” or “Like you, we are
frustrated by . . .” or, in the case of one Toyota commercial inviting Toyota
owners to engage their local Toyota service center, simply, “We care about
your Toyota.”
Expressing empathy isn’t difficult. Once we’ve identified our customers’
internal problems, we simply need to let them know we understand and
would like to help them find a resolution. Scan your marketing material and
make sure you’ve told 
your customers that you care. Customers won’t know
you care until you tell them.
ARE YOU LIKE ME?
Empathy is more than just sentimental slogans, though. Real empathy means
letting customers know we see them as we see ourselves. Customers look for
brands they have something in common with. Remember, the human brainlikes to conserve calories, and so when a customer realizes they have a lot in
common with a brand, they fill in all the unknown nuances with trust.
Essentially, the customer batches their thinking, meaning they’re thinking in
“chunks” rather than details. Commonality, whether taste in music or shared
values, is a powerful marketing tool.
A recent Discover Card television campaign tapped into the power of
empathy by featuring people who call customer service and end up talking to
an exact replica of themselves. The message? Discover Card will take care of
you the same way you would take care of yourself.
Demonstrate Authority
Nobody likes a know-it-all and nobody wants to be preached at. Brands
that lord their expertise over the masses turn people off. For this reason,
many marketing experts say we shouldn’t express authority at all, that what
people want is a brand that puts their arm around their customer’s shoulder
and walks alongside them as an equal. But this isn’t completely true.
Imagine walking into a nutritionist’s office for the first time, determined to
get into the best shape of your life.
“I’d like to lose thirty pounds,” you tell her. “It’s been a struggle for a long
time, but I’m ready.”
What would you do if the nutritionist looked back at you and said, “Me
too!”
It wouldn’t take you long to realize you’d chosen the wrong nutritionist.
When I talk about authority, I’m really talking about competence. When
looking for a guide, a hero trusts somebody who knows what they’re doing.
The guide doesn’t have to be perfect, but the guide needs to have serious
experience helping other heroes win the day.
So how do we express our authority without bragging about ourselves so
much that we step into the role of hero?
As customers view our websites, commercials, or e-mails, they simply
want to check off a box in the back of their minds that gives them confidence
in our ability to help them.
There are four easy ways to add just the right amount of authority to our
marketing.1.
Testimonials:
 Let others do the talking for you. If you have satisfied
customers, place a few testimonials on your website. Testimonials give
potential customers the gift of going second. They know others have
worked with you and attained success. Avoid stacking ten to twenty
testimonials; otherwise you run the risk of positioning yourself as the
hero. Three is a great number to start with and will serve the need most
customers have to make sure you know what you are doing. Also, avoid
rambling testimonials that heap endless praise on your brand. It won’t
take long for a customer to trust you, so keep a testimonial brief.
2.
Statistics:
 How many satisfied customers have you 
helped? How much
money have you helped them save? By what percentage have their
businesses grown since they started working with you? A simple
statement like the e-mail marketing platform Infusionsoft’s “125,000
users trust [our] award-winning automation software”
6
 is all your
potential customer needs. Moreover, this scratches the itch of the left-
brained consumer who loves numbers, statistics, and facts.
3.
Awards:
 If you’ve won a few awards for your work, feel free to
include small logos or indications of those awards at the bottom of your
page. Again, there’s no need to make a big deal about it, but awards go
a long way in earning your customer’s trust, even if they’ve never heard
of the award.
4.
Logos:
 If you provide a business-to-business product or service, place
logos of known businesses you’ve worked with in your marketing
collateral. Customers want to know you’ve helped other businesses
overcome their same challenges. When they recognize another business
you’ve worked with, it provides social proof you have the ability to help
them win the day.
Take a minute to scan your marketing material and ask yourself whether
you’ve demonstrated competency. Remember, you don’t have to brag about
yourself. Testimonials, logos, awards, and statistics will allow customers to
check the “trust” box in the back of their minds. The questions they’re asking
themselves are, “Does this brand know what they’re doing? Is investing my
time and money going to be worth it? Can they really help me solve my
problem?”HOW TO MAKE A GREAT FIRST IMPRESSION
When people meet your brand, it’s as though they are meeting a person.
They’re wondering if the two of you will get along, whether you can help
them live a better life, whether they want to associate their identity with your
brand, and ultimately whether they can trust you.
Harvard Business professor Amy Cuddy has spent more than fifteen years
studying how business leaders can make a positive first impression. Cuddy
distilled her research into two questions people subconsciously ask when
meeting someone new: “Can I trust this person?” and “Can I respect this
person?” In her book 
Presence
, Cuddy explains human beings value trust so
highly, it’s only after trust is established that a person begins to consider
getting to know us further.
7
When we express empathy, we help our customers answer Cuddy’s first
question, “Can I trust this person?”
Demonstrating competence helps our customers answer the second
question, “Can I respect this person?”
The same two characteristics that help us make a great first impression
with people at a cocktail party also work to help our brand make a great first
impression with potential customers.
Once we express empathy and demonstrate authority, we can position our
brand as the guide our customer has been looking for. This will make a
significant difference in the way they remember us, understand us, and
ultimately, engage with our products and services.
That said, even though our customers like us and trust us, it doesn’t mean
they’re going to place an order. There is still a 
yawning chasm between a
customer’s affection and their decision to invest their hard-earned money in
what we’re offering. What are they looking for next? We’ll talk about it in
the next chapter.
For now, though, brainstorm how you can position yourself as the guide in
your customer’s life by expressing empathy and demonstrating authority.
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a BrandScript or log in to
your existing BrandScript.
•
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm empathetic statements you can
make so your customers know you care about their internal problem.
•
Brainstorm the many ways you can demonstrate competence and
authority by exploring potential testimonials, statistics that demonstrate
competence, awards you’ve won, or logos from other businesses you’ve
helped succeed.
•
Once you finish your brainstorming session, make the two StoryBrand
BrandScript decisions that will allow you to fill out module 3.
CHAPTER 7
WHO GIVES THEM A PLAN
StoryBrand Principle Four: Customers trust a guide
who has a plan.
At this point in our customer’s journey, we’ve identified something they
want, which got the story started. Then we defined their problems, which
created intrigue as to whether we can help them overcome their challenges.Then we introduced ourselves as the guide by expressing empathy and
demonstrating authority, which established trust. And yet, even with all this,
the customer isn’t going to place an order. There’s something missing.
If we’ve positioned ourselves as the guide, our customers are already in a
relationship with us. But making a purchase isn’t a characteristic of a casual
relationship; it’s a characteristic of a commitment. When a customer places
an order, they’re essentially saying, “I believe you can help me solve my
problem, and 
I believe it so much I’m willing to put skin in the game. I’m
willing to part with my hard-earned dollars.”
Commitments are risky for our customers because as soon as they make a
commitment, they can lose something. Most customers are not going to take
this risk yet.
When a customer is deciding whether to buy something, we should picture
them standing on the edge of a rushing creek. It’s true they want what’s on
the other side, but as they stand there, they hear a waterfall downstream.
What happens if they fall into the creek? What would life look like if they
went over those falls? These are the kinds of questions our customers
subconsciously ponder as they hover their little arrow over the “Buy Now”
button. 
What if it doesn’t work? What if I’m a fool for buying this?
In order to ease our customers’ concerns, we need to place large stones in
that creek. When we identify the stones our customers can step on to get
across the creek, we remove much of the risk and increase their comfort level
about doing business with us. It’s as though we’re saying, “First, step here.
See, it’s easy. Then step here, then here, and then you’ll be on the other side,
and your problem will be resolved.”
In the StoryBrand Framework, we refer to these “stones” as a 
plan
.
In the movie 
Moneyball
, Peter Brand (the guide) gives Billy Beane a plan
he can employ to turn his baseball team around. In a series of steps, Billy will
begin using an algorithm to choose players, rather than relying on anecdotal
evidence from his antiquated coaching staff. He’s going to begin to trust the
numbers and run the team the way a hedge-fund manager might run his hedge
fund.
In nearly every movie you can think of, the guide gives the 
hero a plan.
The plan is the bridge the hero must cross in order to arrive at the climactic
scene. Rocky has to train using nontraditional methods, Tommy Boy has to
embark on a national sales trip, and Juliet must drink the potion the
apothecary gives her in order to trick her family into thinking she’s died andto be free to be with Romeo.
The plan tightens the focus of the movie and gives the hero a “path of
hope” she can walk that might lead to the resolution of her troubles.
THE PLAN CREATES CLARITY
Plans can take many shapes and forms, but all effective plans do one of two
things: they either clarify how somebody can do business with us, or they
remove the sense of risk somebody might have if they’re considering
investing in our products or services.
Remember the mantra “If you confuse, you lose”? Not having a plan is a
guaranteed way to confuse your customers.
After potential customers listen to us give a keynote or visit our webpage
or read an e-mail blast we’ve sent, they’re all wondering the same thing:
What do you want me to do now?
 If we don’t guide them, they experience a
little bit of confusion, and because they can hear that waterfall downstream,
they use that confusion as an excuse not to do business with us.
The fact that we want them to place an order is not enough information to
motivate them. If we’re selling a storage system a customer can install in
their garage, they hover over that “Buy Now” button subconsciously
wondering whether it will work for them, how hard it will be to install, and
whether it will sit 
unopened in the garage in boxes like the last thing they
bought. But when we spell out how easy this whole thing is and let them
know they can get started in three easy steps, they are more likely to place an
order.
We must tell them to . . .
1.
Measure your space.
2.
Order the items that fit.
3.
Install it in minutes using basic tools.
Even though these steps may seem obvious, they aren’t obvious to our
customers. Placing stones in the creek greatly increases the chance they will
cross the creek.THE PROCESS PLAN
At StoryBrand we’ve identified two plans you can use to effectively
encourage customers to do business with you. The first kind of plan, and the
one we recommend every one of our clients employ, is a process plan.
A process plan can describe the steps a customer needs to take to buy our
product, or the steps the customer needs to take to use our product after they
buy it, or a mixture of both.
For instance, if you’re selling an expensive product, you might break
down the steps like this:
1.
Schedule an appointment.
2.
Allow us to create a customized plan.
3.
Let’s execute the plan together.
Whether we’re selling a financial product, a medical procedure, a
university education, or any other complicated solution, a process plan takes
the confusion out of our customer’s journey and guides them in the next
steps.
So far I’ve mostly talked about stones we can place in the creek that lead
our customers to make a purchase, but another kind of process plan would be
the post-purchase process plan. A post-purchase process plan is best used
when our customers might have problems imagining how they would use our
product after they buy it. For instance, with a complicated piece of software,
we might want to spell out the steps or even the phases a customer would
take after they make the purchase:
1.
Download the software.
2.
Integrate your database into our system.
3.
Revolutionize your customer interaction.
The post-purchase process plan does the same thing a prepurchase process
plan does, in the sense that it alleviates confusion. When a customer is
looking at the wide span between themselves and the integration of a
complicated product, they’re less likely to make a purchase. But when theyread your plan, they think to themselves, 
Oh, I can do that. That’s not hard
,
and they click “Buy Now.”
A process plan can also combine the pre- and post-purchase steps. For
instance:
1.
Test-drive a car.
2.
Purchase the car.
3.
Enjoy free maintenance for life.
Again, the key to the success of 
any
 plan is to alleviate confusion for our
customers. What steps do they need to take to do business with you? Spell
out those steps, and it’ll be as though you’ve paved a sidewalk through a
field. More people will cross the field.
We get frequent questions about how many steps a process plan should
have. The answer varies, of course, but we recommend at least three and no
more than six. If doing business with you requires more than six steps, break
down those steps into phases and describe the phases. In reality, you might
guide your customer through twenty or thirty steps, but studies show when
you bombard customers with information, buying decreases.
Remember, the whole point of creating a plan is to alleviate customers’
confusion. Having more than four steps may actually add to, rather than
reduce, confusion. The key is to simplify their journey so they are more likely
to do business with you.
THE AGREEMENT PLAN
If process plans are about alleviating confusion, agreement plans are about
alleviating fears.
An agreement plan is best understood as a list of agreements you make
with your customers to help them overcome their fear of doing business with
you.
Earlier I talked about CarMax and how they resolve the customer’s
agitation of having to deal with a used-car salesman. One of the tools they
use to communicate that customers don’t have to encounter this internal fear
is an agreement plan. CarMax’s four-point agreement includes the promisethat customers will never have to haggle. Afraid you’ll be stuck with 
a
lemon? CarMax refuses to sell a car that doesn’t meet their standards, and
they put every car through a renewal process to be sure it earns their quality
certification seal.
1
Today, CarMax sells more cars than its next three competitors combined.
In 2015, 
Automotive News
 named CarMax the undisputed used-car
champion.
2
 As I mentioned in 
chapter 5
, CarMax rarely advertises the
solution to their customers’ external problems, that is, the need for a used car.
Instead, they focus on their customers’ internal problem, the fear of
interacting with a used-car dealer, and they alleviate this fear with an
agreement plan.
An agreement plan can also work to increase the perceived value of a
service you promise to provide. For instance, Newt Gingrich’s “Contract with
America” is an example of an agreement plan. Newt was a relatively
unknown congressman from Georgia who led a takeover in both houses of
Congress by making an agreement with voters. Newt simply took age-old
conservative talking points, turned them into a list, and said, “If you vote for
us, we’ll do all these things.” More than three hundred conservative
legislators signed on, and Newt became an overnight presidential hopeful.
Another benefit of an agreement plan is that it can work to clarify shared
values between our customers and us. Whole Foods’s list of values has
attracted millions to their stores and, in ways, works as an agreement with
their customers to source their food in a way that is socially and
environmentally responsible.
Unlike a process plan, an agreement plan often works in the background.
Agreement plans do not have to be featured on the home page of your
website (though they could be), but as customers get to know you, they’ll
sense a deeper level to your service and may realize why when they finally
encounter your agreement plan.
The best way to arrive at an agreement plan is to list all the things your
customer might be concerned about as it relates to your product or service
and then counter that list with agreements that will alleviate their fears.
If it’s short enough (we’re fans of brevity, obviously), you can feature
your agreement plan on the wall of your business or even on your packaging
or shopping bags.WHAT’S THE PLAN CALLED?
Once you create your process or agreement plan (or both), consider giving
them a title that will increase the perceived value of your product or service.
For instance, your process plan might be called the “easy installation plan” or
the “world’s best night’s sleep plan.” Your agreement plan might be titled the
“customer satisfaction agreement” or even “our quality guarantee.” Titling
your plan will frame it in the customer’s mind and increases the perceived
value of all that your brand offers.
Now that you’ve given your customer a plan, they will be much more
likely to do business with you. You’ve lifted the fog, made things clear, set
stones in the creek, and they are ready to continue the journey.
And yet before they’ll make a commitment, they will need one more thing
from you. They will need you to call them to action. I’ll teach you the right
and wrong ways to call customers to do business in the next chapter.
First, though, spend some time defining the plan or plans you want to
implement to ease your customers’ fears and concerns so they will engage
your brand.
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN
•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript or
log in to your existing BrandScript.
•
Either alone or with a team, brainstorm the simple steps a customer
would need to take to do business with you (either a pre- or post-
purchase process plan or a combination of both).
•
What fears do your customers have related to your industry? What
agreements could you make with them that would alleviate those fears?
Feel free to use the notes feature of your BrandScript, where there is
more room, to document your agreement plan. Use the plan section,
then, to document the title of your plan.
•
Do you share unique values with your customers? Can those values be
spelled out in an agreement plan?•
Write the steps (and name) of your process plan on your StoryBrand
BrandScript. If you’re creating an agreement plan, simply use the notes
section of your BrandScript to capture the agreement you’ll be making
with your customers.CHAPTER 8
AND CALLS THEM TO ACTION
StoryBrand Principle Five: Customers do not take
action unless they are challenged to take action.
At this point in our customers’ story, they are excited. We’ve defined a
desire, identified their challenges, empathized with their feelings, established
our competency in helping them, and given them a plan. But they need us todo one more thing: they need us to call them to action.
ASK THEM TO PLACE AN ORDER
In stories, characters never take action on their own. They have to be
challenged to take action. Tom Cruise’s character would never have
journeyed to pick up his brother in the movie 
Rain 
Man
 unless he’d received
a call explaining his father had died. Romeo wouldn’t have climbed into the
Capulet courtyard unless he’d fallen sick with love for Juliet. Elle Woods
wouldn’t have applied to Harvard unless she’d been dumped by her
boyfriend. Liam Neeson’s character wouldn’t have chased the bad guys to
Europe unless his daughter had been kidnapped.
The reason characters have to be challenged to take action is because
everybody sitting in the dark theater knows human beings do not make major
life decisions unless something challenges them to do so.
If I wrote a story about a guy who wanted to climb Everest and then one
day looked at himself in the mirror and decided to do it, I’d lose the audience.
That’s not how people work. Bodies at rest tend to stay at rest, and so do
customers. Heroes need to be challenged by outside forces.
Have you ever wondered why late-night infomercial hosts keep screaming,
“Call now! Don’t delay!” over and over as though they’re trying to wake
people up from a zombie trance? They do that because they’re trying to wake
people up from a zombie trance!
Your customers are bombarded with more than three thousand commercial
messages per day, and unless we are bold in our calls to action, we will be
ignored. If our calls to action are soft, they will not be noticed.
The Power of the “Buy Now” Button
I have a friend who has bought and sold nearly one hundred companies.
He knows a lot about scaling a company up, and as he evaluates a company,
he makes sure the people, products, and procedures are all healthy. But the
key ingredient he looks 
for in a company is whether the company is
challenging their customers to place orders. My friend knows the fastest way
to grow a company is to make the calls to action clear and then repeat themover and over. He’s made millions simply buying companies, creating
stronger calls to action, and then selling the company after their revenue
increases.
One of the biggest hindrances to business success is that we think
customers can read our minds. It’s obvious to us that we want them to place
an order (why else would we be talking to them about our products?), so we
assume it’s obvious to them too. It isn’t.
There should be a “Buy Now” button in the top right corner of your
website, and it shouldn’t be cluttered with a bunch of other buttons. The same
call to action should be repeated above the fold and in the center of your
website, and again and again as people scroll down the page.
Companies that don’t make their calls to action clear remind me of my
dating days before I met my wife. Instead of clearly asking a girl out, I’d say
something like, “Coffee is nice, isn’t it? Do you like coffee?”
What in the world is a woman supposed to do with a question like that?
That’s just not how you make a baby.
As I got older I realized the power of clarity. In fact, the way my wife and
I got together was probably the clearest I’ve communicated about anything.
I’d known Betsy from a distance for a while, but when I finally got up the
courage to ask her out, I discovered she had a boyfriend. Still, I’d been
passive long enough. I’d been hoping she’d notice how much I liked her even
as I completely ignored her. It was time for a strong call to action. The next
time I saw her, I told her how I really felt and 
that I’d like to call her in thirty
days to ask her out. I said she’d need to ditch the other guy to keep things
from being awkward.
Amazingly, thirty days later, she’d broken up with the other guy and we
started dating. About a year later we got married. We’re currently working on
a baby that we’re probably going to name “Buy Now” to remind everybody
how important it is to have a clear call to action.
The moral of the story is people don’t have ESP. They can’t read our
minds and they don’t know what we want, even if it seems obvious. We have
to clearly invite customers to take a journey with us or they won’t.
When I was a kid there was a guy on late-night television who used to saw
mattresses in half with a chainsaw. He’d scream at the camera that he’d gone
crazy and was slashing prices on all kinds of furniture. I think a lot of us are
afraid to ask for the sale because we don’t want to look like that guy.
It’s true we don’t want to constantly beat our customers over the head withdirect calls to action. Of the thousands of clients we’ve worked with, though,
we’ve yet to encounter anybody who oversells. Most people think they’re
overselling when, in truth, their calls to action fall softer than a whisper.
Do You Believe in Your Product?
The reality is when we try to sell passively, we communicate a lack of
belief in our product. When we don’t ask clearly for the sale, the customer
senses weakness. They sense we’re asking for charity rather than to change
their lives. Customers aren’t looking for brands that are filled with doubt and
want affirmation; they’re looking for brands that have solutions to their
problems.
If we can change our customer’s story for the better, why 
shouldn’t we be
bold about inviting them to do business with us? The guide in a movie must
be direct with the hero about what they want the hero to do, otherwise the
plot gets muddled and the audience starts to daydream.
Two Kinds of Calls to Action
At StoryBrand we recommend two kinds of calls to action: 
direct calls to
action
 and 
transitional calls to action.
 They work like two phases of a
relationship.
Let’s say we ask a customer to buy but they don’t. Who knows why, but
they don’t. There’s no reason to end the relationship just because they aren’t
ready. I believe in honoring people who aren’t ready, and I’m a fan of no-
pressure sales. Still, I want to deepen the relationship so that whenever they
need what I sell, they will remember me. The way I deepen that relationship
is through transitional calls to action.
Direct calls to action include requests like “buy now,” “schedule an
appointment,” or “call today.” A direct call to action is something that leads
to a sale, or at least is the first step down a path that leads to a sale.
Transitional calls to action, however, contain less risk and usually offer a
customer something for free. Transitional calls to action can be used to “on-
ramp” potential customers to an eventual purchase. Inviting people to watch a
webinar or download a PDF are good examples of transitional calls to action.
To further the relational metaphor, a transitional call to action is likesaying, “Can I take you out on a date?” to your customer, and a direct call to
action is like saying, “Will you marry me?”
In our marketing collateral, we always want to have a direct 
call to action
and a transitional call to action. The metaphorical conversation with our
customers goes like this:
Us
: Will you marry me?
Customer
: No.
Us
: Will you go out with me again?
Customer
: Yes.
Us
: Will you marry me now?
Customer
: No.
Us
: Will you go out with me again?
Customer
: Sure, you’re interesting and the information you provide is
helpful.
Us
: Will you marry me?
Customer
: Okay, I’ll marry you now.
As a brand, it’s our job to pursue our customers. We want to get to know
them and for them to get to know us, but we are the ones who need to take
the initiative.
THOSE WHO ASK AGAIN AND AGAIN SHALL
FINALLY RECEIVE
Years ago, I was preparing a keynote presentation for a global shampoo
brand and my graphic designer was too busy with other projects to help. Not
wanting to wait, I decided to outsource the presentation to a design house. I
went looking online for a shop that dealt specifically with presentations and
found two local houses that could help.
The first website I visited was beautifully designed—a 
looping video
loaded beneath text that explained the design house’s values and priorities.
After about twenty seconds admiring the look of their site, though, I started
searching for information about how to do business with them. I couldn’t find
anything. They featured samples of previous projects, a few testimonials, anda phone number I could call but no direct, clear call to action. So I decided to
check out their competitor’s site.
The other company’s site wasn’t nearly as beautiful, but it dared to be
clear. “If you’re worried about a presentation, we can help you hit a grand
slam.” The truth is I was worried, and they spoke to my internal fear. They
also painted a picture of a climactic scene: to hit a grand slam. Then they
asked me out: they offered a PDF called “5 Things Great Presenters Get
Right,” and I was quite curious. I downloaded the PDF and read it in a few
minutes. Their transitional call to action earned my trust and positioned them
as the guide in my story. They had authority, it seemed. Then, on their
website, they had a “schedule an appointment” button, and because they’d
wined and dined me, I did. I never went back to the initial designer’s website
(which, remember, was much better looking), and before long I was gladly
writing a check for several thousand dollars to the company that had clearly
challenged me to take action.
Direct Calls to Action
It bears repeating: there should be one obvious button to press on your
website, and it should be the direct call to action. When I say, “one obvious
button,” I don’t mean “only one button,” but rather one that stands out. Make
the button a different color, larger, a bolder text, whatever you need to do.
Then repeat that same button over and over so people see it as they scroll
down the page.
Our customers should always know we want to marry them. Even if
they’re not ready, we should keep saying it. You just never know when
they’re going to want to make a commitment, and when they do, you want to
be on one knee, holding flowers, smiling for the picture.
Examples of direct calls to action are
•
Order now
•
Call today
•
Schedule an appointment
•
Register today
•
Buy nowDirect calls to action can be included at the end of every e-mail blast, on
signage, in our radio ads, and even in our television commercials. Consider
including direct calls to action in every team member’s e-mail signature, and
if you really want to get the point across, on all your business cards. The idea
is to make it very clear what we’d like customers to do: to make a purchase
so we can help them solve their problem.
Transitional Calls to Action
Direct calls to action are simple and obvious (though ridiculously
underused), but transitional calls to action can be equally as powerful to grow
your business. In fact, StoryBrand grew into a multimillion-dollar company
in only its second year based solely on the use of a transitional call to action.
Recognizing that most of our clients were using the StoryBrand Framework
to fix their websites, we released a free PDF called “5 Things Your Website
Should Include,” and thousands of people downloaded 
it. At the back of the
PDF we placed an ad for our StoryBrand Marketing Workshop. In the next
twelve months, we doubled revenue without spending a dollar on marketing.
A good transitional call to action can do three powerful things for your
brand:
1.
Stake a claim to your territory
. If you want to be known as the leader
in a certain territory, stake a claim to that territory before the
competition beats you to it. Creating a PDF, a video series, or anything
else that positions you as the expert is a great way to establish authority.
2.
Create reciprocity.
 I’ve never worried about giving away too much
free information. In fact, the more generous a brand is, the more
reciprocity they create. All relationships are give-and-take, and the more
you give to your customers, the more likely they will be to give
something back in the future. Give freely.
3.
Position yourself as the guide.
 When you help your customers solve a
problem, even for free, you position yourself as the guide. The next time
they encounter a problem in that area of their lives, they will look to you
for help.
Transitional calls to action come in all shapes and sizes. Here are a fewideas to create transitional calls to action of your own:
•
Free information:
 Create a white paper or free PDF educating
customers about your field of expertise. This will position you as a guide
in your customer’s story and create reciprocity. Educational videos,
podcasts, webinars, and 
even live events are great transitional calls to
action that on-ramp customers toward a purchase.
•
Testimonials:
 Creating a video or PDF including testimonials from
happy clients creates a story map in the minds of potential customers.
When they see others experience a successful ending to their story, they
will want that same ending for themselves.
•
Samples:
 If you can give away free samples of your product, do it.
Offering a customer the ability to test-drive a car, taste your seasoning,
sample your music, or read a few pages of your book are great ways to
introduce potential customers to your products.
•
Free trial:
 Offering a limited-time free trial works as a risk-removal
policy that helps to on-ramp your customers. Once they try your product,
they may not be able to live without it.
Connecting the Dots
Earlier this year StoryBrand worked with a health clinic that specialized in
health screening, drug testing, treating minor sicknesses, and giving shots.
The primary traffic the clinic received was through businesses who needed
their employees to complete drug tests. Still, the clinic was stagnant in
growth. Customers were coming in to get one product but weren’t aware of
anything else the clinic offered.
Upon visiting the clinic, one of our StoryBrand Guides noticed they
needed to create clear direct and transitional calls to action.
Patients would come into the shop, sign and date an entry form, then sit in
the lobby reading magazines or watching 
television while they waited for a
nurse. As one of our StoryBrand Certified Guides consulted with the clinic,
she told the owner to remove the television and magazines. Instead of
magazines, she encouraged them to create a transitional call to action called
“The Healthy Body Checklist,” allowing patients to self-assess their health.
The checklist included questions like, “Do you feel tired at about two in theafternoon every day?” and “Are you satisfied with your current weight?”
After patients finished their drug or blood tests, we suggested that nurses
review the checklist with each patient and let them know about solutions that
were also available at the clinic. The receptionist could then enter the
customer’s data into their e-mail marketing system and, based on how a
patient was tagged, an automated campaign would go into effect. If the
customer seemed like they needed more vitamin B, they’d get a series of e-
mails explaining the benefits of a monthly vitamin B shot, along with clear
calls to action directing the patient to make another appointment.
Is there a transitional call to action you can create that will grow your
business? Are your direct calls to action clear and repeated often? If not, your
customers likely don’t know what you want them to do. Remember, people
are drawn to clarity and away from confusion. Having clear calls to action
means customers aren’t confused about the actions they need to take to do
business with you.
WHAT ARE THE STAKES?
Once customers decide to buy our products, how can we increase the
perceived value of those products and deepen the positive 
experience they
have with our brand? How can we make the story we’ve invited them into so
enticing that they can’t wait to turn the page?
To do this, we must define the stakes. What’s at stake in the customer’s
story if they do or do not choose to do business with us? If we’ve not defined
the stakes, we’ve not made the story interesting.
In the next two modules, I’ll teach you how to deepen your customers’
experience with your brand by defining exactly what’s at stake.
Before we move forward, though, continue clarifying your business by
brainstorming potential calls to action you can include in your StoryBrand
BrandScript.
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO YOUR
CUSTOMERS LISTEN•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript or
log in to your existing BrandScript.
•
Decide what direct call to action you want to make obvious on all your
marketing material.
•
Brainstorm any transitional calls to action you can create that will stake
a claim to your territory, create reciprocity with your customers, and
position your brand as a guide.
•
Fill out the “Call to Action” section of your StoryBrand BrandScript.CHAPTER 9
THAT HELPS THEM AVOID
FAILURE
StoryBrand Principle Six: Every human being is trying
to avoid a tragic ending.
A story lives and dies based on the question: Will the hero succeed or willthey fail? Throughout a story, storytellers foreshadow a potential successful
ending and a potential tragic ending. The audience remains in suspense as
long as the storyteller keeps the hero teetering on the precipice of success and
failure.
The only two motivations a hero has in a story are to escape something
bad or experience something good. Such is life. Our desire to avoid pain
motivates us to seek a resolution to our problems.
If a storyteller doesn’t clearly let an audience know what no-good, terrible,
awful thing might befall their hero unless she 
overcomes her challenge, the
story will have no stakes, and a story without stakes is boring.
As a rule, each scene in a movie must answer the question: What’s at stake
for the hero? Every conversation, every chase scene, every reflective montage
should serve the movie in the same way: it must either move the character
closer to, or further from, the tragic result that might befall them.
We kept turning the pages of Charlotte Brontë’s 
Jane Eyre
 to find out the
dark secret Edward Rochester had been hiding.
We sat on the edge of our seats in 
Jaws
 because we knew the citizens of
Amity Island might be killed by the shark if Chief Martin Brody didn’t do
something.
Imagine a story in which nothing bad could befall the hero. Imagine a love
story in which everything went well for the couple straight through to the
beautiful and tension-free wedding. Imagine an action movie in which the
bomb the hero had to destroy was actually a dud and nobody was in danger.
Would an audience care?
Brands that don’t warn their customers about what could happen if they
don’t buy their products fail to answer the “so what” question every customer
is secretly asking.
WHERE’S THE MAYHEM?
Allstate Insurance’s long-running Mayhem campaign features actor Dean
Winters humorously portraying everything from raccoons in the attic to a
raging fire started by a barbecue grill at a tailgating party. The idea was to
humorously remind people why they needed insurance. Mayhem is always
contrasted against the 
peaceful stability of Allstate, which asks the question,
“Are you in good hands?”In 2015, Allstate, along with the advertising agency Leo Burnett, took the
campaign to a higher level. During the Sugar Bowl on New Year’s Day,
Allstate launched a campaign called Project Share Aware. The idea was to
make people aware that sharing their whereabouts on social media might tip
off criminals about when to burglarize their homes.
To announce the project, Allstate found a real couple and led them to
believe they’d won a prize. They visited the couple in their home, secretly
taking pictures of their household items. Later, they recreated their home on a
soundstage, complete with duplicates of their belongings. The couple was
then invited to attend the Sugar Bowl and given their own private box.
During the game, Mayhem began auctioning off the couple’s belongings on
national television. People were directed to Mayhemsale.com for bargain-
basement prices on everything from the couple’s used car to an old tuba. As
the couple watched their possessions being sold on the big screens at the
game, they panicked. Hidden cameras caught their reactions and broadcast
them on live television.
Of course, the couple’s actual possessions were safe. Nevertheless, the
campaign agitated a fear in many Americans. In fact, news outlets all over the
country, including ABC News,
Wall Street Journal
, and the 
New York Times
,
covered the story. Suddenly, the threat of criminals walking into our homes
as we announce our distant whereabouts on social media became a national
fear.
The result? Mayhemsale.com received 6,000 to 10,000 hits per second
immediately following each commercial. The site received more than 18
million hits during the game. Also, #Mayhemsale trended in the top ten
hashtags during the game, 
and immediately after the commercials aired,
surged to number one worldwide. Mayhem’s Twitter followers increased by
24,000 during the game, and the first commercial of the campaign resulted in
more than 20 million impressions on Facebook and almost 70,000 likes.
1
Allstate had, in the course of one football game, foreshadowed a potential
failure for their customers and sold an insurance protecting them, both
opening a story loop and offering to close it in a single campaign.
Of course, we don’t all have access to the millions it takes to create a
campaign like this, but the benefits of featuring the potential pitfalls of not
doing business with us are much easier to include than we may think. Blog
subjects, e-mail content, and bullet points on our website can all include
elements of potential failure to give our customers a sense of urgency when itcomes to our products and services.
WHAT’S THERE TO LOSE?
As it relates to our marketing, the obvious question is: What will the
customer lose if they don’t buy our products?
Some of you just cringed. I understand. I used to cringe when I thought
about “warning” my customers about imminent doom too. Why wouldn’t I?
The last thing I want to be is a fearmonger, because it’s true that fearmongers
don’t do well in the marketplace. But fearmongering is not the problem 99.9
percent of business leaders struggle with. Most of us struggle with the
opposite. We don’t bring up the negative stakes enough and so the story
we’re telling falls flat. Remember, if there are no stakes, there is no story.
People Are Motivated by Loss Aversion
Emphasizing potential loss is more than just good storytelling; it’s good
behavioral economics. In 1979, Nobel Memorial Prize winner Daniel
Kahneman published a theory about why people make certain buying
decisions. Prospect Theory, as it was called, espoused that people are more
likely to be dissatisfied with a loss than they are satisfied with a gain. In other
words, people hate losing $100 more than they like winning $100. This, of
course, means loss aversion is a greater motivator of buying decisions than
potential gains. In fact, according to Kahneman, in certain situations, people
are two to three times more motivated to make a change to avoid a loss than
they are to achieve a gain.
2
When Lyndon Baines Johnson worked to pass the Civil Rights Act of
1964, he faced undying pressure from conservative political leaders across
the South. One of the principal leaders who refused to endorse the legislation
was George Wallace, then governor of Alabama. Wallace had no vote on the
bill, but his influence threatened its passage all the same. At a crucial moment
in the negotiations, Johnson sat Wallace down and explained he’d better get
on the right side of history. Johnson said that Wallace’s legacy hung in the
balance, that they’d either build a statue in his honor or he’d be remembered
for instigating hate. The choice was his. Johnson spelled out the narrative andemphasized the stakes, including the potential of the governor’s tarnished
legacy. The Civil Rights bill, of course, was passed.
So how do we use messages from the failure category in our marketing? In
Dominic Infante, Andrew Rancer, and Deanna Womack’s book 
Building
Communication Theory
, they propose a four-step process called a “fear
appeal.”
First,
 we must make a reader (or listener) know they are vulnerable to a
threat. For example:
“Nearly 30 percent of all homes have evidence of termite infestation.”
Second,
 we should let the reader know that since they’re vulnerable, they
should take action to reduce their vulnerability.
“Since nobody wants termites, you should do something about it to protect
your home.”
Third,
 we should let them know about a 
specific
 call to action that
protects them from the risk.
“We offer a complete home treatment that will insure your house is free of
termites.”
Fourth,
 we should challenge people to take this specific action.
“Call us today and schedule your home treatment.”
3
Essentially, Infante, Rancer, and Womack present a soft way of agitating a
fear and then highlight a path that would return readers or listeners to peace
and stability.
Fear Is Salt in the Recipe
We do not need to use a great deal of fear in the story we’re telling our
customers. Just a pinch of salt in the recipe will do. While we do need to
communicate something from the failure category in order to complete our
BrandScript, too many warnings about imminent doom will turn customers
off.
Infante, Rancer, and Womack explain why:
When receivers are either very fearful or very unafraid, little 
attitude or
behavior change results. High levels of fear are so strong thatindividuals block them out; low levels are too weak to produce the
desired effect. Messages containing moderate amounts of fear-rousing
content are most effective in producing attitudinal and/or behavior
change.
4
WHAT ARE YOU HELPING YOUR CUSTOMER
AVOID?
What negative consequences are you helping customers avoid? Could
customers lose money? Are there health risks if they avoid your services?
What about opportunity costs? Could they make or save more money with
you than they can with a competitor? Could their quality of life decline if
they pass you by? What’s the cost of not doing business with you?
If you’re a financial advisor, for example, the list of what you’re helping
customers avoid might look like this:
•
Confusion about how your money is being invested
•
Not being ready for retirement
•
A lack of transparency from your financial advisor
•
A lack of one-on-one interaction with your advisor
•
Hidden fees
We can even imagine a tragic scene that might befall our customers if they
don’t engage. Our financial advisor might write something like this:
“Don’t postpone your retirement. You’ve worked too hard for too long to
not enjoy time with your grandchildren.”
Here are a few examples of what StoryBrand clients are helping their
customers avoid:
PERKINS MOTORPLEX (USED CARS)
Getting ripped off by a used-car salesman
Being stuck with a lemon
Feeling taken advantage ofRELY TECHNOLOGY (AUDIO AND VIDEO FOR THE HOME)
Living in a boring home
Nobody will want to watch the game at your house
You need a PhD to turn on the TV
AEROSPACE MARKET ENTRY (MANUFACTURER OF
AEROSPACE EQUIPMENT)
Product failure, damaging your reputation
Inefficient production
Being passed by the competition
WIN SHAPE CAMPS (SUMMER CAMP FOR KIDS)
A long, boring summer
A bunch of restless kids in your house
Regret about having wasted the summer
You can see how including these ideas in each client’s marketing material
will give their overall story a sense of completeness and urgency.
In this module of your StoryBrand BrandScript, you’re only given a few
bullet points. You’ll notice you’re given a great deal 
more in the success
module. This, of course, is on purpose. You’ll only need a few terrible,
dastardly, awful things to warn your customers about to get the point across.
Too much and your customers will resist you, too little and they won’t know
why your products even matter.
Once we’ve defined the stakes, your customers will be motivated to resist
failure. Next we’ll dramatically increase their motivation by helping them
imagine what life can look like when they buy your products or services.
After they see what you offer and how it can make their lives better, you’ll
have included stakes in the narrative and customer engagement will grow.
First, though, let’s warn customers about the consequences of not doing
business with you.
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERSLISTEN
•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript or
log in to your existing BrandScript.
•
Brainstorm the negative consequences you are helping your customers
avoid.
•
Write down at least three of those consequences on your StoryBrand
BrandScript.
CHAPTER 10
AND ENDS IN A SUCCESS
StoryBrand Principle Seven: Never assume people
understand how your brand can change their lives. Tell
them.
Years ago, a friend gave me the best leadership advice I’ve ever received. He
said, “Don, always remember, people want to be taken somewhere.”I’ve found that advice applies to my family, my team, the books I write,
and the speeches I give. And it certainly applies to our marketing.
Where is your brand taking people? Are you taking them to financial
security? To the day when they’ll move into their dream home? To a fun
weekend with friends? Without knowing it, every potential customer we meet
is asking us where we can take them.
Ronald Reagan envisioned America as a shining city on a hill. Bill Clinton
promised to build a bridge to the twenty-first 
century. Casting a clear,
aspirational vision has always served a presidential candidate.
By foreshadowing a potential successful ending to a story, or, as Stew
Friedman at the Wharton School puts it, defining a “compelling image of an
achievable future,”
1
 leaders captivate the imaginations of their audiences.
Successful brands, like successful leaders, make it clear what life will look
like if somebody engages their products or services. Nike promised to bring
inspiration and innovation to every athlete. Likewise, Starbucks offered to
inspire and nurture their customers, one cup at a time. For years, Men’s
Wearhouse promised, “You’ll like the way you look,” and they even
guaranteed it.
Without a vision, the people perish. And so do brands.
In the final and most important element of the StoryBrand Framework,
we’re going to offer our customers what they want most: a happy ending to
their story.
THE ENDING SHOULD BE SPECIFIC AND
CLEAR
One of the problems we run into with StoryBrand clients is the vision they
paint for their customer’s future is too fuzzy. Nobody gets excited about a
muddled vision. Stories aren’t vague, they’re defined; they’re about specific
things happening to specific people. Otherwise they’re not stories; they’re
just lofty notions.
Harrison Ford had to defeat the terrorists on Air Force One to return to a
peaceful White House. Erin Brockovich had to win the final verdict against
Pacific Gas and Electric so the citizens of Hinkley, California, could know
justice. In a good story, 
the resolution must be clearly defined so the audienceknows exactly what to hope for.
Being specific matters. Kennedy would have bored the world had he cast a
vision for a “highly competitive and productive space program.” Instead, he
defined the ambition specifically and as such inspired a nation: “We’re going
to put a man on the moon.”
BEFORE AND AFTER
My friend Ryan Deiss at DigitalMarketer created a great tool to help us
imagine the success our customers will experience if they use our products
and services.
In a simple grid, Ryan allows us to see how our customers’ lives will look
after they engage us, how they will feel, what their average day will look like,
and what kind of new status they will enjoy.
Filling out this grid for your brand is a terrific exercise. Once you know
how your customers’ lives will change after they engage your brand, you will
have plenty of copy to use in your marketing collateral.The next step is to say it clearly. We must tell our customers what their
lives will look like after they buy our products, or they will have no
motivation to do so. We have to talk about the end vision we have for their
lives in our keynotes, in our e-mail blasts, on our websites, and everywhere
else.
Images are also important when it comes to casting a vision for our
customers. If you’re selling kitchen flooring, your website might show a
happy mom picking up her child from the beautiful and sparkling kitchen
floor. If you’re selling education, show us students in the classroom having a
great time learning in the environment you provide. Whatever it is you sell,
show us people happily engaging with the product.
HOW TO END A STORY FOR YOUR CUSTOMER
Ultimately, the success module of your StoryBrand BrandScript should
simply be a list of resolutions to your customers’ problems. Brainstorm what
your customer’s life will look like externally if their problem is resolved, then
think about how that resolution will make them feel, then consider why the
resolution to their problem has made the world a more just place to live in.
When we resolve our customers’ internal, external, and philosophical
problems, we’ve truly created a resolution that will satisfy their story.
If you want to take the concept a little deeper, it’s worth exploring how
most stories are resolved by story experts. Over the centuries, storytellers
have learned what really gives an audience closure and a sense of
satisfaction.
The three dominant ways storytellers end a story is by allowing the hero to
1.
Win some sort of power or position.
2.
Be unified with somebody or something that makes them whole.
3.
Experience some kind of self-realization that also makes them
whole.
The fact that these are the three most-employed story endings implies
these are three dominant psychological desires shared by most human beings.
If our brand can promise a resolution that associates with one of thesepowerful desires, our BrandScript will be effective and our message will be
enticing.
Let’s explore the three desires more closely:
1. Winning Power and Position (The Need for
Status)
When I was in high school, a film came out called 
Can’t Buy Me Love
 in
which a likable loser named Ronald Miller falls in love with a popular
cheerleader named Cindy Mancini. Unfortunately for me, Ronald’s character
was so overlooked and invisible in his school that most people called him
Donald. You can imagine the teasing I received.
But we loved the movie all the same. Why? Because in 
the end, of course,
Ronald gets the girl. But he gets more than the girl. He gains status. After
winning the heart of Cindy, he becomes one of the popular kids, or, more
accurately, he realizes trying to be somebody else is a waste of time, which,
of course, makes him more popular.
Regardless, everybody wants status, which is evidenced by the number of
“coming-of-age” stories in which a character realizes they’ve got what it
takes to run with the big dogs.
As I mentioned earlier in the book, the primary function of our brain is to
help us survive and thrive, and part of survival means gaining status. If our
brand can participate in making our customers more esteemed, respected, and
appealing in a social context, we’re offering something they want.
So how can our brand offer status? There are many ways:
Offer access:
 My wife loves using her Starbucks membership card
because it gains her points, which gains her status and the occasional
free latte. We’ve had many conversations about the intangibility of said
status, but I’ve learned not to argue. She’s excited to be on her way to
some kind of double-pump jazzy diamond level, which I’m pretty sure
means she can cut in front of people at the drive-through.
Create scarcity:
 Offering a limited number of a specific item creates
scarcity, and owning something that is scarce is often seen as a status
symbol. When Jeep puts a badge that reads “limited” on the back of
their Grand Cherokee, they’re promoting the scarcity of the luxurySUV.
Offer a premium:
 Most companies earn 70 percent or 
more of their
revenue from a small percentage of their clients. Few, though, identify
those clients and offer them a title such as “Preferred” or “Diamond
Member.” I love being an “Emerald Club” member with National Car
Rental because it means I get to bypass the counter, jump in a car, and
drive off. We even recommend a status-associated title for the nonprofit
brands we work with. People will be much more likely to donate if they
know they are an “Anchor Donor” and even more likely if they get
special privileges like updates from the founder or access to other
anchor donors at fund-raisers.
Offer identity association:
 Premium brands like Mercedes and Rolex sell
status as much as they do luxury. Is it worth it? Depends on who you
ask. Status really does open doors, and by associating their brand, and
thus their customers, with success and refinement, they offer them
status.
2. Union That Makes the Hero Whole (The Need for
Something External to Create Completeness)
The reason stories often end with the union of lovers has little to do with
the desire for love or sex. Rather, union between male and female
characteristics fulfills in the reader a desire for wholeness.
When the prince rescues the princess and they unite in a wedding at the
end of the movie, the audience subconsciously experiences the joining of two
halves. The subconscious idea is that the man needs to become more like a
woman and the woman needs to become more like a man in order to be
whole.
This need to be completed by an external source doesn’t have 
to include a
wedding or even a male or female character, however. A superhero deficient
in a particular way could be helped out by another superhero who reenters the
story at the end, for example.
The controlling idea of this kind of ending is that the character is rescued
by somebody or something else that they needed in order for them to be made
complete. In love stories, of course, it’s all about the union of male and
female characteristics, but the emotional need this kind of story resolves ismuch greater. It’s about being made whole by external provision.
So what are some of the ways we can offer external help for customers
looking to become complete or whole? Here are a few examples:
Reduced anxiety:
 For years, brands that sell basic items like dish
detergent and glass cleaner have almost comically positioned their
products as anti-anxiety medication. As the hero in the commercial uses
the product, his or her sense of frustration subsides until, at last, they’re
able to see their bright shining face glowing back at them in the polished
platter, and then off they go into the sunset. What is the brand really
offering? Satisfaction for a job well done. A feeling of closure about a
clean house. A better, more peaceful life. Will the use of your product
lead to the relief of stress and a feeling of completeness? If so, talk
about it and show it in your marketing material.
Reduced workload:
 Customers who don’t have the right tools must work
harder because they are, well, incomplete. But what if a tool you offer
could give 
them what they’re missing? Whether they’re selling
wheelbarrows, software, jackhammers, or a fishing apparatus,
manufacturers have been positioning tools as “the thing that will make
you superhuman” for decades.
More time:
 For many customers, time is the enemy, and if our product
can expand time, we’re offering to solve an external problem that is
causing an internal frustration. Not being able to “fit it all in” is often
perceived by our customers as a personal deficiency. Any tool, system,
philosophy, or even person who can expand time may offer a sense of
completeness.
3. Ultimate Self-Realization or Acceptance (The
Need to Reach Our Potential)
Movies like 
Rudy
, 
Hoosiers
, and 
Chariots of Fire
 all tap into the human
desire to reach our potential. And it’s not just sports movies. 
Legally Blonde
,
The Theory of Everything
, and 
Whiplash
 are all about heroes who face great
odds in their journey to prove themselves. Once proven, the heroes realize an
inner peace and can finally accept themselves because they’ve reached their
potential.An outward demonstration of worth isn’t always necessary to create this
kind of resolution. Heroes can also take an internal journey to come to the
same conclusion. When Bridget Jones realized she was too good for the boss
with whom she desired a relationship, she came to an ultimate self-realization
that returned her to a place of peace and stability. And while it’s true she
didn’t close the story loop of uniting with the man she wanted, resolution is
brought about as she abandons that goal 
in exchange for the greater
fulfillment of self-acceptance and contentment.
In 2013, the soap company Dove released a series of short films featuring
women who were the subjects of an FBI-trained forensic artist. Without
actually seeing the women, the artist would draw each woman based on how
she described herself. Later, the artist would draw the same woman based on
how a stranger described her. The reveal was shocking. The sketches drawn
from the stranger’s description were always more beautiful than the ones in
which the women described themselves. The point: many women don’t
realize how beautiful they are. The ad was an attempt to help women accept
themselves and find greater contentment in their intrinsic beauty.
Whether it’s by fulfilling some purpose or accepting themselves as they
are, this return to contentment resolves something in a story that is
universally human: the desire for self-acceptance.
How can a brand offer a sense of ultimate self-realization or self-
acceptance? Here are a few ideas:
Inspiration:
 If an aspect of your brand can offer or be associated with an
inspirational feat, open the floodgates. Brands like Red Bull, 
Harvard
Business Review
, Under Armour, The Ken Blanchard Company,
Michelob Ultra, and even GMC have associated themselves with
athletic and intellectual accomplishment and thus a sense of self-
actualization.
Acceptance:
 Helping people accept themselves as they are isn’t just a
thoughtful thing to do; it’s good marketing. Not unlike the Dove
campaign, American Eagle turned heads when they launched their Aerie
campaign. In the campaign, American Eagle used real people as models
and refused to retouch the images. Tackling body-image issues,
American Eagle went beyond basic product promotion and contributed
to universal self-acceptance among their clientele.
Transcendence:
 Brands that invite customers to participate in a largermovement offer a greater, more impactful life along with their products
and services. Tom’s Shoes built a name for itself by selling stylish shoes
while simultaneously giving a pair to somebody in need in what they
called a “one for one” model. Those who wore the shoes claimed a
major factor in deciding to make the purchase was a sense of
involvement with a larger movement. At less than ten years old, the for-
profit brand sold for more than $700 million. Another example of a
brand that helps customers achieve a level of transcendence is Daymond
John’s clothing brand FUBU, an acronym for “For Us By Us,” in
reference to the African American community being represented in the
marketplace. The brand offers more than fashion; it offers a sense of
unity, transcendence, and entrepreneurialism for the African American
community.
CLOSING THE STORY LOOPS
The idea behind the success module in the SB7 Framework is that we offer to
close a story loop. Human beings are looking for resolutions to their external,
internal, and philosophical problems, and they can achieve this through,
among other things, status, 
self-realization, self-acceptance, and
transcendence. If our products can help people achieve these things, we
should make this a core aspect of our brand promise.
KEEP IT SIMPLE
Offering to close a story loop is much more simple than you think. Even the
inclusion of smiley, happy people on your website is a strong way to offer the
closing of a story loop. People want to be happy, and those images promise
your product will deliver.
If you sell rugs, a successful resolution might be a beautiful floor or a
room that finally feels finished. If you sell ice cream, a successful resolution
might be a rich, creamy taste of heaven. Camping gear? An adventure to
remember.
While I’ve been slightly philosophical in this chapter, try not to overthinkit. What problem are you resolving in your customer’s life, and what does
that resolution look like? Stick to basic answers because basic answers really
do work. Then, when you get good, start diving deeper into the levels of
problems your brand resolves.
The important idea in this section is that we need to show repeatedly how
our product or service can make somebody’s life better. If we don’t tell
people where we’re taking them, they won’t follow. A story has to go
somewhere.
Have you told your customers where you want to take them?
CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN
•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript or
log in to your existing BrandScript.
•
Brainstorm the successful resolution you’re helping your customers
achieve. What will their lives look like if they use your products and
services?
•
Use the bullet points in the success module of your BrandScript to
capture your best answers.Now that you’ve created your StoryBrand BrandScript, let’s take a look at
the biggest motivator your customer has for making a purchase: the desire to
become somebody different
.CHAPTER 11
PEOPLE WANT YOUR BRAND TO
PARTICIPATE IN THEIR TRANSFORMATION
Even though you’ve filled out all seven parts of your StoryBrand
BrandScript, you’ve likely noticed there’s one left. The final section serves as
the foundation for the overall BrandScript and will help you create a guiding
focus for your brand. In fact, we’ve only danced around the greatest single
motivation your customer has. This single motivator is the driving force
behind nearly every decision we make as human beings. Whether we’rebuying lawn furniture or choosing a mate, we can’t escape it.
I’m talking about the human desire to 
transform
.
Everybody wants to change. Everybody wants to be somebody different,
somebody better, or, perhaps, somebody who simply becomes more self-
accepting.
When you look closely at your BrandScript, you’ll see it. Your brand is
helping people become better versions of themselves, which is a beautiful
thing. You are helping them become wiser, more equipped, more physically
fit, more accepted, and more at peace. Like it or not (and we hope you like it),
we are all participating in our customers’ transformation, which is exactly
what they want us to do.
Brands that participate in the identity transformation of their customers
create passionate brand evangelists.
HEROES ARE DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM
At the beginning of a story, the hero is usually flawed, filled with doubt, and
ill-equipped for the task set before them. The guide aids them on their
journey, rife with conflict. The conflict begins to change the character,
though. Forced into action, the hero develops skills and accrues the
experience needed to defeat their foe. Though the hero is still filled with
doubt, they summon the courage to engage, and in the climactic scene defeat
the villain, proving once and for all they have changed, that they are now
competent to face challenges and are better versions of themselves. The story
has transformed them.
This same character arc, by the way, is the arc for 
The Old Man and the
Sea
, 
Pride and Prejudice
, 
Pinocchio
, 
Hamlet
, 
Sleeping Beauty,
 and 
Tommy
Boy
. It’s the arc of almost every popular story we can name. Why? Because
it’s our story. Feelings of self-doubt are universal, as is the desire to become
somebody competent and courageous. And all of this matters when it comes
to branding our products and services.
A few important questions we have to ask ourselves when we’re
representing our brand are: Who does our customer want to become? What
kind of person do they want to be? What is their aspirational identity?SMART BRANDS DEFINE AN ASPIRIATIONAL
IDENTITY
Recently I ran down to Home Depot to get a stud finder so I could install
shelving in the garage. Next to the stud finders in the tool section was a
selection of Gerber Knives. Gerber is a knife company out of Portland,
Oregon, that makes a range of multipurpose pocketknives. Their commercial
campaign, however, offers the buyer a lot more than a knife. They sell
something intangible. They sell an identity, and by that I mean they sell a
kind of person you and I can become. I’d been studying their commercials for
a long time, and even though I knew exactly what they were doing to my
subconscious, I wanted one anyway. 
But why?
 I thought to myself as I stood
there staring at the knives. 
I’m a writer. The only thing I need a knife for is to
make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
Still, the pull was palpable. What if I had to swim under a boat to cut a
tangled rope from its propeller? Or cut a pant leg off my bloody blue jeans to
make a tourniquet for my injured arm?
Thankfully my executive brain overpowered my primitive brain and I
walked away with just the stud finder. But why was it so hard? Why did I
want the knife so badly? And then why did I specifically want a Gerber
Knife? Certainly they make great knives, but there are many other companies
making great knives and I’d never really cared or noticed.
The reason was simple. Gerber defined an aspirational identity for their
customers and they associated their product with that identity. The
aspirational identity of a Gerber Knife customer is that they are tough,
adventurous, fearless, action oriented, and competent to do a hard job.
Epitomized in their advertising campaign “Hello Trouble,” Gerber positioned
their customer as the kind of person who sails boats into storms, rides bulls,
rescues people from floods, and yes, cuts tangled ropes from boat propellers.
In their television commercials they present images of these aspirational,
heroic figures over anthemic music and a narrator reciting the lines:
Hello, Trouble.
It’s been awhile since we last met.
But I know you’re still out there.
And I have a feeling you’re looking for me.You wish I’d forget you, don’t you, Trouble?
Perhaps it’s you that has forgotten me.
Perhaps I need to come find you, remind you who I am.
1
The commercial is terrific. One day, to my surprise, a StoryBrand
alumnus, who happened to have been one of the Army Rangers about whom
the movie 
Black Hawk Down
 was made, stopped by the house. We caught up
for a moment, and then he gave me a little thank-you present, a Gerber Knife.
He even had my name engraved on the blade. He knew I liked the
commercial and thought it would be a thoughtful gift. To this day I keep that
knife clipped to the dashboard of my truck. Occasionally I’ll take it into the
kitchen, stare at a jar of peanut butter, and say, “Hello, Trouble.”
I may just be a writer, but I love that knife.
But let me ask you a question. Was that knife a waste of money? I mean,
let’s say I did pay forty dollars for the knife and never used it. Did I get
ripped off?
I’ve asked that question to hundreds of people who’ve attended the
StoryBrand Marketing Workshop, and the answer has always come back the
same: no. It was not a waste of money. It was well worth the forty dollars. I
can’t help but agree. The truth is I got a knife and something more than a
knife. In a way, Gerber helped me become a better person. They defined an
aspirational identity and invited me to step into it. They made me feel more
tough and adventurous, and they even created a moment between two friends.
And that’s worth a great deal more than forty dollars.
HOW DOES YOUR CUSTOMER WANT TO BE
DESCRIBED BY OTHERS?
The best way to identify an aspirational identity that our customers may be
attracted to is to consider how they want their friends to talk about them.
Think about it. When others talk about you, what do you want them to say?
How we answer that question reveals who it is we’d like to be.
It’s the same for our customers. As it relates to your brand, how does your
customer want to be perceived by their friends? And can you help them
become that kind of person? Can you participate in their identitytransformation? If you offer executive coaching, your clients may want to be
seen as competent, generous, and disciplined. If you sell sports equipment,
your 
customers likely want to be perceived as active, fit, and successful in
their athletic pursuits.
Once we know who our customers want to be, we will have language to
use in e-mails, blog posts, and all manner of marketing material.
A GUIDE OFFERS MORE THAN A PRODUCT
AND A PLAN
Playing the guide is more than a marketing strategy; it’s a position of the
heart. When a brand commits itself to their customers’ journey, to helping
resolve their external, internal, and philosophical problems, and then inspires
them with an aspirational identity, they do more than sell products—they
change lives. And leaders who care more about changing lives than they do
about selling products tend to do a good bit of both.
Last year StoryBrand consulted with Dave Ramsey and his team at
Ramsey Solutions. Ramsey Solutions may be the best example of a narrative-
based company I know, and Dave himself is a terrific example of a guide.
Over a series of workshops, dinners, and speeches, we introduced the
Ramsey team to the SB7 Framework, less as a way of educating them than as
a way of giving vocabulary to what they were already doing.
Dave Ramsey hosts one of the largest radio shows in America with more
than eight million daily listeners. On the show he offers financial advice and
strategies that center around tackling and conquering personal debt. Unlike
many advisors, though, Ramsey offers more than wisdom; he offers a
narrative map his customers can enter into. Ramsey comes back from every
break 
on his radio show with the same line: “Welcome back to 
The Dave
Ramsey Show
, where debt is dumb, cash is king, and the paid-off home
mortgage has taken the place of the BMW as the status symbol of choice.”
There they are, the elements of story, complete with an identity to step into
and a new status symbol to go along with it.
Though Dave’s face is prominent on book covers and billboards
promoting his show, he never positions himself as the hero. Instead, Ramsey
has a near obsession with his listeners’ journeys. Dave’s understanding of hislisteners’ external problems (consumer debt and financial illiteracy), internal
problems (confusion and a feeling of hopelessness), as well as their
philosophical problem (accruing debt for things we don’t need posits moral
questions) engages listeners in a living story. Always entertaining, Dave
never misses an opportunity to embolden his listeners with an aspirational
identity, encourage their improvements, and remind them that tackling their
financial challenges is a step to personal strength and there are few of life’s
problems that can’t be conquered with a little strategy and commitment.
Dave even offers a climactic scene in his customers’ story. After executing
a plan he offers through his Financial Peace University, listeners are invited
on his show to perform a “Debt-Free Scream.” People travel from thousands
of miles away to be featured on the show, and when they arrive, dozens of the
Ramsey team surround the accomplished hero with applause as the hero
shouts, “I’m debt-free!”
Once a listener has completed the journey, Dave lets them know they’ve
changed, that they’re different now and there’s nothing they can’t accomplish
if they apply themselves.
GREAT BRANDS OBSESS ABOUT THE
TRANSFORMATION OF THEIR CUSTOMERS
When we first met with Dave, I was surprised to learn he didn’t know that
affirming the hero’s transformation was an oft included scene at the end of
many stories. After the climactic scene (the debt-free scream), the guide
comes back to affirm the transformation of the hero.
In 
Star Wars
, the ghost of Obi-Wan stands next to Luke Skywalker as he’s
rewarded for bravery. In 
The King’s Speech
, Lionel tells King George he will
be a great king. Peter Brand sits Billy Beane down in the movie 
Moneyball
and lets him know he’s hit the equivalent of a home run as the manager of the
A’s.
The main purpose these scenes serve is to mark the transformation the
hero has experienced so the audience has a point of reference that contrasts
the hero’s character from the story’s beginning. The audience needs to be told
very clearly how far the hero has come, especially since the hero usually
struggles with crippling doubt right up until the end and they don’t evenrealize how much they have changed.
A hero needs somebody else to step into the story to tell them they’re
different, they’re better. That somebody is the guide. That somebody is you.
There are hundreds of thousands of financial advisors, and thousands of
them have written books. Hundreds of those who’ve written books have
podcasts or radio shows, and yet Dave Ramsey enjoys a wider popularity.
Why? Well, certainly his advice is good. Nobody is attracted to
incompetence. But I’m convinced it is the way he frames the customer’s
journey 
as a narrative and participates in their transformation that sets him
apart.
IDENTITY TRANSFORMATION
In the foundational module of your StoryBrand BrandScript, we’ve included
a section that will allow you to define an identity transformation your
customer may experience as they relate to your brand.
Who does your customer want to become as they relate to your products
and services?
At StoryBrand, we want our customers to become marketing experts.
When they leave our workshop or after having spent time with one of our
StoryBrand Guides, we want them to return to the office and have people
wondering what happened to them. How did they get such marketing savvy?
How did they become so clear in their thinking? Why are their ideas suddenly
so good? Did they suddenly get a PhD in messaging?
Similar to the success module of your BrandScript, the aspirational
identity section answers a question about how the story ends, except instead
of telling us where the story is going, it tells us who the hero has become.
Brands that realize their customers are human, filled with emotion, driven
to transform, and in need of help truly do more than sell products; they
change people. Dave Ramsey changes people. Starbucks changes people.
Apple changes people. Tom’s Shoes changes people. Gerber Knives changes
people. It’s no wonder brands like these have such passionate fans and do so
well in the marketplace.EXAMPLES OF IDENTITY TRANSFORMATION
Thousands of StoryBrand clients have defined an aspirational identity for
their customers and begun to participate in their transformation. Because of
this, more and more companies are not just improving the world through their
products and services; they’re actually improving the way their customers see
themselves. Offering an aspirational identity to our clients adds enormous
value to everything else that we offer.
Here are some examples of aspirational identities from StoryBrand
alumni:
PET FOOD BRAND
From: Passive dog owner
To: Every dog’s hero
FINANCIAL ADVISOR
From: Confused and ill-equipped
To: Competent and smart
SHAMPOO BRAND
From: Anxious and glum
To: Carefree and radiant
Have you thought about who you want your customer to become?
Participating in your customer’s transformation can give new life and
meaning to your business. When your team realizes that they sell more than
products, that they guide people 
toward a stronger belief in themselves, then
their work will have greater meaning.
Spend some time thinking about who you want your customers to become.
How can you improve the way they see themselves?
How can your brand participate in your customer’s transformational
journey?
Let’s do more than help our heroes win; let’s help them transform.CLARIFY YOUR MESSAGE SO CUSTOMERS
LISTEN
•
Go to mystorybrand.com and either create a StoryBrand BrandScript or
log in to your existing BrandScript.
•
Brainstorm the aspirational identity of your customer. Who do they want
to become? How do they want to be perceived by others?
•
Use the “to” lines of your BrandScript to define an aspirational identity.
Filling out the “from” line is then simple. It’s simply the opposite of
whatever you define as their aspirational identity captured in the “to”
line.
SECTION 3
IMPLEMENTING YOUR
STORYBRAND BRANDSCRIP
TCHAPTER 12
BUILDING A BETTER WEBSITE
We will only see an increased engagement from customers if we implement
our StoryBrand BrandScript in our marketing and messaging material. The
BrandScript you’ve put together has to show up on websites, in e-mail
campaigns, elevator pitches, and sales scripts. You must edit existing
marketing materials and create new and better materials, then get those
materials in the hands of potential customers.
To the degree that you implement your StoryBrand BrandScript is the
degree to which people will understand why they need your products. The
more we implement, the more customers will listen.
The more you execute, the more clearly you’ll communicate and the more
your brand will stand out.
The third section of 
Building a StoryBrand
 gives both large and small
companies tangible, practical steps they can take to apply their StoryBrand
BrandScript. Whether you’re 
a mom-and-pop shop, a start-up, a personal
brand, or even a multibillion-dollar organization, you’ll learn from the
thousands of companies who have created and executed their StoryBrand
BrandScript to see radical results.
START WITH YOUR WEBSITE
Most of us don’t have millions to spend on a marketing campaign, but that’s
okay. These days we can get serious traction just paying attention to our
digital presence. A great digital presence starts with a clear and effective
website. Our website isn’t the only tool we need to motivate buyers, but it’s
usually the one that does the heavy lifting. People may hear about us through
word of mouth or social media, but they definitely go to our website to learn
more. When they get to our website, their “hopes need to be confirmed,” andthey need to be convinced we have a solution to their problem.
In short, we need a website that passes the grunt test and converts
browsers into buyers.
KEEP IT SIMPLE
At our workshops we’ve reviewed thousands of websites, and most of them
have succumbed to villainous noise. The days of using our website as a
clearinghouse of information are over. Businesses were once able to post all
the small print about what they do on their website, but the Internet has
changed. Today your website should be the equivalent of an elevator pitch.
Your website is likely the first impression a potential customer will
receive about your company. It’s almost like a first date. The customer
simply needs to know that you have something they want and you can be
trusted to deliver whatever that is.
Even if your company has grown because of word of mouth, a website full
of noise can kill potential sales. Your website matters.
As we’ve helped our clients create great websites, we’ve come back to
five things they need to include in order to see results. These five things are
just the beginning of a marketing campaign, but unless we’ve got these five
things working for us, there’s no reason to move on. Let’s just call these the
basics.
THE FIVE THINGS YOUR WEBSITE SHOULD
INCLUDE
1. An Offer Above the Fold
When people go to your website, the first thing they see is the images and
text above the fold. The term 
above the fold
 comes from the newspaper
industry and refers to the stories printed above where the newspaper folds in
half. On a website, the images and text above the fold are the things you see
and read before you start scrolling down.
As I mentioned earlier, I like to think of the messages above the fold as afirst date, and then as you scroll down you can put the messages you want to
share on a second and third date. But as we’ve talked about, the stuff you
share on a first date should be short, enticing, and exclusively customer-
centric.
My wife was recently gifted an online membership to some sort of
cooking school in Seattle. A friend sent it to her as a thank-you for some
work she’d done on their website. At first, Betsy was excited, until she went
to the site. On the main page of the site (before she logged in), there was a
beautiful picture of a carrot cake and beneath it some kind of inside joke
about having something to eat while watching 
Game of Thrones.
 We didn’t
get it. She scrolled down and clicked on a video, hoping it would explain
what kind of thing she’d been given. Instead, the video featured a cartoon
explanation of how the company got started. Somebody named Joe met
somebody named Karen, who was friends with somebody named Todd, and
they all loved cooking!
It wasn’t until my wife signed in and began exploring what the site offered
that she got excited. She came to bed that night telling me about a certain
kind of natural ingredient she could use to take the color out of liquor so all
her cocktails would look clear. I didn’t understand why this was important
until she explained that the sage from her garden would stand out more as it
hung from the glass. “Oh, the sage,” I said. “They offer a service to help your
sage stand out.”
“No,” Betsy said. “It took me a couple hours to figure it out, but the whole
subscription is about these three fun friends in Seattle who are going to make
me a pro in the kitchen!”
BINGO! Betsy said it. She said the very words that needed to be printed
above the fold on their website:
“WE WILL MAKE YOU A PRO IN THE KITCHEN!”
One short sentence would have helped us understand what they offered
and even given us words to use to help their business spread.
There is no telling how many customers that site is losing because they are
making their customers work so hard to understand why anybody would need
their service. My own wife, who now loves the site, would have bounced had
she not been given a free pass.
The idea here is that customers need to know what’s in it for them rightwhen they read the text. The text should be bold and the statement should be
short. It should be easy to read and not buried under buttons and clutter. I
recently went to the website for Squarespace and it simply said, “We Help
You Make Beautiful Websites.” Perfect. They could have said a lot of things
on their website, but because they know to keep messages short and relevant,
they’re making millions.
Above the fold, make sure the images and text you use meet one of the
following criteria:
•
They promise an aspirational identity.
By offering to make my wife a pro in the kitchen, the school in Seattle
could have let her know “what’s in it for her” by appealing to an
aspirational identity. Can we help our customers become competent in
something? Will they be different people after they’ve engaged us? Let’s
spell it out clearly.
•
They promise to solve a problem.
If you can fix a problem, tell us. Can you stop my cat from clawing
the furniture? My car from overheating? My hair from thinning? Say it.
We didn’t go to your website to read about how many company softball
games you’ve won; we came here to solve a problem.
•
They state exactly what they do.
The easiest thing we can do on our website is state exactly what we
do. There’s a shop down the street from us called Local Honey, which
would cause anybody to think they sell local honey. They quickly
overcame this confusion, though, with a tagline that says, “We sell
clothes. We do hair.” Gotcha. Local Honey sells clothes and does hair.
I’ve now filed them away in the Rolodex of my brain and will remember
them when I need new hair or new clothes.
Take a look at your website and make sure it’s obvious what you can offer
a customer. Some of our clients do spell out their offer, but they spell it out in
the middle of a paragraph that starts out, “We’ve been in business since 1979,
committed to excellence and caring about our customers . . .” That’s all nice
and sweet, but J. K. Rowling didn’t start her first Harry Potter novel with
“My name is J. K. Rowling and for a long time I’ve wanted to write a
book . . .” The fact that she always wanted to write a book wasn’t part of theactual Harry Potter story, and she was smart enough to know it. She got
straight to the point. She hooked the reader. She was smart, and we can be
smart too. An offer above the fold is a sure way to get a customer hooked on
the story we’re telling.
2. Obvious Calls to Action
If you’re not sure what a call to action is, go back and read 
chapter 8
 in
this book. It’s important. For now, know that the whole point of your website
is to create a place where the direct call to action button makes sense and is
enticing. While we’re in business to serve our customers and better the world,
we’ll be 
out of business soon if people don’t click that “Buy Now” button.
Let’s not hide it.
There are two main places we want to place a direct call to action. The
first is at the top right of our website and the second is in the center of the
screen, above the fold. Your customer’s eye moves quickly in a Z pattern
across your website, so if the top left is your logo and perhaps tagline, your
top right is a “Buy Now” button, and the middle of the page is an offer
followed by another “Buy Now” button, then you’ve likely gotten through all
the noise in your customer’s mind and they know what role you can play in
their story.
For best results the “Buy Now” buttons should be a different color from
any other button on the site (preferably brighter so it stands out), and both
buttons should look exactly the same. I know this sounds like overkill, but
remember, people don’t read websites, they scan them. You want that button
to keep showing up like a recurring theme. A person has to hear something
(or 
read something) many times before they process the information, so we
want to repeat our main call to action several times.
Your transitional call to action should also be obvious, but don’t let it
distract from the direct call to action. I like featuring the transitional call to
action in a less-bright button next to the call to action so the “Will you marry
me?” and “Can we go out again?” requests are right next to each other.
Remember, if you aren’t asking people to place an order, they won’t.
3. Images of Success
Words make up the majority of our messaging, but not all of it. The
images we use on our websites also communicate something. If people come
to our website and see pictures of our building, we’re likely wasting some of
their mental bandwidth on meaningless messages, unless, of course, you’re a
bed-and-breakfast. But even then, images of the building aren’t what I’d lead
with. I’d save that for the second date. We believe images of smiling, happy
people who have had a pleasurable experience (closed an open story loop) by
engaging your brand should be featured on your website.
Everybody wants to experience a better life in some way or another, and
while it may seem simple, images of people smiling or looking satisfied
speak to us. They represent an emotional destination we’d like to head
toward.
Many of us need to display our products, but if we can feature those
products in the hands of smiling people, our images 
might have more power.
Not everybody needs to be smiling, of course; this wouldn’t seem authentic.
But in general we need to communicate a sense of health, well-being, and
satisfaction with our brand. The easiest way to do this is by displaying happycustomers.
4. A Bite-Sized Breakdown of Your Revenue
Streams
A common challenge for many businesses is that they need to
communicate simply about what they do, but they’ve diversified their
revenue streams so widely that they’re having trouble knowing where to start.
If this is your struggle, you’re hardly alone. We had a client a couple of years
ago that had two main products: a two-day personalized life-planning process
for individuals and a two-day strategic operations planning session for teams
of executive leaders. Sounds simple enough, except the company didn’t
really make money off either product; instead, they made money training and
certifying the facilitators. The challenge, then, was to increase demand for
each product so that more people would want to become facilitators. This
means they had to drive traffic to three different products: the life-planning
product, the strat-ops product, and the facilitator certification.
If this company sounds like yours, the first challenge is to find an overall
umbrella message that unifies your various streams. For our friends
delivering life-planning and strat-ops facilitation, we chose the need people
have for a customized plan. Above the fold on their website, we
recommended the text “The Key to Success Is a Customized Plan” over an
image of a facilitator mapping out a plan on a whiteboard for a satisfied
client. As potential customers scrolled down the page, they would see two
sections to choose from, personal life plans and corporate 
strategy plans.
Each of these buttons led to new pages with messages filtered by two
different BrandScripts. Customers were able to schedule facilitations on
either page. The key to growing the business, though, was a button at the top
and bottom of each and every page that said, “Become a Trained Facilitator.”
We may think our business is too diverse to communicate clearly, but it
probably isn’t. Certainly there are examples where various brands within an
umbrella company need to be split up and marketed separately, but in most
cases we can find an umbrella theme to unite them all. Once we have an
umbrella message, we can separate the divisions using different web pages
and different BrandScripts. The key is clarity. When we break down our
divisions clearly so people can understand what we offer, customers will beable to choose their own adventure without getting lost.
5. Very Few Words
People don’t read websites anymore; they scan them. If there is a
paragraph above the fold on your website, it’s being passed over, I promise.
Around the office we use the phrase “write it in Morse code” when we need
marketing copy. By “Morse code” we mean copy that is brief, punchy, and
relevant to our customers. Think again about our caveman sitting in his cave.
“You sell cupcakes. Cupcakes good. Me want eat cupcake. Me like pink one
and must go to bakery now.” Most of us err too far in the opposite direction.
We use too much text.
Why say, “As parents ourselves, we understand what it feels like to want
the best for our children. That’s why we’ve created a school where parents
work closely with teachers through every step of their child’s education
journey,” when you could just say, 
“Weekly Conference Calls with Your
Child’s Teacher” as a bullet point along with five other great differentiators
about your school?
As customers scroll down your page, it’s okay to use more and more
words, but by more and more I really mean a few sentences here and there.
Some of the most effective websites I’ve reviewed have used ten sentences or
less on the entire page. That’s the equivalent of about ten tweets or one press
conference with Bill Belichick.
If you do want to use a long section of text to explain something (we do it
on our site, in fact), just place a little “read more” link at the end of the first
or second sentence so people can expand it if they like, that way you aren’t
bombarding customers with too much text.
As an experiment, let’s see if you can cut half the words out of your
website. Can you replace some of your text with images? Can you reduce
whole paragraphs into three or four bullet points? Can you summarize
sentences into bite-sized soundbites? If so, make those changes soon. The
rule is this: the fewer words you use, the more likely it is that people will read
them.
STAY ON SCRIPTThese are the five most important things to do with your website. There are
more, of course, but if you added all the rest of the tips and strategies
together, they wouldn’t make as big of a difference as getting these five
things right.
If you think about your StoryBrand BrandScript as a drum kit, think of
your website as a drum solo. There shouldn’t 
be a single word, image, or idea
shared on your website that doesn’t come from the thoughts generated by
your StoryBrand BrandScript. The words don’t have to be an exact replica of
your BrandScript, but the ideas should be the same. If you’re including
messages on your website that don’t come from one of the categories of the
StoryBrand 7-Part Framework, your customers will only hear noise.CHAPTER 13
USING STORYBRAND TO
TRANSFORM COMPANY CULTURE
So far we’ve seen how a solid StoryBrand BrandScript transforms 
customer
engagement. But its value doesn’t stop there. Your BrandScript can also be
leveraged to transform 
employee
 engagement. And that has enormous
implications for your company culture.
Customers aren’t the only ones who get confused when the message is
unclear. Employees get confused too, from the division president to the
regional manager to the laborer earning minimum wage on the front line.
THE CURSE OF THE NARRATIVE VOID
You may not realize this, but your organization is haunted. I know this
because every organization encounters the same 
sinister spirit that roams the
halls looking for victims to oppress. I call this shifty shadow the 
Narrative
Void
.
The Narrative Void is a vacant space that occurs inside the organization
when there’s no story to keep everyone aligned. In extreme cases the
Narrative Void can take up residence in the very center of the organization,
splintering it into factions of disconnected efforts that never quite come
together as a unified mission.
For years, companies have attempted to exorcise the Narrative Void using
the most sacred document available: 
the mission statement
. The corporate
mission statement is like the holy grail of organizational effectiveness. With
monastic dedication, executives gather for off-site retreats where they etch
painstaking phrases onto tablets few will ever read and even fewer will
understand or apply. Talk about a story going nowhere.Needless to say, only in very rare cases has a mission 
statement
 actually
led a company to be 
on a mission
.
ARE YOUR PEOPLE CONFUSED?
The diagram below gives a snapshot of an organization infected with a
Narrative Void. It paints a picture of many companies today. The different
divisions across the organization exist in microcosms that can only be truly
understood by the people who live in them. Left to themselves, these people
must make decisions and develop strategies to meet demands. They assume
these decisions only affect them. But along the way their choices create tiny
overtones that ripple across the organization. From an organizational
perspective, it’s like bleeding to death from a thousand paper cuts.
As you can see, where there’s no plot, there’s no productivity.
THE COST OF A NARRATIVE VOID
In the 1990s, Gallup began measuring the level of commitment employees
felt toward their job and their employer. The numbers were startlingly low.
Their research found that about one out of every five employees nationwide
were truly excited about the work they were doing.
1
 This is a problem. The
obvious assumption is that an engaged associate gives more discretionary
effort than someone who is not engaged. Not only that, but engaged
associates took fewer sick days and were less likely to become a turnover
statistic.
Gallup’s discovery revealed that companies were losing hundreds of
millions through gaps in productivity and efficiency. Back in 2012, Gallup
estimated this was costing the United States $450 billion to $550 billion each
year.
2
 Needless to say, employers pay someone the same amount in salaries
and benefits whether they’re engaged or not. So when leaders of companies
began to get their heads around Gallup’s findings, the race was on to cure the
disengagement epidemic.
As it turns out, one of the biggest contributors to the rise of disengagement
has been the information explosion. As I mentioned earlier, people are
bombarded with more than three thousand marketing messages every twenty-
four hours. And that’s just marketing messages. The number of non-
marketing messages—through articles, Internet posts, and slanted news
stories—is even higher. Compare that to, say, the 1970s. We’ve gone from
three TV networks and one local newspaper to more than two hundred
channels, millions of news blogs, podcasts, Internet radio, Twitter, Instagram,
Facebook, Snapchat, and LinkedIn.
Meanwhile, the communication of most companies has been going in
reverse. The personal interaction that once fueled connection in the
workplace has been replaced by telecommuting, remote field offices, and
conference calls. The days of catching up around the water cooler are gone.
Granted, they’ve added e-mail blasts and an employee portal, but studies
show readership of those outlets is minimal.
Could it be the white noise is a breeding ground for the Narrative Void? I
don’t think it’s a coincidence.
A strong, StoryBrand-inspired narrative expels the Narrative Void the way
light drives out darkness. Companies who calibrate 
their activities around acommon story don’t just 
state
 their mission; they're 
on a mission
. They didn't
just dream about a better story, their culture tells one.
JUST BECAUSE YOU KNOW THE STORY
DOESN’T MEAN YOUR TEAM DOES
So how does a StoryBrand BrandScript stop the bleeding? Let’s look at how
most workplaces work.
In many cases it starts with onboarding. Without a StoryBrand
BrandScript, it usually goes like this: HR person welcomes new employee,
issues a company key fob, and sits him down in front of a sexual harassment
video for ten minutes. Next they skim through the company manual together
and cover some light gossip about the personal life of a certain senior
manager. A quick trip to the lobby to read the company mission statement,
drop the new guy off at his cube, and the HR person is back at his desk in an
hour. Done.
For the next three to five years, the new guy does a solid job meeting all
the performance management metrics laid out by his supervisor. He earns
three bonuses, one promotion, and the department’s top award two years in a
row—and never works past 6:00 p.m. He learns to navigate around the
people who create resistance, picks his battles, accepts compromises, and
absorbs occasional consequences. Then one afternoon a headhunter calls with
a good-enough offer, and he’s on to the next chapter of his life.
No boats were rocked. No stars were reached. For the company, there
were wins and losses and a few ties. It’s like a movie where nothing happens,
nobody cares, and the popcorn’s stale.
Is it any wonder the workplace is wracked by disengagement?
Did you notice the Narrative Void in this story? Without a unifying
narrative at the center, there was nothing to inspire the new hire beyond the
status quo. The company didn’t do anything wrong. But they didn’t do
anything special either. In a competitive environment, that approach won’t
get you very far. That’s the intoxicating deception of the Narrative Void. It
lulls the company to sleep. And eventually to death.GETTING THE ORGANIZATION BACK ON
MISSION
When customers are invited into a magnificent story, it creates customer
engagement. Could the same be true for employees? Absolutely.
With a StoryBrand-inspired narrative, ordinary jobs become extraordinary
adventures. With a unifying BrandScript, the above story would have gone
more like this:
Before even applying for a job, the prospective employee has already
heard the buzz on the street about this cool company. It’s somehow more
alive. The people who work there love it and so do their customers. They
exude a sense of competence within their industry as well as across the
community in general. Their leaders are respected. Even their former
employees talk about it with a hint of sentimental longing. On the list of ideal
places to work, there are few that compare.
During the first interview, the candidate starts to understand where the
buzz has been coming from. The hiring manager describes the company the
way you might describe Lewis and 
Clarke preparing to tame the western
frontier. There are interesting characters whose lives have led them to this
place. Business goals sound like plot twists. There are mountains to climb
and rivers to cross. There are storms to weather, bears to hunt, and treasure to
find. The hiring manager is visibly excited as she walks effortlessly through
the seven categories of the company’s narrative.
But not just anyone gets selected for this expedition. The employees of
this company aren’t trying to be snobs; they’re just staying true to the story
they’re following and they don’t want to compromise the plot. If you happen
to be selected, it’s because destiny basically demands it. Instantly the
candidate’s concept of work shifts up a level. It’s no longer just about what
he can get 
out
 of it. It’s also about who he will become if he’s allowed to
enter the story. He senses that working for this company will transform him.
By the second and third interviews, the candidate has met most of the team
and even been interviewed by them. Everyone he meets tells the exact same
story he heard on the street and in the first interview. The story is growing on
him. He realizes he 
needs
 to be part of a story like this to be fully satisfied in
life. We all do.
Finally, his first day on the job arrives, and the onboarding experience ismore like being adopted than getting hired. He spends quality time with a
facilitator who takes a small, new team through a curriculum explaining the
story of their customer and how the company positions themselves as the
guide in their customers’ story. Amazingly, the onboarding is more about the
company’s customers than it is about the company itself. This organization
loves their customers and is obsessed with seeing them win the day. Finally,
the new employee discovers the secret. These people are here to serve a
customer they love.
Our new recruit is then invited to a special luncheon for 
new hires hosted
by the CEO. During the luncheon, the CEO delivers a short but powerful
keynote based on the company’s BrandScript. The keynote is invigorating,
the CEO is intoxicating in his love for the company’s customers, and the
whole thing backs up what the new recruit learned during the onboarding
course. The grand finale? A short film, based on the company’s StoryBrand
BrandScript, about the amazing impact the organization is making not only in
business but also in the lives of individuals. Our new recruit asks the HR
director if he can get a link to the video so he can send it to his friends and
family, more or less bragging about his amazing new job.
For the next three to five years, the new guy feels like he’s still getting to
know the place. Every month he discovers new reasons why this is his dream
job. Pictures of customers are plastered all over the walls, celebrating their
successes. His daily tasks are not mundane but are specific objectives that
have him working together with other teams to help their customers solve the
problems that are frustrating them. His coworkers are not his competition but
are a supportive community that actually wants him to thrive and grow as
they live out a story about changing the world. Customers themselves visit
the office to get a tour of the company that helped solve their problems.
Headhunters call every month with jobs that almost always represent a
raise and a promotion. He usually forgets to call them back.
Across the organization, the people seem fully present not just physically
but mentally. Productivity is high and efficiency is a matter of pride. Thanks
to very low turnover, the organization maintains a rich repository of valuable
experience that pays dividends most companies never realize.
Did you notice the alignment and consistency in this story? 
It’s not
because they gather around a plaque in the lobby each morning and sing the
company song like a bunch of communists obeying a dictator’s failed vision.
If you didn’t know their secret, you’d think everything just sort of fell intoplace spontaneously. But behind it all is a leadership team that understands
the power of story, has created a StoryBrand BrandScript, and has learned to
implement that narrative in every facet of the organization.
WHEN A MISSION COMES TO LIFE
Mission statements were never a bad idea. They were just never enough. In
fact, a mission is exactly what people need in order to come together as a
company. But a statement is inadequate to turn a mission into a story. It’s like
reading the tagline on a movie poster instead of seeing the actual movie.
Ben Ortlip is the director of the StoryBrand culture program. He
specializes in implementing the StoryBrand Framework inside large
organizations. A few years ago, a very popular fast-food restaurant chain
approached his team about helping them with engagement. At the time, the
brand had crossed the billion-dollar threshold and was experiencing about 5
percent growth. That might seem pretty solid to most people, but this place
has amazing food and is made up of some of the finest people you’ll meet.
Ben felt like they should be doing better.
After spending some time at headquarters and behind the scenes in
restaurants in several states, it was clear that some complacency had begun to
set in. There was nothing wrong with their operations. The product was
phenomenal. And their marketing 
was effective. The problem was they’d
grown large enough, and in so many directions, they’d lost their plot. It’s not
unlike when a movie becomes a success and they turn it into a sequel. Often,
the story just feels forced.
IS YOUR 
THOUGHTMOSPHERE
 ON SCRIPT?
Killing off a Narrative Void isn’t easy, and it takes time. Around the
StoryBrand office, Ben uses the term 
thoughtmosphere.
 A thoughtmosphere
is an invisible mixture of beliefs and ideas that drives employee behavior and
performance. A thoughtmosphere improves when a StoryBrand-inspired
narrative is created, talking points are devised, and a plan of execution is put
in place to reinforce those talking points so every stakeholder understandstheir important role.
For the restaurant chain in question, this involved video curriculum, a
series of regional meetings, a major national convention, and updates from
the CEO often filmed in casual settings at headquarters. Retreats for franchise
owners involved personal updates from the CEO followed by inspirational
speakers who could speak into the organization’s narrative. The company
held concerts on the beach for just the stakeholders, and other brands who
had a similar mission were discussed and publicly praised for their similar
work serving customers.
Almost immediately you could sense a shift across the brand. There was
renewed energy. People who hadn’t been seen or heard from in years started
showing up at meetings, ready to lock arms again. The Narrative Void was
gone.
And tangible growth? In less than three years, the chain 
went from 5
percent growth to nearly 30 percent, all with the very same people who had
been inside the organization all along. For a billion-dollar company, that
translated into hundreds of millions per year, every year.
The number one job of an executive is to remind the stakeholders what the
mission is, over and over. And yet most executives can’t really explain the
overall narrative of the organization. Here’s the problem: if an executive
can’t explain the story, team members will never know where or why they fit.
When your culture tells a great story, everybody wins. A company with a
healthy culture looks something like this:READY TO GET YOUR COMPANY ON MISSION?
A true mission isn’t a 
statement
; it’s a way of living and being. A mission is
more than token rituals that make momentary reference to the things your
employees should care about. A mission is a story you reinforce through
every department strategy, every operational detail, and every customer
experience. That’s what it means to be a company 
on mission
.
And it all starts with your StoryBrand BrandScript.
We created the StoryBrand culture program to provide a turnkey service
for larger organizations to achieve a full, custom implementation of their
StoryBrand BrandScript—to weave the elements of their vital narrative into
the important functions that shape culture and foster employee engagement
around the mission.
We guide many organizations through a process that goes something likethis:
1.
Create a BrandScript with your leadership team.
2.
Audit the existing 
thoughtmosphere
.
3.
Create a custom StoryBrand culture implementation plan.
4.
Optimize internal communications to support the plan.
5.
Install a self-sustained team to enhance the culture.
People often ask how a StoryBrand culture is different from everywhere
else. I think they want a list. Yes, there are cool ideas you probably haven’t
seen before, like using behavioral typologies to identify job fit, or introducing
a platform called a “virtual water cooler” to foster connections between
coworkers.
The reality is most of the things StoryBrand culture does look strangely
similar to the things other companies do. It’s 
just that StoryBrand cultures do
these things while unified around a common, disciplined narrative.
A StoryBrand Culture Turns Their Entire Team
into a Sales Force
The main distinction in a StoryBrand culture is their attention to how the
basic blocking and tackling of business is synchronized around a StoryBrand
BrandScript. The BrandScript filters out all the noise and lets each
stakeholder, each day, know why they’re doing what they’re doing.
When team members understand the story of the organization and can
explain it in short, disciplined sound-bites that have been reinforced through
varying modes of communication from executives, they give words to
potential customers that potential customers can use to spread the word.
Brief, narrative ideas shared from inspired team members spread faster than
muddled, confusing explanations shared by bored, disengaged employees.
A StoryBrand Culture Honors the Story of Its
Team Members
When you leverage the StoryBrand Framework externally, for marketing,it transforms the 
customer value proposition
. When you leverage it internally,
for engagement, it transforms the 
employee value proposition
.
All engagement rises and falls on the employee value proposition.
Increasing compensation is one way you might add value to employees, but
that’s just the beginning. You can also raise value by improving the employee
experience: advancement opportunities, recognition, meaningful work,
camaraderie, and flexibility. All those things add value too.
To accomplish this, many StoryBrand BrandScripts are created. Certainly
there is the external BrandScript that is pointed at the customer, but there are
also BrandScripts created from the perspective of the leadership to the overall
team. In these StoryBrand BrandScripts, the team is positioned as the hero
and the company leadership is positioned as the guide. Compensation
packages, leadership development, organized events, and more are all “tools”
the leadership creates to help their employees win the day. Without
understanding where a team member’s narrative is going, compensation,
development, and events are all fueling fires heading in a thousand directions.
We’ve found time and time again that leaders desire to be seen as heroes
when, in actuality, everything they think they want from playing the hero
only comes by playing the guide. Guides are respected, loved, listened to,
understood, and followed loyally.
When the story of the customer and the story of the company align with
the story of the team, we get an alchemy that is not only profitable, it’s
healing. Now that I’ve spent several years running a company that is on
mission, I can never go back. There is more to life than dominating the
market. Dominating the market is only a beautiful story if the team that
accomplishes such a challenging task has tied that ambition to their own
personal dreams.
Is your organization on a mission? Does every stakeholder you interact
with understand the story of your customer and what role the organization
plays in that story? And do they understand their personal role in this
important narrative? If not, building your company around a compelling story
may be the first step in a turnaround. Not just for the company, but for your
customers, your team members, and even you.
Where there’s no story, there’s no engagement.THE STORYBRAND MARKETING
ROADMAP
Five (almost free) things you can do to implement the
StoryBrand Framework and grow your business
So where do we go from here? Now that we have a StoryBrand BrandScript,
how can we use these powerful messages so they have the greatest possible
impact on our bottom line?
The StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap is your hassle-free “getting started”
guide to implementing what you’ve accomplished in creating your
BrandScript. If you’ve yet to create a BrandScript, either attend one of our
workshops live or online, or go back and follow the process outlined in this
book.
Once your StoryBrand BrandScript is created, you’ll likely want to refine
your website. We consider this the first and most important step you can take
to grow your business, and that’s 
why we separated that step into a previous
chapter. Not only will editing your website grow your business, but it will
help you and your team understand the basic talking points of your new and
improved message.
Once your website has been edited so that it communicates clearly, we
consider this roadmap the most effective next step most businesses can take
to see an impact.
Of the thousands of clients we’ve worked with, these five marketing and
messaging efforts (along with editing their website so it works) get the best
results regardless of whether our clients are running a small business or a
multibillion-dollar company. And the great news is, they’re nearly free. I
mean, they’re going to cost you some time, but you won’t have to hire a giantadvertising firm to see results.
What are the five (almost free) things you can do to grow your business?
Here they are:
1.
Create a One-liner.
 This roadmap is going to teach you the four-part
formula for creating a single statement that will grow your business.
You’ll want to memorize this statement yourself and repeat it any time
somebody asks you what you do. You can teach your one-liner to your
staff and feature it on your website, in e-mail signatures, and even on
the back of your business card. People are wondering how you can
make their lives better, and we’re going to show you how to tell them in
such a way that they will want to engage with your brand.
2.
Create a Lead Generator and Collect E-mail Addresses.
 You need a
lead generator. You need a PDF, e-course, 
video series, webinar, live
event, or just about anything else that will allow you to collect e-mail
addresses. A lead generator will help you find qualified buyers so you
can let them know, directly and authoritatively, how you can help them
resolve their problems. This may be the single most important piece of
collateral you create in response to this book, and in this roadmap, I’ll
show you how.
3.
Create an Automated E-Mail Drip Campaign.
 Marketing has
changed, and even the largest of companies are diversifying their ad
spend to include e-mail campaigns. But where is the best place to get
started? By far, you’ll get your best results through an automated drip
campaign. In this section, I’ll give you the basics. Once you start
collecting e-mail addresses and using a beginner’s nurturing campaign,
it will be as though you’ve employed a sales team that works for you
while you sleep.
4.
Collect and Tell Stories of Transformation.
 Almost every story is
about the transformation of the hero, and when we tell stories about how
we’ve helped our customers transform, potential customers immediately
understand what your brand can offer them. In this section, I’ll help you
collect stories of transformation, teaching you what questions to
specifically ask your customers and where to use those stories to get the
greatest response from potential customers.
5.
Create a System That Generates Referrals.
 Once you create asystem that funnels potential customers into becoming actual customers,
your work is not quite done. The final step is to turn around and invite
happy customers to become evangelists for your brand. This will only
happen 
if we create a system that invites and incentivizes them to spread
the word. The StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap will close out with a
step-by-step guide, as well as outside-the-box ideas, for incentivizing
your existing customers to tell their friends about your products and
services.
YOUR STEP-BY-STEP PLAN
Each step of the StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap will help your company in
percentages. The more you execute, the clearer your message will become
and the more your company will grow.
The roadmap may take you a few months or even a year to execute, but
don’t worry. You should see results with each step.
If you’d like to hire a Certified StoryBrand Guide to take you through the
roadmap, you can search for the guide who is right for you at
www.clarifyyourmessage.com. Certified StoryBrand Guides are independent
contractors who act as marketing coaches and consultants and are each
certified through an immersive, live training program. They are specifically
trained to help you clarify your message and execute this roadmap to get the
greatest result.
Whether you hire a guide or go it alone, these are five of the most
successful ways our clients have implemented their new and improved
message. Consider this roadmap to be a checklist. Once you’ve created a
StoryBrand BrandScript using the SB7 Framework, refined your website so it
is clear and compelling, and executed each of the five tasks on the
StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap, you will save money and grow your
company.
STORYBRAND ROADMAP TASK ONE: CREATE
A ONE-LINER FOR YOUR COMPANYMost business leaders lose the sale the second they start talking about their
business. When somebody asks what we do and we answer by rolling our
eyes and saying, “Well, it’s complicated” or “Well, my grandfather started
the company . . .” we’ve lost the customer’s interest immediately. Instead,
imagine memorizing a single statement you could repeat after anybody asks
what you do. And imagine that statement being relevant to the needs of
potential customers. Imagine this statement being so powerful it causes
people to ask for your business card.
A one-liner is a new and improved way to answer the question “What do
you do?” It’s more than a slogan or tagline; it’s a single statement that helps
people realize why they need your products or services.
To understand how it works, let’s take another page out of the Hollywood
playbook. When writers pitch their screenplays to studio executives, the
difference between being accepted or rejected often comes down to what’s
called a 
logline
.
A logline is simply a movie’s one-sentence description. A strong logline
sells the screenplay and continues to be used all the way through a movie’s
opening weekend. If you’ve ever scrolled through a movie app on your phone
or on Netflix looking for something to watch, chances are you’ve read a
logline. Here are a few examples:
“A precocious private high school student whose life revolves around his
school competes with its most famous and successful alumnus for the
affection of a first-grade teacher.”—
Rushmore
“Blacksmith Will Turner teams up with eccentric pirate ‘Captain’ Jack
Sparrow to save his love, the governor’s daughter, from Jack’s former pirate
allies, who are now undead.”—
Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the
Black Pearl
“A science-fiction fantasy about a naive but ambitious farm boy from a
backwater desert who discovers powers he never knew he had when he teams
up with a feisty princess, a mercenary space pilot, and an old wizard warrior
to lead a ragtag rebellion against the sinister forces of the evil Galactic
Empire.”—
Star Wars: A New Hope
“An incompetent, immature, and dimwitted heir to an auto-parts factory
must save the business to keep it out of the hands of his new con-artist
relatives and big business.”—
Tommy Boy
What makes these loglines complete and effective? Two things:
imagination and intrigue. They summarize the movie in a way that a viewercan imagine the story, and they do so with enough intrigue that they make the
reader want to watch the film.
The one-liner you will create for your company will work like a logline in
a movie; it will intrigue qualified buyers and invite them to do business with
you.
Now imagine everybody in your company memorizing your one-liner.
What would life look like if everybody you worked with were converted into
a sales force spreading the word about your products and services? Creating a
one-liner and repeating it over and over is a great way to spread the word
about what you do.
To craft a compelling one-liner, we’ll employ a distilled version of the
StoryBrand Framework. If you use the following four components, you’ll
craft a powerful one-liner:
1.
The Character
2.
The Problem
3.
The Plan
4.
The Success
Your one-liner doesn’t have to be a single sentence, nor does it need to be
four sentences. Think of it more as a statement. You simply want to
communicate these four ideas. Who is your customer? What is their problem?
What is your plan to help them, and what will their life look like after you
do?
Let’s take a deeper look at each of the four necessary components:
1.
THE CHARACTER
If you’ve created a StoryBrand BrandScript, you’ve done the heavy
lifting when it comes to understanding who your character is and what
they want. Let’s say your demographic is soccer moms and you sell a
Pilates class. Your one-liner might be, “We help busy mothers get a
weekly, meaningful workout so they feel healthy and full of energy.” If
you sell vacation rentals to retired couples you might say, “We save
retirees the cost of a second home in Florida, yet deliver the warm
beaches and luxury accommodations they love.” These examples start
with a character. A busy mom. A retiree. People need to be able to say“That’s me!” when they hear your one-liner.
2.
THE PROBLEM
As I said earlier in the book, stories hinge on conflict, so we should
never shy away from talking about our customers’ challenges. Defining a
problem triggers 
the thought in your customer’s mind: 
Yeah, I do
struggle with that. Will your brand be able to help me overcome it?
Soccer moms are challenged with busy schedules, and they can never
seem to find time to work out. A retired couple looking to spend their
winter in Florida cringes at the cost of buying a second home. But
defining the problem is vital, because once you do you’ve opened a story
loop and they’ll be looking to you to help them find a resolution.
3.
THE PLAN
You won’t be able to spell out your entire plan in your one-liner, but
you must hint at it. For workout-deprived soccer moms, the plan might
be weekly, meaningful workouts. For the retired couple, the plan of a
time-share can make the difference.
When a customer reads your one-liner, the plan component should
cause them to think, 
Well, when it’s organized that way, it makes sense.
Perhaps there’s hope.
4.
THE SUCCESS
This is where you paint a picture of what life could look like after
customers use your product or service. For soccer moms, success may
involve a sense of health, well-being, or attractiveness. For retired
couples looking for a second home in Florida, success could be as simple
as warm, enjoyable winters.
Let’s put it all together by crafting a one-liner for soccer moms to see how
powerful a one-liner actually is.
•
The Character: Moms
•
The Problem: Busy schedules
•
The Plan: Short, meaningful workouts
•
The Success: Health and renewed energy
•
“We provide busy moms with a short, meaningful workout they can use
to stay healthy and have renewed energy.”Contrast that statement with the description most business leaders might
give: “I run a gym.”
If you’re a busy soccer mom, your ears would perk up because the new
one-liner identifies you, helps you overcome your problem, gives you a plan,
and promises a better life. A statement like this will invite customers into a
better story they can actually live.
What about our retired couple?
•
The Character: Retired couples
•
The Problem: A second mortgage
•
The Plan: A time-share option
•
The Success: Avoiding those cold, northern winters
•
“We help retired couples who want to escape the harsh cold avoid the
hassle of a second mortgage while still enjoying the warm, beautiful
weather of Florida in the winter.”
Again, compare this statement to what most business leaders would say:
“Well, it’s complicated. I got involved in real estate several years ago and
then when we had our second kid we moved to Florida . . .” Boring. Noise.
At StoryBrand, our one-liner is “Most business leaders 
don’t know how to
talk about their company, so we created a framework that helps them simplify
their message, create great marketing material, connect with customers, and
grow their business.” Again, a one-liner is simply a clear, repeatable
statement that allows potential customers to find themselves in the story a
company is telling.
Keep Editing Your One-Liner Until It Works
Consider your first one-liner a rough draft. Write it down and test it
repeatedly. Run it by your friends, spouse, potential customers, even
strangers standing in line at Starbucks. Do people look interested? Do they
completely understand what you offer? If so, you’re on the right track. When
they start asking for your business card or for more information, you’ve
really dialed it in.How to Use Your One-Liner
Once you’ve created your one-liner, use it liberally. Here are a few ways
to put it to work:
1.
Memorize your one-liner and repeat it over and over.
 There’s a
good chance you’ve become so used to rambling about your business
that reciting your one-liner won’t come naturally. Memorize it as
though you’re an actor in a movie and it’s your most important line.
Read and repeat it until you can recite it as fast as your own name. This
will take some time, but it might be the best few hours you spend
working on your new messaging campaign.
2.
Have your team memorize the one-liner.
 Now it’s time to get your
team to own the one-liner. That includes 
everyone from the CEO to the
guy who mows the lawn. If every team member can repeat the one-liner,
you will have converted your staff into a viral sales force. Have fun with
this! Print the one-liner on your walls, coffee cups, T-shirts, or anything
else your team interacts with daily. After each member of your team
memorizes the one-liner, they will be spreading a clear and compelling
message about your company at every cocktail party and baseball game
they attend.
Be prepared, though, because you’ll be amazed at how hard this really
is. Branding is difficult and it will take time. Carry around a wad of five-
dollar bills and ask somebody in the office each day what your company
does. If someone answers with the one-liner, reward him or her with a
crisp five. Soon, word will spread around the office and people will
know they need to get this down. It might cost you a thousand dollars by
the time you’re done, but I assure you, it will be the best money you’ve
spent marketing your company.
3.
Include it on your website.
 While it’s largely subjective what words
you include on your website, make sure to get your one-liner in there
somewhere. Even a small paragraph beneath the main section of your
website will do. Including your one-liner almost guarantees your site
invites potential customers into a story they find interesting. Make it
bold and legible so it becomes one of the obvious statements you want
viewers to read.
4.
Repeat your one-liner in every piece of marketing collateralpossible.
 Use your one-liner till it feels borderline excessive. Include
your one-liner in every piece of 
marketing possible. Our customers
aren’t going to read every one of our e-mails or visit our webpage every
day. The more opportunities a customer has to read or hear our one-
liner, the more likely they will be to understand how we can make their
lives better.
Print your one-liner on your business cards and in your social media bios.
Print it on your packaging. Include it in your e-mail signature. Repeat it over
and over to increase the percentage chance customers will read it.
I recently attended a benefit concert in which a bunch of A-list musicians
passed a guitar around to raise money for a nonprofit. Even though these
artists had written hundreds of songs among them, I noticed they only played
their hits. Had this been their own show, they would have played lesser-
known songs or mixed in new ones, but since they could each only play a few
songs, they played the crowd’s favorites.
Have you ever considered what it’s like to be a big-time music star? The
adoring crowds and star treatment are great, but life on stage can get rather
repetitive. I’ve often wondered how difficult it must be for James Taylor to
sing “Fire and Rain” again and again, night after night, decade after decade.
What’s worse is he can never mail it in—each night the crowds are different,
and he has to deliver a song first released in 1970 with fresh energy and
passion every time.
That’s the discipline it takes to be successful. James Taylor sings the same
song over and over again because ultimately he’s a servant of the people.
He’s a brilliant artist, but he’s also a professional, and professionals do what
it takes to please their customers, pay the bills, and grow their brand.
When you think about how often you’ll need to say your one-liner, think
of yourself as a big music star. Amateurs ramble on, playing and saying
whatever they want, but professionals serve their audience. Our one-liner is
like our hit song, and we need to say it over and over and over until even our
customers have it memorized and start repeating it to their friends.
ROADMAP TASK TWO: CREATE A LEAD-
GENERATOR AND COLLECT E-MAILADDRESSES
Quick question: What is the most sacred, private, personal possession you
own today? The one thing you’d be terrified of other people having full,
unmitigated access to?
I’m going to take a wild guess and say it’s your smartphone.
If you think about it, there’s an awful lot of your life—photos, texts, and
apps—stored up in that little device. It’s also very likely there’s one
important account on your phone that acts as a gateway to nearly every other
component of your life:
Your e-mail account.
If this is true of you, it’s also true of your customers. An e-mail account is
one of the most sacred, personal things people possess. But what if you could
have a direct line to customers through that very channel? What if customers
willingly gave you permission to contact them in such a personal way?
That’s e-mail marketing. E-mail is the most valuable and effective way
you can spread the word about your business, especially if your company
revenue is under $5 million and you don’t have a large marketing budget. As
of this writing I have hundreds 
of thousands of Twitter followers and nearly
as many Facebook fans, but all my social media platforms combined don’t
perform anywhere close to sending out an update or offer via e-mail.
Busting the Myth of the Newsletter Signup
Most business leaders who come to one of our workshops think e-mail
doesn’t work because so few people sign up for their newsletter. I hate to be
the bearer of bad news, but no one wants to sign up for your newsletter.
Nobody wants to sign up to “stay in the loop,” because this kind of offer
doesn’t promise anything of value. The only thing it implies is spam.
So how do we get people to join our e-mail list? We offer them something
valuable in return, something more valuable than the vague offer of a
newsletter. This “something” is a lead generator, a resource that magnetically
attracts people to our businesses and invites them to take action. In the
StoryBrand Framework, we call this a 
transitional call to action
. A
transitional call to action, if you remember, is like asking potential customers
out on a date. We’re not asking them to commit, but we are asking them tospend a little more time with us.
How to Create an Irresistible Lead Generator
In order to combat noise in today’s marketplace, your lead generator must
do two things:
1.
Provide enormous value for your customer
2.
Establish you as an authority in your field
In the year we started StoryBrand, our first lead generator was a simple,
downloadable document (in PDF format) called 
“5 Things Your Website
Should Include.” It was remarkably successful. More than forty thousand
people downloaded it, which allowed me to e-mail reminders about our
upcoming StoryBrand Marketing Workshops. I credit that single lead
generator with taking our company past the $2 million mark. From there, we
created a free video series called The 5-Minute Marketing Makeover
(http://fiveminutemarketingmakeover.com), which took our lead generation
to another level. We were no longer grinding to create business. Now we
create lead generators for each revenue stream our company offers. This
allows us to segment our customers by their interests and offer different
products to solve their various problems.
There are endless options for creating lead generators. Our clients have
been incredibly creative in offering valuable information and services in
exchange for an e-mail address. Of all we’ve created and we’ve seen our
clients create, there are five that are most effective.
Five Types of Lead Generators for All Types of
Businesses
1.
Downloadable Guide:
 This is a shockingly inexpensive way to
generate leads, and it’s what we used when launching StoryBrand. Get
specific. If you’re a local market selling produce, offer monthly recipes
or tips for tending a garden.
2.
Online Course or Webinar:
 Creating a brief online course or webinaris involved, but it’s also easier than ever. If you’re an expert on
something and want to position yourself as such in the marketplace,
offer a free training online in exchange for an e-mail address. By doing
so, 
you’ll have positioned yourself as an expert, created reciprocity, and
earned your customer’s trust.
3.
Software Demos or a Free Trial:
 This has worked wonders for many
businesses. Remember in the early nineties when AOL sent demo CDs
in the mail with one thousand hours of free Internet browsing for forty-
five days? They worked like a charm. The Internet has changed since
then, but the marketing principle remains the same.
4.
Free Samples:
 My wife, Betsy, orders ready-to-cook meals from a
business called Blue Apron. To generate more leads, Blue Apron credits
her with “free sample meals” she can send to friends and family. A
number of them try it, and they end up buyers.
5.
Live Events:
 If you’ve ever walked into a large pet store like Petco,
you’ve likely seen invitations to free dog obedience classes. Even if
you’re a smaller operation, hosting a quarterly class is a terrific way to
build a small database of qualified customers.
Still Stuck? Swipe Ideas from These Examples
One key to having an effective lead generator is to give it an irresistible
title. These are some sample lead generators I’ve seen that worked well.
There’s no need to reinvent the wheel. Leverage these proven examples and
create something similar.
“5 Mistakes People Make with Their First Million Dollars”
— A
downloadable PDF guide offered by a financial advisor who wanted to
find young, newly wealthy clients to help them with their financial
planning.
“Building Your Dream Home: 10 Things to Get Right Before You
Build”
— A free e-book offered by an architect who wanted to establish
herself as a guide to families looking to build a custom home.
“Cocktail Club: Learn to Make One New Cocktail Each Month”
—
This was a monthly event surprisingly put on by a garden store that
taught attendees how to infuse bitters and simple syrups with herbs. Theobjective for this promotion was to create a community around their
store. Business is booming (or should I say blooming) because people
want to attend their classes.
“Becoming a Professional Speaker”
—A free online course offered by a
speaking coach for those who wanted to become professional speakers.
This generated leads for long-term subscriptions to his coaching service.
The ideas go on and on. Now that you’re aware of lead generators, you’ll
see them everywhere. Keep a running list of lead generator possibilities. If
one strikes you as abnormally strong, get to work and create a version of your
own. The key here is to avoid falling into “paralysis by analysis.” The best
and easiest place to start is with a downloadable guide in PDF format. If you
aren’t a writer, don’t worry. There are plenty of writers for hire, and you can
find some terrific StoryBrand Certified Copywriters through our directory at
clarifyyourmessage.com.
The process is quite simple: Have the writer interview you about your area
of expertise, and he or she will flesh out the content. You can then send the
final draft to a designer to lay out. The process is fast and inexpensive and
will yield tremendous results.
How Much Value Should I Give Away for Free?
This is one of the most common questions we get asked. My response: be
as generous as possible. To my knowledge, it’s never cost me to give away
valuable, free content. People consume this content on the run and will gladly
pay to attend a workshop or hire a facilitator that helps them slow down and
learn the information at a custom-created pace.
If you’re going to create a downloadable PDF, keep it to about three pages
of content. Stuff as much value as you can into those three pages so your
prospects will see you as the “go-to” guide.
Among marketers, it’s been said you give away the “why”—as in why a
potential customer would need to address or be aware of a certain issue—and
sell the “how,” which is where you offer a tool or teach customers how to
follow through step-by-step. My personal belief is that we should be
generous—very generous. At StoryBrand, we certainly give away the “why,”
but we also give away an awful lot of the “how.” It’s never cost me to begenerous with my customers.
How Many E-mail Addresses Do We Need to Get
Started?
This is a common question, and I’m going to give the common answer: it
depends. A financial advisor may get “above the grind” with five hundred e-
mail addresses, but those may take years to acquire. A national or global
business may need hundreds of thousands of e-mails that are further
segmented based on demographic information. But if your business is
generating less than $5 million a year, you should see results with as little as
two hundred and fifty qualified e-mail addresses.
Where Should I Feature My Lead Generator?
Make sure you feature your lead generator liberally on your website. I
recommend creating a pop-up feature on your site that, after ten seconds or so
of the browser arriving, offers your resource to the user. Though people
complain about pop-ups, the stats are clear: they readily outperform nearly
every other type of Internet advertising. Just make sure there’s a ten-second
buffer. You don’t want the pop-up to appear immediately. That would be like
being tackled by a salesman as soon as you walk through the door of a retail
store.
Like farming a field, building a healthy and engaged e-mail list takes time,
but it’s time well spent. Start today. A year from now, you’ll be glad you did.
ROADMAP TASK THREE: CREATE AN
AUTOMATED E-MAIL DRIP CAMPAIGN
In my midtwenties, after having spent a year or more traveling around the
country in a Volkswagen van, I got a warehouse job at a publishing company
outside Portland, Oregon. The job came to me by accident. A friend’s dad
owned the company and noticed I needed a job. But I’m grateful. Working in
publishing, even in an entry-level position, helped me fall in love with books.Within a few years of getting that job, I was put in charge of the company.
It was an unintentional move on the owner’s part because people kept retiring
or taking other jobs and the owner kept “temporarily” moving me up. One
season, though, the owner hired a consultant to help him figure out what to
do, and after studying the numbers, the consultant pointed at me 
and said,
“Put that guy on commission and let him do what he wants.” I was just as
taken aback as my boss. Without any of us realizing it, the company had
actually started growing. And when we sat down and looked closely at the
numbers, we realized the reason.
Just before my series of promotions, I’d discovered a piece of software
called FileMaker Pro. We used this software to manage our database and
orders. I passed the hours fiddling around with the software and one day
realized we could see who had placed the largest orders each month and send
them a letter in the mail. This is all standard marketing these days, but back
then it was relatively new technology. Each month I sent about two hundred
form letters to the businesses that ordered the most copies of our books. That
simple activity generated a ton of business.
The letters I wrote to our customers contained anything but good sales
copy. One of the letters was about a camping trip I’d taken as a kid!
Shakespearean plots, these were not.
These days my letters get a lot bigger response, but looking back, even
those terrible letters worked to grow our business. And yet all our customers
were doing was taking them from a pile of mail on their desk and throwing
them away.
So why did the company grow if people weren’t even reading my letters?
What I realized, in hindsight, was that every month our top customers
were being reminded that we existed. Every time one of those customers
threw a letter away, even without opening it, our logo was flashing across
their eyes.
Content is important, but the point is, there is great power in simply
reminding our customers we exist. I was young and dumb at the time, but I’d
stumbled onto something. Our customers 
may not need our product today,
and they might not need it tomorrow, but on the day they do need it, we want
to make sure they remember who we are, what we have, and where they can
reach us.Send Potential Customers Regular, Valuable E-
mails
The days of direct mail aren’t completely dead, but it goes without saying
that e-mail has largely taken over. Now that you’ve obtained e-mail addresses
through your lead generator, the next step is to create an automated e-mail
campaign.
An automated e-mail campaign is a terrific way to remind customers that
you exist. And if they happen to open your e-mail (you’ll be surprised at how
many people actually do), then it’s a great way to invite them into the story
you’re telling as a company.
An automated e-mail campaign is a prewritten sequence of e-mail
messages that trigger once a person is added to your list. Some people call
this an “auto-responder series” or a “funnel,” but the idea is that you’ll be
inviting people into a narrative that leads to a sale even while you sleep.
Does Anybody Read These Things?
Don’t worry if the open rates on these e-mails are low. A 20 percent
open rate is industry standard, so anything above that is performing
well. And remember, even if a person sees and deletes an e-mail,
the goal has been accomplished: you are “branding” yourself into
their universe.
If someone unsubscribes from your list, that’s a good thing. That
person will probably never buy from you anyway, and it reduces
the size of your list so you aren’t paying your e-mail service
provider for e-mails that are dead weight. The last thing you want to
do in your marketing is bother someone, so if someone
unsubscribes, all the better. It’s more important to have a list of
qualified, interested subscribers than a large number of people who
never intend to buy.
I subscribe to plenty of mailing lists that I hardly open an e-mailfrom. Why don’t I unsubscribe? Because every twenty or so e-
mails, they send something I actually want to open. Yet all those e-
mails I delete are further branding those companies into my
consciousness.
Getting Started
While there are many kinds of automated e-mail campaigns, the one we
recommend starting with is the 
nurturing campaign
. A nurturing campaign is
a simple, regular e-mail that offers your subscribers valuable information as it
relates to your products or services.
Not unlike our lead generator, we want these e-mails to continue
positioning us as the guide and to create a bond of trust and reciprocity with
potential customers. There will come a time to ask for a sale, but this isn’t the
primary goal of a nurturing campaign. A typical nurturing campaign may
have an e-mail going out once each week, and the order might look like this:
E-mail #1: Nurturing e-mail
E-mail #2: Nurturing e-mail
E-mail #3: Nurturing e-mail
E-mail #4: Sales e-mail with a call to action
This pattern can be repeated month after month. I recommend creating a
few months’ worth of material and letting it ride, then adding to it as you
have time. The idea is to offer something of great value and then occasionally
ask for an order and remind people you have products and services that can
make their lives better. Pretty soon you’ll have hundreds of potential
customers being introduced to your business. When they need help in your
area of expertise, they will remember you and place an order.
So what’s the difference between a nurturing e-mail and an e-mail with an
offer and call to action?The Nurturing E-mail
A good way to craft each nurturing e-mail is to use an effective formula
that offers simple, helpful advice to a customer. I’ve been using this formula
for years and customers love it.
1.
Talk about a problem.
2.
Explain a plan to solve the problem.
3.
Describe how life can look for the reader once the problem is
solved.
I also recommend including a postscript, or the P.S. Often, the P.S. is the
only thing somebody who opens a mass e-mail will actually read.
That’s really it. If you cover these three areas as efficiently as possible,
you’ll be crafting e-mails your customers open, read, and remember.
A GOOD NURTURING E-MAIL
Recently we consulted with the owner of a dog boarding company interested
in growing her business. We recommended she create a lead-generating PDF
called “5 Things Your Dog Thinks About When You’re Away” in exchange
for the e-mail addresses of qualified customers. What dog lover wouldn’t
want to read a PDF with a title like that? Perfect.
A few days after somebody downloaded the PDF, they would get the first
e-mail in the nurturing campaign. It looked like this:
Subject: Should We Free Feed Our Dogs?
Dear Name,
At Crest Hill Boarding we’re often asked whether it’s okay to free feed
our dogs. It’s certainly the easiest way to make sure a dog always has
food and never goes hungry. But there are some problems with free
feeding. Dogs that are free fed often gain excess fat later in life and
health problems can occur without our noticing.
We recommend feeding your dog a set amount, once or twice per day.After twenty minutes, if your pet hasn’t eaten their food, we
recommend discarding the excess and waiting until the next set time to
feed them again.
By sticking to a set amount and set schedule, you’ll be able to monitor
what your dog eats and also be able to diagnose any illness your pet
may be suffering from 
that is making them lose their appetite. This will
ensure your dog stays healthy and happy long into their life.
Here’s to enjoying our pets for a long, long time.
Sincerely,
X
P.S. As for how much each dog should be fed, it really depends on how
old your dog is and how big. Next time you and your dog are in the
shop, introduce us to your dog and we’ll tell you everything we know
about the breed.
The bottom of this e-mail contained our client’s logo, their one-liner, and a
phone number in case anyone was ready to place an order. Still, getting an
order wasn’t the primary concern. The primary concern was to offer
something of value, position the business as the guide, and create reciprocity.
You can see how getting a weekly e-mail like this would make our client’s
kennel stand out in any dog owner’s mind. The next time a potential
customer had to suddenly leave town, they’d fondly remember her kennel
and take their dog in for boarding.
After three more e-mails like this, our client included an e-mail that
contained an offer and a call to action.
The Offer and Call to Action E-mail
About every third or fourth e-mail in a nurturing campaign should offer a
product or service to the customer. The key here is to be direct. You don’t
want to be passive, because being passive 
communicates weakness. In this e-mail you are clearly making an offer.
The formula might look like this:
1.
Talk about a problem.
2.
Describe a product you offer that solves this problem.
3.
Describe what life can look like for the reader once the problem is
solved.
4.
Call the customer to a direct action leading to a sale.
A GOOD OFFER AND CALL TO ACTION E-MAIL
Similar to the nurturing e-mail, the offer and call-to-action e-mail aims to
solve a problem. The only difference is that the solution is your product and a
strong call to action has been inserted. You are inviting this subscriber to do
business with you. Here’s an offer and call-to-action e-mail we wrote for
Crest Hill dog kennel:
Subject: A solution for scary boarding
Dear Name,
If you’re anything like us, you hate leaving your dog behind when you
go out of town. And you hate the idea of your dog being locked in a
crate next to a bunch of other stress-inducing, barking dogs. As dog
lovers, we used to hate that feeling too, and that’s why we created Crest
Hill Boarding.
At Crest Hill, your dog plays so hard all day, they are eager to lie down
at night. We have three full-time staff members throwing tennis balls
and enticing 
dogs to run and play so they’re far too distracted to realize
they’re anywhere other than a second home. This means that by the end
of the day all the other dogs are eager to sleep too, and so your dog
rests comfortably. You won’t believe how quiet our kennels are once
we put the dogs to bed at 8 p.m.
Right now you can book three nights at Crest Hill at half price. This is aone-time offer and it’s meant to introduce you to how differently we
take care of your pet. We think once you see how eager your dog will
be to join us, you’ll feel better when you have to leave town. No more
guilt. No more sad good-byes.
To take advantage of this offer, just call us. You don’t even have to
know when the next time you’re going to leave town is, we will just
mark you in our system as having taken advantage of the offer.
Call us today at 555–5555.
We can’t wait for your dog to experience the Crest Hill difference.
Sincerely,
X
P.S. Make sure to call today. The call will only take a couple of
minutes, and you’ll be in our system forever. After you call, your dog’s
favorite home away from home will be waiting whenever you’re in
need of a safe, reliable, and fun-for-your dog solution.
This e-mail weaves in a tremendous amount of content from Crest Hill’s
StoryBrand BrandScript, including the external problem and internal fear of
the customer along with elements from the success module. But the gist of
the e-mail is that if a subscriber purchases Crest Hill’s offer, one of their
concerns will be resolved.
Note that the call to action is strong and contains a degree of scarcity
because it is a one-time offer. Anyone who reads this e-mail knows exactly
what we want them to do: board their dog at Crest Hill.
What Software Should We Use?
There are many software options when it comes to creating an automated
e-mail campaign. If you’re working with a designer or advertising agency,
this is likely a question for them. You want your designer to work withwhatever software they’re accustomed to using.
If you want to create the system yourself, MailChimp is a fantastic service,
especially for automated e-mail campaigns that are simple and reliable.
If you have a robust list and want to segment your audience, provide e-
commerce solutions, take advantage of advanced strategies, and create a
powerful e-mail force to be reckoned with, we recommend Infusionsoft. At
StoryBrand we use Infusionsoft with great success. Our friends at
Infusionsoft are working on template e-mails developed in coordination with
the StoryBrand team to ensure e-mails that get a response. You can learn
more about these e-mail templates at storybrand.com/infusionsoft.
Start Small
Getting an e-mail campaign up and running can be intimidating, but it
doesn’t have to be. Make sure to start small. To get started, simply open a
Word document and start writing your e-mails. You can paste your e-mails
into an e-mail application later. Writing that initial e-mail is the first step.
Once you read it back to yourself, you’re going to want to send it to
customers. That’s the beginning. Before you know it, you’ll have a robust
system of e-mails that are engaging customers at all hours of the day, even
while you sleep.
ROADMAP TASK FOUR: COLLECT AND TELL
STORIES OF TRANSFORMATION
As we learned earlier in the book, few things are more foundational to a
compelling story than the transformation of the hero. Why? Because
transformation is a core desire for every human being. That’s why so many
stories are about the hero being transformed into somebody better.
People love movies about characters who transform, and they love
businesses that help them experience transformation themselves. One of the
best ways we can illustrate how we help our customers transform is through
customer testimonials.
Great testimonials give future customers the gift of going second. The
challenge lies in getting the right kind of testimonial: one that showcasesyour value, the results you get for customers, and the experience people had
working with you. Simply asking for a testimonial usually won’t work
because 
customers will share their feelings about you by default. “Nancy is a
great friend! We highly recommend Nancy and her team!”
While those are nice words, they do very little in telling a story of
transformation. There are no specific results mentioned or details about what
life is like now that the transformation has taken place.
If you’re asking customers to write a testimonial for you, it’s likely they
are (1) too busy to give deep thought to writing the testimonial or (2) subpar
writers or communicators.
Weaving together a compelling tale of transformation means you have to
ask the right questions—you need some raw materials to work with. The
following questions will allow you to build a bank of compelling testimonials
that work with nearly any customer quickly and easily.
These questions work because they “lead” the client down a specific train
of thought. Simply use these questions to create a form customers can fill out.
Once they fill out the form, the natural flow of the sentences will allow you
to copy and paste the answers to build a client case study.
These same questions can also be used to create video testimonials.
Simply invite customers to be interviewed and ask them the following
questions. Once the video is edited and b-roll is inserted, you can feature your
video on your website or in a nurturing or sales e-mail campaign.
Here are five questions most likely to generate the best response for a
customer testimonial:
1.
What was the problem you were having before you discovered our
product?
2.
What did the frustration feel like as you tried to solve that problem?
3.
What was different about our product?
4.
Take us to the moment when you realized our product was actually
working to solve your problem.
5.
Tell us what life looks like now that your problem is solved or being
solved.
You can see the arc of the questions naturally yields a transformation
story. Once you capture the testimonial, feature it everywhere: e-mails,promo videos, keynote speeches, live interviews, events. One season we
closed each episode of the 
Building a StoryBrand
 podcast with an interview
with someone who transformed their business and their life by applying the
StoryBrand Framework. The response was overwhelming. We noted an
immediate uptick in registrations for our marketing workshops.
The point is that people are drawn to transformation. When they see
transformation in others, they want it for themselves. The more we feature the
transformation journey our customers have experienced, the faster our
business will grow.
ROADMAP TASK FIVE: CREATE A SYSTEM
THAT GENERATES REFERRALS
Ask any business owner how they get new customers and the majority will
say “word of mouth.” It would seem obvious, then, that every business out
there has a system for generating more word-of-mouth referrals.
Unfortunately, that’s seldom the case.
Once you create a system that funnels potential customers into becoming
actual customers, the final step is to turn around and invite happy customers
to become evangelists for your brand. This will only happen if you create a
system that invites and incentivizes people to spread the word. Various
studies conducted by the American Marketing Association have shown that
referrals and peer recommendations are up to 2.5 times more responsive than
any other marketing channel.
If you’ve done the simple, fun work of creating your StoryBrand
BrandScript, your message should be clear. Now it’s time to implement a
system that gets people repeating that message to their friends and family.
Let’s take a step-by-step look at what it takes to create an effective referral
system.
1.
IDENTIFY YOUR EXISTING, IDEAL CUSTOMERS
At the top of the current Domino’s Pizza website there’s a link that says,
“Don’t have a pizza profile? Create one.” That link, even though it’s in small
print, is a huge moneymaker. Those who frequently order from the restaurantchain use this link to build their perfect pizza and enter their credit card
information to order it. Domino’s then sends them occasional prompts to
reorder, especially before big events like important football games or holiday
weekends when they know their customers are likely to enjoy their product.
Now imagine taking that strategy to the next level. What if creating a
special database of existing, passionate customers and communicating with
them differently can help you generate referrals? Developing a simple
campaign using tools your 
existing fans can use to spread the word about
your brand is key. Not only could you increase your existing business, but
these happy customers will become an activated sales force and invite their
friends.
2.
GIVE YOUR CUSTOMERS A REASON TO SPREAD THE
WORD
A few years ago, I utilized the services of a consulting firm that, as part of
their system, asked me for a list of referrals. The request made me
immediately uncomfortable. I felt like they wanted to use me for my
friends, or worse, turn me into one of their salespeople.
That said, the service they provided was good, and had they framed the
request another way, I might have complied. Specifically, it would have
been nice if they’d have created a small, educational video that would
have been valuable to my friends. I’d much more quickly pass along a
video than I would hand over my friends’ e-mail addresses.
Consider creating a PDF or video that you automatically send to
existing clients along with an e-mail that goes something like this:
Dear Friend,
Thanks for doing business with us. A number of our clients have
wanted to tell their friends about how we help customers, but they
aren’t sure how to do so. We’ve put together a little video that will
help your friends solve 
X problem
. If you have any friends with 
X
problem
, feel free to send it along. We’d be happy to follow up with
any of them, and we’ll be sure to let you know whether we could
help.
We know you value your relationships and so do we. If yourfriends are experiencing a problem we’ve helped you solve, we’d
love to help them too. If there’s anything else we can do, please let
us know.
Sincerely,
Nancy
P.S. 
X Problem
 can be frustrating. If you’d rather introduce us to
your friend in person, just let us know. We are more than happy to
meet with them in their place of business or at our office.
3.
OFFER A REWARD
If you really want to prime the pump, offer a reward to existing clients
who refer their friends. As I mentioned earlier, my wife has invited dozens of
friends to try out Blue Apron, a company that sends ready-to-cook meals
right to people’s doors. Plenty of Betsy’s friends have enjoyed the service
and signed on for themselves. Betsy receives a reward from Blue Apron
every time somebody signs up.
Another way to offer a reward is to start an affiliate program. You can
offer your customers a 10 percent commission on the orders they bring to
you. This system has generated millions of dollars for thousands of
companies. A good affiliate program can do the work of an expensive sales
force if you structure the percentages well.
Automate the Work
The easiest, fastest referral system can be automated using Mail Chimp,
Infusionsoft, HubSpot, or any other e-mail marketing system. Simply include
any customer who places one or two orders in an automated campaign that
offers them an educational video or PDF they can pass on, an added value for
telling their friends about you, or a bonus or even a commission. Make sure
the system opts customers out after placing several orders so you don’t hit
every customer every time they order with another sales pitch. We don’t want
to risk annoying people.SOME REAL-WORLD REFERRAL SYSTEMS
Implementing a referral system takes work, but it’s effective. Take some
inspiration from these samples. You’ll quickly see that the effort will pay off.
A 100 Percent Refund for Three New Referrals Within a Semester.
This was the brainchild of an after-school test-prep academy that
prepared high school students for the SAT and ACT college admissions
test, but it could just as well have been an eye doctor or a massage
therapist. Parents were given a referral card to hand out to friends, many
of whom had kids around the same age. Each time one of the cards came
back, the referrer was credited hundreds of dollars because these courses
were expensive! When they referred three new registrants, the referrer
was given a 100 percent refund. Sure, the kids were competing with test
scores, but the parents ended 
up competing for referrals, and business
skyrocketed. The business also offered special seminars for parents and
students of the 100 Percent Referral Club.
Invite-a-Friend Coupons.
 When students signed up for golf lessons, the
range offered each new student several coupons for a free bucket of golf
balls for a friend. While it’s an individual game, golf is a social sport
since people enjoy playing together. The course experienced a 40
percent increase in students signing up for lessons because word of
mouth spread so effectively.
Open-House Party.
 Whenever a home contractor finished a large-scale
project, he asked the homeowners if they would be willing to throw an
open-house party in exchange for a slight discount. Friends, family, and
neighbors were invited to a cookout on the newly built deck. The
contractor used this opportunity to explain how the work was done and
pass out cards. With only a few open-house parties, the contractor filled
his schedule for the following twelve months.
Free Follow-Up Photos.
 A wedding photographer in Syracuse, New
York, offered couples a free follow-up portrait on their one-year
anniversary if the couple provided three referrals at the time of the
wedding. She also followed up with cards to the entire bridal party,
expressing how much of a pleasure it was to photograph them. Needless
to say, business boomed because people who are in wedding parties
often end up getting married soon themselves.WHAT’S YOUR MARKETING PLAN?
In my twenties I spent an entire year playing chess. Nearly every day I met a
friend at a coffee shop and we’d go at it for a couple of hours. My skills
improved, and I ended up winning more than half my matches until another
friend started showing up. He beat me every time, usually within twenty
moves.
The reason? I knew a lot about the philosophy of chess, but I didn’t have
what’s referred to as an 
opening
. Before sitting down to play, my more
skilled opponent planned his first five moves. This opening strategy was
critical to his success. Once I memorized a few openings of my own, I started
to win again.
If the StoryBrand Framework is a foundation, the five marketing ideas that
make up the StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap should serve as your opening.
These five simple yet powerful tools have been used by countless businesses
to increase their revenue.
Again, consider this roadmap a checklist. After you’ve created your
StoryBrand BrandScript, get to work on each aspect of this roadmap and
watch as your customers engage and your company grows.
To hire a StoryBrand Certified Guide to help you execute your StoryBrand
Marketing Roadmap, visit www.clarifyyourmessage.com. Our directory can
help you find a StoryBrand Certified Guide (marketing coach), StoryBrand
Certified Copywriter, web designer, videographer, printer, or even a complete
design agency. Stop wasting money on marketing that doesn’t work. Hire
somebody who knows how to craft a clear message.
StoryBrand does not take a percentage of sales from any of our certified
agents
.AFTERWORD
Sadly, you don’t have to look around long to realize that often the people
who are communicating the clearest aren’t necessarily the people with the
best products or services, and they’re often not the people who are best
qualified to lead.
Our hope at StoryBrand is to help the people who actually do make the
best products and services, and the people who really should be leading, find
their voice. We want the good guys holding the microphone more than the
bad guys, to put it simply. Why? Because if hardworking people like you
invite their customers into a story that makes their lives better, the world
itself will become a better place.
Business is one of the most powerful forces in the world for good. With
our businesses we provide jobs, a nine-to-five community for our teams,
meaningful work for terrific people, and 
most importantly, products and
services that solve our customers’ problems.
There’s a popular notion among cynics and politicians these days that says
business is bad, that corporations are ruining the world. I suppose there are
some bad eggs out there, but I’ve not met them. The clients we work with just
want to improve their customers’ lives, and I’m grateful to help them do so.
Getting up every day to grow your company is difficult work. I know how
it feels to lose sleep wondering how you’re going to make the bottom line so
you don’t have to let anybody go. The StoryBrand Framework was created to
reduce this stress. It was created so you would be heard in the marketplace,
grow your business, and transform your customers’ lives. I’m grateful for the
work you’re doing. Your work is important.
It’s true: if you confuse, you’ll lose. But if you clarify your message,
customers will listen. Here’s to helping the good guys win.Because in a good story, they always do.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I’m grateful to Tim Schurrer, Kyle Reid, Koula Callahan, Avery Csorba, JJ
Peterson, Chad Snavely, Suzanne Norman, Matt Harris, Brandon Dickerson,
Tim Arnold, Matt Olthoff, and Betsy Miller for helping me build StoryBrand.
Their tireless work on behalf of our clients has helped thousands of
businesses connect with customers, hire more people, and solve their
customers’ problems. This team is more than a staff; they are family.
I’m also grateful to Mike Kim, who helped me edit this book into shape.
Mike spent weeks going through the book making it better on every page.
Webster Younce, Heather Skelton, and Brigitta Nortker of HarperCollins also
contributed significantly to the book with their careful edits and additions.
Special thanks to Brandon Dickerson for his help fleshing out commercial
evidence for the framework. Ben Ortlip 
lent invaluable feedback on how to
implement the StoryBrand Framework in large organizations. I’m grateful for
his help in creating our StoryBrand culture program along with his
contribution to 
chapter 13
. Ben’s ability to take large corporations through a
multifaceted program, allowing them to conquer the narrative void and see
bottom-line results, has inspired us all.
Lastly, thank you. Thank you for daring to make and sell things, for
solving customers’ problems, helping heroes find homes, and putting your
customers’ stories above your own. As I said in the beginning, may you be
richly rewarded for your effort.PRAISE FOR THE STORYBRAND
FRAMEWORK
“Before StoryBrand, customers weren’t seeing themselves in our offering.
We’re a staffing agency that specializes in helping companies find and hire
the right people. We help companies post job applications, we test
candidates, and we provide software for applicant tracking. Sadly, our
message, though, was all about us. We were talking about our strengths rather
than the customer’s needs. Also, our marketing material was too complex and
hard to understand. After bringing in a StoryBrand facilitator, we clarified
our message and made it about our customer. We revised our sales process
and started listening to our customers’ needs, asking them about their
external problems and how those problems were making them feel in their
daily work. The results were immediate. We created our BrandScript in
December and spent the next couple months executing our new messaging
across every part of the customer journey. Within seven months we’d seen a
118 percent increase in overall revenue. Yes, that means we more than
doubled sales. We also saw a 276 percent increase in the number of paying
customers during that same time period. And we’re still growing. In the last
six months, we’ve been increasing revenue 9 percent month over month,
which really adds up!”
—E
DWIN
 J
ANSEN
, 
HEAD OF MARKETING
, F
ITZII
“Lipscomb University is one of the fastest growing universities in the
Southeast, so it was no small task to get all the stories of our school clear and
on mission. We knew it was important, and so we brought in StoryBrand to
deliver a workshop to our entire faculty. Without question, it helped usunderstand who we were, who we were serving, and what we needed to
communicate to offer value. After StoryBrand, each department felt like they
were a subplot in the greater story of Lipscomb. The most tangible way we
saw results was through our outreach to the community. We stopped
positioning ourselves as the hero and instead began to serve the greater
collective vision of Nashville. All of this culminated in a series called
‘Imagine,’ in which we brought in the mayor of Nashville, Governor Bill
Haslam, and former president George W. Bush to speak about how Nashville
and Lipscomb could positively contribute to the world. We stopped talking
about us and we started serving as a guide to the community around us. Since
this dramatic pivot, the renewed energy around a greater vision in which
Lipscomb would play a part has resulted in more than $50 million in
donations that will go toward development. I’d say the results have been
fantastic.”
—J
OHN
 L
OWRY, VICE PRESIDENT OF DEVELOPMENT
, L
IPSCOMB
 U
NIVERSITY
“Before StoryBrand, we at Reed’s Dairy thought we had to tell people about
us. Our marketing was clumsy and awkward, and our conversion rates on e-
mails were declining. This was keeping me up at night. I bought the
StoryBrand online course and put the framework to use immediately. We
have an annual campaign in which we sell little milk coupons so people can
buy their milk in advance, twenty gallons at a time. The most we’d ever sold
through an e-mail campaign was $3,000 worth. We only do this campaign for
one day each year, so we considered $3,000 pretty good. I wondered if the
StoryBrand Framework could help us do even better. I sat and wrote that
year’s e-mail using a few of the things I had learned in the workshop. The
response was incredible: $52,000 worth of coupon books in one day. 
We’d
never seen anything like it. I got on a plane to Nashville to attend the next
live workshop and have since bought the copywriting course. Our conversion
rates on our e-mails have more than doubled. In the last few months we’ve
increased our extra product sales by 12.5 percent. We keep seeing results in
everything we apply the framework to, including our retail stores and our ice
cream division. I sleep pretty good these days.”
—A
LAN
 R
EED
, CEO 
OF
 R
EED
’
S
 D
AIRY
“I was asked to give a TED Talk about the work I do advocating for proton
therapy as a treatment for cancer. As I reviewed the enormous binder ofmaterial I wanted to cover, I realized the task was epic. There was no way I
could boil down all I wanted to say into an eighteen-minute talk. After
spending a single day with a StoryBrand facilitator, I had hope. We mapped
out my talk on a whiteboard, and I agreed to leave most of the things I
wanted to talk about on the editing room floor. The talk was easy to
memorize, flowed like a short story, and engaged the audience from
beginning to end. StoryBrand didn’t just help me prepare my TED Talk, they
helped me understand how to better approach the advocacy I’d been doing. It
all comes down to simple, repeatable messages that grab the audience.
Without StoryBrand, I’d have never been able to clarify my message and
inform the audience about a cause I care so deeply about. With the help of
StoryBrand, I hit a home run, or more appropriately, I landed a triple luxe.”
—S
COTT
 H
AMILTON
, O
LYMPIC GOLD MEDALIST, FOUNDER OF
 S
COTT
 C
ARES
,
AND THREE-TIME CANCER SURVIVOR
“These Numbers Have Faces is a nonprofit working to provide educational
equality in Sub-Saharan Africa, where only 5 percent of the population will
attend university. Before StoryBrand, our biggest problem was we were
playing the hero. We talked more about our nonprofit than we did about our
students or our donors. When we did talk about our students’ problems, we
talked about their external problems rather than their internal problems,
which we now know 
is a limited way of approaching our messaging. After
attending the StoryBrand workshop, we overhauled our messaging. In our e-
mails, we began to connect donors with the narrative of the mission, and on
social media, we told the stories of our heroic students. We used our
StoryBrand BrandScript to draft our end-of-year report that got significant
attention. As of today, we are on track to raise more money this year than
ever before. We blew our fund-raising goal out of the water. We will go into
next year with the largest cash advantage we’ve ever had. Team, donor, and
student morale is at an all-time high.”
—J
USTIN
 Z
ORADI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
 T
HESE
 N
UMBERS
 H
AVE
 F
ACES
“When EntreLeadership grew from a brand that basically just offered live
events into a full-fledged coaching service for small business owners, we
started experiencing challenges in how to explain what we did and how we
did it. Even though we’d been writing copy and updating our website for
years, the reality was that most of the time we were just guessing at the best
way to say things. As a result people didn’t understand our coaching servicethe way we thought they did. This was frustrating because the value of our
program was so obvious to us. The mistake we made was assuming it was
obvious to our customers too. We were clear . . . they were confused. That
doesn’t sell. I knew we were capable of more conversions and more effective
connection with our audience, but I wasn’t sure how to get there. It wasn’t
until we brought in a StoryBrand facilitator and sat down as a team to
overhaul our entire world through the lens of the StoryBrand Framework that
we became crystal clear on how to explain our coaching service.
EntreLeadership has grown significantly, and we are tracking to more than
double membership in the next two years. The StoryBrand Framework is an
invaluable resource, and I now expect our marketers to use it in everything
we create.”
—D
ANIEL
 T
ARDY
, 
VICE PRESIDENT OF
 E
NTRE
L
EADERSHIP
, R
AMSEY
S
OLUTIONS
“At Marie Mae we sell beautiful paper products and office supplies. Before
StoryBrand, our marketing efforts were a jumbled mess. I once overheard a
close friend talking about Marie Mae Company . . . and it was nothing close
to what we were doing. I attended a StoryBrand Marketing Workshop and
learned we were talking about the wrong things in our marketing copy. This
was life changing for our start-up. We used the framework to simplify our
message down to a single tagline: ‘You are changing the world from your
desk. Shouldn’t your office products do the same?’ We started focusing more
on the meaningful work our customers were doing and showing how they
could make an even bigger impact around the world just by choosing office
products that also make an impact. We simplified our website using the SB7
Framework, and all of our marketing e-mails are now run through the SB7
filter as well. In the year since we implemented the StoryBrand Framework,
we have increased our revenue by 20x and gotten our products into the hands
of 250,000 people. We attribute this success largely to the clarity in our story
and the shift in our marketing messages. We are grateful.”
—J
ILLIAN
 R
YAN
, 
FOUNDER OF
 M
ARIE
 M
AE
 C
OMPANY
“Before StoryBrand, I felt like my marketing was falling flat. I felt like my
business had hit a ceiling. Going through the framework taught me I was
talking about my programs all wrong. I used the StoryBrand Framework to
recreate my sales material from scratch. It took quite a bit of effort to rethinkthe whole thing. I dipped my toes in the water by making a few changes to
key pieces of marketing material, being sure they spoke directly to my
clients’ needs. I relaunched my program with my new sales materials and saw
a massive response. A campaign that would have typically brought in $6,000
to $9,000 brought in more than $40,000. StoryBrand is the most practical,
applicable, implementable, logical, simple, useful marketing program I’ve
ever experienced. It’s going to change everything in my business, and I’m
just getting started.”
—J
ENNY
 S
HIH
, 
BUSINESS COACH
“We often got a great deal of confusion when we tried to answer the question,
‘So what do you 
do
?’ We were regularly frustrated by the fact that we had a
huge body of organizational knowledge about our own work, and it required
at least an hour to convey it to people. As a start-up, nonprofit organization,
our revenue (donations) were barely enough to keep us afloat. We knew a big
reason for this was that our model was a bit complex and it didn’t get
communicated with clarity, leaving potential donors confused. We took a big
risk and chose to send our entire US team (three people) to StoryBrand—a
risk that ate up a significant cut of our cash on hand. StoryBrand was
indispensable for us. In the days following StoryBrand, we made a hard pivot
on our communications strategy. Over the course of a couple months, we
went from an organization on the verge of collapse to an organization that
was thriving. In Q4 alone (post-StoryBrand), we literally tripled our annual
revenue. Now Mavuno has expanded its reach by 400 percent in eastern
Congo, and we are ending extreme poverty for thousands of Congolese. We
are making dramatic change for some of the most vulnerable people in one of
the world’s most war-torn environments. We are postured for enormous
scale, and that is due in large part to StoryBrand. Thank you for helping us
change the world.”
—D
ANIEL
 M
YATT
, CEO 
OF
 M
AVUNOSTORYBRAND RESOURCES
THE STORYBRAND ONLINE MARKETING
WORKSHOP
If you learn better via video and would like to take an SB7 course on your
own time and at your own pace, the StoryBrand Online Marketing Workshop
walks you through the creation of your BrandScript while giving plenty of
examples and inspirational stories of success. Once you’re done with the
course, you will have a message you can use to create websites, keynotes,
elevator pitches, and much more. Get the course at storybrand.com/online.
STORYBRAND MARKETING ROADMAP ONLINE
COURSE (A COURSE IN COPYWRITING)
Donald Miller and copywriting legend Ray Edwards team up to teach you
how to write a great sales letter, wireframe a website, create a one-liner, write
an e-mail campaign, and much more. If you want to learn to write terrific
sales copy using the StoryBrand method, then get the course at
storybrand.com/roadmap.
THE STORYBRAND LIVE MARKETING
WORKSHOP
If you want to get away and clarify your message while being surrounded byexciting peers who are also working to grow their companies, sign up for our
live workshop. Our facilitators will show you endless examples of successful
messaging and coach you to make sure you’re creating the perfect
BrandScript for your company. Not only this, but we will review best
practices in simple marketing techniques that will give you a plan moving
forward. Get away for two days and walk away with the entire process this
book describes finished and ready for execution. Our live workshops will get
you results. Register for a workshop today at storybrand.com.
THE STORYBRAND PRIVATE WORKSHOP
Walking your people through the StoryBrand Framework in the comfort of
your own office is the next step to aligning your team, growing your
business, reducing marketing costs, and creating a common language that
excites and inspires your team. You’ll spend two days clarifying your
StoryBrand BrandScript and unifying your team, and our facilitators will
even take a look at your existing marketing materials once your BrandScript
is created. The private workshop process takes 1.5 days, and your company
will never be the same. Get more information at
storybrand.com/privateworkshop.
BECOME A CERTIFIED STORYBRAND GUIDE
If you’d like to give great marketing advice by helping people clarify their
message and execute the StoryBrand Marketing Roadmap, apply to become a
Certified StoryBrand Guide. StoryBrand Guides are approved through an
interview process and then listed in our online directory. Those who have a
knack for marketing and messaging and want to start a coaching business,
along with existing coaches looking to increase their value, are welcome to
apply. Corporations wanting to certify members of their team may also apply.
You can learn more at storybrand.com/guide.
STORYBRAND COPYWRITER CERTIFICATIONStoryBrand clients often need a copywriter, and if you want to be one of
them, you have to do more than just take the online course; you have to be
certified. Donald Miller and Ray Edwards have teamed up to create a robust
certification course that will equip you to write copy that gets results. As a
StoryBrand Certified Copywriter, you will understand how to wireframe a
website, create a one-liner, write an e-mail campaign, draft a terrific sales
letter, and more. And once you’re certified, you’ll be listed on our website so
potential customers can find you. Only a select number of copywriters are
certified each year. Certification can be done online through our courses and
an assessment. Register at storybrand.com/copywriter.
STORYBRAND AGENCY CERTIFICATION
If you have a design agency and want to use the SB7 Framework to create
marketing collateral for your clients, you can be listed in our Agency
Certification database by taking our agency certification program. Each
program is custom-comprised for each agency based on how many designers,
copywriters, and project managers your team includes. Find out more at
storybrand.com/agency.
STORYBRAND CULTURE PROGRAM
Large companies are more fractured than ever. As a company grows and
succeeds, the plot often starts to get lost. Our culture program helps a large
corporation create an overall StoryBrand BrandScript, create a BrandScript
for each division, create onboarding curriculum to implement the BrandScript
company-wide, and create a custom plan to radically affect the
thoughtmosphere
 of your organization. Our culture program works with
individual companies to create custom strategies to make sure your entire
team is on the same page, acting as a unified body, and moving forward
toward your mission. If your team members don’t fully understand the story
you’re inviting customers into, schedule a culture analysis today. Schedule
your analysis at storybrand.com/culture
.STORYBRAND TRAIN THE TRAINER
Do you want to teach your entire team to clearly communicate the value your
brand offers? If you want to convert your sales team, marketing team,
managers, and executive leadership into Guides that serve their hero
customers, have your facilitators trained by StoryBrand. We will train your
facilitators to train your people. Find out more at StoryBrand.com/corporate.NOTES
Chapter 2: The Secret Weapon That Will Grow
Your Business
1
.
Samantha Sharf, “The World’s Largest Tech Companies 2016:
Apple Bests Samsung, Microsoft and Alphabet,” Forbes.com, May
26, 2016,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/samanthasharf/2016/05/26/the-worlds-
largest-tech-companies-2016-apple-bests-samsung-microsoft-and-
alphabet/#2b0c584d89ee.
2
.
Alfred Hitchcock: Quotes, IMDB,
http://m.imdb.com/name/nm0000033/quotes.
Chapter 3: The Simple SB7 Framework
1
.
“Great Presentations: Understand the Audience’s Power,” 
Duarte
,
http://www.duarte.com/great-presentations-understand-the-
audiences-power/.
2
.
Ronald Reagan, “Farewell Address to the Nation,” January 11,
1989, The American Presidency Project,
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws?pid+29650.
3
.
“President Bill Clinton—Acceptance Speech,” 
PBS Newshour
,
August 29, 1996, http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/politics-july-
dec96-clinton_08-29/.
4
.
Claire Suddath, “A Brief History of Campaign Songs: Franklin D.Roosevelt,” 
Time
,
http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1840998_1840901,00.html.
Chapter 4: A Character
1
.
Viktor E. Frankl, 
Man’s Search for Meaning
 (Boston: Beacon
Press, 2006).
Chapter 5: Has a Problem
1
.
James Scott Bell, 
Plot & Structure: Techniques and Exercises for
Crafting a Plot That Grips Readers from Start to Finish
 (Cincinnati,
OH: Writer’s Digest Books, 2004), 12.
2
.
“Why CarMax?,” CarMax.com, accessed February 10, 2017,
https://www.carmax.com/car-buying-process/why-carmax.
3
.
“The Just 100: America’s Best Corporate Citizens,” 
Forbes
, May
2016, http://www.forbes.com/companies/carmax/.
Chapter 6: And Meets a Guide
1
.
James Scott Bell, 
Plot & Structure: Techniques and Exercises for
Crafting a Plot That Grips Readers from Start to Finish
 (Cincinnati,
OH: Writer’s Digest Books, 2004), 31–32.
2
.
Christopher Booker, 
The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories
(London: Continuum, 2004), 194.
3
.
Ben Sisario, “Jay Z Reveals Plans for Tidal, a Streaming Music
Service,” 
New York Times
, March 30, 2015,
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/business/media/jay-z-reveals-
plans-for-tidal-a-streaming-music-service.html.
4
.
Ibid.
5
.
“Clinton vs. Bush in 1992 Debate,” YouTube video, 4:08, posted by
“Seth Masket,” March 19, 2007, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=7ffbFvKlWqE.
6
.
Infusionsoft home page, accessed February 9, 2017,
https://www.infusionsoft.com.7
.
Amy Cuddy, 
Presence: Bringing Your Boldest Self to Your Biggest
Challenges
 (New York: Little Brown and Company, 2015), 71–72.
Chapter 7: Who Gives Them a Plan
1
.
“Why CarMax?,” CarMax.com, accessed February 10, 2017,
https://www.carmax.com/car-buying-process/why-carmax.
2
.
Arlena Sawyers, “Hot Topics, Trends to Watch in 2016,”
Automotive News
, December 28, 2015,
http://www.autonews.com/article/20151228/RETAIL04/312289987/hot-
topics-trends-to-watch-in-2016.
Chapter 9: That Helps Them Avoid Failure
1
.
Susanna Kim, “Allstate’s ‘Mayhem’ Is Biggest Winner of College
Bowl,” ABC News, January 2, 2015,
http://abcnews.go.com/Business/allstates-mayhem-biggest-winner-
college-bowl/story?id=27960362.
2
.
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk” (
Econometrica, 47
 (2), March
1979), 263–91,
https://www.princeton.edu/~kahneman/docs/Publications/prospect_theory.pdf.
3
.
Dominic Infante, Andrew Rancer, and Deanna Womack, 
Building
Communication Theory
 (Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press, 2003),
149.
4
.
Ibid., 150.
Chapter 10: And Ends in a Success
1
.
Stew Friedman, “The Most Compelling Leadership Vision,”
Harvard Business Review
, May 8, 2009, https://hbr.org/2009/05/the-
most-compelling-leadership.
Chapter 11: People Want Your Brand toParticipate in Their Transformation
1
.
“Hello Trouble,” Vimeo video, 1:44, posted by Adam Long,
February 13, 2013, https://vimeo.com/59589229.
Chapter 13: Using StoryBrand to Transform
Company Culture
1
.
The Gallup Organizaion (1992-1999). Gallup Workplace Audit,
Washington, DC: U.S. Copyright Office.
2
.
Susan Sorenson and Keri Garman, “How to Tackle U.S.
Employees’ Stagnating Engagement,” Gallup, June 11, 2013,
http://www.gallup.com/businessjournal/162953/tackle-employees-
stagnating-engagement.aspx
.