 
Business Case Template  
 
Purpose  
 
The purpose of this tool is to help you design a Business Case for any corporate 
investment. A Business Case is a formal management communication document that 
provides an opportunity overview, key success factors, assumpt ions & decision -
making criterion, business impact analysis, sensitivity analysis, risks, contingency 
plans, and action -oriented recommendations.  
 
  
How to Use this Template  
 
Complete the following sections with your project team and/or stakeholders.  Cut &  
paste this information into a document that reflects your corporate image, and 
deliver your Business Case to senior executives interested in sponsoring the project.  
 
 
Title Page  
 
 
 
[Insert Company Name or Logo]  
 
 
 
Business Case – (insert project title)  
 
 
 
 
[Insert Completion Date]  
 
 
Completed By: [Insert Project Manager Name]  
Completed For:  [Insert Project Sponsor Name]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table of Contents  
 
 
       Page  
 
1. Executive Summary         3 
 
 1.1 What Problem does this Business Case Solve?       
 
 
2. Oppo rtunity Overview & Key Success Factors     3 
 
 2.1 Opportunity Overview  
 2.2 Project Purpose           
 2.3 Project Scope  
 2.4 Project Schedule         
 2.5 Key Success Factors          
 
 
3. Assumptions & Decision -Making Criterion      4 
 
 3.1 Assumptions         
 3.2 Use -case Scenarios & Options         
 3.3 Recommended Decision -Making Criterion     
 3.4 Information Sources & Research Methodology      
   
 
4.  Business Impact Analysis        5 
 
 4.1 Cost/Benefit Analysis  
 4.3 Qualitative/Intangible Business Benefits       
 4.4 Required Resources for Implementation       
      
 
5. Risks & Contingency Plans        6 
 
5.1 Key Risks to Mitigate  
5.2 Contingency Plans       
 
 
6. Recommendation         6 
   
6.1 Action Plan       
  
 
 
1. Executive Summary  
 
1.1 What Problem does this Business Case Solve?  
 
Provide a brief description of the problems that this business case was 
designed to solve.  Consider cost -savings, revenue growth, increased 
customer satisfaction, better product management, higher retention, 
employee growth & develop ment, or pain -points for your organization.  
 
2. Opportunity Overview & Key Success Factors  
 
2.1 Opportunity Overview  
 
In this section, put a positive spin on the solution you are recommending.  
Document your vision of the impact your solution will have on the 
organization. Write from each key stakeholder perspective: senior 
management, sales, marketing, customer service, IT, finance, and operations.  
 
 
2.2 Project Purpose  
 
Provide a description of how this project DIRECTLY relates to business goals 
and objec tives.  You need to obtain buy -in from your project sponsor, and 
projects that clearly fit organizational goals are more likely to be supported.  
 
2.3 Project Scope  
 
Additionally, document what is in scope for this project and explicitly state 
what is not i n scope.  If you are planning on a phased approach, provide a 
summary of what each phase will look like from your perspective.  Consider 
how many departments/stakeholders will be involved; then, document them.  
 
2.4 Project Schedule  
 
Following is a sample p roject schedule that you can customize further:  
 
Project Milestones  Deadline  
1. RFP Delivered to Vendors  June 1, 2007  
2. RFP Question Period Ends  July 15, 2007  
3. RFP Close Date  July 31, 2007  
4. Conduct Vendor Evaluations  September 1, 2007  
5. Award C ontract to Vendor  September 30, 2007  
  
 
 
 
2.5 Key Success Factors  
 
Key Success Factors are the most important items that need to work for you 
to ensure project success.  Examples include:  adequate budget & resources, 
skill sets, time to do the project amo ngst other priorities, project sponsorship.  
 
Key Success Factors  Justification  
1. Insert KSF #1  Why is this critical?  
2. Insert KSF #2  Why is this critical?  
3. Insert KSF #3  Why is this critical?  
4. Insert KSF #4  Why is this critical?  
5. Insert KSF # 5 Why is this critical?  
 
 
3. Assumptions & Decision -Making Criterion  
 
3.1 Assumptions  
 
List all the assumptions you made when creating this business case.  Some 
examples of assumptions include:  costs, savings, incremental returns, 
pricing, volume, or res ource requirements such as expected consulting costs.  
 
3.2 Use -Case Scenarios & Options  
 
Contrast and compare various options, such as “Do Nothing”, “Conduct a 
Pilot”, “Conduct Full -scale Implementation”, “Build Internally”, or “Buy”.  This 
section should provide assurance that the business will not fall apart should it 
be decided that moving to your recommendation is not feasible.  Your goal is 
to economically justify your investment to generate returns.  
 
3.3 Recommended Decision -Making Criterion  
 
This sec tion is useful for proposing the decision -making criterion that you 
believe a senior executive should consider when making a decision.  The idea 
is to make it very easy for your sponsor to agree with your proposal, given 
that you have already completed the  majority of the required critical thinking.  
  
Following is a prioritized list of proposed evaluation criterion:  
 
1. Insert Criteria  
2. Insert Criteria  
3. Insert Criteria  
  
 
 
3.4 Information Sources & Research Methodology  
 
Where did you go to learn more about this opportunity?  Are your sources of 
information credible?  What process did you take to do the res earch?  Some 
examples include: vendor discussions, whitepapers, analyst firms, Google 
searching, conferences, peer -to-peer networking, consultants.  
 
4. Business  Impact Analysis  
 
This section will outline the costs and benefits of the proposed initiative.  Both 
quantitative and qualitative (intangible) benefits need to be documented here.  
Additionally, providing a “High/Low” adds an element of sensitivity analysi s, which 
provides both a conservative and optimistic outlook for your proposed initiative.  
  
4.1 Incremental Cost/Benefit Analysis  
 
Determine the projected incremental costs/benefits over a 3 -year period.  
Insert your cost categories, a description of each , and a high/low estimate for 
each.  Divide total benefits by total costs and multiply by 100 to obtain a %.  
Complete this worksheet for each use -case scenario, and/or project option.  
 
 
Cost/Benefit Analysis Worksheet  
Project Costs  
Incremental Costs  Description  High Low 
    
    
    
    
    
    
Total Costs    
Project Benefits  
Incremental Benefits  Description  High Low 
    
    
    
    
Total Benefits    
% Benefits/Costs     
 
 
4.2 Qualitative/Intangible Business Benefits  
 
What are the qualitative or intangible benefits that were not captured in the 
cost/benefit analysis worksheet?   (Customer satisfaction, brand awareness)  
 
1. Insert Qualitative Benefit #1  
2. Insert Qualitative Benefit #2  
3. Insert Qualitative Benefit #3  
4. Insert Qualitative Benefit #4  
5. Insert Qualitative Benefit #5  
 
 
4.3 Required Resources for Implementation  
 
What are the required resources in terms of budget, staffing, consulting, or 
other expenditures related to moving forward with this business case?  
 
 
5. Risks & Contingency Plans  
 
This se ction will outline the key risks that need to be mitigated and provide 
contingency plans for each identified risk.  Risks include:  lack of end -user adoption, 
project over -time/over -budget, technical risk, and senior management commitment.  
 
5.1 Key Risks t o Mitigate  
 
1. Insert Key Risk #1  
2. Insert Key Risk #2  
3. Insert Key Risk #3  
4. Insert Key Risk #4  
5. Insert Key Risk #5  
 
5.2 Contingency Plans  
 
What is the contingency plan for each of the preceding risks?  
 
 
6. Recommendation  
 
What is your proposed course of action?  I nsert your recommendations here.  
 
6.1 Action Plan  
 
1. Action Plan Step #1  
2. Action Plan Step #2  
3. Action Plan Step #3  