1
1
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR A FREE TRIALC
B Insights helps the world’s leading companies make 
smarter technology decisions with data, not opinion. 
Our Technology Insights Platform provides companies 
with comprehensive data, expert insights and work management tools to drive growth and improve operations with technology. WHAT IS CB INSIGHTS?CB Insights helps us compress our 
time-to-decision when gathering and 
analyzing data and getting an external 
view on what's happening in the market 
so we can quickly take action. 
Meraj Mohammad 
Vice President, Ventures Group, ADP 
4
We break down no- code AI, stream processing, data 
governance, and other top trends in the space. ENTERPRISE AI
AI companies raised a record $33B in equity funding in 2020. 
As commercial applications of AI scale rapidly, enterprises are 
looking to overhaul existing data management practices to become “AI -first.” Organizations are seeking best practices for 
sourcing and storing big data in different formats, deploying AI models, monitoring their performance, and developing ethical solutions that are compliant with new regulations.
In this report, we look at trends in enterprise data management 
in the context of AI, automation in IT and DevOps, no -code 
solutions to enable non-experts to develop AI models, and more. 
5Track the latest 
private enterprise 
AI companies and 
deals using the CB Insights 
AI Collection .
6Contents
No-code AI platforms take off
AIOps: IT and DevOps automation gains 
traction
Graph neural nets find mainstream 
enterprise applications
Stream processing: Capturing real -time 
IoT data for AI applicationsAnalytics vendors increase support for 
unstructured data types
Transformers, multilingual models 
improve enterprise NLP
Data governance and explainable AI7
1
5
23
3140
48
567No-code AI platforms take off8What is 
no-code AI?Low-code and no -code solutions allow users without coding 
expertise to build applications. While these have been around 
for decades, no -code AI platforms are relatively nascent. 
Companies that offer no -code AI solutions allow enterprise 
users to build and deploy AI models through a “drag -and-drop” 
interface.
No-code AI enables teams without IT or data engineering 
experience to integrate machine learning (ML) applications 
into enterprise workflows, automate data pre- processing, 
reduce time- to-deployment, and narrow the skills gap in 
machine learning.9“Covid -19 has accelerated the urgent need for every business 
to create no -code, low -code apps and workflows in hours or 
days, not weeks or months . Power Platform [Microsoft’s AI -
powered BI platform] is already used by more than 3.4M 
citizen developers and business decision-makers.”  
Satya Nadella, Microsoft CEO, 
Q3’20 earnings call
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING10The emerging no -code AI ecosystem
VC-backed companies
Other developer toolsCreateMLAutoML , 
Teachable Machine
SageMaker
Autopilot
Lobe.ai, 
AI BuilderCorporates
Stage: Seed
Total funding: $4.2M
Last raised: Dec ‘20
Stage: Seed
Total funding: NA
Last raised: Apr ‘20Stage: Series F
Total funding: $750M
Last raised: Dec ‘20Stage: Series B
Total funding: $37M
Last raised: Nov ‘20Stage: Series A
Total funding: $16M
Last raised: June ’20
Stage: Seed
Total funding: $3M
Last raised: June ’20Stage: Series B
Total funding: $12M
Last raised: Dec ’20
Stage: Seed
Total funding: $1.7M
Last raised: Jan ‘21Stage: Seed
Total funding: $2.3M
Last raised: July ’20Stage: N/A
Total funding: $4.6M
Last raised: Nov ‘20
Stage: Seed
Total funding: $0.12M
Last raised: Apr ‘17 Y Combinator
June ‘20
Stage: Series A
Total funding: $8.5M
Last raised: Dec ‘20
Stage: Seed
Total funding: $7M
Last raised: Mar ‘20
Source: cbinsights.com
Stage: Series A
Total funding: 18M
Last raised: Apr ‘20
Stage: Series C
Total funding: 37M
Last raised: Dec ’15
ShareInsights
 Ex Machina11What big tech companies are doing in no -code AI
Key highlights and product launches from Google, Microsoft, Apple, and Amazon
Google AutoML Vision, 
Teachable Machine
For computer vision 
applications and in -browser ML 
experimentsMicrosoft’s Lobe.ai M&A 
Lobe.ai is a no -code tool for 
image classification
Microsoft AI Builder
No-code tools for business 
intelligence applications on 
Microsoft's Power PlatformAmazon SageMaker
Autopilot
Automatically chooses the right 
algorithm and fine -tunes the AI 
model
2017 2020 2018 2019Apple CreateML
Apple introduces no -code model 
development
Google AppSheet
Google acquires no- code 
solution for app developers12
C3.ai launches Ex Machina
C3.ai went public with a $4B valuation in 
December 2020. Around the same time, 
it launched Ex Machina, a no -code 
platform with support for data preparation, model development, and 
integration with C3.ai’s business intelligence suite. 
C3.ai’s initial client list spans energy & 
utility –where the company has an 
established presence –as well as 
banking, manufacturing, and government agencies.
13No-code computer vision lowers barrier to entry for 
app developers
Lobe.ai: Computer vision 
tasks including gesture, 
pose, color, and emotion 
recognitionSuperannotate :Image 
annotation platform for 
training AI modelsFritz AI :Augmented 
reality applications and ML model development 
for Snapchat Lens and 
mobile app developersTeachable Machine:
Pose, sound, and image 
recognition
14Mastercard, Lux Capital, and others are backing 
industry-specific solutions
Signzy is developing no -code AI for 
customer verification and onboarding 
solutions for banks and financial 
institutions. These include document 
and ID verification, as well as risk intelligence.
Select investors: Mastercard, Vertex 
Ventures; previously incubated in the 
Facebook India Innovation Hub and 
Google for Startups AcceleratorRunwayML is building an AI -based 
photo and video editing toolkit for 
content creators, including options to 
create synthetic media using 
generating adversarial networks (GANs). 
Select investors: Lux Capital Ushur creates end- to-end automation 
solutions for customer engagement, 
such as virtual assistant tech and 
automated email processing. Ushur
works with companies including 
Cigna, Aetna, HealthSpire , and others.
Select investors: Plug and Play 
Accelerator, 8VC, Plug and Play Ventures, Third Point Ventures, Iron 
Pillar, Aflac Corporate VenturesBANKING MEDIA INSURANCE
15AIOps: IT and DevOps automation 
gains traction16What is AIOps, 
or AI for IT operations?Enterprise IT infrastructure is becoming more complex with 
hybrid cloud technology, on -prem, distributed databases, 
containerization, and microservices architecture. As a result, AIOps —using machine learning to automate IT and DevOps 
functions —is gaining traction. 
AIOps can help enterprises detect anomalies in traffic based 
on historic data, monitor logs to pinpoint the source of 
performance issues, monitor applications across multi -cloud 
and on -prem environments, and find security vulnerabilities in 
code.
Cloud and software services vendors are adding the tech to 
their offerings as enterprises face increasing costs incurred from IT outages.17"Our real -time analytics and monitoring offerings are mission-
critical for our customers as they face a growing complex 
application environment .To simplify and automate their IT 
operations, we recently launched AIOps, leveraging AI 
machine learning and automation...” 
Chuck Robbins, Cisco CEO,
marking the first -ever mention of AIOps on an earnings call
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING18AIOps companies attracted record funding in 2020
Note: We include startups providing AI -based IT automation and DevOps solutions.PRIVATE MARKET TRENDS
Deals and equity funding ($M), 2016 –2020
$102 $109 $205 $433 $62020
152131
23
05101520253035
$0$150$300$450$600$750
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Deal count Funding amount ($M) 19New unicorns: DevOps vendors raise significant funding
Harness uses machine learning to automate CI/CD 
(continuous integration and continuous delivery, or 
the handling of frequent code changes to 
applications). SoulCycle reportedly used Harness to 
reduce its deployment times from 60 minutes to 10 -
15 minutes. 
Latest round: $115M Series C in Q1’20 at $1.7B 
valuation 
Select investors: Norwest Venture Partners, Battery 
Ventures, Citi VenturesSnyk is an applications security company that uses AI 
to find and fix vulnerabilities in code. It supports open -
source, container, and infrastructure -as-a-code 
security. In Q3’20, Snyk acquired DeepCode, an ETH 
Zurich spin -off that helps software developers with 
real-time analysis of their code as they write it. 
Latest round: $175M Series E in Q1’20 at $4.7B 
valuation
Select investors: Google Ventures, Accel, Salesforce 
Ventures, Canaan Partners
Note: Unicorns are private companies valued at $1B+.
20Notable deals in testing and anomaly detection
In Q4’20, Carbon Relay , which automates Kubernetes 
app deployment, acquired automated performance 
testing platform StormForger and rebranded as 
StormForge to offer AI- based container application 
testing and performance optimization.
Latest round: $63M Series B in Q1’20 Select investors: Foxconn Technology Ventures, 
Insight PartnersLogz.io detects anomalies in logs data. By cross-
referencing with crowdsourced data from forums like 
Stack Overflow and GitHub, it surfaces relevant logs 
associated with a production issue. 
Latest round: $23M Series E in Q4’20 
Select investors: Giza Venture Capital, 83North, 
OpenView Venture Partners, Vintage Investment 
Partners, General Catalyst, next47
21ScienceLogic develops automated 
troubleshooting, hybrid cloud monitoring, 
network monitoring, and other IT 
automation solutions. The company was 
granted 2 US patents in 2020 , including 
one for a “self -configuring network 
management system.” 
Select investors: Intel Capital, Goldman 
Sachs, Silver Lake, NewView Capital, New 
Enterprise AssociatesSelect clients: HCL, Kellogg, BlackBerry, 
Cisco, JPLTotal funding: 
214MScienceLogic raises $105M from Intel, Goldman Sachs
Latest round: $105M Series E 
in Q1’2122Corporates are acquiring for AIOps
IBM acquired Instana in Q4’20 
to bolster Watson AIOps (a 
product announced earlier in 
2020). Instana builds 
application monitoring tools 
with AI -based 3D performance 
visualization and automated notifications for DevOps 
teams.ServiceNow acquired Israel -
based log analytics startup 
Loom Systems in Q1’20. 
ServiceNow made 4 AI 
acquisitions last year, 
including Sweagle , an AI -based 
configuration management tool. It also struck a 
partnership with IBM for AIOps 
and IT management. In its 
earnings call in Q3’20 , HP 
announced the launch of Aruba Edge Services Platform (Aruba 
ESP), combining AIOps and 
security features to “unify, automate, and secure the 
edge.” Additionally, to 
strengthen its AIOps platform 
HPE Infosight, HP acquired IT 
infrastructure monitoring 
software 
CloudPhysics in 
Q1’21.APPLICATION MONITORING LOG ANALYTICS OPERATIONAL INSIGHTS
23Graph neural nets find mainstream 
enterprise applications24What are graph 
neural nets?Most machine learning techniques are designed to work on 
tabular data or relational databases. But the rise of graph 
databases such as Amazon Neptune, Neo4j, and TigerGraph
has created a need for machine learning techniques tailor -
made for graphs.
Graph databases consist of nodes (individuals/entities) and 
edges (the relations between them). A graph- based approach 
works well for applications like advanced material discovery, 
drug R&D (where atoms are nodes, and the interactions between them are the edges), anti -money laundering, anti -
fraud, and enterprise recommendation systems.
This has given rise to interest in graph neural networks 
(GNNs), or applying machine learning and neural nets to a 
graph database.25“Applications of graph-based ML at Twitter are abundant and 
exciting. Graphs in different forms are the core data assets 
generated by people using our platform… Developing ML 
methods capable of taking advantage of these data assets is 
important for making Twitter a better place for 
public conversation.” 
Michael Bronstein, head of graph learning research, Twitter
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING26Graph database patents trend up over last decade
Note: By date of filing; patterned column(s) may show decline due to publishing delay.PATENT ANALYTICS
Patent activity related to graph databases, 2001 –2020
27Amazon launches Neptune ML f or customer retention, 
fraud detection, and more
Amazon launched its own graph 
database called Neptune in 
2017. Three years later, the tech 
giant launched Neptune ML, 
machine learning specifically 
built for graphs. The solution provides the database and 
analytics support for enterprise 
customers.
Neptune ML is built on the Deep 
Graph Library , an open- source 
graph neural network library with 
contributions from Intel, Nvidia, 
and others.  
28Graph neural nets power recommendation systems
In 2019, Twitter acquired Fabula AI , a 
company building GNNs to detect 
social network manipulation. 
In 2021, Twitter published research on 
applications of deep learning on 
dynamic graphs which “evolve over 
time, with prominent examples 
including social networks, financial 
transactions, and recommender 
systems.”In 2019, Alibaba published a paper on 
AliGraph , a graph neural net system 
already deployed internally to power 
personalized search and e- commerce 
recommendations. 
The tech was also used during 2020 
Singles Day in China to generate 3D 
models of items like furniture on 
Alibaba’s e -commerce site Taobao.Uber Eats uses GraphSAGE , a 
framework developed by Stanford, to 
recommend dishes and restaurants to 
users. The company reports 
“significant improvements in recommendation quality and 
relevancy.”SOCIAL NETWORKS E-COMMERCE ON-DEMAND DELIVERY
29
Google improves Maps, 
advanced materials research
The Google Maps team has partnered 
with Alphabet subsidiary DeepMind to 
use GNNs to improve the service’s ETA 
predictions.
In Q2’20, DeepMind published research 
on using GNNs to understand the 
formation of glass, with implications for 
manufacturing and other sectors. In the 
project, the nodes and edges were 
particles and the interactions between 
them, respectively. AI was used to 
predict the movement of molecules as 
they transitioned between solid and 
liquid states.
30
Integrating ML analysis with 
graph database -as-a-service 
offerings
The graph databases market is 
expected to grow at a 17.7% CAGR to 
reach $4.6B by 2027, fueling a need for 
machine learning techniques tailor -
made for graphs.
Neo4j , a popular graph database 
vendor, announced graph machine learning tools for enterprises in Q4’20. It 
raised $30M that quarter, reaching a 
valuation of $532M. 
31Stream processing: Capturing real -time IoT 
data for AI applications32What is stream 
processing?As the number of real -time data sources grows with the 
proliferation of IoT, traditional batch processing methods –
which store data and retrospectively analyze it in batches –
can result in missed opportunities for enterprises.
Organizations increasingly want instantaneous analysis and 
decision- making capabilities. This has raised interest in 
stream processing technologies, where data is viewed as a 
“stream of events” that is constantly generated.
Stream processing powers AI apps that are responsive in real 
time. Meanwhile, the streaming process itself can benefit 
from the use of machine learning. 33“We're seeing a lot more interest in terms of real -time data 
analytics, especially with 5G and IoT use cases… We have 
streaming capabilities in the product just now, but we're also 
investing to develop more streaming capabilities as we go 
through 2021.”
Mark Culhane, CFO, Teradata
Q4’20 earnings call
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING34The streaming analytics market is a $52B opportunity
Note: Based on CB Insights market sizing aggregate data.MARKET SIZE 
35Technologies enabling the streaming ecosystem
Stream processing technology has benefited from the 
availability of open -source tools. Apache has several 
distributed streaming platforms under its umbrella, lowering the barrier to entry for developers who want to 
integrate streaming analytics into their enterprise 
workflows. 
Kafka, which LinkedIn contributed to developing, is one 
of the most popular services currently used today.In-memory computing pools together parallel 
distributed random access memory (RAM) from 
multiple computers to store and process data at high 
speeds, making analysis thousands of magnitudes 
faster than traditional memory. 
The advantages of in -memory computing make it a 
natural enabler of stream processing.OPEN- SOURCE TOOLS IN-MEMORY COMPUTING 
36Cloudera acquires streaming analytics vendor Eventador
Cloudera acquired Texas -based seed -
stage stream processing company 
Eventador in Q4’20. 
Eventador has introduced several 
features to improve machine learning 
pipelines for data science teams, 
including introducing SQL queries for 
use on streaming data. 
Cloudera CEO Rob Bearden said 
during the company’s Q3’21 earnings 
callthat it will be increasingly 
focused on solutions like real- time 
analytics for streaming data.
37Vendors are expanding to offer solutions for the entire streaming 
ecosystem
Hazelcast is one of the most popular 
vendors in the in- memory computing 
space, with $88M in funding from Bain 
Capital Ventures, Earlybird Venture 
Capital, and others.
Hazelcast has been iteratively building 
more stream processing capabilities by 
introducing Hazelcast Jet, which works 
in tandem with its in- memory tech 
Hazelcast IMDG (in -memory data grid). 
In 2020, Hazelcast announced support 
for machine learning inference in Jet.38
Striim positions itself as an 
end-to-end solutions provider
Striim , which raised its first round of 
funding in 2013, is positioning itself as a 
“one -stop shop” for building and 
deploying streaming infrastructure, including:
•Log-based change data capture, with 
support for multiple source and 
target types
•In-memory stream processing
•Streaming SQL (a SQL -like 
programming language for interacting with streaming data)
•Edge processing and cloud 
integration capabilities
39AI can help parse data from various sources automatically 
Data streams can originate 
from IoT sensors, social 
media, or real -time changes 
to relational databases. In the image to the right, 
leading data integration vendor Informatica’s CLAIRE 
AI engine automatically 
recognizes the structure of 
incoming data and parses it.
To strengthen CLAIRE’s 
capabilities, Informatica 
acquired data management 
company 
GreenBay
Technologies in Q3’20.
40Analytics vendors increase support for 
unstructured data types41What is 
unstructured data analysis?Around 80% of big data today is unstructured, meaning it is 
without a predefined format and is not searchable by 
organizations. 
The commercialization of AI in recent years has enabled 
enterprises to mine unstructured data and unlock 
information that was previously inaccessible. The number 
of alternative data sources has also increased and 
includes IoT sensors, images, social media posts, and 
surveillance videos. 
Support for unstructured data formats and pipeline 
management solutions has become a necessity for cloud 
data management and business intelligence vendors.42“…it's why we're implementing Project Ascent, for us to bring 
on more than 100 alternative data sources over the next 
couple years... being able to bring new and unstructured 
sources of data in and connecting it to a D-U-N -S Number to a 
specific client...” 
Anthony Jabbour , Dun & Bradstreet CEO,
Q2’20 earnings call
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING43 Note: This is a selection of alternate dataset -based product developers and analytics vendors. It isnot a comprehensive list of all companies in a space.OUTBREAK MONITORING
 SATELLITE IMAGE ANALYTICS
OCEAN DATA
CUSTOMER BEHAVIORAL BIOMETRICS
SMART CITY AND TRAFFIC 
DATA
AIR QUALITY DATA
WEATHER INTELLIGENCE
GEO-LOCATION DATA
SUPPLY CHAIN RISK PREDICTION
ALT DATA FOR PROPERTY DAMAGE ASSESSMENT
MEDIA AND CUSTOMER SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
ALT CREDIT SCORING/LENDING
CUSTOMER FEEDBACK AND VOICE DATA (SALES & CRM)
Alt and unstructured data become commonplace in business intel
ENVIRONMENT & ECONOMIC FORECASTING CUSTOMER & BRAND DATA44Audio transcription patents trend up 
Note: By date of filing; patterned column(s) may show decline due to publishing delay.PATENT ANALYTICS
Patent activity related to unstructured data types, 1999 –2020
45Venture capital firms back unstructured document 
analysis vendors 
Latest round: $22M 
Series B in Q4’20
Select investors:
.406 Ventures, Jump 
Capital, Osage 
Venture Partners, 
Sandbox Insurtech 
VenturesLatest round: 80M 
Series D in Q4’20
Select investors:
Bessemer Venture 
Partners, Battery 
Ventures, FirstMark
Capital, Tiger Global 
ManagementLatest round: $13M 
Series B in Q3’20
Select investors:
QED Investors, 
Bullpen Capital, 
FinTech Collective, RiverPark VenturesLatest round: $12M 
Series B in Q3’20
Select investors:
Grazia Equity, Plug 
and Play Ventures, 
BlackFin Capital 
PartnersLatest round:
Series C in Q1’21 for 
undisclosed amount
Select investors:
Insight Partners, Oak 
HC/FT Partners
46Corporates mine audio data, climate risk scores, and more
S&P Global acquired analytics 
company Kensho in 2018, which 
launched a transcription feature called 
Scribe to extract unstructured audio 
data. Kensho has created other AI 
solutions including ProSpread , which 
supports data extraction in 9 languages using optical character 
recognition and natural language 
processing. 
In 2018, S&P also acquired 
Panjiva , a 
company that analyzes unstructured 
shipping and trade data. In a Q2’21 earnings call , Microsoft CEO 
Satya Nadella reported strong growth in the company’s analytics business. 
He added that FedEx, Grab, P&G, and 
others use Microsoft’s Synapse “to 
generate immediate insights from 
massive amounts of structured and 
unstructured data.” In June 2020 
alone, over 9M hours of speech were 
transcribed using Azure Cognitive 
Services. 
In Q3’20, Microsoft acquired 
Orions
Systems to tag and manage 
unstructured data in video feeds. Moody’s launched DataHub in Q1’21, 
combining structured and 
unstructured datasets for financial 
risk management with billions of data 
points, including climate risk scores 
and ESG (environmental, social, and 
corporate governance) assessments.AUDIO TRANSCRIPTION VIDEO, AUDIO ANALYTICS FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
47Rubrik and Snowflake add unstructured data support
CLOUD DATA MANAGEMENT
Rubrik expanded its unstructured data management 
capabilities with the acquisition of Igneous in Q4’20. 
Igneous initially built hardware for on -prem storage of 
unstructured data and later expanded to cloud data 
management. 
Total funding: $553M 
Valuation: $3.3B
Select investors: Lightspeed Venture Partners, Khosla 
Ventures, Bain Capital Ventures, Greylock PartnersDATA WAREHOUSING
Snowflake added support for unstructured data 
management –including for images, PDFs, and video 
files – in addition to structured and semi -structured 
data types. The feature was released in private preview 
in Q4’20. 
Exit date: Sep ’20 (IPO)
Exit valuation: $33.3B valuation
Select clients: Siemens, Comcast, Instacart, Logitech
48Transformers, multilingual models improve 
enterprise NLP49What are 
Transformer models?Google introduced a language model called Transformer in 
2017. The following year, it launched BERT, another model 
based on Transformer. With these models, Google 
delivered breakthrough improvements in natural language 
processing (NLP) and understanding. Around the same 
time, OpenAI launched its now -popular Generative Pre -
trained Transformer (GPT) AI series.
Transformer- based models, or Transformers, are “pre-
trained” without the need for labeled datasets, removing a 
huge bottleneck in NLP progress. In pre -training, an AI 
model is trained on an enormous amount of text readily 
available on the internet. This way, the model understands 
context of words and relations between sentences. 
Transformers are leading to breakthroughs in sentiment 
analysis, translation, reading comprehension, gaming, and 
more.50“And just as AlexNet 7 years ago kind of was the watershed 
event for a lot of computer vision -oriented AI work, now the 
Transformer -based natural language understanding model 
and the work that Google did with BERT really is a watershed 
event also for natural language understanding … that 
breakthrough is really quite significant.” 
Jensen Huang, Nvidia CEO,
Q3’20 earnings call
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING51Recent breakthroughs in natural language processing
Key research highlights from Google and OpenAI
Google’s Transformers
New neural net architecture for 
language understanding 
outperforms older approaches
Google’s BERT
Transformer -based bi -
directional AI pre -trained with 
Wikipedia text, where a word is 
taken in the context of 
preceding & succeeding wordsOpenAI’s GPT-2
AI pre -trained with 8M pages of 
internet textGPT-3 produces 
human- like text
Larger and more compute-
intensive than GPT -2; OpenAI
releases an API integration
2017 2020 2018 2019OpenAI’s GPT
Transformer -based 
unidirectional contextual AI 
model, where a word is taken in 
the context of words preceding 
it in a sentence52NLP models get bigger and better
Note: Image published in Q1’20 before the release of OpenAI’s GPT -3 and Google’s 1T+ -parameter model. Image source: Microsoft, DistilBERTPublished in Q1’20, 
Microsoft claimed its 
Turing Natural Language 
Generation (T- NLG) model, 
with 17B parameters, outperformed others in tasks like question 
answering and 
summarization.
In Q2’20, OpenAI beat this 
record with its GPT -3, with 
100B+ parameters. Google 
took the lead in Q1’21, 
releasing a model with 1T+ 
parameters.
The number of parameters in AI language models over time, Q1’18 –Q1’2053
APIs make advanced NLP tech 
accessible to enterprises
In Q2’20, OpenAI released GPT- 3, larger 
and even more compute -intensive than 
its predecessor GPT -2. 
Due to potential for misuse, OpenAI
initially didn’t release the entire source 
code of GPT -3, but later licensed the 
tech to Microsoft and made it available via a limited beta API.
“Unlike most AI systems which are 
designed for one use -case, OpenAI’s
API today provides a general -purpose 
‘text in, text out’ interface, allowing 
users to try it on virtually any English 
language task.” –OpenAI blog
54Early applications of GPT -3’s language generation
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Sapling uses GPT -3 to compose 
personalized responses to assist 
sales and customer support teams with customer response. Features 
include autocomplete and spelling 
and grammar checks.GAMING
Utah -based 
AI Dungeon is 
developing a text -based 
adventure game where an AI 
model generates open -ended 
storylines based on GPT -3. The 
game reportedly attracts 1.5M 
active users per month.VR/GAMING 
In Q1’21, Modbox , a sandbox for 
PC/AR/VR multiplayer games, released 
a demo of an AI -driven NPC (non -player 
character) using GPT -3 and Replica 
software for natural language understanding and speech synthesis.
55Facebook AI’s milestone in language translation
In Q4’20, Facebook open- sourced a multilingual 
machine translation model, M2M -100, that can 
translate between 100 languages “without 
relying on only English -centric data.” The model 
relies on a dataset with 7.5B sentences. 
Earlier, in Q3’19, Facebook developed its own 
version of BERT, called RoBERTa , to moderate 
hate speech on its platform. 
That same quarter, FB open- sourced a speech 
recognition model that bypasses the need for 
manually annotated transcripts. Called 
wav2vec, it is particularly useful for speech 
recognition in non- English languages, where 
annotated training data is sparse.
56Data governance and explainable AI57What are data 
governance and explainable AI?Establishing protocols for sourcing, handling, and using 
data is crucial for developing ethical AI solutions and 
preventing algorithmic bias in outcomes. 
Strong governance is the foundation of AI explainability . 
Enterprises may not know what an algorithm is “seeing” in 
the input data or why it arrives at a certain conclusion. For 
example, in lending, where consumers are protected 
against discrimination, banks need visibility into the inner 
workings of an algorithm. 
To comply with regulations like GDPR and CCPA, vendors 
are increasingly focusing on explainability , bias monitoring, 
and strong governance.58“Data governance is top of mind for every business leader 
and will grow into an important category on its own as critical 
as any AI or analytics category today. We are investing to 
participate in this growth…Azure Purview provides an end -to-
end view of an organization's data state across on-premise, 
multi-cloud, and SaaS apps that previously was impossible.”
Satya Nadella, Microsoft CEO,
Q2’21 earnings calls 
WHAT EXECUTIVES ARE SAYING59
Ethical concerns mount as AI takes 
bigger decision -making role in more 
industriesAI regulation and ethics in focus
Recent news mentions
Why companies are thinking twice about using artificial intelligence
[Global] alliance aims to accelerate the adoption of inclusive, trusted and transparent AI worldwide
 Why this is the year for regulation that finally reins in AI
Oct ’20
Jan ‘21Jan ‘21
Feb ‘21
60Companies are using AI for data governance, which is 
key for ethical AI
Dathena is an AI -enabled data privacy 
and security vendor that monitors on-
prem and cloud data. Dathena has a co-
sell partnership with Microsoft. 
Latest round: $12M Series A in Q2’20
Select investors: Jungle Ventures, 
CapHorn Invest, CerraCap Ventures; 
previously participated in Microsoft AI 
Factory and Nvidia InceptionPrivacera develops software -as-a-
service for cataloging sensitive data across multi -cloud environments.
Latest round: $50M Series B in Q1’21
Select investors: Accel, Point72 
Ventures, Cervin Ventures, Alchemist 
AcceleratorSecuriti builds an AI -powered 
PrivacyOps platform, RPA solutions, 
and tech to automatically link 
personal data to users.  
Latest round: $50M Series B in Q1’20 
Select investors: Mayfield Fund, 
General Catalyst
61Media mentions of explainable AI peak in 2020
Note: Based on CB Insights news trends tool.NEWS TRENDS
“Explainable AI: A Must For 
Nuclear Nonproliferation, National Security” –Pacific Northwest 
National Laboratory •“Fiddler Secures Strategic Investment from Amazon Alexa Fund” –FinSMEs
•“Appen Partners with World Economic Forum to Create Responsible AI Standards” –Unite.AI
•“NIST Issues Draft Publication on ‘Explainable’ AI” –ExecutiveGov
“Temenos Acquires a SaaS -based, Patented, 
Explainable AI (XAI) 
Platform” –AiThority
“DARPA sees future wars won 
with hypersonic weapons and 
artificial intelligence” –Business 
Insider (mentioning DARPA’s explainable AI research program)“FICO Announces xML
[explainable ML] Challenge” 
–PR Newswire62Fiddler develops a platform for 
enterprises to build explainable AI 
models. Lockheed Martin recently 
partnered with Fiddler, calling 
explainable AI tech key to building successful AI solutions.
Select investors: Amazon Alexa 
Fund, Lockheed Martin Ventures, 
Lux Capital, Lightspeed Venture 
Partners, Haystack Ventures, 
Bloomberg BetaTotal funding: 
13MValuation: $31M
Alexa Fund, Lockheed Martin back explainable AI company
63Risk management: Monitoring AI performance and bias
Weights & Biases develops tools to track 
model performance and ensure AI experiments 
are reproducible. Its tech is used by companies 
including OpenAI and John Deere.
Latest round: $45M Series B in Q1’20 
Select investors: Insight Partners, Trinity 
Ventures, Bloomberg Beta, Coatue
Management ArthurAI ’splatform tackles model monitoring 
and performance optimization, bias detection, 
and explainability. 
Latest round: $15M Series A in Q4’20 
Select investors: Index Ventures, Homebrew, 
Work -Bench, AME Ventures, Plexo Capital, 
Acrew Capital
ML EXPERIMENT TRACKING MODEL MONITORING