AI trends to 
watch in 20222022Where is all this data from?
The CB Insights platform 
has the underlying data 
included in this report
Click here to sign up for free
3
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022Table of Contents
Synthetic data for privacy. From healthcare to finance, 
corporations are experimenting with synthetic datasets to 
enable data sharing and collaboration — while complying 
with GDPR and other privacy laws. 
The $67B chip race. As companies scramble to dominate 
in AI chips, new innovations from 3D chips to in-memory 
computing are poised to shake up the space.
Protecting virtual worlds.  The threat of toxic content and 
behavior has spilled over from social media to a new front: 
online worlds. Companies are using AI to detect harmful 
behavior in gaming and other virtual spaces. 
Weeding out deepfakes. As deepfake candidates 
campaign for votes and AI videos spread wartime 
misinformation, deepfake detection tech competes with 
the AI creating it.
Augmented coding.  AI is making coding easier and more 
efficient by assisting with code completion and automating 
software testing.
Multimodal AI.  Tech companies are making strides in 
multimodal AI — a single AI model that can understand 
concepts from multiple modalities, like video, text, and 2D 
images — to improve search and content generation.
End-to-end machine learning.  In the fragmented market 
for AI development, end-to-end machine learning platforms 
that take a project from start to finish will emerge as 
a compelling option for enterprises struggling with AI 
implementation.6 
 
 
9 
 
13 
 
 
16 
 
 
20 
 
22 
 
 
25 
 
 4
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022The era of machine learning has arrived.
AI companies raised a record $66.8B in funding  in 2021 — over 
double the global funding total in 2020. And while quarterly AI 
funding slipped 12% from Q4’21 to Q1’22 , this decline was less 
dramatic than venture as a whole, which saw funding fall 19% 
during the same period.
In our 2021 enterprise AI trends report, we highlighted themes that 
continue to remain relevant: natural language processing models 
are getting bigger and better, AIOps vendors are raising multi-
million-dollar funding rounds, and more vendors are integrating 
no-code features into their platforms. 
Now, new trends — as well as new solutions to old problems — that 
are relevant to consumers and enterprises alike are appearing 
across industries.
The “metaverse” has emerged as a major theme in the last year, as 
online worlds and games grew in popularity and Facebook made its 
highly publicized name change to Meta. This has in turn fueled the 
need for new AI-powered content moderation tools to monitor for 
toxic and hateful behavior online.
From the war in Ukraine to presidential campaigns in South Korea, 
deepfakes have become more prominent in mainstream media and 
politics — putting deepfake detection and media provenance tech 
back in the spotlight.Intro5
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022Finally, to comply with data privacy laws, corporations across 
healthcare, telecommunications, and finance are turning to 
synthetic data: fake data that closely mimics real-world data.
From familiar technology to cutting-edge advancements, read on 
for 7 AI trends to watch closely this year. 6
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022From healthcare to finance, corporations are experimenting with 
synthetic datasets to enable data sharing and collaboration — 
while complying with GDPR and other privacy laws. 
In industries where sufficient real-world data to train AI is 
unavailable or sparse, or where compliance and privacy are major 
concerns, enterprises are turning to synthetic datasets: fake 
images, videos, or tabular data that resemble real-world datasets. 
Despite the challenges in accurately mimicking real-world data, big 
corporations are betting on the tech.
 
SOURCE: CB INSIGHTS ESP VENDOR MATRIX FOR SYNTHETIC TABULAR DATA PROVIDERS
Illumina is using synthetic genomics data developed by startup 
Gretel  for medical research. In a joint case study, the 2 companies 
highlighted issues like restrictive legislation and patient consent 
requirements that limit the speed and scale of medical research 
that relies on sensitive patient data. In response, Gretel used real 
genotype and phenotype data to train an AI algorithm to generate 
artificial genomic data.Synthetic data for privacy7
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022“Along with privacy enhancing technologies such as 
differential privacy, synthetic data has the potential 
to address the deep privacy concerns working with 
genomic data, enabling faster sharing of data and 
unlocking innovation. ” 
— Gretel-Illumina joint case study  
In the financial sector, J.P . Morgan is training financial AI models 
with fake data, while in the telecom industry, Telefónica has worked 
with Mostly AI  to create GDPR-compliant synthetic customer 
profiles that mirror statistical patterns of real customer data. It’s 
estimated that up to 85% of real customer data in the telecom 
industry is unusable due to lack of customer consent, making 
behavior analysis and prediction difficult.
In March 2022, MDClone  raised $63M from Lightspeed Venture 
Partners, OrbiMed Advisors, and others for its synthetic health 
data platform. The company claims that synthetic data is a viable 
alternative to other methods of data de-identification (i.e., removing 
personally identifiable information from patient records) where 
patients may potentially be re-identified through cross-referencing.
Another vendor in the space, Tonic, has introduced AI features on 
its platform to improve the fidelity of fake data. It raised $35M last 
year from Insight Partners, Bloomberg Beta, and others, and works 
with clients including Flexport, eBay, and Oscar.8
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022While synthetic image and video generation has taken off — thanks 
to GANs, a now popular approach that uses 2 neural networks to 
generate hyper-realistic synthetic videos and images — synthetic 
tabular data generation is still in its early stages. But the upsides of 
data anonymization, privacy compliance, and potential bias reduction 
make it an appealing option for corporations across industries.9
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022As companies scramble to dominate in AI chips, new innovations 
from 3D chips to in-memory computing are poised to shake up  
the space.
The rapid commercial success of AI across industries is creating 
demand for specialized hardware that can support compute-
intensive AI workflows, both in cloud data centers and edge devices 
like cameras.
Once dominated by Nvidia’s GPUs, the $67B AI chip market  has 
been blown open by a number of players. 
Google’s latest Pixel phones are powered by the tech giant’s own 
Tensor processors to support on-device AI applications, while 
Amazon launched Graviton3, its custom chip for AI inference, in 
Q4’21.
Beyond the incumbents, startups are also entering the fray. 
Cerebras Systems  offers what it claims to be “the largest chip ever 
built,” with 2.6T transistors and 850,000 AI cores. The company 
raised $250M in Q4’21 at a $4B valuation.
 The $67B chip race10
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022However, mammoth chips aren’t practical for many everyday AI 
applications, due to space and energy limitations. Seeing this 
opportunity, a growing number of companies are offering AI chips 
that can be used with low-power devices like car sensors, store 
cameras, automated factory robots, and more. 
On-device AI processing can power low-latency — and potentially 
privacy-preserving — experiences. Startups including Mythic, 
Syntiant , and Kneron have each raised more than $100M to develop 
this technology. 
SOURCE: SYNTIANT  
Meanwhile, startups like Untether AI  and HOUMO.AI are working 
on “in-memory computing.” This approach brings AI processors 
and memory together onto a single chip. The close proximity and 
high level of integration in these systems can deliver dramatic 
performance gains compared to conventional methods: Samsung 
reports it used the approach to more than double the speed of a 
speech recognition neural net while cutting its energy consumption 
in half.11
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022
SOURCE: GRAPHCORE  
AI chip unicorn Graphcore is also playing with chip structure to 
boost performance gains using an approach called “3D chips.” 
The tech involves bonding multiple chipsets together to create a 
fused stack of intricately aligned components. Graphcore used 
this method to place a power delivery chip directly on top of an AI 
processor, allowing the chip to train a neural net 40% faster than its 
previous generation while using less energy.
Other companies are ditching the physics of conventional AI 
chips altogether by turning to photonic processors, which shuttle 
data around using light as opposed to electrical signals. The big 
advantage of photonics is speed — light can move information 
faster, with greater bandwidth, and using less energy than relying 
purely on electrons flowing through cables. With the demands of 
AI tools expected to continue growing exponentially, photonics 
promises a way to avoid hitting a looming hardware barrier. 12
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022Researchers have struggled for decades to make practical, general-
purpose chips using photonics. However, startups including 
Lightmatter  and Luminous Computing are betting that they can 
use photonic chips optimized for tasks like deep learning to build 
“AI supercomputers” capable of handling even particularly taxing 
algorithms.  
Specialized AI chips are here to stay — and incumbents like Nvidia 
and Intel are facing fierce competition from startups and big tech 
leaders alike. New technologies are emerging that will make these 
chips perform better and use less energy. 
Looking further ahead, cutting-edge technology like quantum 
machine learning — which uses quantum computers to help run 
certain AI tasks much more efficiently — will complicate this 
landscape even further. 13
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022The threat of toxic content and behavior has spilled over from 
social media to a new front: online worlds. Companies are using AI 
to detect harmful behavior in gaming and other virtual spaces.
In the US, the number of people playing video games is at an all-
time high. Additionally, 76% of Americans under 18 play games, 
raising concerns that children will be exposed to inappropriate or 
hateful content. 
Detecting hate speech online is not a new problem. Meta reportedly 
spent $13B on content moderation between 2016 and 2021, while 
TikTok claimed in 2020 to have 10,000 people working on content 
moderation. Both TikTok and Meta have been sued by content 
moderators who suffered psychological damage on the job.
Now, given the increased hype around the metaverse and a rapidly 
evolving online gaming ecosystem, the threat of toxic content and 
behavior has spilled over from social media sites to a new front: 
online gaming and virtual worlds.
 Protecting virtual worlds14
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022Games can quickly turn toxic in the form of hate speech, 
cyberbullying, griefing (intentionally helping the other team win  
to frustrate your teammates), and rage quitting (refusing to play  
a game to ruin the experience for everyone else). A study from  
the Anti-Defamation League found that up to 80% of players  
have experienced harassment in some of the most popular 
multiplayer games. 
Startups are both pivoting and emerging to address this market 
with the belief that AI can combat this behavior at scale. Spectrum 
Labs claims its natural language processing (NLP) platform 
reduces audio- and text-based content moderation efforts by 50% 
while improving toxic behavior detection by 10x. 
Meanwhile, in March 2022, GGWP emerged from stealth and 
announced its intention to combat toxic behavior in games by 
using AI to monitor chat logs and gameplay data. The startup 
had previously raised a $12M seed round backed by investors like 
BITKRAFT Esports Ventures, Sony Innovation Fund, and Riot Games. 
In April 2021, Hive raised a $50M Series D at a $2B valuation.The 
startup, which was founded in 2013 as a platform to crowdsource 
AI training data, is providing automated content moderation to help 
metaverse companies like HighRise  and Naver Z  (which runs the 
Zepeto platform) stay on top of player hate speech, cyberbullying, 
and more. 15
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022
SOURCE: HIVE  
Big tech players are also snapping up AI startups to bring 
moderation capabilities in house. In October 2021, for instance, 
Microsoft acquired Two Hat, an AI content moderation service that 
lists Roblox, Epic Games, and Microsoft-owned Minecraft as its 
customers. 
Ultimately, perfect content moderation may be impossible. Online 
communities constantly adapt to escape platform censorship. 
However, breakthroughs in key areas like NLP and image-based 
classification, as well as recent funding rounds to AI-powered 
content moderation startups, indicate that AI will be at the forefront 
of the content moderation war. 16
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022As deepfake candidates campaign for votes and AI videos spread 
wartime misinformation, deepfake detection tech competes with 
the AI creating it.
Deepfakes  have expanded from hyper-realistic images to voice and 
video spoofs — including face reenactment, where one face in a 
video is swapped out with another. 
Powered by self-learning algorithms, these fakes have gotten better 
and better over time. The sheer number of publicly available videos 
and voice recordings makes it easy to train AI algorithms and 
generate deepfakes — especially of celebrities. Researchers say it 
will only get harder to distinguish AI-generated faces, objects, and 
videos from real ones.
Deepfakes have proliferated in the media in 2022, especially in the 
political sphere. In March 2022, The Wall Street Journal reported 
how Yoon Suk-yeol, a candidate in the South Korean presidential 
elections, was using deepfakes of himself to improve his public 
image with young voters. The “AI Yoon,” as the deepfake version was 
called, came off as more humorous than its real-life counterpart.
 
YOON SUK-YEOL. SOURCE: THE WALL STREET JOURNALWeeding out deepfakes 17
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022In Europe, viral deepfakes of Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Vladimir 
Putin have added to wartime misinformation in Ukraine and 
Russia in recent months. And in 2021, a wave of politicians around 
Europe were tricked during video calls by live deepfakes of Russian 
political actors.
Beyond fake news and political disinformation, deepfakes are also 
targeting enterprise customers — and have the potential to become 
a mainstream tool in consumer phishing and extortion scams.
“What we observe is that fake media is getting better 
and better and better, and the ability for computers to 
tell what’s real and what’s fake, or users to tell what’s 
real and what’s fake, is rapidly tending to zero. ” 
— Paul England, engineer at Microsoft Research Lab
Arguing that AI-powered defense cannot fully combat AI-generated 
fakes, Microsoft (alongside partners like Adobe and the BBC) 
launched Project Origin, a service that allows publishers to 
authenticate media using tamper-proof metadata. 
Microsoft has also separately partnered with startup AI Foundation, 
which operates both commercial and non-profit ventures. AI 
Foundation’s nonprofit is headed by Twitter co-founder Biz Stone, 
Trion Worlds creator Lars Buttler, and others.  18
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022In 2020, AI Foundation raised $17M to build deepfake avatars, 
while also announcing the launch of a deepfake detection platform, 
Reality Defender, with Microsoft. Reality Defender has partnerships 
with ABC, Homeland Security, and the Department of Defense, 
among others.
Taking a different approach, Truepic  uses cryptography and 
blockchain-based tech for photo and video identification. Truepic 
has been working with Qualcomm to add a cryptographic 
seal around pictures captured by Qualcomm chipset-powered 
smartphones. It raised $27M last year from Adobe, Microsoft’s 
M12, Sony Innovation Fund, and others. 
SOURCE: META AI  
Last year, researchers at Meta announced that they can now “reverse 
engineer” a deepfake image — that is, not just determine whether an 
image is fake or not, but also dissect the attributes of the AI model 
used to create the deepfake. This makes it possible to determine 
whether multiple fake media originated from a single source. 19
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022As a first wave of response to this growing cybersecurity threat, 
tech companies have experimented with approaches ranging from 
on-device authentication software and APIs to blockchain-based 
solutions. However, deepfakes will continue to become more 
advanced and ubiquitous, forcing tech companies to find new ways 
to detect and disrupt them.20
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022AI is making coding easier and more efficient by assisting with 
code completion and automating software testing.
Algorithms are taking natural language commands and translating 
them into computer code, signaling a new era for software 
development — especially among citizen developers. 
In June 2021, GitHub (acquired by Microsoft in 2018) and OpenAI  
(in which Microsoft owns a $1B minority stake) tag-teamed to 
launch GitHub Copilot. Trained on publicly available GitHub data, 
Copilot converts English-language comments into code. Copilot 
is particularly useful in mapping smaller programming tasks to 
existing code. 
 
SOURCE: GITHUB COPILOTAugmented coding 21
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022Microsoft isn’t the only big tech player making moves in the space. 
In February 2022, Google’s DeepMind  released AlphaCode, AI-
generated programs that were tested on more complex problems 
in competitive programming. After evaluating its AI on recent 
competitions hosted on Codeforces, DeepMind claimed that its AI 
performs “roughly at the level of the median competitor.”
On the private market side, startups are more focused on software 
testing: automating quality checks and unit tests of code. Key 
vendors in the space include Mabl (backed by CRV and Google 
Ventures), Autify (backed by Salesforce Ventures), and University of 
Oxford spinout Diffblue  (which raised a $10M Series B in Q1’22).
Automated programming is still in its infancy. But recent advances 
favor a growing enterprise trend toward no-code/low-code 
solutions that enable non-technical users to participate in data 
science projects, close skills gaps, and speed up production cycles. 22
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022Tech companies are making strides in multimodal AI — a single 
AI model that can understand concepts from multiple modalities, 
like video, text, and 2D images — to improve search and content 
generation.
Today, an AI model trained on video data can be used for predicting 
video content, a model trained on text can be used for text 
predictions, and so on.  
To go beyond this, multimodal AI research aims to be more holistic, 
using a single AI model to conceptualize information across multiple 
types of data like text, 2D images, and videos to make a prediction. 
For example, in early 2021, OpenAI trained an AI model called 
DALL-E to generate images based on a text prompt. In the image 
below, the AI generates avocado-shaped armchairs following a 
prompt for the same.
 
SOURCE: OPENAI
In January 2022, OpenAI released DALLE-2, which improves the 
original model’s output image resolution by 4x.
In May 2022, Google launched Imagen, a text-to-image project that 
reportedly outperforms OpenAI’s model in terms of the quality of 
images generated, as well as the alignment between the input (text) 
and output (AI-generated image).Multimodal AI 23
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022
 
SOURCE: GOOGLE  
Earlier this year, Meta published a paper called “Omnivore: A Single 
Model for Many Visual Modalities.” The paper details an AI model 
that, when trained to recognize 2D images of pumpkins, can also 
recognize pumpkins in videos or 3D images without requiring 
additional training for the latter 2 media types.
Multimodal AI is growing beyond academic research labs to find 
practical applications.
Google, for instance, is using multimodal AI to improve search. In 
the future, a user could take a photo of their hiking boots and ask 
a query like, “Can I use these to hike Mt. Fuji?” The search engine 
would recognize the image, mine information on the web about Mt. 
Fuji from text, image, and video data, and connect the dots to provide 
a relevant answer.24
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022
SOURCE: GOOGLE  
On the startup side, Twelve Labs  raised $5M in seed funding from 
Index Ventures, AI researcher Fei-Fei Li, and other investors in 
March 2022. The company is developing AI to understand context 
from both visuals and audio data to index videos and make them 
searchable. 
Multimodal AI research is poised to go beyond corporate research 
labs to power the next era of search and content generation, among 
other applications. 25
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022In the fragmented market for AI development, end-to-end machine 
learning platforms that take a project from start to finish will 
emerge as a compelling option for enterprises struggling with AI 
implementation.
As commercial applications of AI scale rapidly, enterprises are 
looking to overhaul existing data management practices to become 
“AI-first.” 
This strategy is easier said than done. Taking a project from raw 
data to production-ready AI is a multi-step process, from sourcing 
data and running data quality checks to developing models and 
monitoring post-production performance. 
Hundreds of vendors have emerged in the MLOPs (machine 
learning operations) market to tackle different parts of the process. 
(Clients can dig deeper in our AI lifecycle management Tech Market 
Map, which maps vendors across 11 different steps in the AI 
development process.)
 End-to-end machine learning26
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022End-to-end machine learning vendors — who combine multiple 
steps in the AI lifecycle management process into a single SaaS 
product — will emerge as a more scalable option for enterprises 
that want to build AI systems quickly and efficiently.
Google released an end-to-end AI development platform, Vertex AI, 
in May 2021, touting it as a one-stop shop for data science teams 
that don’t have prior machine learning experience. 
DataRobot , a company valued at $6.3B and a leader in our E SP 
Vendor Matrix for machine learning platforms , has been actively 
scaling its product through M&A for several years. Last year, 
DataRobot made 3 acquisitions to capture a larger share of the 
enterprise AI market. 
 
 
SOURCE: CB INSIGHTS ESP VENDOR MATRIX FOR MACHINE LEARNING PLATFORMS  27
AI TRENDS TO WATCH IN 2022ML platforms are also building no-code and low-code features to 
bridge the talent gap in AI, using plug-and-play features to encourage 
non-experts to participate in AI projects. To this end, Databricks, the 
second-most highly valued AI unicorn in the world at $38B, acquired 
8080 Labs, developer of a no-code Python data analysis tool, in 2021.
Meanwhile, “AI for AI” — using AI to automate aspects of the AI 
development process itself, such as data quality checks or parts 
of model development — is another growing space, with most 
established vendors now offering AutoML (automated machine 
learning) features. 
In the increasingly crowded AI development space, big tech 
companies and unicorn startups will continue to compete for  
a greater share of the market by offering an ever-wider range of  
AI services.