 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Creating Permission Based Email Marketing Lists  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
Having a solid list of contacts is one of the most important factors in 
determining the success or failure of an email marketing campaign. 
Read the following summary to understand how you can build a rock -
hard list.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What is Permission Based Marketing?      3  
 
Models of Acquisition for List Building      3  
 
Types of Permission Based Lists       4  
 
List Building Best Practices        5  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What is Permission Based Marketing?  
Models of Acquisition for List Building    
 
 
 
 
Email marketing permission is defined as giving “formal consent” to 
receive email marketing messages. Permission can not be assumed and 
must be granted by a willing party.  
 
 
There are a number of ways to gain permission from your target. We 
recommend that you explain the value of “opting -in” to the campaign 
and simply ask for permission. Permission based campaigns that require 
an “opt -in” tend to have higher conversion rates, higher retention rates, 
a better reputation with prospects/customers and more relevant 
campaigns.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Opt-in – This is the most common method of permission. Simply 
check a box if you would like to receive our email.  
 
 Confirmed Opt -in – This method of permission is similar to the 
traditional opt -in but follows up with an email to remind the 
customer of what they opted in for.  
 
 Double Opt -in – This is the longest way of obtaining permission. 
However, by using a double opt -in, the recipient is giving you 
strong permission to email him/her and this often results in 
higher retention rates. This method uses a tradition al opt -in 
form, then sends an email requiring confirmation that they did in 
fact register to receive the email marketing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Types of Permission -Based Lists   
  
 
 
 
Generally speaking, there are two types of lists: in -house and rentals.  
 
House lists: 
 
 Includes customers, prospects and website visitors  
 Multiple collection points  
 Part of an Integrated Marketing Campaign  
 Lists are segmented into groups with specific traits (i.e. age, 
gender, etc.)  
  
Rental lists:  
 
 Collected by businesses, websites and publications  
 Re-sold directly to interested parties or via third -party list 
brokers  
 Pricing for sending a message to these lists is standardized on a 
CPM basis depending on scarcity, purchase power and amount of 
supporting data  
 Cost to design and produ ce the email messages is additional  
 Larger examples include BELO, Dun & Bradstreet and Equifax 
who have access to hundreds of millions of email addresses and 
are able to sort by specific criteria and preferences (industry, 
geographic location, income, etc. ) 
 
We strongly recommend that you build your own lists. However, if you 
decide to rent a list, make sure you use a trustworthy source. In order 
to establish credibility, ask the following questions before you rent:  
 
1. How often do they rent these lists?  
2. When  were these lists last cleaned?  
3. Do these third party senders have any spam complaints?  
4. What is the privacy policy and opt -out system that these third 
parties use?  
5. What sites or sources are these opt -in lists gathered from?  
6. Is this company CAN SPAM complain t? 
7. What are the payment terms and what are the make -good or 
refund policies?  
8. What data points are available about the list?  
9. Is the list opt -out, opt -in or double opt -in? 
10. How often has the list been mailed to?  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
List Building Best Practices  Regardless of how you obtain your list, it is imperative to review all 
legislation before sending an email campaign. If you would like more 
information on legislation in your country, schedule a discussion with 
one of our research analysts today.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
1. Offer an Incentive : People will provide you with their contact 
information when they are enticed by something that you can 
offer and they can’t get otherwise. Instead of offering a gimmick, 
try and offer something that will help build a lasting relationship.  
 
2. Use M any Different Touch Points : 
 
A few examples include the following:  
 
 Website - Have a sign up form easily accessible on each 
page of site.  Also include a check box on value content 
downloads like whitepapers, tech sheets, etc.  
 
 Networking  - Take advantage of viral marketing. 
Encourage subscribers to use social networks, widgets and 
“send to a friend” options located on all email 
communications.   
 
 Events and Tradeshows  - Obtain permission from booth 
visitors.  
 
 Post Cards  - Offer additional  incentives to customers who 
opt-in to your newsletter after receiving a post card with a 
unique URL.  
 
 Speaking Engagements and Seminars  - Send a 
feedback survey to attendees with opt -in check box at the 
end. 
 
 Paid Search  - Include form and check box on landing 
page.  
 
 POS - Invoices, Warranty Information Cards and Product 
Registration Cards should have a unique URL to register 
for a newsletter.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
 
 Transactional Emails  – Employee email signatures can 
have a link to newsletter  opt-in. 
 
 Telemarketing  - Sales or customer service reps asking if 
prospect/customer would like to be added to the 
newsletter.  
 
 Blogs  
 
 Online Advertising and Site Sponsorship  
 
 Catalogues, Direct Mail, Print Advertising, 
Newsletters and Press Releases  
 
3. Provide a Preview :  Include a “preview” of the message that 
they will be receiving during the registration process. This tactic 
reinforces trust. Include a list of subscriber benefits, the 
frequency expectations, and a sample email at registration.  
 
4. Choose  the Right Call -to-Action : Depending on the nature of 
your email, use a call to action that does not have a negative 
connotation. Your call to action should leave the subscriber 
feeling comfortable with their level of commitment. We 
recommend using with “S ign Up” or “Join.”  
 
5. Be Specific : Allow subscribers to select their areas of interest 
when signing up. If possible, give subscribers a choice of content 
using checkboxes. Only send subscribers content on the topics 
they have requested.  
 
6. Post Privacy Policy : Make sure your privacy policy is clear and 
concise. Use Demand Metric’s Privacy Policy Template as a 
framework for crafting your opt -in policy.  
 
7. Stay Current : Provide an easy way for subscribers to update 
their info.  
 
8. Be CAN SPAM Compliant : Fields that are required at the time 
of online acquisition include email address and level of 
permission. Also required by the CAN -SPAM Act is 
timestamp/date that contact subscribed and IP address of 
contact.  
 
9. Segment your List : You may want to ask for data that will allow 
you to include basic segmentation with your list.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
 
10. Test your Opt -In Form : Try different data collections and 
determine if there are fields that cause form abandonment.  