Thank you for downloading this Simon &
Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus,
get updates on new releases, deals, recommended
reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to
sign up and see terms and conditions.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we
can register this ebook and send you more of what you
like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers
in your inbox.creative 
WORKSHOP
creative 
WORKSHOP
80 challenges to sharpen 
your design skills
DAVID SHERWIN
CREATIVE WORKSHOP. 
Copyright © 2010 by David Sherwin. Manufactured in China. All rights
reserved. No other part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical
means including information storage and retrieval systems without permission in writing from the
publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review. Published by HOW Books,
an imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc., 57 Littlefield Street, Avon, MA 02322 (800) 289-0963. First
edition.
Distributed in Canada by Fraser Direct 
100 Armstrong Avenue 
Georgetown, Ontario, Canada L7G 5S4 
Tel: (905) 877-4411
Distributed in the U.K and Europe 
by F+W Media International 
Brunel House, Newton Abbot, Devon, TQ12 4PU, England 
Tel: (+44) 1626-323200, Fax: (+44) 1626-323319 
E-mail: postmaster@davidandcharles.co.uk
Distributed in Australia by Capricorn Link 
P.O. Box 704, Windsor, NSW 2756 Australia 
Tel: (02) 4577-3555
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sherwin, David. 
   Creative workshop / David Sherwin. 
      p. cm. 
   ISBN 978-1-60061-797-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
   eISBN: 978-1-6006-1797-3
   1. Creative ability--Problems, exercises, etc. I. Title. 
   BF408.S4486 2010 
   153.3’5--dc22
2010022826
Edited by AMY SCHELL OWEN 
Designed by GRACE RING 
Production coordinated by GREG NOCKDedication
For MaryABOUT THE AUTHOR
© Mary Paynter Sherwin
David Sherwin is an award-winning designer and art director with a depth of
expertise in developing compelling creative solutions for challenging
business problems.
He has worked at a wide range of creative agencies, from large marketing
consultancies to smaller interactive agencies. His clients have included
AT&T, Cingular Wireless, Holland America Line, Onyx, Microsoft, Toshiba,
T-Mobile and many others.
He is currently Senior Interaction Designer at frog design, a global
innovation firm, where he helps to guide the research, strategy and design of
novel products and services for some of today’s leading companies.
David is an active speaker and teacher, and his writing has appeared in A List
Apart, design mind and other periodicals. He currently lives in Seattle with
his wife, the poet Mary Paynter Sherwin. In his free time, he maintains the
blog ChangeOrder: Business + Process of Design at
http://changeorderblog.com
.CONTENTS
 INTRODUCTION
 FOUNDATION
01 
Hello, My Name Is
02 
Easy as ABC
03 
Time Machine
04 
One Line Logo
05 
I’m Drawing a Blank
06 
Mr. Blue
07 
Gridlocked
08 
Spray Paint Wars
09 
Tragic Sans
10 
Grungevetica
11 
Future Penmanship
12 
Strange Chemistry
13 
Three in One
14 
10 x 10
 EXECUTION
15 
Sixty-Second Deadline
16 
Hey, You Made That Up!
17 
Free Association
18 
I’m Feeling Really, Really Lucky
19 
It Sounds Better on Vinyl
20 
Storybook Ending
21 
Dead Philosphers Rock
22 
Opposites Attract
23 
Book Report24 
He Shaves, She Shaves
25 
Totally Cereal
26 
Imaginary Film
27 
Creature Feature
28 
Ten-Second Film Festival
29 
I’ve Got a Golden Ticket
30 
Flapping in the Wind
31 
Going to Seed
32 
Sell Me a Bridge
33 
Let’s Take a Nap
 MATERIALITY
34 
Type Face
35 
Lick It Good
36 
Never Tear Us Apart
37 
Trompe L’Oh Wow
38 
I Heart Plaid Candles
39 
Outdoor Wedding
40 
Crane Promotion
41 
Just My Prototype
42 
Reduce, Reuse, Redecorate
43 
Printed and Sewn
44 
Record Store Puppet Theater
 INSTRUCTION
45 
Robot Army Mail-Order Kit
46 
Poster by Numbers
47 
Seeing What Sticks
48 
Check Me Out
49 
The Game of Sustainability
 OBSERVATION50 
Patience, Grasshopper
51 
Tour de Home
52 
Wacky Vendo
53 
Excuse Me, I’m Lost
54 
Thinking Outside the Wrist
 INNOVATION
55 
CD, LP, EP, DP
56 
iPhone Americana
57 
Biodegradable Backyard
58 
More Is Less
59 
Veni, Vidi, Vino
60 
E.V.O.O. to Go
61 
TechnoYoga
62 
I Think, Therefore I Shop
63 
Ready When You Are
64 
Let’s Dish
65 
Listen Up, Write It Off
 INTERPRETATION
66 
I’d Buy That For a Dollar
67 
What’s in Store?
68 
Urban Diapers
69 
Out of Gamut
70 
Future-Casting
71 
This Is for Your Health
72 
Paper, Plastic, Glass, Vapor
73 
Free Tibet Blog
74 
Blinded by the Light
75 
Touch Screen of Deaf Rock
76 
Sniff Test
77 
Can You Hear Me Now?78 
Bending Geography
79 
What Do I Know?
80 
Well, in My Book
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
RESOURCESIntroduction
“Difficult situations breed astonishing results.”
— Jeffrey Veen
Have you ever struggled to complete a design project on time? Or felt that
having a tight deadline stifled your capacity for maximum creativity? This
book is for you.
Within these pages, you’ll find eighty creative challenges to help you reach a
breadth of innovative design solutions, in various media, within any set time
period. By completing these challenges, you’ll round out your skills by
exploring projects along the full continuum of design disciplines, from the
bread and butter of branding and collateral to the wild world of advertising to
the user-centered practices of creating interactive projects. Along the way,
we’ll take brief forays into wayfinding, editorial design, video and motion
graphics, and many other areas of our continually expanding practice.
To aid you in conquering these challenges, I’ll provide useful brainstorming
techniques and strategies for success. By road-testing these techniques as you
attempt each challenge, you’ll find new and more effective ways of solving
tough design problems and bringing your solutions to life.
BECOMING MORE CREATIVE TAKES
PRACTICE
Designers are often encouraged to bluff their way through unfamiliar
deliverables in order to bootstrap their way toward a stable career, and my
experience was no different. My first decade as a designer was humbling. A
typical day in the life looked like this:
Two fresh logo sketches for your new wine bar by tomorrow? Catalog cover designs for your
cruise line’s venture into South America? Home and secondary page user interface examples
for a technology consulting web site by Friday? No problem. I’ll figure things out before I
collapse on my keyboard, exhausted, at 2:00 A.M.
During those years in the trenches, I discovered that:Failure is a necessary component of creativity.
Well-seasoned designers understand that resilience in the face of repeated
failure is the only path to success. Improving as a designer requires us to
consciously choose to explore novel territory as part of our daily work. David
Kelley from IDEO calls this “enlightened trial and error,” and it is the best
way to seek out a great result that fulfills your client’s business need.
Process is more important than the final product.
As architect Matthew Frederick notes, “Being process-oriented, not product-
driven, is the most important and difficult skill for a designer to develop.”
Being aware of your working process as a designer and reshaping it to fit the
problem presented to you is a lifelong practice that will define your career.
However, don’t forget what Mark Rolston of frog design says:
Topics Covered in This Book
Trying these eighty challenges will take you on a trip through most of
today’s prominent design disciplines. They’re organized into the
following categories:
FOUNDATION SKILLS
copywriting
design history
grid systems
illustration
paper engineering
photography
physical prototyping
research
typography
WORK DISCIPLINESAdvertising and Marketing
guerrilla tactics
online ads
out of home ads
print ads
posters
TV commercials
Branding
annual reports
collateral
identity development
product packaging
Editorial and Film
book covers
magazine layout
music packaging
film posters
Interactive Media
information architecture
interaction storyboarding
user interface design
Product Design
Store Design and Wayfinding
environmental graphics
retail store experiences
trade show booths
wayfindingType Design
Video and Motion Graphics
hand animation
storyboarding
“Plans are no substitute for the real thing… Process is a means to an end. Our
purpose is to create.”
Rote repetition rarely leads to deep design intuition.
Your design process consists of the living, breathing flow of actions that you
take—some conscious, some unconscious—as part of solving a client
problem. As you repeat similar types of design projects, you become more
proficient in identifying which of these actions lead to a well-designed result.
But we radically improve our skills when we are forced outside of our
comfort zone and asked to solve problems that seem foreign, or use tools or
methods that seem alien to us.
You’ll never have enough time to work on a paid
client project.
Having less time to work on a project can lead to more creative results, if
you’re smart about how you use that time. We often expend a good part of
our projects bemoaning our lack of time to solve a client problem, rather than
fully using our time to confront it. Deadlines come fast and furious, no matter
whether you are a solo designer, work in-house at a company or have a role
at a design firm or creative agency. Client deliverables will always verge
outside your areas of expertise. A designer’s career is more like a marathon
than a series of sprints, and maintaining a productive, yet creative pace is the
only way you’ll stay sane
.
Designers become more creative by learning to
access their intuition.We become better designers when our design skills are grounded in intuition.
One of my favorite designers, Paul Rand, said, “The fundamental skill [of a
designer] is talent. Talent is a rare commodity. It’s all intuition. And you
can’t teach intuition.” That’s true. You can’t teach intuition in a classroom
lecture. But you can become more intuitive by solving wildly divergent
design problems in a disciplined manner.
UNDER CONSTRAINTS, CREATIVITY
THRIVES
Completing the eighty challenges in this book and abiding by the unique
constraints of each design problem will force you to confront your inner critic
and improve your working habits in order to keep the pace, as well as
develop a clearer sense of how to access your design intuition in the pursuit
of more meaningful design concepts and visual executions. It will also teach
you to embrace failure as part of your working process, and to become more
confident in your capacity to create meaningful designs in any time frame.
These are worthwhile goals for anyone seeking a long-term career in design.
Rather than being endlessly driven by the fear that you may not have enough
talent to be the next über-designer of the century, you can be confident that
you have the necessary skills to solve a greater breadth of design problems.
HOW TO COMPLETE A CHALLENGE
Getting Started
Before diving into solving a challenge, read it carefully. They’ve been crafted
to test your design skills regarding everything from visual aesthetics to
nuanced business strategy to product innovation. You may need to conduct
research before you can complete the challenges in the last third of the book.What Tools Will You Use?
Here are some of the tools you can use when executing these creative
challenges:
PRODUCTION TOOLS
black marker
colored markers and pencils
colored paper
craft knife
cutting mat
glue
needle and thread
pencils
rulertracing paper
transparent tape
DIGITAL TOOLS
digital camera or mobile device
visual design software, such as
Adobe Creative Suite
About the Time Limit
Each challenge includes a time limit for how long you can spend on idea
generation. Within this time limit, you should be exploring a range of ideas
with pencil sketches. Working with pencil and paper is the fastest way to land
on a direction for a compelling design execution.
“Ask any great designer and they’ll tell you they always doodle and generally
start any design assignment by drawing,” says design manager and strategist
Daniel Schutzsmith. Creative director Carrie Byrne concurs: “By quickly
sketching out ideas, the poor ones fade quickly from priority without wasting
precious time executing them.”
Moving From Sketch to Design Execution
After the time limit is up, gather the necessary tools and start executing the
deliverables outlined in the challenge. Be sure to run your selected idea
through the final litmus test: Is it meaningful? Experience designer, teacher
and author Nathan Shedroff says
“Meaning is the most significant and powerful element of whatever people
create for others.” If your idea has deep meaning, it will encourage a more
beautiful expression in the final design.
Should you jump into Adobe Illustrator, or reach for colored paper, scissors
and glue? Based on what the challenge requires, your tools may vary. You
can even explore mixing mediums or inventing a new way of executing your
design idea. (Some of the challenges may require it!)“Hybridize your tools in order to build unique things,” says designer Bruce
Mau. “Even simple tools that are your own can yield entirely new avenues of
exploration. Remember, tools amplify our capacities, so even a small tool can
make a big difference.”
Know When to Move On
Don’t become hung up on having a final, polished result for every challenge
in this book. Your time is better spent attempting to solve all of the
challenges with pencil and paper first.
This can be a real struggle if you’re used to using a computer for your
everyday design work. “There’s something about sitting down and finessing
an idea on the computer that can make it harder to let go of an idea that’s just
not working. Even when you know it’s not!” says book designer Michel
Vrana.
Whether you’re executing the design for a business card or a complicated
web site, your first stab at execution rarely feels complete. So, after you’ve
undertaken your first attempt at realizing your idea via the appropriate
medium, take a moment to evaluate if your concept holds up. If you aren’t
making progress, feel free to move on to another challenge.
DESIGNING FASTER BY TIMEBOXING
As you work on the creative challenges in this book, you’ll end up throwing
some of your accumulated knowledge about your design process out the
window. No single designer can be an expert in all of these disciplines and
types of projects—especially within the provided time limits. After
completing a few dozen challenges, you may be forced into new ways of
thinking about how to approach specific design activities. As a result, your
process—from the way you approach a problem to how it is executed 
in
layout—will evolve. In a sense, you’ll start to design how you do design.
One of the ways you can definitely speed up your process is by using a time
management technique called timeboxing. This technique is regularly used in
the world of software development, but it’s also useful for any creative
professional looking to produce better work faster. The activity of timeboxingwill teach you to switch on your creativity at will and to think more
intuitively.
What Is Timeboxing?
In its simplest form, timeboxing is the use of short, structured sprints to
achieve stated idea generation goals. That is, you use little boxes of time.
When presented with a deadline, you take the first few minutes of the allotted
time to plan out a series of manageable steps that have tangible work output,
such as a set number of design ideas or sketches.
Why Should I Use Timeboxing?
Timeboxing is a great way to put structure around solving a design problem
while avoiding the risk of aimless or unfocused idea generation. By stating
your intent at the start of your process to solve a design problem, you can
dismantle a thorny challenge into easily digestible nibbles. Working within a
timebox forces you to focus and fill the time with your effort, which is great
for days full of distractions. Any designer who struggles to meet deadlines
can easily benefit from using this approach. The more you use timeboxing,
the more effective you’ll become as a creative thinker, and the less time
you’ll need to come up with a viable design idea.
How Do I Get Started?
Timeboxing requires you to plan the activities you’ll be carrying out in each
box, and that you step through them in the sequence you’ve prescribed. As an
example, here’s what it looked like when I solved Challenge 61,
TechnoYoga:
Timeboxes for TechnoYoga / 120 minutesI recommend setting a timer with an alarm and training yourself to finish the
deliverables in each timebox before the alarm goes off.
What Duration Should I Use for My Timeboxes?
Brief timeboxes are great for ideation and evaluation—ten to twenty minutes
at most. As you attempt the challenges in this book, split the provided time
limit into discrete activities and time them independently. The more time you
give yourself, the less likely you’ll be able to focus.
What Results Should I Expect?
Adopt this activity at your own pace. The first half-dozen times you try
timeboxing, be realistic about the quality and quantity of output you can
generate. Don’t give up until you’ve given it a fair shake! It will take some
practice for this activity to feel comfortable, and there will always be
occasions when you’ll need to stop and work out details that couldn’t be
resolved in the time you had allotted.Ideate, Evaluate, Iterate
Build time into your idea generation process to evaluate your design
sketches. Don’t fall in love with the first idea that seems to emerge
magically from your mechanical pencil or Sharpie. Be willing to rethink
your freshest ideas to see if there are any new, unexplored directions that
will spawn even better ones.
The SCAMPER checklist is a time-tested tool that will help you. If you
have a few strong ideas, putting them through this checklist will confirm
their strength—and maybe even create some brand-new ideas.
S
ubstitute something
C
ombine it with something else
A
dapt something to it
M
odify or 
M
agnify it
P
ut it to some other use
E
liminate something
R
everse or 
R
earrange it
This idea synthesis checklist was suggested by Alex Osborn, the advertising executive who coined
the word “brainstorm.” It was arranged into the SCAMPER mnemonic by writer Bob Eberle.
USING BRAINSTORMING METHODS
Being Creative on a Deadline
I’ve read through my first challenge. I’m ready to embark on my first twenty minutes of
brainstorming. The timer is running. The blank page yawns before me like the arctic tundra…
Being creative on demand is, well, demanding. Sometimes the ideas won’t
flow without a little extra prodding of the brain cells.
If the idea of being creative under a deadline seems scary, use these
brainstorming methods in your time-boxes as you solve the challenges in this
book. They’ll help you kick-start creative thoughts within a matter of
minutes.
In brainstorming, everything in your mind is dumped on the page, much likeemptying a drawer full of curiosities onto the floor. This yields clusters of
words, pictures and ideas that suggest possible design directions. By avoiding
formal logic and embracing impulse, all sorts of unusual ideas bubble to the
surface. Once the notebook page is full, you can sift those elements to
identify what may be of use.
Be sure to save the raw material from your brainstorms for potential use later.
Often, these raw ideas end up informing your final designs and enhance the
result.
Mind Mapping
This brainstorming method allows individuals or groups to identify a range of
ideas quickly in a freeform manner.
1. In the center of your page, place the key point of focus for your
brainstorm. It could be an insight or intuition that you gleaned from your
research, a simple restatement of the problem or a potential direction for
your solution.
2. Write words related to your key insight in the empty space around the
center, radiating outward. If you run out of concepts, write down related
things, opposites or thoughts that may seem 
unrelated.
Sean Baker and Lenny Vella utilized mind mapping for the Free Association
challenge.
3. Expand upon relationships in the ideas that emerge from the various
nodes; circle and group elements as necessary.
4. Distill big ideas from the map and run them through the SCAMPER
checklist before starting to sketch out possible design executions.
Word Listing
This is an alternate method of mind mapping that has more structure and can
yield quicker results.
1. On a sheet of paper, make three columns. In the first column, write as
many concepts or terms as possible related to your point of focus for your
design.
2. In the second column, pick an idea that interests you from the first
column and write down a series of words related to it.
3. In the third column, write down words that are the opposite of the
material you included in column one.
4. Circle and connect relationships that span columns one through three.
Then, distill those connected words into big ideas and run them through
the SCAMPER checklist before you start sketching possible design
executions.
Picture Association
This is another kind of mind mapping that relies on pictures as a source of
raw material.
1. Print out photographs and illustrations that feel related to the project.
This can include material from online image search engines, design
inspiration resources and magazines, art books, stock web sites and image
bookmarking web sites like FFFFOUND! (
ffffound.com
).
2. Arrange your images in groups or clusters that seem to speak to oneanother, then write words around the clusters that describe the essential
messages they convey.
3. From these groups, distill your findings into possible directions or design
sketches and run them through the SCAMPER checklist before sketching
full execution ideas
.
Brutethink
This brainstorming technique is included in the book 
Thinkertoys 
by Michael
Michalko, and it’s good to use at times when you’re really stuck. Human
beings have a tendency to find relationships between things whose meanings
seem to be in direct conflict. The tension between those sparring words or
images, and the ensuing friction in your mind, forms the sparks that can
ignite more novel concepts.
1. Come up with a seed word related to the overall project (or an old one
that you couldn’t get to “activate”).
2. Write down the first random thing that pops into your mind.
3. Hold both words in your mind, then find as many ways as possible to
(intuitively) associate the idea and the random word. See what words,
images and overarching concepts begin to emerge.
Idea Inversion
If you’ve been brainstorming and none of your ideas inspire you, try this
method. Take a concept that’s not quite working and envision its exact
opposite in every way. Write out the opposing attributes, and draw that new
idea. Compare the new idea to what you started with, then mix and match
elements from both to inspire new possibilities.
Free-Form Sketching
Draw pictures, words and layout ideas in a free-form, associative way. Every
five minutes, step back, assess and refocus on an element on the page that
suggests further possibilities. This method often inspires new possibilitieswhen you work with another designer and swap your notebooks mid-
brainstorm.
Design Role Playing
In tandem with another designer, friend or relative, act out how your client’s
product or service could be used in the real world. Observe, react and
question your behavior in order to glean insight from the experience and
inspire possible design ideas. This method is very effective in helping people
to envision design ideas for novel products or interactive experiences.
Yes, And…
Provide a group with a problem to solve. The first person who comes up with
a possible solution shares it with the group. Then, go around the room
clockwise and continue to evolve that solution without 
judgment by saying,
“Yes, and,” then adding to it. Have one person record the solutions as the
group morphs the original idea into something new. When the evolved idea
returns to its original maker, consider ways to invert the idea and see what
happens. I observed this method in a collaborative brainstorm led by Steve
Portigal at a design conference.
One of my classes used Design Role Playing to help solve the Touch Screen of
Deaf Rock challenge.Designer Mad Libs
You know that game Mad Libs, where you fill in the blanks with words?
Create a simple Mad Lib for your project that describes your concept. Your
Mad Lib could be phrased like this: My ___________ is like ___________
because ___________. Try writing different words in the blanks and see what
stories emerge. Or ask random people to fill in the blanks and work from
their ideas.
Future Thinking
Stop brainstorming in the here and now and start exploring the future. If your
project concepts were going to appear one year in the future, what would they
look like? Removing the constraint of what’s possible from a real-world
standpoint can sometimes give you more space to roam in a design
exploration.
Blank Bubbles
Sketch your target audience like they’re in a cartoon, complete with empty
speech balloons and potential activities that they might be taking part in. Add
dialogue to the speech balloons, just like you’re writing a comic book. What
kind of story is this person telling you? This also works well if you put a
picture of your intended audience in a photo frame on your desk, then place
sticky notes around it with possible things they are saying to you. You can
keep the photo for the life of the design project, changing the dialogue as the
project evolves.
Don’t Draw—Use Design Sketching
Design sketching isn’t formal drawing or illustration. It’s a way to
rapidly record and explore visual ideas.
Many of us learned to draw things beautifully in a photorealistic way.
This is often considered a cost of entry for being a designer. As each of
us learned to draw, we evolved our own style and approach as to how we
rendered elements in an illustration. These drawing habits can increasethe expressiveness of what peers up at us from the page. But using our
illustration skills for sketching designs can lead to overestimating the
quality of the idea itself. The quality of your sketch should never hide a
weak idea.
By using rough design sketching as you tackle the challenges in this
book, you can quickly consider layout and grid use, select type styles and
applications, determine the art direction of photography and illustration,
and draft copy for your final execution, all before you even come near a
computer. Even the most adept Adobe Photoshop artists and Illustrator
whiz kids need to do some form of preplanning when under deadline.
Most design ideas can be iterated more quickly on paper.
Being aware of the fidelity of your design sketching can have a big
impact on the speed at which you can render ideas, as well as the number
of ideas you can place on the page. If you take too much time polishing a
single idea in a sketch, you may miss a better idea that decided not to
wait around for you to finish.
Also, please visit 
CreativeWorkshopTheBook.com
for more challenges, downloadable worksheets,
and a free teacher’s guide for classroom and
corporate 
use.
SAY HELLO TO THE DESIGNRANDOMIZER™
If you want to make these challenges even harder, try using the
DesignRandomizer. It’s a feedback generator that will teach you how to
handle arbitrary client changes in your design work.
Photocopy this page, then cut on the dotted lines and throw all the slips of
paper into a hat. When you’re halfway through executing one of your design
challenges, draw a slip of paper from the hat and do what it says.
See if you can stay nimble in the face of shifting client needs and still yield a
meaningful result in the finished design!Make the logo bigger. Twice as big.
(Identify the main color used in your
design.)
We don’t use that color.
Add two more columns to your page
grid.
If it’s photography, use illustration. 
(Or vice versa.)
You’re just wrong. Start over with 
another concept from your
brainstorm.
The CEO’s wife would prefer a 
handwritten font.
Use purple as the anchor color 
in your design.
Cut the copy in half. 
Then cut it in half again.
You know what your design needs? 
Skydivers.
Over budget. 
Cut your color scheme to black and
white.
Use circles in the background of your
design.
Hard drive failed! 
Complete your design without a
computer.
Add twenty years to your target
audience.
Make things feel more “edgy.”
Tone it down. Make the whole layout 
more conservative.
Can the photography or illustration 
you chose “pop” more?
I bet this would look great in 3-D. 
Give it more dimension.
Change the orientation of your design
90 degrees.
Spend only twenty minutes finishing 
this design.
This should really be a web site. 
(If it’s already a web site, make it a
poster.)FOUNDATION
Go back to basics. Brand yourself. Real-world
typography. Delve into design history. When you
are finished with the test, put down your pencil.
Think in white space. Reading blue. Grids, grids,
grids. Embrace your inner juvenile delinquent.
Using five typefaces is just plain evil. Now destroy
the font. Scientific branding. Hand-drawn, yet
refined. Different angles on one photo. A hundred
design ideas in just one hour.
01 
Hello, My Name Is
02 
Easy as ABC
03 
Time Machine
04 
One Line Logo
05 
I’m Drawing a Blank
06 
Mr. Blue
07 
Gridlocked
08 
Spray Paint Wars
09 
Tragic Sans
10 
Grungevetica
11 
Future Penmanship
12 
Strange Chemistry
13 
Three in One
14 
10 x 1001
Hello, My Name Is
 30 minutes          
 Identity development, illustration
My trash can overflows with crumpled-up sketches. On my desktop is a
folder jam-packed with Illustrator files of lovingly executed logos composed
of delicate, hand-finessed Bézier curves. It’s been almost three months, and
no matter how many times I try to design for this client, I’m just not satisfied
with the work.
This is a branding assignment for… well… me.
Identity development is the most poetic of the design disciplines, where all
excess is pared away to reveal the pure essence of a client’s brand. But when
it comes to self-promotion, most designers can’t easily gain the self-
detachment necessary to summarize their own practice in an artful mark.
(And without spending eons on the result.) That’s what makes this first
challenge a form of self-help.
“Designing for yourself is worse than
representing a client; it can be like having
an identity crisis.”
—AIGA’s 
Graphic Design: A Career Guide and Education
Directory
CHALLENGE
Spend ten minutes answering the following questions: “What are
my three strengths as a designer? My weaknesses? What’s my
favorite color? What designers do I love? What design work do I
enjoy? What kind of work do I want to do in the future?” Then!
design a logo for yourself that is clearly informed by
your off-the-cuff responses. Be sure to stick to the time
limit provided—don’t cheat!
TAKE IT FURTHER
In a second thirty-minute period, explore how you can apply your logo to a
stationery system, a brochure and a personal web site.
1 
This identity concept for Claire Kohler, a designer based in Seattle, came out of a
productive twenty-minute class brainstorm where she turned the initials of her
name into a “fast-forward” icon that could be used on business cards, stationery
and other elements of a self-promotional identity system.2,3 
In the same brainstorming period, Mark Notermann designed this simple mark
for his design services. “I started by just making some diagonal lines. The
inspiration was originally in the shape of a lightning bolt, which quickly became a
factory icon. I liked the factory icon, and felt it represented industry and
workmanship… I chose a ‘safety yellow’ to keep with the industrial theme but
keep the palette light and lively. If I’m lucky, it says ‘he likes to work hard but still
has fun.’”
4 
If this challenge freezes you in your tracks, try to design a logo for another
designer. Jake Rae, a Seattle-area designer interested in specializing in brand and
identity work, answered the questions associated with this challenge. Over twenty
minutes, I brainstormed a number of possible logo solutions—this one being the
most appropriate for his area of interest.02
Easy as ABC
120 minutes          
Illustration, paper engineering, physical
prototyping, photography, type design
When considering how we create typefaces, our methods of production have
evolved considerably. From scratching symbols in the dirt to painting
letterforms, we have developed increasingly sophisticated tools to
communicate with written language.
But it wasn’t until the invention of movable type that the discipline of
typography truly began to coalesce. And yet, even with this vast array of
tools at our disposal, from the pencil to the computer, unlimited typefaces
still exist beyond the printed page—in the physical world.
“Letters are highly specialized images, and
we have always read words as images.
Words are perceived as silhouette image-
shapes; the letters they are made from are
actually little pictures, and writing is a
highly evolved and specialized form of
drawing.”
—Timothy Donaldson, 
Shapes for Sounds
CHALLENGE
Design a typeface that will be composed from elements in the
world around you. Assemble your twenty-six-character alphabet
using only found objects or environments. Letters may be!
documented through collage, photography,
photocopying, digital illustration and other appropriate
mediums. Avoid examples of computer typefaces out “in
the wild,” documenting elements of existing writing or
signage, or pulling into your typeface anything that may
be considered a traditional letterform.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Add in numbers, symbols and supplementary punctuation as part of your
real-world font. Or create a poster that shows your lettering in action.
1 
For this found alphabet, Donnie Dinch stood on a chair in his bedroom and
arranged his jeans in concert with his girlfriend’s jeans to create his own “Denim
Alphabet.”2 
Exploring the bathroom for type-design inspiration, Jessica Thrasher landed upon
a box of Q-tips
® 
as the ingredients for a very soft and absorbent “Q-tip Alphabet.”
3 
In Claire Kohler’s “Liquid Alphabet,” letterforms are constructed from various
fluids. For example, the letter 
H 
is made from honey, while the 
V 
is implied by
leftover balsamic vinegar from an eaten salad. See if you can determine whichliquids were used for each letter.03
Time Machine
90 minutes          
 Research, print advertising
We study art history more thoroughly than advertising history. The best art is
crafted to withstand the ravages of decades, while the best advertising is
designed to linger in your mind after you toss aside the most recent issue of
your favorite magazine—and hopefully reach for your computer to pull up
Amazon.com
.
But there is much to be learned from studying advertisements from a
previous decade. A single ad can be a treasure trove of information about
how tastes, products and societal norms have changed over time, giving a
designer a valuable window into the consumer mind. So hit the fast-forward
button on an old ad and rocket it into the future!
“When one looks back at ads they seem
hopelessly dated and often ineffectual.
Let’s face it, advertising today is all about
being current, or even ahead of the
curve.So why look at what is behind the
times? … Believe it or not, great
advertising is also an 
intellectual
enterprise. Little is haphazard about it,
though it often seems so casual, often
whimsical, even 
anti
-intellectual.”
—James B. Twitchell, 
Twenty Ads That Shook the World!
CHALLENGE
Select a print ad from before 1980 that you admire, then
redesign it in a contemporary style as a full-page color ad
for one of the following magazines: 
Wired; GQ; Better
Homes and Gardens; O, The Oprah Magazine; Dwell;
Vanity Fair; or US Weekly
. Feel free to reinterpret the
photography, illustration, copy and typography as necessary to
match today’s design idiom. For further inspiration and samples
to draw from, explore Taschen’s 
Golden Age of Advertising
series. There are also stock libraries that can serve as a research
tool.
TAKE IT FURTHER
If you want to stretch your design and illustration skills, try the same
assignment in reverse: Find a print ad that you admire in a contemporary
magazine, then redesign it as if it were created before 1980.
1 
Care to redesign one of the industry-defining, classic Volkswagen ads from the
1950s? Montreal-based book designer Michel Vrana kept the spirit of the original
“Lemon” ad by DDB, only needing to update the car and a little dollop of copy.
2 
Donnie Dinch took a classic advertisement by Apple for the launch of the
original Macintosh and brought it into the future—while cleverly forgetting to
bring the computer along for the ride. Would you like to get your hands on the
slowest Macintosh ever?3 
“I don’t know about you, but I’ve been looking for one of those newfangled
Model T automobiles…” Designer Jake Rae took a tongue-in-cheek approach to
this challenge.!
04
One Line Logo
30 minutes          
Identity
An owl clinging to a tree branch. A woman’s face, framed by a dove. The
whimsical shape of a painter’s loyal dachshund…
When leafing through the collected pencil sketches of Pablo Picasso, it’s easy
to be inspired by his fluid use of line. By reducing each visual idea to a single
line recorded on a sheet of paper, he was able to explore a wealth of artistic
possibilities.
With the following challenge, try to capture the same free-form illustrative
gesture in your own design work.
“Art is the elimination of the
unnecessary.”
—Pablo Picasso
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked to submit an identity design for the
2012 Olympic Games in London. The initial sketch of
your logo must be composed from a single, unbroken
line. Once you’ve placed your pen or pencil down on the
paper, you can’t take it off the page until the logo is complete.
Don’t go back for corrections—embrace mistakes!
TAKE IT FURTHERFor a further challenge, try this exercise with two or more designers. Each
person is allowed to make one line on the page, and then must pass the pencil
to the next person to continue the thought. Use colored pencils to further
enhance the process.
1,2,3 
Meta Newhouse, principal of Newhouse Design and a graphic design
professor at Montana State University, took on this challenge “because it was an
odd way to go about designing a logo… I typically do some research—review
visual imagery, competitive marks, learn everything I can about the client, etc.—
then I sit down and do quite a bit of writing… But the rules were the rules, so I
started drawing one-stroke doodles in my notebook. I did begin with the idea of a
flame/torch, as that was the only thing I felt I could accomplish with one
continuous line, and I felt the line had to represent 
something 
that communicated
Olympics. This was a fairly foreign process for me, as I really don’t think I draw
all that well, but it was interesting to see that some of the drawings worked better
than others, and why. For example, there is a drawing with subtle loops at the tips
of the flames, which sort of look like sparks, or little flames shooting up from those
tips. I thought that was a bit of serendipity. So, I kept going, drawing, drawing,
drawing. I experimented with the flames shooting up in descending order, and…
the image began to lean more and more to the right. A few started to look less like
flames and more like some kind of dove/bird. And then my writing mind took over
and started thinking about what the Olympics are all about. Sure, they are about
athleticism, excellence and endurance, but since so many different countries
participate, it is also about community—appreciating each other’s differences but
also our similarities. So the dove symbol really started to make sense to me. Iwould never have gotten to that if I had stuck with my old tried-and-true process.”
4 
Jake Rae and Katharine Widdows took this challenge further, creating this logo
together over the course of twenty minutes: the crown and the sweatband, happy
together.
5 
Erik Borreson’s approach to this challenge was to have Big Ben, the Olympic
torch and the word “London” as part of one single line.!
05
I’m Drawing a Blank
60 minutes          
Collateral
White space… the final frontier.
These are the voyages of the graphic designer. Our mission: to bring balance
and grace to an otherwise overloaded layout. To seek out opportunities to
pare away excess and focus on what’s necessary. To boldly convey the
appropriate conceptual idea to our audience.
Our quest for bold use of white space is what makes the following challenge
so difficult—and the results that come out of it so rewarding.
“The single most overlooked element in
visual design is emptiness.”
—Alexander W. White, 
The Elements of Graphic Design:
Space, Unity, Page Architecture, and Type
CHALLENGE
You were recently hired by a paint company to help them
with a rebranding effort. For your first project, they
would like you to design a 9" x 12" (23cm x 30cm) folder
that will hold a revamped press kit and other
supplementary collateral. Your client has given only one
mandatory direction: The folder must have at least 90 percent
white showing in the overall design.
TAKE IT FURTHEROnce you’ve completed the folder, determine how you can design a set of
sales sheets that describe the characteristics of various lines of paint. Your
sell sheets should clearly associate with the cover and feel integrated with
your proposed brand aesthetic.
1,2,3 
In a twenty-minute brainstorm session for this challenge, I sketched out an
idea for a paint-by-numbers cover for the fictional Kingston Artist’s Supply
catalog. The reader can flatten out the folder, purchase the paint colors noted in the
legend on the back cover and start on their first masterwork.4,5,6 
A quick design sketch can express a visual idea just as thoroughly as a final,
polished drawing. While brainstorming solutions to this challenge within a twenty-
minute time limit, Jake Rae (4), Michelle Cormack (5) and Katharine Widdows (6)
and all came up with simple, viable ideas that imply a range of possible design
executions.!
06
Mr. Blue
60 minutes          
Magazine design
Blue is America’s most popular color. There are so many variations on this
hue—from the sparkle of a sapphire to the clear blue sky, the deep cerulean
ocean to the stunning iris at the tip of a peacock feather.
This challenge is about how many different ways you can interpret the color
blue.
“Artists can color the sky red because they
know it’s blue. Those of us who aren’t
artists must color things the way they really
are or people might think we’re stupid.”
—Jules Feiffer
CHALLENGE
Design the masthead and the cover of a new magazine
devoted solely to things that are associated with the 
idea
of blue. Consider the magazine name, suggestions for art
direction and what kinds of articles you think the editor
should include. Don’t restrict yourself to literal interpretation—
feel free to branch your design ideas out into what kinds of
people, places, feelings, artworks or emotions may be
conceptually related to the color.
TAKE IT FURTHERMove beyond the masthead and cover of your first issue. Design the
magazine’s grid and put together two sample spreads, including the table of
contents and the first spread of your favorite article concept.
1 
Mark Notermann’s magazine concept is 
True
: a scientific and photographic
exploration of the color blue. Inside its pages, you’ll find articles about how the
color blue is the most frequently used color on flags, explorations into air quality
and why blue diamonds continue to enchant us.2 
Jake Rae designed 
Carver
, a magazine devoted to the surfing life. Get stoked
about surfing the Gulf Coast or head out to Hawaii to check out the Banzai
Pipeline.3 
Michelle Cormack used a literary slant on the idea of blue with the invention of
Blu
, Canada’s literary review magazine dedicated to symptoms of loneliness and
heartache. With this issue, read up on Canada’s country music scene, enjoy the
short fiction of Bob Thompson and take up a search for the real Richard Wilbur.4 
My obsession with digital collage artwork and birds led to the invention of the art
magazine 
Blubird
.
5 
Jessica Thrasher’s contribution was 
Bleu
, a magazine where you can explore “sea
life under a scope.” Take a dive into issue #24 and learn all about jellyfish,
including their current overabundance in today’s waters and Japan’s latest craze:jellyfish ice cream.
6 
Designer Subarna Ghoshal used a photograph of a blue vase in her house as a
foundation for a wide-ranging exploration of color, emotion and impression.!
07
Gridlocked
60 minutes          
Layout
“All design work involves problem solving on both visual and organizational
levels,” says designer and educator Timothy Samara. Without understanding
how to use a grid as the basis of your page layout decisions, you aren’t likely
to master the skill of artful organization.
Use the following challenge as a way to safely explore the possibilities for
page layout that exist when using a grid system.
“As the use of grids has changed from self-conscious gesture
to that of second-nature reflex, so, too, has the viewing public
become more accustomed to information presented to them in
greater quantities, simultaneously, in greater complexity, and
in more languages.And they’re not simply accustomed to
it:They want it that way.”
—Timothy Samara, 
Making and Breaking the Grid
CHALLENGE
You’ve been tasked with designing the interior spread of
an 11" x 17" (28 cm x 43 cm) brochure, 8½" x 11" (22
cm x 28 cm) folded, for a juvenile diabetes treatment
plan. After you’ve determined the name of the treatment
plan and a logo for it, design the brochure spread as follows:
1. Roll a die to determine the number of columns in your grid on
the left and right pages of your spread.
2. Based on that grid, design your spread with the following sixrequired elements: 1 picture (3" x 4" [8 cm x 10 cm]), 4–6
paragraphs of copy (500 words), 1 paragraph legal (100 words in
tiny type), 1 inset/pull quote (20 words), 1 headline (8 words),
and your logo (shown at least 1.25" [3 cm] wide).
3. Create a new version of the same spread where the logo is at
least 2" (5 cm) larger in width. How does that change your
layout?
4. Roll your die again and add that number of columns to your
page grid. Then reorganize the page content to fit that new grid.
What in your design needs to change to fit the new arrangement,
while also accommodating your oversized logo?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Add in numbers, symbols and supplementary punctuation as part of your
real-world font. Or create a poster that shows your lettering in action.
1,2,3,4 
After creating his logo, designer Jake Rae rolled a two on his die and
created a first layout for his brochure with a simple two-column grid. He then
increased his logo size, which forced him to rethink the placement of nearly every
page element in his first layout. When he rolled the die again, he came up with a
three, which forced him to redesign the layout again with an awkward number of
columns for the type of content on the page—plus a gigantic logo.!
08
Spray Paint Wars
120 minutes          
Hand animation, identity development,
typography
Remember the airbrush?
Until the advent of computer art, many commercial artists used this method
of spray painting to create everything from food advertisements to retro pin-
up girls to science-fiction book covers.
Fast-forward to today, and the vernacular has been limited to graffiti—or to
the virtual airbrush in Photoshop. It’s rare that you’ll see a designer on the
street, practicing his trade with a can in hand.
With this in mind, stretch your hand-typography skills by taking on the
following challenge.
“People say graffiti is ugly, irresponsible
and childish. But that’s only if it’s done
properly.”
—Banksy
CHALLENGE
Come up with a name for a new clothing company whose
work is inspired by street art, then design a logo for your
company in a graffiti style. Once the logo is complete,
create a motion graphics storyboard where your logo will
be painted into place on a television within the store.TAKE IT FURTHER
Put together a storyboard showing a “graffiti battle ad” between your
company and a competing street wear company as part of an event going on
next month at a rap battle. The highlight of the event is two different graffiti
artists fighting for supremacy and layering upon each other’s work.
1,2 
Brandon Dawley took a different tack, working his hand lettering into a full
graffiti tag that would look quite comfortable on a clothing store sign.
3,4,5 
Richard Wallace started with a word list of what a shopper might find at his
store—shoes, clothes, high tops, hoodies and so on—which led to the name Manrs.
He then conducted a range of type explorations in his sketchbook (3): “In drawing
the logo I realized that it could be built from a series of repeated lines (4), and went
into the storyboards with that in mind.” His final storyboard (5) feels fashionable,
with the raking repeated lines providing great contrast with the splashy spray-
painted backdrop.!
09
Tragic Sans
30 minutes          
 Collateral, research, typography
If you are a student of typography, you know the more important rules of
thumb for good typesetting.
Be sure to kern your headlines. In most cases, keep your paragraphs in a rag
right alignment. Limit the number of fonts on a page so your layout doesn’t
turn into a total circus.
With this challenge, you’re going to break that last rule. Who doesn’t like a
circus?
“If one more wannabe David Carson shows
me one more unreadable headline with five
different fonts in it 
without there being
any reason for the five fonts or the lack of
readability, 
I fear I may spit up.”
—Mark Fenske
CHALLENGE
Create a brochure cover promoting the Slow Food
movement. As part of your design, you must use five or
more unique fonts. Can you make a coherent brochure
cover under these constraints?TAKE IT FURTHER
Design a brochure holder that can display your collateral piece in a grocery
store. In your work, be sure to incorporate two more fonts that weren’t part of
the original brochure.
1 
For this challenge, Michelle Cormack decided to use the entire Slow Food
Manifesto as her brochure cover. By chunking the text into multiple type sizes and
fonts, the reader’s eye must slow down and take it all in. The use of earthy green
and brown-red hues, used in association with sky blue, seems reminiscent of old-
fashioned theater and vaudeville posters.2 
Katharine Widdows took the negativity inherent in the use of multiple fonts and
turned it to her advantage—conveying what we may sacrifice daily in the name of
convenience.3 
Drawing from the rustic Italian origins of the Slow Food movement, Mark
Notermann’s design weaves five fonts together in a manner that has a slow pace,
an elegant feel and a handcrafted polish that feels intentional, not haphazard.10
Grungevetica
120 minutes          
Type design
“Watching me work is like watching a refrigerator make ice,” said Matthew
Carter, creator of classic typefaces such as the omnipresent Verdana. Such is
the price of perfection: your body hunched over a drafting table with pencil,
paper and protractor, belaboring the counter shape in the letter 
q 
for days on
end…
Designing a legible typeface is a painstaking process yielding a product that,
if properly executed, is entirely transparent to readers. In this regard,
Helvetica is the undisputed king of the type world—entirely neutral to the
eye. No one seems to have been able to beat Helvetica for sheer ubiquity.
So, for this challenge, let’s distress this notion of typography as a
perfectionist pursuit. Let’s burn Helvetica to the ground and watch the
phoenix that rises from its ashes.
“Any good typeface can be completely
destroyed when misused or extensively
overused. Helvetica seemed to sustain a
beating like no other.”
—Alexander Gelman
CHALLENGE
Project yourself far into the future. Linotype GmbH has chosen
you to create a seventieth anniversary edition of Helvetica—a
modern update of the font composed of destroyed letterforms.!
What would the twenty-six characters of this new font look like?
How would you associate your work to the legacy of the
original face?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design a poster for your new typeface release, writing eye-catching copy to
convey the ideas underlying your solution.
1 
Book designer Michel Vrana says of his font Feedback: “This is my grunge
‘cover’ of Helvetica… I gravitated toward photocopy manipulation as a basis for
my exploration, as a visual nod to the photocopied band posters that would have
been used during the ’90s… In layering the three different manipulations with
transparent cyan, magenta and yellow, the resulting [letterforms] brought out the
Helvetica-ness of each version, with some fun outer-edge ‘feedback’ still
apparent.”2 
How much can you cut up a typeface and still have it be legible? This page is
from a series of experiments by Katharine Widdows and Jessica Thrasher where
they explored methods of font surgery.
3 
Michelle Cormack and Shimon Alkon made Helvetica grungy through
deconstruction, giving each letter of the alphabet a completely different hand-
wrought visual treatment.
4,5,6 
Jake Rae and I created Nope, a variant of Helvetica that is a scribbled version
of the original face. In the process of creating Nope we discovered that the
indentations left by our heavy scribbles, as well as the interactions between our
tracing paper and the printed font, would make lovely motifs for further
exploration.11
Future Penmanship
90 minutes          
Illustration, identity development, research
A physics graduate student once told me that the universe is expanding at an
impossibly fast rate—and at some later date, it may collapse back in on itself,
recreating the Big Bang.
“What are the odds that such a thing could happen?” I said.
“Well, that depends on what scientific point of view you choose,” he said.
Then he began to outline a series of fascinating theories that, to this very day,
I still can’t remember.
Does this mean he was a bad communicator? Or that I just didn’t grasp the
concepts he had brought to bear on our conversation? In the world of design,
if we don’t clarify and communicate complex ideas in the simplest ways
possible, our efforts are considered failures.
So, what do we do when tasked to communicate an idea that’s impossibly
complex? And in a manner that’s artistically counterintuitive? With this
challenge, you’ll stretch the boundaries of both your mind and your making
skills.
“A perfection of means, and confusion of
aims, seems to be our main problem.”
—Albert Einstein
CHALLENGE
A technology startup focused on the area of quantum computing
wants you to help craft their new brand system. They’re too busy!
chasing venture capital to explain to you what quantum
computing actually is, so you’ll need to do a bit of
research to understand what they’re technically pursuing.
And, while they don’t care what name you come up with,
they did have some mandatory input regarding the way in
which you render their logo: They want all elements of
the system to be rendered in a hand-wrought calligraphic
style. Can you design a logo in this fashion—saying bleeding-
edge technology with a nibbed fountain pen and ink?
TAKE IT FURTHER
How would your design explorations manifest themselves through a Flash
advertisement? On your client’s web site? In a complete stationery system?
1,2,3 
Manda Szewczyk settled on the name Qubit for her identity—which is short
for “quantum bit,” a unit of quantum information. In receiving her sketches of
potential mark ideas and her final logo (which was accompanied by thorough color
studies), I couldn’t help but think that an intriguing way to execute on her logo as a
complete brand system would be for the colors to vary depending on placement
and use. So, on a web page, for example, the color of the logo could vary
depending on any number of factors, such as time, date, weather, what buttons
you’re planning to click and so forth.4 
Designer and illustrator Lisa Stewart created this mark with the following
rationale as its basis. “While quantum computing is still young, three fundamental
properties are [its] basis—most of which are based on quantum mechanics. The
physical representations extracted for the purpose of identity building were adopted
from research and are defined [here]. The Optical Lattice & Bloch Sphere: The
well of the optical lattice is represented by the calligraphic 
U 
and the
corresponding atom is the sphere that hovers above. The sphere also represents the
Bloch Sphere, the pure state space. Light and Sound: The three knots undulating
horizontally represent light and sound waves. Once these elements were assigned,
the arrangement humanizes the identity, promoting an entanglement of both
quantum computing and data collection.” I’m not sure I understand exactly what
Lisa’s talking about, but I think the client would be happy with the final design.5 
Erik Borreson took a type-only approach. “It is a hybrid of uncial and gothic
calligraphy—based on my initial ‘swoosh’ form in the letter 
I
.”!
12
Strange Chemistry
90 minutes          
Annual reports
I’m in awe of the mixologist at my favorite bar. She’s always throwing
wildly contrasting ingredients into her cocktails. Last night, I tried a Thai
chile-infused vodka with muddled cucumber and passion fruit purée. Each
visit yields something creative and new to my palate, and I’m always asking
her to surprise me with bold new concoctions.
Hmm… I think I just described the designer-client relationship. When
bringing a design concept to life, you want to foster the delicious friction that
happens between opposing forces. Just like peanut butter and boysenberry
jam on thick whole wheat bread, varying flavors and textures achieve greater
substance when mashed together.
With the following challenge, you’ll need to exploit incongruity to achieve an
artistic effect—on multiple levels.
“You can take two substances, put them together, and
produce something powerfully different (table salt),
sometimes even explosive (nitroglycerine).”
—Diane Ackerman, 
A Natural History of the Senses
CHALLENGE
There’s a new breed of chemical company out there in
the wild that’s seeking an ethical, “green” stance toward
their efforts to produce critical substances that help
today’s industries function. You’ve been asked to create
the annual report for one such company. The overall theme for
this year is “Better Living Through Chemistry.”In order to complete this challenge, you need to first determine
the name and brand position of this company—counter to all of
their competitors in the market. Then, based on your proposed
brand position, provide the client with a cover design and first
spread that conveys their desired theme in a powerful manner.
And as a requirement for your art direction, you must mix scruffy
hand-drawn type with ultra-refined photography.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Consider how you could expand your print design into an online experience
that would animate the visual and written themes in your report.
1 
Regarding this design, Katharine Widdows said: “I formed the name of the
company Organichem by fusing the words ‘organic’ and ‘chemical,’ which couldbe thought of as a paradox, or as a strategy for utilizing the best of both worlds. (I
did find later that there does exist a chemical company with this name.) I wanted to
balance images of natural, green growth with images of chemistry and lab work,
and stress the idea of natural order and the order of thought and equations
coexisting beautifully. In hindsight, it does seem important that the more ‘natural’
term forms the beginning of the name, as it is the precedent and basis for man-
made chemicals.”
2 
In Michelle Cormack’s annual report design for the fictional company
NaturalElements, she notes that water is the most abundant chemical on Earth. As
readers progress through the annual report, they would see each spread focus on
another common chemical that forms a part of our everyday lives.
3 
Designer Jake Rae’s annual report cover for the fictional PrismaLab fusesphotography and typography into one—and opens the door for mixing whiteboard
marker sketch with photography through future spreads.!
13
Three in One
90 minutes          
Photography, print advertising
While perusing a women’s magazine, a print ad catches your eye. There’s a
happy woman picking dandelions with her young daughter, while the caption
reads: “Because of cancer, Juliette’s mother only has two months left to live.”
A picture may be worth a thousand words, but sometimes it only takes a few
words carefully selected by a designer to completely recast that picture’s
story. Coming up with compelling advertising concepts requires this kind of
artful spin through the intelligent marriage of word and image. If executed
properly, these ads hit you square in the gut.
Want some practice with this style of advertising? Take on the following
challenge.
“The secret of all effec-tive advertising is
not the creation of new and tricky words
and pictures, but one of putting familiar
words and pictures into new
relationships.”
—Leo Burnett
CHALLENGE
Shoot a photograph of an item that you carry with you
throughout the day. Then design three print ads showing
that product in three different ways: positive, negative
and metaphorical. As an example, if you took a photo ofyour eyeglasses, you could have a glowingly positive ad for the
pair that you wear, an ad for a competing product that uses your
glasses as an example of what not to buy, and a third ad that uses
the glasses as an example of the focus you need when selecting a
mutual fund. Be sure to preplan your ads in sketch form before
moving into execution.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Make a storyboard for a TV ad adapted from your favorite ad from 
the
sequence.
1,2,3 
Designer Michelle Cormack chose a USB memory stick as the foundation of
her three advertisements. For her positive ad, she created a company called Stroller
whose USB sticks help you bring your memories everywhere. In her ad that
focused on a negative attribute of the product, she conceived of a cloud-based file
sharing service that could back up all of your digital files—and then arranged a
photo shoot in her home that showed the risks of leaving copies of your data at
large. And for the ad that was meant to show the product in a metaphorical context,
she used the USB stick as a literal replacement for a woman’s memory in a public
service announcement.!
14
10 x 10
90 minutes          
Packaging design
Ninety-eight… ninety-nine… one hundred sit-ups!
We force our bodies through all sorts of challenging workouts, but when it
comes to exercising the mind, sustained ideation can leave a designer feeling
completely spent. Plus, when I’m tasked with creating packaging concepts, I
often feel like I’m running out of ideas after only a page or two of
concentrated sketching.
As a general rule, I’ve found that this empty feeling is sheer illusion. The best
way to dispel it is by forcing constant iteration and repetition in my
sketchbook—especially when I don’t think too hard about what my pencil is
doing on the page. My best work often happens in this magical space.
Want to give it a try? In taking on this challenge, discover how to silence
your inner critic by generating an astounding number of design ideas.
“Nothing is more dangerous than an idea
when it’s the only one you have.”
—Émile Chartier, French philosopher
CHALLENGE
You’ve been hired by a soda company to create the
packaging for an affordable organic energy drink. Your
audience is well-off twenty-year-olds. Brainstorm a name
and description of the drink, then spend sixty minutes on
a hundred sketches of the possible energy drink design, including
form factor and typography. Spend the last thirty minutesrefining the hundred sketches down to three final design sketches
that incorporate all of your best thinking.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Use the same process to create one hundred sketches outlining a web site
design for your energy drink.
1,2 
I spent ninety minutes on this challenge with an idea for an energy drink called
tTree made with rooibos tea and enhanced with vitamins and minerals. As I
reached sketch sixty, I began to realize that the name wasn’t playing very well in
my form factor ideas, so I began iterating the name with various design ideas,
landing on Tsquared (or T2 for short). By the time I had finished the initial
sketching period, I had earmarked a few winners from the hundred thumbnail
sketches that seemed worth pursing further, including a “message in a bottle”
design that incorporated fruit leather or some other consumable object within the
bottle that could be drawn out by the purchaser. Another idea that seemed
interesting to pursue was a drink that, when the person opened the cap, released
special flavorings into the tea that gave it an extra kick. And an idea that would
probably get shot down by the FDA: an energy drink whose design mimicked
prescription drug bottles.
3,4,5,6 
Photocopy and cut out your favorite sketches, arranging and clusteringthem into bigger ideas. This is often the fastest way to get to the best result from
the wide range of explorations that come from this challenge.EXECUTION
Get it done! One minute advertisement. Animate
type meaningfully. Annual reports meet theater
sports. Google your next project. Greatest hits
illustration. Stories are kids’ play. DIY philosophy.
Beautify ugliness. “Unisex” shaving cream? Invent
your own cereal. Your imagination, on DVD. Love
monster movies. “Blink and you miss it” cinema.
Three types of chocolate = endless possibilities.
This ad dries clothes. Urban Gardening Web 2.0.
Vacation in Saskatoon? Celebrate the idea of
getting some sheep—I mean sleep.
15 
Sixty-Second Deadline
16 
Hey, You Made That Up!
17 
Free Association
18 
I’m Feeling Really, Really Lucky
19 
It Sounds Better on Vinyl
20 
Storybook Ending
21 
Dead Philosphers Rock
22 
Opposites Attract
23 
Book Report
24 
He Shaves, She Shaves
25 
Totally Cereal
26 
Imaginary Film27 
Creature Feature
28 
Ten-Second Film Festival
29 
I’ve Got a Golden Ticket
30 
Flapping in the Wind
31 
Going to Seed
32 
Sell Me a Bridge
33 
Let’s Take a Nap15
Sixty-Second Deadline
60 minutes          
Writing, advertising
How long does it take to come up with a good idea? Answer: The time it
takes you to reach your deadline.
No matter whether you have hours or minutes, a solid deadline will force you
to cough up a great ad idea fast—and probably quicker than any other
brainstorming method. In these kinds of hair-trigger creative situations, you
learn to trust intuition and go with what feels right on the page.
Designers don’t want to hear this, however. Don’t great ideas materialize
after you’ve agonized over the ninety-seventh iteration of your layout? Nope.
In as little as one minute, creative lightning can strike. And in the process,
that blank page before you can reveal a jewel of an idea.
In the following challenge, prepare yourself for the briefest of deadlines. You
might be surprised at the results.
“Good work habits lead us to address
specific problems systematically.
Sometimes we even stumble upon a great
idea along the way.”
—Eric Karjaluoto
CHALLENGE
Ask a friend or family member to fill a box with seven items
from around his house. With a stopwatch at your side, randomly
pick one item out of the box and take exactly sixty seconds to!
write a slogan that could be associated with the item. Do that for
each item, sixty seconds each time. Then choose the most
exceptional slogan from your rapid brainstorming and
design a billboard for that product. Be sure to render your
headline prominently in it.
TAKE IT FURTHER
See if you can repeat the same exercise to come up with a series of new
headlines associated with the one in your billboard—which can then be used
in print ads, posters and online advertising.
1,2,3,4 
In true Burma-Shave style, designer Jessica Thrasher conceived of the
slogans for this multi-part billboard series (in sixty seconds) that pays off the value
of owning a multi-bit screwdriver. If the client was willing to pay a little extra in
production, the screws could protrude from the billboard—providing extra
dimension to the viewer on the road.5 
Jake Rae was provided with this stuffed dog toy and came up with the following
slogan, which he then incorporated into a billboard ad for PrizeWinner Toys, a
fictional company responsible for these obedient animals.!
16
Hey, You Made That Up!
60 minutes          
Motion graphics storyboarding, identity
development
There are some things in life that can’t be faked. Sugar in your morning
coffee. Fresh-cut flowers in a crystal vase. Hair that hasn’t been dyed,
streaked or chemically treated within an inch of its life.
There are things in life that often seem faked, such as brand names for new
products. We’re surrounded by thousands of brands whose names are just
empty containers. The ones that catch our attention often communicate their
meaning through motion.
In the following challenge, put on your animator’s hat and bring out the
meaning in what could otherwise be meaningless.
“Brand is the F word of
marketing.Everybody swears by it, few
people are that good at it and everyone
would like you to believe they do it more
often than they do.”
—Mark Di Soma
CHALLENGE
Write down three three-syllable adjectives. Create a new
made-up word by mashing together the first syllable from
the first adjective, the second syllable from the second,
and the third from the third adjective. This is yourclient’s new brand name. Apparently, they spent a billion dollars
coming up with this name—the market research supports the
choice—and as their designer, you’re responsible for creating a
six-panel storyboard for a motion graphics piece that will be
shown at the shareholders’ meeting.
The video should convey through typography, color and
movement exactly what their company does in the market. Is this
name describing a new product or service in the marketplace? A
nonprofit initiative? Be as inventive as possible.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Write a voiceover script and select music to support your storyboard. Read
the words out loud and time it to match up with your storyboard, noting what
details you may not have considered as part of your motion graphics
treatment.
1 
In six frames, there isn’t much time to tell a complex story. When I came up withNoteron, creator of energy-efficient LED lights for cars, this solution seemed to be
the simplest way to express the benefit of their product. The lights had almost
outlasted the car they were installed inside.
2 
Mark Notermann 
chose the words “synchronized,” “effortless” and “fantastic.”
That led to this simple storyboard for the Syncortic Pen, which can write on any
surface.17
Free Association
60 minutes          
Annual reports
Yes, I’d love to sit down and read your Form 10-K—as long as you include
some beautiful charts, graphs and smiling children frolicking in a dandelion-
laden meadow. And be sure to print the report on 100% recycled, post-
consumer waste paper with soy inks on a printing press powered by wind.
Well, designing an annual report isn’t 
that 
easy. Any designer who has lived
through an annual report project knows the struggle of digesting a few dozen
interviews with clients and customers and seeking that magical thread of
story that will weave a full year of business and community activities into a
cogent narrative. If you fail in making the story tangible in your overall copy
and design, this long-form document becomes a jumble of disparate elements
that lack a cohesive vision. Plus, as times grow tough for businesses and
nonprofits, production values on the annual report receive the axe—further
handcuffing your creative vision.
Never had a chance to design an annual report? Take this challenge and
discover what it’s like to summon a grand business narrative from seemingly
random elements.
“Clients have no trouble paying $5,800 for an hour in a
Gulfstream corporate jet or $425 for a month of parking. But
God forbid they spend $3 per on a glossy annual report.”
—Bill Cahan
CHALLENGE
Write down the name of an animal, a physical location
somewhere in the world, and the name of a non-profit you
admire. Using this information, create the cover design of this!
year’s annual report for said non-profit, including some
form of textual or visual reference to the animal and
location. If you have time left, design the layout for the
first and second spreads of the report, including
considerations of the grid, while deftly weaving in the
details you’ve improvised.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Take your annual report theme to the web. How would you extend the overall
story of your project into an interactive experience that breaks free of the
printed page?
1,2 
Designers Sean Baker from Pictoric and Lenny Vella from ‘peeps creative tag-
teamed this challenge. The client: Amnesty International. The target: Human rights
and freedoms. The animal: Raven. Location: Iran. Using this seed material, the two
designers used mind mapping to quickly generate ideas for their final execution.
3,4 
For the cover and spread of their annual report, Sean Baker and Lenny Vella
utilized a type-only approach that highlights a portion of a speech by Mehdi
Karroubi and Zahra Rahnavard to create a new message that speaks to Amnesty
International’s fight to protect the human rights of those who dissent with their
governments.!
18
I’m Feeling Really, Really Lucky
90 minutes          
User interface design
Mystery meat navigation. Flashing text. Jumbled page layouts. Frames.
Awful photography. Amateur illustration. Overwritten copy—or the complete
lack of words on the page. The list could go on and on.
The world is full of web sites that desperately need the loving attention of a
visual designer. But our services are often engaged to create a site, not to
improve one. Or we’re tapped to redesign a site that may be visually
unpleasing but isn’t a complete failure.
How often are our skills put to the ultimate test? We see dozens of pages
every day that need our care and attention, from top to bottom. How would
we even know where to start?
With the following challenge, you won’t choose what corner of the Internet
needs improvement. It’ll choose you.
“A picture is worth a thousand words. An
interface is worth a thousand pictures.”
—Ben Shneiderman
CHALLENGE
Execute the following instructions to the letter: 1) Turn
on the radio. 2) Write down the third and fourth words
within the first complete sentence you hear from the
announcer or in a song. 3) Type those words into the
Google search engine. 4) Hit the “I’m Feeling Lucky” button. 5)
Redesign the user interface.A good approach to this exercise would be to start with a rough
inventory of all the content that is displayed on the page. Then, in
sketch form, consider improvements to only the navigation.
Move from the navigation to considerations of content
organization: where material will appear on the page, via a
sketched wireframe. After you’ve completed your wireframe,
attack the visual design of your page and the discrete details of
your information design and typography.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Move past the single page you’ve retooled and explore opportunities to
improve the entire web site you’ve struck upon.
1,2,3 
I was listening to my Pandora station and, per the rules of this challenge,
randomly plucked the words “Tuesday’s grey” from the song “Friday I’m in Love”
by the Cure. Entering those words into Google and hitting “I’m Feeling Lucky”
brought up the Wikipedia page for Danger Mouse’s 
The Grey Album
.A good process to work through this challenge quickly is to do as I’ve noted here. First, draw
on a sheet of paper all of the page elements divorced from the context of layout. Then, rank and
prioritize those elements, deciding on a case-by-case basis what improvements can be made to
each individual element. Then, bring those elements back together into a fairly tight sketch that
expresses how they fit together as a coherent whole. Only then is it safe to jump into Photoshop
or Illustrator and start rendering your improved user interface design. Otherwise, you’ll end up
solving a number of those problems while trying to polish the interface in the computer, which
is very time consuming.19
It Sounds Better on Vinyl
90 minutes          
Packaging
The compact disc may have radically transformed the fidelity with which we
enjoy our favorite music, but if you’ve ever owned a record player, you know
there is no substitute for kicking back and relaxing to the warm natural tones
of your favorite songs. There’s just something about vinyl that makes music
feel more expansive.
LP record packaging was also bold. The visuals shout out for attention when
you’re leafing through the record crate. Now, there is no shortage of clever
printing approaches for the compact disc, but the LP gives the designer more
physical size for the cover—and designing for that scale inspires different
possibilities. Big and bold visual ideas thrive at a larger physical scale—
especially if they have a handmade feel. With this challenge, you’ll get your
chance to explore this medium.
“Record companies, in the early days,
simply adapted the original vinyl sleeve
design for the initial CDs and squeezed it
unceremoniously into a two- or four-page
booklet. Sacrilege!”
—Storm Thorgerson, 
Mind Over Matter: The Images of Pink
Floyd
CHALLENGE
Tune the radio to your local variety or mix radio station. Write!
down the name of the first artist you recognize. You’re now
designing the LP cover of their latest greatest hits
collection. In your design execution of the cover you
must have a photograph that transitions into an
illustration—or vice versa.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design the back cover, sleeve and label that appears on the record. Then
consider how it would look alongside other records from that recording
artist’s back catalog.
1 
Inspired by the song “Tumbling Dice,” Mark Notermann concocted a greatest
hits album for the Rolling Stones’ next release, 
Boxcars
. Mark said, “In dice,
double sixes is called ‘boxcars.’ It implies an abundance of material, trains, escape.
It could have twelve songs, and even be broken in two sets of six like a vinyl LP.”2 
Jessica Thrasher heard “Refugee” by Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers on the
radio. Her design for their greatest hits LP incorporates hand-sketching and
crumpled paper—deftly weaving references to several lyrics and themes from
Petty’s songs into her work.
3 
Katharine Widdows’s hand-drawn type puts the last thirty years of R.E.M.’s
career to rest.!
20
Storybook Ending
30 minutes          
Book design, illustration, storyboarding
Once upon a time, there was a designer who wanted to create a children’s
book. She was an expert at drawing and painting in oils, but no matter how
hard she tried, she couldn’t come up with the right plot for the book of her
dreams. This was a shame, because storytelling is a critical attribute of any
piece of designed communications—and knowing how to write a meaningful
story is a learned skill, not a nefarious talent.
For this challenge, hone your skills in storytelling and illustration for a
youthful audience.
“As far as I’m concerned, all design is storytelling. Brochures
and books tell stories in a very familiar way; they have covers,
chapters and pages… even logos tell succinct moral
tales.Thinking of design as an act of storytelling may help you
focus your choices as you work.”
—Christopher Simmons
CHALLENGE
Sketch out a ten- to twelve-panel storyboard for a book
geared toward children ages three to seven. Organize
your working process as follows to make your plot
decisions more intuitive:
1. Spend ten minutes brainstorming an overall plot for the book.
Summarize the arc of the story in a sentence.
2. Over the next ten minutes, come up with rough sketches of the
visual direction and write some copy describing how the storywould play out over twenty to twenty-four pages.
3. Use the rest of your time to tighten up your storyboards and
tease out a moral, if you can.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Run your sketches by a toddler and read the copy out loud. Immediate
reactions will be a good indication of the book’s success or failure; toddlers
are pretty honest folk. Is there anything you need to redo based on this
feedback? Then, after you’re done testing the material, consider making your
book a reality by fully writing and illustrating it.
1,2,3 
Over the course of thirty minutes, a team from one of my classes—Donnie
Dinch, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Mark Notermann—brainstormed the high-
level concept for a children’s book entitled 
The Gloomy Galoshes
.
In the book, a girl named Toni has three pairs of shoes: sneakers, sandals and blue galoshes.
Through the book, Toni’s other shoes get taken out to the playground and the park. The
galoshes grow sad, since they just sit in Toni’s bedroom and wait to be worn. At the end of the
book, there’s a big rainstorm, and Toni takes her galoshes out to play. “The reward of being
patient is sometimes great… a big messy jump in a puddle.”
After the initial brainstorm, the team fleshed out full storyboards and copy for the book, then
worked together collaboratively to illustrate it over the course of three weeks.4,5,6,7 
The class took an iterative approach to the storyboard development, moving
from very rough sketches of possible book illustration layouts to character studies
that created a simple visual language that the entire team could share and execute
for the final text.!
21
Dead Philosphers Rock
90 minutes          
Book design
What is there to know about philosophy? The critical discourses of our time
could fill dozens of hefty volumes and require many years of conscientious
study to master their complexity.
One of the things I love about being a designer, however, is that we are often
asked to find novel ways to reduce the appearance of complexity and make
ideas more manageable for people to digest. You don’t need a Ph.D. in
Western philosophy to understand the essence of a series of ideas and express
them succinctly to others. Though for the following challenge, that advanced
degree wouldn’t hurt.
“The charm of history and its enigmatic
lesson consist in the fact that, from age to
age, nothing changes and yet everything is
completely different.”
—Aldous Huxley
CHALLENGE
Come up with the overall look and feel for a series of
short forty-eight-page or longer books that discuss key
concepts provided by the most important philosophers of
the ages: Aristotle and Socrates all the way up to Kant
and Heidegger. As part of your solution, consider ways in which
the books could be clustered or lined up on a shelf to create a
larger visual motif with their narrow spines.TAKE IT FURTHER
Translate your cover design concepts into an interactive timeline on the
publisher’s web site that explains the history of philosophy.
1,2,3,4,5 
Dave Fletcher, creative director at theMechanism in New York City, took
on this challenge. “I began the project by avoiding the obvious: beards. While one
of my earliest ideas involved sketching all the philosophers and connecting them
from ‘beard to beard,’ so to speak, in the end, I felt that the real solution to this
particular problem would lie in categorizing and simplifying philosophic principals
into digestible chunks. And it had to be modern and appealing.”
Dave separated the book series into eight books that treat the “spectrum” of philosophic
thinking throughout history: Aesthetics, Metaphysics, Mind, Epistemology, Language,
Political, Ethics and Logic. He also thought about how the book experience could extend to the
online space. “An expanded web component—only accessible by going to {book
title}.
deadphilosphers.com
—would allow true buffs and/ or masochists to dig deeper into the
hearty details that await them.”!
22
Opposites Attract
60 minutes          
 Book design
“Beauty is in the eye of the beholder,” goes the old cliché. For designers, the
opposite is often true. When you’re solving a design problem, you often need
to land on a beautiful 
idea 
for the appropriate audience before you start
worrying about how good the idea will actually look in the final, designed
execution.
So, what happens if you’re asked to come up with a beautiful design idea
about what beauty really means? What do you do when the entire foundation
of your design is unnervingly objective, something that can be defined
differently for each consumer? With this challenge, you’re going to find out.
“When I am working on a problem, I never
think about beauty. I only think about how
to solve the problem. But when I have
finished, if the solution is not beautiful, I
know it is wrong.”
—Buckminster Fuller
CHALLENGE
An editor at a major publishing house has contacted you
and asked if you’ll brainstorm cover concepts for an
upcoming hardcover book about perceptions of beauty
throughout the ages. Ironically, the book is titled 
Ugly 
by
author Jane Klingslaner. In the time limit provided, come up witha range of cover ideas, then select one of those ideas to draw out
in a clean, professional comp that can easily be migrated into a
computer execution.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Choose a specific style of execution that you must conform to before you
begin your cover concepts. Will it be hand illustration, collage, photography
or a type-only solution? Make a commitment to a specific medium or artistic
method, and follow through on a set of executions.
1,2,3 
“Am I so ugly that I need to put a paper bag over my face?” Yes, Mona, you
are. During a twenty-minute individual brainstorm in one of my classes, Jessica
Thrasher hatched this idea for the cover design of 
Ugly
—proof that it doesn’t take
days of effort to yield a great concept.4 
In that same brainstorm, Michelle Cormack came up with the sketch of the
following cover, which plays off the iconography of beauty pageantry.!
23
Book Report
60 minutes          
 Book design
Walking through a bookstore, it’s easy to be inspired by great book covers by
master designers like Chip Kidd and Barbara de Wilde. A well-considered
book cover does more than put a pretty face on a work of literature—it
embodies the metaphors and emotions submerged beneath the details of plot
and character, grounding the book’s overall theme. It must be compelling and
informative within a limited space; a veritable wine label for literary
complexity.
That’s why the following challenge is so difficult!
“My hope is that when people first see the
cover, they won’t understand what they are
seeing. Then, only as they read the book or
the flap copy will that image change from
dishes with dust on them to something
else.”
—Chip Kidd
CHALLENGE
Pick up the phone, call a good friend and ask for a book
recommendation. You’ll need a one- to two-minute
synopsis of the plot.
Now, you are the designer assigned to design the new
paperback edition of said book. Can you create a meaningfulbook cover if you haven’t read the book? You may not conduct
any further research on your book other than reading the back
cover and inside jacket flap.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design a single chapter heading and the necessary front matter required to
integrate your book cover design with the book’s interior layout. Or, after
you’ve finished your cover, read the book. Would you revise your design to
match the book’s content?
1,2,3 
Mark Notermann was provided a summary from one of his classmates,
Claire, for 
I Know This Much Is True 
by Wally Lamb: “Dominick is an identical
twin whose brother, Thomas, is a paranoid schizophrenic. The book starts with
Dominick’s life at forty and alternates between the past and the present, so as a
reader, you slowly find out more about the twins’ unbelievably hard childhood,Dominick’s ex-wife, the loss of their child in infancy, their abusive stepfather and
repressed mother.” Over a series of iterations, Mark settled upon the following
cover concept/self-portrait that uncannily expresses the sense of duality that
permeates the novel.
4 
Another one of my classes took on a young-adult themed version of “Book
Report.” Michelle Cormack sketched this hand-drawn cover for 
The Boy Who
Cried Wolf and Other Tales 
from 
Aesop’s Fables
—starting from a single
paragraph from Wikipedia describing the content.5 
Katharine Widdows designed a cover for 
Katie and Nan Go to Sea 
by Nan Inger,
which was recommended by Michelle, who said a good deal of the book “was
filled with fishing, swimming and visiting friends in their summer homes.
Sometimes the Dunkan misbehaved, as on the day when the smokestack caught
fire; more often it was Katie and Nan who misbehaved; but then there were the
really perfect times that the whole family would remember forever. The summer
had to end, but Katie and Nan wished it never would.” This was enough for
Katharine to design a cover that captured the book’s spirit.24
He Shaves, She Shaves
30 minutes          
 Packaging
Hair happens. And often in the places you wish it didn’t grow. That’s why
there’s shaving cream. Of all the various lotions, emollients, pastes and
creams that clutter our bathroom counters, this magic substance has been
around practically forever—thousands of years.
When shopping for shaving cream, it feels like the packaging design for this
toiletry product hasn’t progressed past 1983. Have you noticed the multitude
of niche-targeted shaving creams? The aisles are jammed with cans
advertising sensitive skin protection, mint-scented foam, extra hair-coating
action, green-colored gel, citrus-infused non-lathering lotion. The list goes on
forever.
Why isn’t there a brand out there that makes it simpler to choose what
shaving cream you should use? Try the following challenge and see if you
can!
“Good design, at least part of the time,
includes the criterion of being direct in
relation to the problem at hand—not
obscure, trendy or stylish. A new language,
visual or verbal, must be couched in a
language that is already understood.”
—Ivan Chermayeff
CHALLENGE!
Design packaging for a single type of shaving cream
three ways: for women, for men and in a gender-neutral
fashion. All three packaging ideas must be systematic,
conveying via your design choices that they are a
cohesive line of products.
In your brainstorming, feel free to choose a more
sustainable option for your product’s form than the normal
aerosol dispenser.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Convey how your shaving cream concepts could be sold in a point-of-
purchase display or on the shelf at the local drugstore. How could you have
your product appeal to both men and women?
1 
Are you BUFT? Jessica Thrasher brings a simple visual language to clearly
convey masculine and feminine versions of the same product—as well as a gender-
neutral, all-gray version.2 
The idea behind this shaving cream brand came from a name that Donnie Dinch
brought into class—PheromoneMagnetic—accompanied by a sketch of a man and
a woman icon attracting iron filings. Pictured is the dual-gender package, which is
a marriage of the male 
and 
female editions.
3 
Katharine Widdows created packaging with an elegant, Parisian feel for a brand
of shaving paste scented with natural ingredients.
4 
Mark Notermann brainstormed a clean and simple solution to this challenge:
Men are from Mars, women are from Venus, and there’s nothing more romantic
than the full moon for either sex.
5 
My quick solution to this challenge was to call my shaving cream Deface,
complete with the anarchy symbol and yellow warning tape on the label. Punk rock
shaving cream? Why not?25
Totally Cereal
30 minutes          
 Packaging
I can’t imagine a complete morning without granola in my yogurt. Whether
flakes, rolled oats or crunchy squares composed of twelve grains, most
mornings begin with cereal—a product of American inventiveness. Most
grocery stores devote a whole aisle to this multifarious product, and it’s easy
to be overwhelmed by the sheer variety of flavors.
But in many other cultures, cereal is a complete anomaly. Whether eating
rice, fish, fermented beans or buttered tortillas, billions of people get along
just fine without a bowl of Corn Flakes.
Which begs an important question: Just how important to our health are
packaged cereals? Michael Pollan, writer and guru of responsible eating,
says, “You’re better off eating whole fresh foods rather than processed food
products.” And with the current trend toward eating whole unrefined grains
and fewer sugars, abstaining from corn syrup, selecting products with organic
ingredients and so forth, it’s amazing to see just how many cereals continue
to crowd the shelves while trumpeting health benefits that seem a little bit
soggy.
Can you reinvent breakfast cereal for our health-obsessed times?
“For while it used to be that food was all you 
could 
eat, today
there are thousands of other edible foodlike substances in the
supermarket. These novel products of food science often come
in packages elaborately festooned with health claims… [but]
if you’re concerned about your health, you should probably
avoid products that make health claims. Why? Because a
health claim on a food product is a strong indication it’s not
really food, and food is what you want to eat.”
—Michael Pollan, 
In Defense of Food: An Eater’s Manifesto!
CHALLENGE
Write one or two sentences describing a new type of
breakfast cereal, including a brand name, audience, and
type of store where this product will be sold. Your
product idea must have at least one unique dietary feature
that sets it apart from similar cereal products—e.g., organic
ingredients, sustain-ably grown fruits, whole grains. Then, spend
thirty minutes sketching at least two package design concepts for
this new product.
TAKE IT FURTHER
When you’ve settled on a packaging design direction that you like, sketch a
flattened view that shows the layout of every panel on your box, bag or
alternate cereal storage device.1,2 
I can’t shake my addiction to breakfast cereal as part of my morning meal, so
I’ve tackled this challenge a number of times to try to invent better alternatives to
ordinary cereals. So far, the best solution I’ve created was GranOlive, a fictional
brand of granola that’s made with healthy olive oil and all-natural ingredients
(modified from a great recipe that I’d seen in 
The New York Times
). One afternoon,
I tasked myself with creating packaging for GranOlive while I was cooking up a
batch. I sketched packaging directions and logos while prepping ingredients,
hopped onto the computer and rendered the package design while I was baking the
granola—stopping every ten minutes to hand-turn the cereal browning away in the
oven—and used the final product and leftover raw ingredients as part of my
photographic rendering of the package. The photograph is all that’s left of the
afternoon; the granola vanished forthwith.3 
Designer Britta Burrus created the cereal Edible, “a low-carb, low-fat, high in
fiber, certified organic, whole grain cereal—it is a tasty delight, morning, noon or
night! This cereal brand uses only recycled materials for their packaging and
searches out small, certified organic farms to provide their ingredients… The
package is an 8" (20 cm) cube box; design is printed using two [PMS] colors while
utilizing the box material as a color and texture. This design mix makes Edible
stand out from the crowd, is easily stackable and helps emphasize the importance
of recycling.”4 
In one of my classes, we had two minutes to come up with a cereal description,
then passed the description to the person across the table and sketched up two
directions. This one was for Core, a healthier revision of Apple Jacks: “Naturally
sweet, and won’t destroy the roof of your mouth. Available in groceries
everywhere.”!
26
Imaginary Film
60 minutes          
DVD cover, illustration, research
Action-packed typography. A bold ingénue enhanced by dramatic shadows
conjured up by Photoshop. An atmosphere conveyed through color that hits
you square in the gut.
Since you’re in the trade of making pictures, you’ll definitely enjoy this
challenge.
“As commercial art produced to sell another form of
commercial art, film posters can often be crass, repetitive,
disposable. They’re just adverts to convince you to sit in a
dark room for a couple of hours, right?… Well mostly,
yes.But, as with the films themselves, amidst all the dreck
you’ll find the occasional poster that goes well beyond what is
expected of it, a poster that deserves a life beyond the
multiplex wall.”
—Daniel Gray
CHALLENGE
Brainstorm a name and plot for a made-up film,
including its genre and the decade in which it was
produced. Using that description, create a DVD cover for
the imaginary film that aesthetically conveys all of those
details.
Will you be in the business of marketing a film noir pic made in
1980? A lost Woody Allen film from the ’70s? Or the fourteenth
sequel in a long-running line of horror classics? Seal in anenvelope a one-sentence plot for your film. Then, show your
DVD cover to some friends, ask them what they think it’s about
and open the envelope—just like the Oscars—to reveal if they’re
correct!
TAKE IT FURTHER
If you’re feeling especially bold, expand your DVD cover design into a full-
size movie poster. Or, if you’re stuck on your film’s plot, choose one of your
favorite films and reinterpret the original poster into a completely new
graphic idiom.
1 
David Everly says that his imaginary film 
Lily, Under the Sea 
is “an offbeat
comedy about Lily, a young twenty-three-year-old New York hairstylist struggling
to make it on her own in the big city.”2 
One of my classes agreed to design DVD covers for 
The Last Steppe
, a historical
drama from the 1970s. Jessica Thrasher created a cover with the following one-
sentence plotline attached: “Chuluuny Bat is one of the remaining shamans of the
Steppes people, struggling to survive and adapt to a changing Mongolia as Altan
Khan proceeds to convert Mongols to Lamaist Buddhism in the late sixteenth
century.”3 
My take on 
The Last Steppe 
was to create a DVD cover for a movie included
within the Criterion Collection. My plot was as follows: “A photographer whose
mother recently passed away takes a long journey across the steppes of Mongolia
—and through her art, rediscovers a part of her childhood that she had forgotten.”!
27
Creature Feature
60 minutes          
User interface design
There are an unlimited number of imaginary monsters that hold a cherished
place in the horror movie pantheon: Godzilla, the Thing, Mothra,
Frankenstein’s monster, Dracula, the Wolf Man. Birthed from the minds of
B-movie scriptwriters and then gobbled up like Milk Duds by an adoring
populace, these films capture the still-beating bloody hearts of millions
worldwide.
But if you’re a layperson when it comes to creature features, how can you get
up to speed with the latest and greatest gems of the genre and achieve fanboy
status? With this challenge, you’ll help create the next generation of horror
movie aficionados.
“Listen to them—children of the night!
What music they make!”
—Bela Lugosi in Dracula
CHALLENGE
Design the user interface for the homepage of a web site
that highlights the history of monster movies. Besides the
main site navigation, the homepage must feature the
following: video clips from the most popular monster
movies, the five most popular movies as noted by people that
visit the site and a search function so you can explore the entire
range of movies available. Be sure to sketch out a tight
wireframe before you hit the computer.While you’re chewing on this challenge, think about the
following: How would you tag and sort the movies within the
web site? How do people rate the movies? What kind of
community would you want to build around these movies? What
kind of dialogue would you foster on the web site? How could
you monetize this web site so you can make it self-sustaining?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design an interactive experience as part of your web site’s homepage that lets
you choose a famous movie monster and have it destroy various cities around
the world.
1,2,3,4,5,6 
Designer and illustrator Nicholas Nawroth took the following approach
in tackling this challenge: “I started out by doing some research on monster
movies. I focused on classic monster movies because I love the posters from that
era. From the beginning, I knew that I would base this project on those old movie
posters. Alas, the more I tried to sketch out this project, the more it seemed like the
ideas I was coming up weren’t quite right.”7,8,9 
Nawroth continues, “The other issue was, what kinds of pages would the site
have? I kept working on this project and putting it aside and finally had a
breakthrough while sketching out my versions of the classic movie monsters:
Frankenstein’s monster, Dracula and the Mummy. After seeing these rough
images, I realized my solution: The homepage would have a ‘featured creature’
and would be the most prominent image… On the real site, guest artists could
render their favorite creatures in their own unique way.
“As for what pages the site would have, after much thought I narrowed them down to: Monster
Media (artwork and videos of classic movies with ratings), Creature Guide (illustrated guide to
every classic monster!), Forums and My Creature Lab (build your own creatures and save yourfavorite clips and artwork).”28
Ten-Second Film Festival
90 minutes          
User interface design, information architecture
Online video is a deadly, addictive opiate for the design mind. It’s also quite
distracting. While I was attempting to write this paragraph, I was also
reprioritizing my Netflix queue. My wife forwarded me some required
viewing: two baby-elephant videos on YouTube. And later, I might get my
Joss Whedon fix on Hulu…
Other than hosting great content, the web sites that I noted above are
regularly optimized by designers for maximum throughput and ease of use.
Designers continually work to reduce the amount of effort that users expend
in accessing video content. Every detail of their interfaces has been
methodically planned.
With the following challenge, discover what it’s like to spend a day in the
shoes of a user experience designer.
“I really have a very short attention span. I
watch TV and think that commercials
shouldn’t be longer than ten seconds at the
most.”
—Barbara Kruger
CHALLENGE
A client has approached you with an idea perfect for people with
short attention spans: an online competition for the best ten-
second videos created by independent filmmakers. Users can!
come to the web site and easily view, sort, select and vote
(thumbs up or down) on any number of these short films.
Create a user interface for the web site that fulfills this
basic functionality, while also working to reduce the
number of clicks required to view each brief film.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Would this same interface work if you made each movie only five seconds
long? Two seconds? What 
would you need to change?
1,2,3 
In graphic designer Grace Soto’s initial design explorations, she wanted an
energetic feel “appropriate to a web site showing motion pictures in very short
bursts. The structure should be clean, clear and easy to navigate… [and]
incorporate some sort of nod to old film reels.” Because of the brevity of each
movie, the web site would auto-play and scroll—a well-established design pattern
that is often seen on Internet radio stations.
4 
In my approach to this challenge, I wanted to take a common design pattern that
you’d usually see on catalog web sites, only flattened onto one page. Upon loading
the site for the 240 Frames Tiny Film Festival, the user would be presented with a
gridded series of thumbnails. And when they clicked on any film thumbnail, the
browser would swap in a video player that would stream and play the selected film
then and there. You could then vote on the video, share it with a friend or move off
that area to sample another video. A tag-based navigation would allow the user to
search for movies of interest or click on exposed popular tags associated with
topics of interest across the web site.!
29
I’ve Got a Golden Ticket
90 minutes          
Identity development, packaging, retail store
experiences
When you step into a well-designed store where every element is arranged
perfectly, it can feel like your eyes are dancing along to a bouncy jazz tune.
You can find balance, rhythm and variety in spades. When designing for
these types of retail experiences, setting the right pace for a customer is
contingent on organizing and presenting a wide range of products coherently.
For this challenge, however, you’ll be given a more limited palette.
“Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.”
—Leonardo da Vinci
CHALLENGE
Design a store experience for a chocolatier that sells only
three types of chocolate: dark, milk and white. As part of
your process, make recommendations regarding the
naming and packaging of your product within the store,
as well as for how you’ll set up the space to convey an overall
aesthetic.
Can you take a store that only has three products and make it
come alive?
TAKE IT FURTHER
When you’ve completed your overall store concept, construct a physicalprototype of your chocolate packaging system. What materials should you
select to keep your chocolate fresh?
1,2,3,4 
Jerry Lofquist, a designer in Los Angeles, decided to solve this challenge
by creating a “legacy brand” that feels like it’s been around for the past fifty years.
Cool Chocolate’s tagline sums it all up nicely: “Store in a cool, fertile place: 1950s
California.”
5,6 
Mark Notermann created a logo for a store concept called Xoco, where
chocolate alchemists (appropriately attired in lab coats) serve three types of
chocolate from test tubes.
7 
With this smart and sexy design, Donnie Dinch took the idea of three chocolate
types and turned it into a brand called ChocoTrois. The chocolate bars for this
brand would be packaged to look like double, queen and king-size beds—complete
with rumpled sheets.30
Flapping in the Wind
60 minutes          
Guerilla advertising
What a sight to behold: As far as the eye can see, the sidewalk is littered with
two-foot-tall ice cubes. A dog is trying to gain some sustenance by licking
one of them. People are snapping pictures left and right. The whole plaza is
starting to look like a circus. Then, as you walk closer, the impetus behind the
stunt becomes as clear as water. They’re trying to sell you iced coffee.
The furthest frontier of advertising is still what’s known as the “guerilla
campaign,” where designers and writers create advertising concepts that exist
in the physical world instead of in a television, on a laptop or in a magazine.
Drawing from both the world of conceptual art and the invasive nature of a
salesperson’s patter, a well-executed guerilla stunt can burn an idea into a
person’s brain unlike any other advertising activity. And if filmed and
disseminated into the working world, these stunts often become associated
with the V-word—viral—thereby attaining millions of views on YouTube
and the status of Holy Grail within the industry.
Take part in the following challenge and see if you can design an
advertisement whose real-world manifestation is street theater.
“As in all areas of advertising, 
substance 
is
more important than 
form.
”
—David Ogilvy, 
Confessions of an Advertising Man
CHALLENGE
Come up with a guerilla advertising campaign urging people to
start drying their clothes outdoors whenever possible to save!
energy. The final deliverable would show what the tactic would
look like in the real world, along with a description of
how the experience would unfold.
While it would be nice if this were simply a public
service announcement, the campaign is sponsored by a
large Swedish home furnishings store to sell their new
line of drying racks and clotheslines.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Write a blog post in the voice of someone happening upon your guerilla
advertisement. Describe how she experiences the event from her perspective.
Then, after writing the post, see if there are any ways that you could improve
upon your original idea.
1,2,3 
In a thirty-minute class exercise, Michelle Cormack and Katherine Widdows
brainstormed the following guerilla campaign for Kömp Air Dried.
As part of the promotion, giant laundry lines would be hung from downtown buildings and
strung with a wide variety of clothing. Below the laundry, a gang of promoters dressed in T-
shirts and boxer shorts would be out on the streets, handing out cards asking pedestrians to
check out Kömp’s “Kant” drying racks.!
31
Going to Seed
90 minutes          
User interface design, grid systems
I am a big proponent of eating local whenever possible. But when it comes to
growing my own food locally, it would be fair to say that I have a brown
thumb.
My backyard is a rock garden with evergreen shrubs. My balcony suffers
from chill and rain at least ten months out of the year. During the other two,
my poor plants take direct sun and high temperatures. Every crop I’ve
attempted has perished, from simple basil and cilantro all the way to
cucumbers and green peppers. Clearly, I need help from a professional or
three. But I don’t even know where to start… In this challenge, create a
community for those who lack the knowledge necessary to grow food in even
the grittiest cities.
“No two gardens are the same. No two
days are the same in one garden.”
—Hugh Johnson
CHALLENGE
Create an online magazine in which failed city gardeners
can receive the wisdom of top gardeners regarding urban
horticulture and food preparation. Come up with a name
for the magazine, design the masthead for its web site,
and then set up an intelligent grid for the web site that will
accommodate many different shapes and sizes of articles,
recipes, reminiscences, photo essays and so forth.One additional constraint: There must be a place independent of
the magazine’s regular content on each page that highlights a
randomly selected plant—shown in seed form—to teach readers
about the different kinds of plants they can grow in an urban
environment.
TAKE IT FURTHER
After fully considering the details of the online experience, how would you
translate your design into a print publication?
1,2 
Michelle Cormack’s 
CityCooks.com
 is organized by type of plant that you can
grow in an urban setting: vegetable, fruit, herb or flower. In the homepage header,
the plants shown would grow out of their pots and wind their way through the
interface upon page load.3 
“Botanicity: Uniting city and country, so we can have it all.” The homepage of
Katharine Widdow’s 
Botanicity.com
 prominently displays the six most recent
articles, the required seed packet and also contains features centered around a city
of the month. I’d love to see what culinary bounty is cultivated by urban gardeners
in Paris…32
Sell Me a Bridge
60 minutes          
Online advertising
Every state and province has its own quirky tourist destination that draws
people from all over the world.
For example: Have you visited the Corn Palace? While driving through
Mitchell, South Dakota, I was stunned into awed silence when I passed this
monument. Used as a convention center, sports facility and paean to the
fertility of South Dakota soil, the most unique features of the building were
the intricate murals emblazoned across every wall—constructed entirely out
of corn.
There’s no way I would have flown to visit the Corn Palace from my home in
Seattle if I’d seen advertisements regarding its wonders. It was sheer
happenstance that our paths had crossed. How would a designer even begin to
advertise visiting such quirky destinations, located in out-of-the-way towns?
With this challenge, you’ll explore the various ways you can explain the
virtues of traveling to one of these rare, yet rewarding locales.
“Novelty has charms that our minds can
hardly withstand.”
—William Makepeace Thackeray
CHALLENGE
Pick one of the following destinations: the Bonneville Salt Flats
in Utah; the city of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Los Angeles
County Department of Coroner; or the Corn Palace. In sixty
minutes, come up with a compelling reason for people to visit!
your selected destination, then execute on your idea
through online banner ad storyboards that artfully tell
your story.
TAKE IT FURTHER
If you’re looking for an extra challenge, see if you can create a rich media ad
or expanding banner that will immerse the user in exploring the actual place
you’ve selected.
1 
In a thirty-minute brainstorm with Michelle Cormack, Jake Rae sketched out a
rough storyboard for this banner advertisement for the Bonneville Salt Flats—
home to everything from popular music videos to racecar drivers seeking a new
land-speed record. Jake focused on the shimmering, almost alien landscape of theFlats to show that (almost) anything is possible on a visit there.
2 
Starting with only a few frames of a brief and simple story usually works best in
the medium of online advertising—and keeping your sketches intentionally crude
at first won’t get in the way of getting an idea on paper. It’s what you do when you
start making the idea—especially when working with technologies such as Flash—
that cause all the heavy lifting. You’ll want to think everything through on paper or
a rough computer story-board before moving to animation, or the cost in time and
effort to make changes will be quite painful.!
33
Let’s Take a Nap
30 minutes          
Posters
I’m sure you’ve heard the following adage: “Want it fast, good or cheap?
Choose two out of three.” The same rules don’t apply to eating, sleeping and
breathing. If you shortchange your nightly sleep—which is where our
subconscious recovers from the day’s travails—there’s hell to pay in your
design work.
When I sit down in my studio, I draw on my stores of experience in both my
conscious and unconscious mind. If a design problem doesn’t want to be
solved, I often step away from my desk and take a stroll. By freeing up my
logical mind, I create space for my subconscious to bubble up great ideas in
the margins. And every night, sleep is the most productive time that the mind
processes conscious experience. I can’t count how many times an insoluble
problem yielded an effortless result with a modest dab of shut-eye.
So, as a paean to this unsung muse of the working designer, take on the
following sleep-inspired challenge.
“To achieve the impossible dream, try
going to sleep.”
—Joan Klempner
CHALLENGE
Create a poster with the slogan: “Sleep: It’s What You
Need.” In your execution, use an illustration style that is
the antithesis of your usual artistic sensibility—i.e., if
you gravitate toward simple, sans-serif typefaces, chooserough hand-drawn scribbles, and so forth.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Print out your poster at full size, put it up in the real world, then observe how
people react to it as they walk past. Visually document their experience with
a still camera or a video camera.
1,2,3 
Just how many sheep have jumped over that fence? Cody Moore of Waking
Illustration depicts what happens when you lose count and finally coast off to
sleep. While solving this problem, she started with a series of ideas in sketch form,
but quickly narrowed her focus to create this lovely hand-drawn execution.4,5 
Katharine Widdows spotted a book pile at her local bookstore that looked
comfortable enough to fall asleep on. This became the foundation of her design—and could easily lead to posters illustrating a range of places where tired souls fall
asleep in public, such as in the produce aisle at the grocery store.MATERIALITY
Can you feel it? You’ve got a face for type. Don’t
forget the postage. Tear up that poster design. Turn
a logo into a magic trick. Make plaid fashionable
again. With this branch from the backyard, I thee
wed. Watch your brochure unfold, and unfold, and
unfold. Say this three times fast: sticky-note zoo
web site redesign. If you save up two thousand
plastic bottles, you get a free couch. Custom-
tailored stationery. Paper-bag puppets make great
TV mascots.
34 
Type Face
35 
Lick It Good
36 
Never Tear Us Apart
37 
Trompe L’Oh Wow
38 
I Heart Plaid Candles
39 
Outdoor Wedding
40 
Crane Promotion
41 
Just My Prototype
42 
Reduce, Reuse, Redecorate
43 
Printed and Sewn
44 
Record Store Puppet Theater34
Type Face
90 minutes          
Illustration, posters, typography
Are those people on television really who they say they are? All too often, we
reduce celebrities and politicians to sound bites, ingraining brief snatches
from song lyrics, bold public speeches and tabloid headlines into the world’s
daily discourse.
From a journalist’s point of view, selecting a memorable quote is a necessary
activity that helps to tell a more powerful story. In the eyes of a designer, a
well-known sound bite or quotation is charged with meaning in a different
way. Well-known words exude a personality that pervades our public
consciousness, suggesting both the speaker and the subject more so than any
Twitter feed.
With this in mind, prepare to take on the following challenge about
typecasting.
“I might repeat to myself, slowly and
soothingly, a list of quotations beautiful
from minds profound—if I can remember
any of the damn things.”
—Dorothy Parker
CHALLENGE
Find a personage of public renown whom you admire. Then,
using hand-drawn or computer-set type, construct an illustration
of this person’s face using only text from words that he or she!
has spoken in public. See how you can best convey the spirit of
the speaker through your sensitivity with type.
TAKE IT FURTHER
If you want an even greater challenge, consider illustrating the
faces of a whole band using their lyrics, conveying actors in a scene from a
famous movie, or recreating a historic event with multiple people.
1 
Mark Notermann hand-sketched his type face from quotes by President Barack
Obama.2 
Jake Rae built his type face from a famous quote by Bill Cosby: “In order to
succeed, your desire for success should be greater than your fear of failure.”3 
From free-form and flowing script, Jessica Thrasher constructed with type a
classic portrait of Albert Einstein during one of his sillier moments.!
35
Lick It Good
90 minutes          
Illustration, paper engineering
Waiting in line at the post office, I couldn’t help but notice the vast intricacy
inherent in a bold display of stamps. From the art of Disney to a new series
meant to look like vintage movie posters, the amount of detail finessed into
each illustration was remarkable.
As designers, we’re more used to working with large-scale press sheets or
low-fidelity pixels on a screen than a few centimeters of glue-smeared paper.
The necessary attention to small-scale detail is what makes this next
challenge so difficult.
“Sometimes the simplest solutions are literally just staring
you in the face. The issue of designing stamps is really that
you gaze at designs on your screen, all the time forgetting
quite how small they end up. When designing stamps you
spend most of your time taking things out, not putting them
in.”
—Michael Johnson
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked by your country’s post office to
design a series of six commemorative postage stamps
that celebrate energy conservation. For your stamp
designs, choose an illustration style from one of the
following types:
Collage: 
All elements cobbled together from found images and
text.Stippled: 
Illustrations comprised entirely of pinpoint dots that
form specific shapes.
Gouache or pastel: 
Work with an artistic medium that relies on
softness of line for its effect.
Photo-realistic: 
Use photography and live digital type as the
foundation of your design.
Folk art: 
The design is comprised of colored and patterned paper
shaped into form and type.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Envision and design a commemorative booklet that would enclose your
stamps. Look to stamp sheets online, a stamp collecting shop or your local
post office for further inspiration.
1 
Michelle Cormack worked from the “stippled” illustration style, creating six
Canadian stamps whose iconography was evoked by colored dots on a white
background.2 
With “collage” as his medium, Jake Rae designed a set of iconic stamps that
mixes photography, illustration and type in playful ways.
3 
Katharine Widdows was assigned “folk art” as her illustration style for this
exercise. Her stamp designs display a playful whimsy that holds up well when
viewed at a tiny size.36
Never Tear Us Apart
60 minutes          
Posters
There’s definitely a specific style that accompanies music poster design:
sleek Illustrator art touched up with a bit of grit, merged with hand-drawn
type that precisely fits into well-defined shapes. Then, when the posters are
screen-printed, the designer gets inventive regarding what order the inks hit
the paper to create unique interactions between colors. Stick twenty of those
creations up at local record stores, give a few to the band and put the rest
online for your fans to buy at $20.99 (plus shipping and handling).
Now, don’t get me wrong. I love this style of poster design, and especially
the work of the Small Stakes and Patent Pending Industries. But I also like to
see how designers can think outside the trappings of this most artistic
medium.
So, for the following music poster challenge, let’s see how you can tear
things up. Literally.
“By all means break the rules, and break
them beautifully, deliberately and well.
That is one of the ends for which they
exist.”
—Robert Bringhurst
CHALLENGE
Create a poster for a rock concert in your neighborhood. Instead
of planning and executing your design via pencil or computer,
make the poster completely out of torn things: pieces of paper,!
solid objects, found elements and collage.
Once you’ve solidified your layout, photograph or scan
the resulting poster, bring it into a photo-editing program
and begin to play with how it will be reproduced to
advertise the upcoming gig.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Sketch out how the artistic motifs used in your poster could be used to
decorate the stage at the show.
1,2,3,4,5,6 
“Twistie Ties make nice type!” Designer Jarred Elrod created thisposter for a compelling Tennessee-based band called Tenderhooks. After mocking
up the design as a collage with various torn elements assembled from elements
he’d stored up in his home, he scanned the appropriate graphic elements into his
computer piece by piece and converted it into printable four-color art.37
Trompe L’Oh Wow
90 minutes          
Identity development
I think every child goes through a phase where he’s obsessed with magic.
From the large-scale illusions of David Copperfield all the way down to the
local magic-shop owner palming coins before a crowd of two adoring twelve-
year-olds, the practice of magic is a wide-eyed delight for millions—and an
exclusive club for those who choose to explore its secrets.
Designers can be magicians as well. The FedEx logo immediately comes to
mind, with its witty placement of an arrow within the mark. With just a
pencil and paper, we can conjure up similarly surprising illusions that bend
our perceptions of space and time. But no matter what methods you choose to
employ, your visual trickery must be simple enough to disguise with a little
sleight of hand—and smart enough to metaphorically act as a representative
of the whole. After all, the most effective illusions are those whose
expressions vanish softly into the fabric of a well-formed idea.
In this challenge, you’ll get a chance to practice your craft on the one
audience that will most appreciate your efforts.
“What the eyes see and the ears hear, the
mind believes.”
—Harry Houdini
CHALLENGE
Create a logo for the Global Magic Society, a national invitation-
only group of upper-echelon magicians. As part of your design
exercise, you must incorporate an optical illusion into your mark.!
TAKE IT FURTHER
Create a brand kit that explains the new identity to Global
Magic Society members. But when opening the kit, the logo
must be revealed in a manner that’s a trick 
in and of itself.
1,2,3 
The following logo magic is courtesy of Dave Fletcher, creative director at
theMechanism in New York City. “I’m a fan of presenting multiple uses of a logo
when appropriate… The idea is to use the word ‘global’ along with traditional
magician props—in this case, the hat, the rabbit and the dove. Instead of a
magician pulling the rabbit out of the hat, the shapes—the rabbit being pulled out
of the hat by the dove—all nicely fit into continental shapes to create a bit of an
optical illusion or trickery for someone who looks closer.”
For the stationery package, Dave’s idea was “to print on slightly translucent paper. The use of
the paper for the envelope, letterhead and business card serves several purposes… When
folded, the back of the letterhead displays the logo in the center—the translucency of the
envelope allows the logo to show through slightly, creating a really nice watermarking effect.
There are three possible uses of the logo, all achieving the same effect.”4 
In Dave’s initial explorations, he played with “the idea of bitmapping a familiar
magician prop until it was unrecognizable—forcing the audience to squint to see
what it is. (Much as they might do while watching a magician and trying to figure
out the trick.)”5 
Lawrence Miller, an editor and designer at Pennsylvania State University,
conjured up this logo that is equal parts Bauhaus and typographic trickery.38
I Heart Plaid Candles
120 minutes          
Packaging, identity development
Designers use a wide variety of patterns in their work to create variety,
dimension and feeling in what could otherwise be a flat, empty execution.
And there’s no pattern that’s more ubiquitous than plaid.
Start with the illustrious tartan. Over the past few hundred years, these kilts
woven in bold plaid patterns transitioned from regional style to clan identifier
to a design pattern that says Scotland—no matter whether it’s emblazoned
across a beach blanket, a pair of sunglasses or the wall of your hotel room.
Then there’s madras plaid. Argyle. There’s quite a list of fabric styles derived
from this funky weave of varicolored threads.
As designers, knowing what pattern to choose as part of your design—and
what feeling that pattern conveys, from luxury product to Blue Light Special
—only comes with practice. Use the following challenge to exercise your
pattern-selection skills.
“Creativity involves breaking out of
established patterns in order to look at
things in a different way.”
—Edward de Bono
CHALLENGE
Create the name, identity and overall packaging concept for a
new luxury brand of soy-based candles whose overriding
graphical motif is the use of bold plaid patterns. As part of your
explorations, you’ll need to home in on what attributes of color,!
texture, and form best convey your product’s sensibility.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design an advertisement that announces the release of your
new line of candles. Or, if you’re looking for an even bigger
challenge, determine how you could extend your line of candles to include
paisley patterns as well.
1,2 
Jessica Thrasher created this sleek, stylized interpretation of the argyle plaid
pattern for her line of soy candles. Each of them comes in a metal tin that can be
refilled with new candles after the previous one has been depleted.3 
Jake Rae’s candle brand, Humdinger Candle Co., has a light Christmas-like feel
that says, “Great holiday gift.”!
39
Outdoor Wedding
60 minutes          
Collateral, paper engineering
Whether we’re using the golden mean as the basis of a layout, or employing
natural-world motifs and patterns as textures throughout a design, we spend a
great deal of time within the computer finessing lines and shapes into
pleasing organic forms. Much as we choose to bring plants into the grittiest
urban locales to soften an otherwise harsh man-made environment, we make
design choices that are reflections of our natural world. And right outside our
window, we’re surrounded by an infinite variety of those same organic forms,
providing endless inspiration.
In this challenge, you’ll be required to step away from your computer and
physically bring the untamed world into your design work.
“Shall I not have intelligence with the
earth? Am I not partly leaves and vegetable
mould myself?”
—Henry David Thoreau
CHALLENGE
Go out into your yard or a local park and collect twigs,
leaves and bark that suggest design possibilities. (From
the ground, not from living trees—your neighbors may
not like you plucking their petunias.) Then, once you’re
back in your studio, use the leaves and twigs you found to craft a
beautiful handmade wedding invitation concept for the future
Marty and Laura Longerman. You can choose the place and time.One critical factor in your design: Your concept for the card,
when printed, must accommodate a different piece of unique
plant matter for each guest.
TAKE IT FURTHER
How could you effectively produce 250 of these cards? What resources
would be required to complete the cards in twelve hours? In eight hours?
What would you need to rethink about your card design in order to make it
happen?
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 
A brief walk outside yielded more than enough material necessary
for this gorgeous wedding invitation by Cody Moore of the Missouri-based studio
Waking Illustration. The intelligent use of white space in her design can
accommodate a wide variety of different flower and leaf arrangements… althoughthe level of time investment required for sewing the plant matter into place on an
invitation-by-invitation basis would require many weeks of conscientious effort to
produce a few dozen.!
40
Crane Promotion
90 minutes          
 Collateral, paper engineering
The flat sheet of blank paper beckons to you, full of creative possibilities. In
deft hands, will it become a crane, a fox, a boat or a box?
Those who have mastered print design know that when they approach the
creation of a collateral piece, they should think not only about what will be
printed on the page, but also how the reader’s experience of the content will
unfold over time. In a designer’s hands, the fully printed page is yet another
element that can be manipulated for artistic effect.
With this challenge, be ready to explore the myriad ways that a sheet of paper
can reveal a compelling message.
“I think I did pretty well, considering I
started out with nothing but a bunch of
blank paper.”
—Steve Martin
CHALLENGE
You’ve been tasked by the International Origami Society
to create a brochure promoting the value of membership
in their organization. Through illustration, type, color use
and your paper engineering skills, tell a story about the
value of origami as an international pastime.
In order to demonstrate the joys of recreational paper folding, the
brochure must utilize at least seven unique folds in itsconstruction.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design two brochures for an upcoming class taught by visiting origami
masters. They must interlock in a visually pleasing fashion as part of a table
display at your local 
Origami Center.
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 
“Think… an entire universe created with only paper and
nimble fingers!” reads the copy in designer Melanie Gilliam’s solution for this
challenge. And the reader of this brochure can use his nimble fingers to transform
her brochure into either a fox or a crow. “I was lucky to find that Aesop wrote a
fable about a fox and crow and added it to the brochure. Of course my brain lit up
like a roman candle and I started to think of all kinds of other possibilities for
subsequent brochures…”41
Just My Prototype
120 minutes          
User interface design
I adore my local zoo. Their exhibits are designed as free-ranging spaces for
animals from different habitats to commingle. When taking friends or
children there, it feels more like a safari through the savannah than a visit to
an animal preserve.
And speaking of safaris—try to visit their web site. Talk about a brutal
excursion that bears no resemblance to your real-world zoo visit. Their
homepage is crammed full of incongruent links. There’s no global search, no
exposed navigation on secondary pages, no grid or coherent structure
underlying the information design. It makes you want to take out your
machete and hack away the interface until some semblance of order emerges.
In the following challenge, you’ll get to strap on your pith helmet and embark
on a roaring-good web site redesign.
“Web design is not book design, it is not poster design, it is
not illustration, and the highest achievements of those
disciplines are not what web design aims for. Web design is
the creation of digital environments that facilitate and
encourage human activity; reflect or adapt to individual
voices and content; and change gracefully over time while
always retaining their identity.”
—Khoi Vinh
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked to create an improved user interface for your
local zoo’s web site. Begin your journey by sketching out ways!
that you can improve the navigation, the overall page grid, the
visual presentation and arrangement of content, the
possible addition of social networking features and so
forth.
But before you hop onto the computer and start pushing
pixels, create a paper prototype of your interface using
pieces of paper, scissors, glue and a marker. Then put your ideas
in front of another person and have him pretend to use your
design, describing what he’d expect to see as he “clicks” on the
various buttons and other links.
Based on his input, revise your design concept as necessary—
then execute in the computer, if you wish.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Think through the in-depth details associated with any interaction: rollovers
for buttons and navigation, tool tips, opening and closing drawers or
accordion menus, and any areas that may have enhanced interactivity through
use of existing web technologies.
1,2,3 
In a class exercise, Mark Notermann was given an old screen design (1) for
the Woodland Park Zoo in Seattle. Mark took this design and rethought its overall
information architecture and user interface through the construction of a simple
paper prototype (2). He then used this paper wireframe as the foundation for a
clean, sophisticated redesign of their entire web site (3). “To make a more
engaging online experience for visitors to the zoo’s web site, video was put on the
homepage. A news feed and blog feeds are also available with limited previewing
via accordion menus. It also features a cleaner interface with a friendlier color
scheme, and all the necessary information is easily accessible from an intuitive
two-layered menu.”42
Reduce, Reuse, Redecorate
120 minutes          
Product design, paper engineering, physical
prototyping
My vision of future fashion, when it comes to home furnishings, is the
concept of reuse.
We can no longer choose to make products out of plastic and expect them to
magically vanish off the face of the planet when they reach the ends of their
use. We need to understand how to reuse the materials surrounding us, not
just recycle used materials into the same forms until they entirely degrade.
Otherwise, we’ll never be able to reduce the number of products that already
choke our landfills and overtake the Pacific Ocean.
I’m all for the craft revolution brought upon us by the 
ReadyMade 
magazines
of the world—and we have the capacity as designers to imagine truly inspired
designs that, if primed for mass production, take care of our trash instead of
creating more of it.
With this challenge, you’ll get a chance to design furniture that does just that.
“Recognizing the need is the primary
condition for design.”
—Charles Eames
CHALLENGE
Take a recyclable object that we purchase regularly when going
about our everyday lives—bottles, cans, cutlery, plates, cups,
magazines, whatever works—and design a piece of furniture that
uses it in multiples.!
As part of your planning process, consider if your
furniture would require detailed instructions for
construction or would be delivered in an entirely
constructed state.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Show how your creation would be featured on a web site like Etsy, including
descriptive copy and price.
1 
One of the big inspirations for this challenge was the ReVision project from
Artists for Humanity, a Boston nonprofit that provides urban youth with the keys to
self-sufficiency through paid employment in the arts. The ReVision tables are
recreated from reclaimed junk mail and magazines. Once the pieces are assembled,
the surfaces are finished with a no-VOC eco-friendly resin, which is water resistant
and easy to clean with eco-friendly products.2,3,4 
Another inspiration for this challenge was the “Meltdown” series by Tom
Price, a furniture and product designer established in London. “These chairs arepart of a series commissioned by Arts Co. for the exhibition ‘From Now to
Eternity,’ and are made exclusively from discarded polyester fleece clothing. The
seat area is created by placing layers of clothing onto a hot steel seat-shaped
former. As it heats, the fabric begins to melt, exposing and integrating colors and
patterns of the various layers. When cooled, the surface is transformed into a rigid,
shiny, colorful display.”!
43
Printed and Sewn
90 minutes          
Identity development, paper engineering
How many Pantone colors did you use on that business card? Was it
embossed? Did you apply a foil stamp or die-cut the corners? When creating
an identity system, we often focus on the most effective and efficient ways to
mechanically reproduce our designs, debating the merits of printing on a
Heidelberg press versus a Komori press, rather than pushing ourselves into
more intimate methods of production.
For this challenge, can you think outside the printing press and grow
comfortable designing with a needle and thread?
“Fashion is not something that exists in
dresses only. Fashion is in the sky, in the
street, fashion has to do with ideas, the way
we live, what is happening.”
—Coco Chanel
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked by a local fashion designer to create
her stationery system. This designer specializes in
stitching her own patterns over vintage clothes found at
estate sales. In your stationery materials, you must
incorporate hand- or machine-stitched thread.
It may be time-intensive to produce your idea, so you might need
to consider ways in which you could manufacture your sewndesigns in a cost- and time-effective manner.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Could you extend your sewn motifs into other branded elements, such as
store signage, collateral or a web site?
1,2 
Say hello to Marguerite Choufleur, sole proprietor of Deco-Rational Apparel
Design. This card design is the brainchild of creative director Carrie Byrne, whofelt a great way to solve this challenge would be to have her Punxsutawney,
Pennsylvania-based designer sew snaps into the card itself.
3 
One of the inspirations for this exercise came from this business card by apparel
and graphic designer Ethan Martin. As part of his card design, Ethan hand-painted
the cards with watercolor, then sewed his contact information onto the card with
red thread.!
44
Record Store Puppet Theater
60 minutes          
Identity development, retail store experiences,
hand animation
Did you see the commercial where the cars flew through the air, transformed
into robot animals and blew up London?
Watching television nowadays, commercials feel like big Hollywood
productions pumped full of slick CG effects—and entirely lacking in the
human touch. Wouldn’t it be nice for a client to come along and solicit a
television ad that depended on scissors and glue instead of bright-smiling
actors and digital manipulation?
In the following challenge, you’ll shoot your own TV spot—but instead of
fancy post-production and famous actors, the stars of your commercial will
be puppets.
“There’s just something visceral about moving a puppet
frame by frame. There’s a magical quality about it. Maybe
you can get smoother animation with computers, but there’s a
dimension and emotional quality to this kind of animation…”
—Tim Burton
CHALLENGE
Come up with the name and logo for a “record store of
the future” where people can purchase physical CDs and
DVDs, then have digital files of the songs and movies
wirelessly auto-downloaded to their mobile devices. This
logo and name will be used in the end-frame of your commercial.
Then, sketch up storyboards and a script for a thirty-secondtelevision spot advertising the grand opening of your store. The
entire ad concept must be shot in one take, and your storyboards
must incorporate handmade puppets and materials.
When your ad concept comes together on paper, use a video-
recording device such as a digital camera, video camera, Flip
Mino, camera phone, etc., to create your ad. Every second of
your spot must be caught on film—no effects or editing in post!
TAKE IT FURTHER
Your first ad was such a hit that your client wants to bring your puppet
characters onto their record store’s web site. Record a set of short videos that
can be used to highlight special offers.1 
For this challenge, Seattle-based designer Scott Scheff and I created a thirty-
second commercial within a thirty-minute time frame on a Flip Mino camcorder. In
the commercial, our puppet hero is listening to the Pixies’s “Wave of Mutilation”
while huffing Elmer’s (nontoxic) glue. Inevitably, he gets so excited that he starts
eating the stuff. The camera pans away to the end card, thereby saving us from the
aftermath of the puppet’s drug binge. Designer Mark Notermann devised in ten
minutes the name and logo for our record store: Un1fi.INSTRUCTION
Time to follow directions. Prepare your robot army for
world domination. Let someone make that poster for
you. Making pasta, then telling the tale. Thanks, I’ll
check out my own groceries. Sustainability at play.
45 
Robot Army Mail-Order Kit
46 
Poster by Numbers
47 
Seeing What Sticks
48 
Check Me Out
49 
The Game of Sustainability!
45
Robot Army Mail-Order Kit
60 minutes          
 Information design, paper engineering
In the back of a comic book, tiny black-and-white ads beckon to you with
their mysterious treasures. Will you send away for a model rocket that you
can launch in your backyard? Perhaps you could use a decoder ring to help
you trade messages with your best friend in math class. Or would you like a
set of plans for constructing your very own robot? Just send us $8.95 plus
$4.95 shipping and handling.
Since you’re a designer, you don’t need to buy the plans for making a robot.
You can design one on your own. And in the process, you can glean some
insight into the realm of paper engineering—where you must not only
become adept at learning how to shape flat substrates into a variety of forms,
but also be able to externalize your design vision into a tangible list of steps
that clearly conveys how to bring your idea to life.
“If popular culture has taught us anything,
it is that someday mankind must face and
destroy the growing robot menace.”
—Daniel H. Wilson, 
How to Survive a Robot Uprising
CHALLENGE
Draw up easy-to-follow plans to construct a robot of your
own design out of various household materials: paper,
pipe cleaners, buttons, cardboard tubes, etc. Give the
plans and materials to a friend, then watch and take notes
as she builds what you’ve designed. The robot must be able to bebuilt in ten minutes or less.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Create a more elaborate, collectible robot that can be constructed,
personalized and decorated by its owner. Then take a series of photographs
showing your robot terrorizing the populace.
1,2,3,4,5 
For this challenge, designer Grace Cheong wanted to make sure her final
robot design (1) was possible to build in five minutes flat. She handed out the
materials and the instructions (5) to assemble her robot to a series of test subjects
(4), and from their response she reduced the number of steps necessary to createher robot and meet her time constraint.46
Poster by Numbers
60 minutes          
Posters
“The layout doesn’t feel cohesive yet.” “Are you sure a green-to-white
gradient is the right treatment for that background?” “I thought the client
wanted seven-year-old children’s photos on the cover.” “The headline isn’t
kerned.” “Have you tried a serif typeface for the body copy?” “After you’ve
addressed these changes, can I see the revised comps before the end of
today?”
If you’ve ever worked in a design studio or creative agency, you’ve probably
had an art director boss you around. This isn’t a bad thing. Art directors help
guide designers toward stronger, on-brief creative solutions. We’re often too
close to the work to see what they see. And it takes years of concentrated
design effort to gain the vocabulary necessary to help direct projects well.
Want to feel what it’s like to be an art director? Try the following challenge
to find out.
“Education is the period during which you
are being instructed by somebody you do
not know, about something you do not want
to know.”
—G.K. Chesterton
CHALLENGE
Select an AIDS prevention charity that you’d like to support.
Write a detailed list of instructions—along with a creative brief,!
if you so desire—for creating a poster that will urge onlookers to
donate money to said charity. Then provide your
instructions to a non-designer and see what he creates.
You may not pre-design or render any portion of the
poster as a reference aid in the instructions.
The results you receive from this exercise will entirely
depend on the level of specificity you provide. You can
experiment by leaving key details open-ended, such as
photography, illustration, typography and content, and see what
happens.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Provide creative feedback to your designer after he has provided you with his
first round of comps and guide him through a round of design revisions.
1
Instructions
This assignment is to create a poster soliciting support for AIDS prevention.
1. Find an image in print of a microphone. The classic, round-ended,
phallic microphone most commonly used. The best place I can suggest to
find this would be Guitar Center—they have catalogues you could take.
Radio Shack might also have something like this. You could also directly
photocopy a real one if you have one handy. I have one you could use.
2. Get a banana. Remove any stickers that are on it. Peel it halfway and eat
the exposed half of the fruit. Take it to a photocopy machine and copy it
directly. Try to arrange the skin pieces in a lovely way if possible.
3. Find an 11" x 17" (28cm x 43cm) sheet of white paper.
4. Cut out the microphone with scissors.
5. Cut out the banana image with scissors.6. Remove the banana fruit and put the microphone in its place. If the sizes
seem unmatched, use photocopiers to adjust this. I’d like the entire image
to be large on the poster, but you will need room on the top and bottom
for text.
7. Position the microphone-banana down on the sheet in the center.
8. The main (largest) text on the poster will be “This willie doesn’t need a
love glove.” Place it above the image. You can hand-draw block letters
or cut out type from magazines and newspapers to create this phrase. (If
you want to write this on a separate sheet and then cut and glue it onto
the poster, that might help to keep things movable and to fit everything
on.)
9. Underneath the image add the following phrases, handwritten legibly,
centered if possible:
(medium-sized type) “Don’t keep AIDS prevention under wraps.”
(below medium type, small-sized type) “The Global Media AIDS
Initiative (GMAI) highlights best practices in relevant, accurate and
effective HIV/AIDS programming from campaigns around the
world. Creative talent and technical resources are put to work to
produce public service ads (PSAs) and integrating powerful
HIV/AIDS themes into news, public affairs and entertainment
programming. Precious airtime and advertising space is then used to
disseminate HIV awareness and prevention messages in some of the
hardest-hit countries and regions of the world. Until there’s a cure,
education is our best defense against this ruthless, quickly spreading
epidemic. Support the GMAI today by visiting 
www.thegmai.org
.”
10. Now that everything is placed, glue all the elements down on the
poster.
11. You’re almost done. Photocopy the poster once on white 11" x 17"
(28cm x 43cm) paper. You can pick the color. Feel free to play with
contrast and any other image settings on the machine to get interesting
effects.12. Feel free to hand-color parts of the poster if you want—the text, parts
of the image, or whatever, you can decide. Use crayons, markers or
whatever’s handy.
13. Call me when you’re done and I will come pick it up. Hope that was
easy enough and you had fun! And thank you; I owe you a drink or two.
1,2,3 
Katherine Widdows wrote up instructions (1), then provided them to Melanie
Noel, who followed them to design this poster (2). You can see the development of
the project in the her sketches (3).47
Seeing What Sticks
60 minutes          
Interaction storyboarding
“How do you make spaghetti?”
This was a question posed by design professor Mark Baskinger’s seven-year-
old daughter. “In trying to explain all of the steps to her, I struggled to
remember what I would do first. Do I open the cabinet and decide which kind
of pasta I’ll make? Or do I first start the water boiling with a dash of salt?
And at what point do I start the sauce for a slow simmer on the stove? In an
effort to answer her question thoughtfully—and to avoid patronizing her with
a response such as, ‘Well, daughter, you boil the pasta, add the sauce, then
eat’—I realized she was asking to learn about a process that she had casually
observed countless times before.”
As we participate in activities that are part of our daily routine, behaviors
become so ingrained that we become less aware of the individual tasks,
subtleties and events associated with the activity. Is there really any logical
reason why many people throw spaghetti on the fridge to make sure it’s fully
cooked, when a simple taste would suffice? Behaviors or customs like this
often go unnoticed—but from a designer’s perspective, these behaviors are
extremely important in gaining an understanding of how people actually live.
In this challenge created by Mark, reflect on how you take part in the
common activity of cooking pasta.
“Everything you see I owe to spaghetti.”
—Sophia Loren
CHALLENGE!
Using your powers of design, visually depict the various
actions, sequences, tasks and behaviors in a one-page
visual narrative that allows you to analyze and explain
how you make pasta.
Consider all the steps, including tools, equipment and
ingredients. Represent the activity from a variety of
perspectives, showing the various stages, sequences and events.
Focus directly on the process of the activity, thinking through all
of the subtleties of behavior rather than the expected outcome.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Take the resulting visual narrative and use it to design something that would
help create the ideal pasta-making experience—whether that’s changing a
step or two in your process, or actually creating a product that could aid you
in your cooking.
1 
Mark Baskinger created this layered visual narrative describing how he makes
pasta with his daughter. For more examples of this kind of sketching activity, take
a look at 
Drawing Ideas
, which Mark coauthored with information designer and
teacher William Bardel.2 
Jason May, one of Mark’s students, incorporated all of the steps necessary for
pasta making in a single sketch. Note the use of blue pencil to help establish the
structure of each element; when photocopied in black and white, this draft
preparatory work would disappear.48
Check Me Out
120 minutes          
Design research, interaction storyboarding
If design is informed decision making, who decided to make the checkout at
my local grocery store such a struggle? I think I’m going to switch to Aisle 6.
Though the person at Aisle 3 only has ten items left on the conveyor belt. But
it looks like they’re having a good chat, which might delay things further. Or
I could go through the self-checkout, but those machines always get upset at
me. Besides, I need to buy a book of stamps.
Designers don’t just make things. They also discover ways to improve
systems. Waiting in line at the grocery store is one such system, which is
contingent on a wide range of factors: the physical design of the store space,
the placement and visibility of signage, the flow of people into and out of the
checkout area and the computer systems that are used to scan items.
Take part in the following challenge, and see how you can systematically
improve the grocery shopping experience for the world.
“Supermarkets have evolved quite a bit from the corner
grocery store, but they remain far from perfect. The
constraints and compromises [made in placement of
merchandise] are so contradictory and so complex that even a
supermarket’s supercomputer probably could not be used to
solve the design problem in a way that would suit the
storeowner and the shopper equally.”
—Henry Petroski, 
Small Things Considered: Why There Is No Perfect Design
CHALLENGE
Go to your local grocery store and observe the process of!
checkout from a number of different perspectives. Distill your
notes into a user flow, sketching out the major
considerations and events that happen through the
checkout process.
Then, using that information, brainstorm comprehensive
ideas regarding how you could improve the process of
checking out—and how you could implement them at your local
grocery store. What solutions, from ideal to feasibly real, would
you propose?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Create a full-size, hand-sketched prototype of your auto-checkout solution,
including any necessary interface elements. Then bring in test subjects to try
out your prototype, and use their feedback to improve your design.
1,2 
Claire Kohler spent an hour at the supermarket documenting the specific details
that contributed to a person’s checkout experience. From those notes, she created
this poster that shows how a person would move through the process.3,4 
Mark Noterman and Claire Kohler considered what would happen if their 
local
grocery stores had RFID (radio frequency identification) tags on all store items. By
placing baskets on or pushing grocery carts underneath specially equipped tables,
store visitors would have their purchases “rung up” and confirmed through a
simple one-step payment confirmation process. This SmartBasket system would
require effort on the part of food suppliers to provide the tags necessary to smooth
out the checkout process, but it would definitely save time for customers when
exiting the store.49
The Game of Sustainability
120 minutes          
Product design
Paper or plastic? Glass or aluminum? Eat local or buy foreign? When we are
asked to make these kinds of decisions, the consequences of our actions are
difficult to apprehend.
Take purchasing asparagus, for instance. You may be buying locally grown
asparagus that was raised using hydroponics—which consumes power and
water from your local utilities and watershed. Upon maturity, those
vegetables were then driven one hundred miles to your farmer’s market in a
gasoline-powered truck and sold for a premium. Meanwhile, the delicious
asparagus tips at your supermarket—flown to you from South America on a
carbon-offset flight—were sun-grown, watered from a local river, certified
organic by a third party, and processed in a wind-powered factory equipped
with a fleet of biodiesel vehicles.
From these descriptions, any person would be hard-pressed to decide which
asparagus was more or less sustainable. When it comes to issues of
sustainability, there are few easy choices.
Now, imagine trying to describe the complexities of sustainability to a child.
How could they even begin to comprehend the impact of their actions on the
world? In the following challenge, you’ll need to determine a way to help
children understand the issue of sustainability.
“Sustainability is an approach to design and development that
focuses on environmental, social and financial factors that
are often never addressed. Sustainable solutions strive to
improve the many systems that support our lives, including
efficiently using capital and markets, effectively using natural
resources, and reducing waste and toxins in the environment
while not harming people in societies across the Earth.”!
—Nathan Shedroff, 
Design Is the Problem: The Future of Design Must Be
Sustainable
CHALLENGE
Create a simple game that teaches young children how to
think about the natural resources they use as they go
throughout their day. Consider the rules of play, whether
the game would be a solo or group activity and what
design choices you would need to make in order to best engage
your audience. And one last constraint: The game has to
demonstrate the principles of sustainability itself—by being
eaten, recycled, composted or otherwise returned to the earth in
the process of being played.
TAKE IT FURTHER
How could you distribute your game to the world with the lowest impact
possible?
1 
As part of an in-class brainstorm to solve this challenge, Shimon Alkon created aphysical prototype of a card game. The different card colors represent resources,
much like in 
The Settlers of Catan
, and players follow what resources are used
over the course of a day to manage the resources in their hand.
2 
Over a lunchtime, my co-workers at frog design tried this challenge. One of the
solutions, by Jake Zukowski, Abdullah Shaikh and Jeff Glasser, was a board game
with waste pinned to particular spaces. If you land on those spaces, you have to
pick up the waste and dispose of it.3,4,5 
Over two hours, I sat down and sketched out an idea for the game
WaterSource
, which would teach children about how to be mindful of water
consumption. The game would be provided in an envelope that contained
instructions, playing cards and printed wraps for drinking glasses from your home.
To play the game, you hold a hand of five cards—most of which represent daily activities that
require water, such as cooking, playing in the park, showering and cleaning up. You then go
around the table and play a card from your hand, pouring any water lost during your turn into a
communal glass at the center of the table.
When that communal glass is full, the game is over and the player with the most water in his
cup is declared the winner.OBSERVATION
Take a look around you. You can’t buy this at
Hallmark. Guided tour of your neighborhood,
please. To vend or not to vend. Just where is the
emergency room? Imagine time without your
watch.
50 
Patience, Grasshopper
51 
Tour de Home
52 
Wacky Vendo
53 
Excuse Me, I’m Lost
54 
Thinking Outside the Wrist50
Patience, Grasshopper
90 minutes          
Illustration, research
Things in this world move too fast for words. Sometimes they just need to be
observed. Sitting still, being present and noting people’s behavior while
withholding judgment: These underappreciated skills can have a powerful
influence on our work. They bring forth the observations that give design a
foundation in what we 
know
, not just what we want or hope to uncover
through the process of making.
With this challenge, you will be observing a problem rather than working to
solve it.
“It is likely that sympathetic and
empathetic skills are the most valuable in
my toolbox. The ability to accurately see
through the eyes of others, according to a
defined context, allows a designer to craft a
more appropriate presentation and
experience. That experience is the whole
reason design is necessary.”
—Andy Rutledge
CHALLENGE
Go and sit in a public place for one hour. Watch what happens.
Empathize with what others around you are thinking, feeling and!
doing. When your hour is up, take the most potent thing you
observed during that time period and express it in one of
the few places reserved for pithy and poetic sentiment: a
greeting card.
You cannot bring a notebook, camera, cell phone or any
other type of digital or analog device to record your
experience. Try not to think about what you’re going to create
until your time is finished.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Write down the key experiences that formed the core of your greeting card
concept. Is there a series of note cards, pads or other goods that could be
created out of what you experienced? Or could you take your ideas further,
into some form of digital expression in the interactive realm?1 
Claire Kohler took up residence on a bench at Green Lake Park in Seattle and
observed what happened around her. Hearing conversation from walkers passing
by, she imagined what the geese would be saying if they were talking as well. The
interior reads, “Go ahead and leave the stroller and the dog at home, ’cuz hey, it’s
your birthday!”2 
Meg Doyle was spending time with her infant nephew when the idea for this
greeting card hit her, along with perhaps some flying food. The inside says,
“Happy Mother’s Day. I hope you have peas and quiet.”3 
Michelle Cormack sat on the steps of the Vancouver Art Gallery in Vancouver,
British Columbia, for an hour on a Friday at lunch. “People were just busy walking
on by, and nobody ever seemed to take a moment to just take it all in.” Hence, the
closing text in the interior of her card: “Put this card down. Go sit on your back
step. Turn your face to the sun. And just stop.”4 
Designer and illustrator Lisa Stewart sat in three different locations for
inspiration. “The one that called to me were the fireflies. This is going to become a
series of reminiscent images from childhood, but not necessarily nostalgic… While
most greeting cards on the market speak of imminent milestones, this greeting card
is not your typical greeting… I haven’t seen many greeting cards that say, ‘Enjoy
Your Summer,’ but it happens to be my favorite season of all.”51
Tour de Home
120 minutes          
Environmental signage, research
Within a mile of my house, there are a number of high-profile landmarks that
I can’t help but share with visitors to Seattle. The Fremont troll sculpture
under the Aurora Bridge with a real Volkswagen Beetle clutched in one of his
giant hands. The Woodland Park Zoo, with its crowd-pleasing penguins and
flamingos. And let’s not forget the organic and fair-trade chocolate factory.
All the places I just listed are what you’d call touristy—easily found in a
Fodor’s guide alongside every other big landmark in the Fremont district. As
designers, we’re often tasked with promoting these big-draw destinations.
But every local community, no matter how urban in nature, is full of unique
and wonderful spots that have great meaning to its inhabitants—lovely
locations that just wouldn’t fit in the hundred-dollar guided bus tour.
For this challenge, you’ve been tasked with sharing these special places.
“Travel is the only context in which some
people ever look around.If we spent half
the energy looking at our own
neighborhoods, we’d probably learn twice
as much.”
—Lucy R. Lippard, 
On the Beaten Track:Tourism, Art, and
Place
CHALLENGE!
Create simple, non-invasive signage that explains the
provenance of the places you most often frequent in your
community. What kind of information should you
include to communicate the importance of each location
to both locals and tourists? How can these signs be
displayed in a manner that doesn’t add visual noise to
your entire neighborhood?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design a piece of collateral for a neighborhood walking tour, complete with a
simple map and callouts. Or, if you’re looking for a big challenge, create a
user interface for an iPhone app that can take you on a guided tour and point
out the landmarks virtually—and allow you to create your own tour on the
fly.
1,2,3,4 
For this challenge, designer Grace Cheong chose Mile End, a lively and
diverse neighborhood of Montreal. “This area is known for its independent music
and arts scene, cozy cafés and restaurants, cute little boutiques, its coffee and
bagels and its architectural staple, the triplex… which is the base unit of the row
housing that makes up most of the residential streets. The logo is inspired by the
triplex form and by the bricks and stone that are the primary building materials in
the area.”
5,6 
Grace devised her tour route: “An intertwining closed loop delineated by lines
set into the sidewalk serves to direct the user on a casual walking tour of the area.
One can join the ‘tour’ at any given point in the loop. Points of interest are marked
by a custom wooden bench with planters. Each bench in the series is linked to the
next by lines marked out in the cement leading you from one point of interest to the
next. These benches serve not only as resting spots and sign posts, but also provide
site history to the user and serve to add a little more green to the somewhat urban
area. The engraved lines on the bench continue to join up with the lines marked out
on the cement, leading you to the next location in either direction.”!
52
Wacky Vendo
120 minutes          
Store design, product design
During a recent trip to Japan, I was stunned to discover the ubiquity of the
vending machine. From Tokyo to Kyoto, there were 
vendos 
clamoring for
attention on every train station platform and major street corner—almost one
vending machine for every twenty-three people.
They don’t use those machines to distribute solely snacks and drinks. From
the necessary to the surreal, you never know what you’ll find in those well-lit
contraptions. Before you enter the Zen temple, would you like soda, juice,
water, tea, coffee, beer or saké? Or, perhaps you would prefer underwear, ice
cream, cigarettes, cosmetics, dirty magazines, MP3 players or tuna onigiri?
For this challenge, transcend the everyday vending machine by bringing the
spirit of the 
vendo 
to your hometown.
“Change is inevitable—except from a
vending machine.”
—Robert C. Gallagher, retired chairman of Associated Banc-
Corp
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked by an industrial design firm to create
a new kind of vending machine—one whose contents
would fit the needs of your local neighborhood. What
could you sell within this vending machine that would
make sense for your local market, and how would you design the
physical shape of the machine to stand out from the sodamachines that we’ve all grown used to? Based on the contents of
your machine, do you have unique space requirements? Will you
need electricity in order to keep things refrigerated or heated?
And how would you handle monetary transactions?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Take photos of spaces in your town where you’d include the vending
machine, then retouch the photographs to include renderings of the machine.
Are there any design modifications that you need to make when you see your
vending machine in context?
1,2,3,4 
From a group brainstorm in class, Katharine Widdows incubated an idea for
the Rain or Shine vending machine. In this rendering, which shows the bus stop a
block from Westlake Center in rainy downtown Seattle, tourists and locals alike
can purchase suntan lotion, a map of the city, sunglasses, a rain slicker, an
umbrella and so forth. One thing the vending machine doesn’t serve, though, is
coffee—for that, you’ll need to walk half a block in any direction.!
53
Excuse Me, I’m Lost
120 minutes          
Typography, wayfinding
Working on environmental signage is fun, but it can also be a deadly serious
business. Your design decisions can have a critical impact on other people’s
health and livelihood, especially when you’re working within the health care
industry. After all, no hospital staffer wants a suffering patient to wander
around the parking lot, crying out: “Can you help me find the emergency
room?”
So, if you’ve ever had the itch to rethink the signage in an important public
space, this challenge is right up your alley.
“The rules of navigation never navigated a
ship; the rules of architecture never built a
house.”
—Thomas Reid
CHALLENGE
You’ve been tasked by your local hospital to improve
their internal signage system. Head over to the hospital
and spend thirty minutes auditing their existing system,
observing and sketching people moving through problem
areas. If you find that you need to take photographs, please be
sure to ask permission from the hospital staff.
When you’re done, create a before/after example of how you
revised a critical piece of signage for the better. Consider the
information design of the signage, the physical placement of eachindicator in the space, and other major factors that can be
improved.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Think outside the signage. Expand your project from one location to make a
recommendation for extending an entire wayfinding system across the
hospital. As part of your process, design a set of symbols that can be easily
applied (along with type) for people who may not be able to read or
understand the local language.
1,2,3 
Katharine Widdows decided to rethink practically every aspect of the interior
design and overall signage used in Swedish Medical Center in Ballard, a
neighborhood of Seattle. By readdressing both the information design of the
signage in the space and freshening the color scheme, she transformed a formerly
dry and lifeless environment into a vibrant, lively space. It’s also amazing that by
typesetting the word “EMERGENCY” in white text knocked-out of a solid red
background, she made locating the emergency room much easier.
4 
Mark Notermann looked at the same hospital photographs and imagined how
much easier it would be for more people to read the directory simultaneously if the
hospital directory took up the entire wall.5 
Jessica Thrasher added bold lines painted on the walls that a hospital visitor
could follow to their intended destination. That way, hospital visitors would be
oriented with regard to where they were going as they moved through the space.!
54
Thinking Outside the Wrist
120 minutes          
Research, product design, paper engineering
Time is a slippery fish for any creative professional.
From aggressive deadlines to daily schedules chock full of meetings, time is a
rare commodity—and the unit of measure that governs our billings and
profitability. Plus, designers yearn to submerge their minds for long stretches
of design time, where they can ignore the ticking clock and luxuriate in the
process of making.
In this challenge, however, you’ll be asked to confront the role of time in
your daily life—and to find ways that you can use your design thinking to
bend it to your will.
“Day, 
n. 
A period of twenty-four hours,
mostly misspent.”
—Ambrose Bierce, The Devil’s Dictionary
CHALLENGE
For one week, keep a diary about time. Every day, as you
interact with your watch, phone, computer or clock, write
down how you feel when you check the time. When the
week is up, use the data that you gathered to design a
“watch” prototype that redefines how people keep track of time
—both in their day-to-day life, and in their pursuit of fashion.
What comes out of this exercise may not resemble anything like
a watch at all. The watch may leave the wrist, merge with
clothing, communicate via Bluetooth with phones or computers,etc. Because time is money, the cost of production on these
watches must be fifty dollars or less.
Some good questions to ask before you begin designing may
include: How did you feel about your watch/phone as you
interacted with it? What would you change if you had unlimited
control over time and space? How would you feel if your
watch/phone was thrown out? And what would take its place?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Create a rudimentary physical prototype of your “watch” idea; carry it on
you, and continue your diary study for a few days with the prototype. Does
carrying the prototype influence any of the details in your final design?1,2,3 
Mark Notermann’s solution for this challenge was pictorial: “The SeeTime
watch interacts via Bluetooth with a desktop app that allows you to build custom
photo libraries or follow an online photo-sharing account. The watch would have a
very simple touch screen that brings up the numeric time when you choose. In this
view, the ‘second hand’ runs vertically in one-minute strips, which complete a full
picture each hour. Options would allow for control of image flow and refresh rates,
as well as visual alarms, reminders, etc.”4,5 
Graphic designer and art director Tom Takigayama observed, “Due to
technology (mainly mobile phones) where time is a built-in feature, the watch is no
longer a necessity and has fallen back onto its other characteristic as a fashionable
accessory. Convenience is the major draw for carrying around an all-in-one device.
Aesthetics and its luxury value as a status symbol have saved the watch from
becoming obsolete. The solution is the watch must become more convenient to
compete with technology. The watch must stay branded as an aesthetic status
symbol.” From this design direction, Tom was inspired by the iPod shuffle and the
classic form of the tie clip to create this sleek and stylish “modern watch” driven
by LED lights below a mirrored face.6,7 
Katharine Widdows wanted to create a modern, touch-screen enabled version
of the fob watch. Within that circular interface, users could visualize their location
on a spinning Earth, see the phases of the moon, bring up tide tables, leaf through
an almanac and explore other content that fosters one’s connection with the planet.INNOVATION
Making things better, as well as better things. Help
define the “digital album.” The iPhone frontier.
Return your patio to Mother Nature. Buy less,
consume less. Cooking with wine you really want
to try. Can you contain your olive oil craving? Help
your yoga mat talk with your Mac. This store
doesn’t sell anything. Text your coffee maker.
Design your favorite dish. Bank on changing the
world.
55 
CD, LP, EP, DP
56 
iPhone Americana
57 
Biodegradable Backyard
58 
More Is Less
59 
Veni, Vidi, Vino
60 
E.V.O.O. to Go
61 
TechnoYoga
62 
I Think, Therefore I Shop
63 
Ready When You Are
64 
Let’s Dish
65 
Listen Up, Write It Off55
CD, LP, EP, DP
90 minutes          
Interactive media
Imagine me in the seventh grade: a denim-jacketed youth trudging his way
toward work at a candy store, Walkman blasting Guns N’ Roses’s 
Appetite
for Destruction
. Next door to my short-term employer was the Record &
Tape Exchange, where I truly fell in love with graphic design.
From Hipgnosis’s work for Pink Floyd to Vaughan Oliver’s sleeves for the
Pixies all the way to New Order’s orderly layouts by Peter Saville, I feasted
my eyes on lavish album packaging that spoke volumes regarding the music
inside. I then spent the proceeds of my day job amassing a stockpile of my
favorite album sleeves. (Oh, and the actual LPs were pretty good, too.)
While digital recording mediums and application platforms like iTunes have
single-handedly destroyed the idea of music needing to be sold in a physical
package, either as an LP or CD, there’s still something to be said for the role
of design in buying music. Visual and tactile stimuli will always contribute
an additional dimension of meaning to songs.
In the following challenge, you will be asked to re-imagine the role of record
packaging in the digital age.
“If the milk industry can make their
product seem sexy and increase consumer
demand, there must be hope for music.”
—Gary Arnold, merchandising manager, Best Buy
CHALLENGE!
Create a “digital package”—or DP—for a recording artist
whose work you admire, but can’t currently bring
yourself to purchase online for $20.99. What kinds of
content would you expect to receive at that price point?
And how would that content be shaped by design to
create a compelling music-listening experience?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Will your new invention single-handedly save the record industry? After
you’ve designed a rough prototype of your idea, put together a business plan
with info-graphics describing the impact of the DP on the recording industry
as a whole.
1 
Dave Fletcher, creative director at theMechanism, had the following simple
solution to this challenge: “The concept of USB drives for the music industry isn’t
a new idea. However, by the small number of bands using the medium, and the
number of labels who are not embracing it—it remains a fringe idea. Radiohead
and the White Stripes have designed unique pieces of art in their USB drives, but I
have attempted to demonstrate something that can be mass produced for a numberof artists at once, either through bands forming a collective or via a label… I’ve
tried to present a practical solution that artists can use now to increase the viability
as well as the longevity of both the final designed product and the music itself.
Unlike CDs that can be simply thrown out, these USB TRAC-PAC drives are
reusable if wiped and also could be used to protect data from being shared.”
2 
With each USB TRAC-PAC purchase, you get the following:
• Full track list in MP3 format without DRM
• An unique image for each MP3 track
• .AIF uncompressed files for remixing
• Photographs
• Video files (accessible only through USB)
• Posters
• Link to online content that requires the USB key to be in the drive
Every new purchase should also provide a “free pass” to download the next album “as it’s
being recorded”—allowing fans to hear what goes into making an album.
The device would lock content, ensuring that the buyer needs to put the USB device into a
computer to access certain content. Possible self-expanding files on the flash drive allow the
user to copy only specifically determined files to the desktop, while additional movies and
music extras must be played via the contained interface.3 
Vending machines could be anywhere, bringing a music store to the sidewalk,
airport or concert venue. Unique, limited-edition live footage of the band
performing could be placed into the machine at venues, adding to the concert
experience. Customers could refill their USB TRAC-PAC as well, instead of
always buying new ones.4 
Retailers who decide to not place USB TRAC-PAC vending machines in their
stores could opt for simple and small packaging similar to phone cards. Packaging
would be made from partially recycled paper to reduce waste.56
iPhone Americana
120 minutes          
User interface design, interaction
storyboarding
Every time a new device platform enters the smart phone market, there’s a
land rush for the creation of well-designed applications. Just look at the
iPhone. The first speculators in the iTunes App Store introduced very simple
games and applications and ended up reaping hundreds of thousands of
dollars in downloads—mostly because there weren’t many applications to
choose from.
Times have changed, however. App designers fight for money and attention,
even with the advent of the iPad. They attempt to coax ninety-nine-cent
downloads out of increasingly skeptical customers whose devices are laden
with low-utility applications that take up precious pixels of screen real estate.
In such an overloaded market, how could you cut through the clutter with a
simple, compelling idea that’s both useful and lucrative? In this challenge,
you’ll explore the wild new frontiers of mobile application design, but with a
nostalgic twist.
“The Internet is like a gold rush; the only
people making money are those who sell
the pans.”
—Will Hobbs
CHALLENGE
Devise a user flow and user interface for an iPhone application
designed to take the place of a real-world physical activity that’s!
rooted squarely in Americana. As an example: You could
craft a jukebox application that plays blues and country
music culled from your iTunes library—complete with
bubble tubes and rotating colored lights.
As you’re working through the details of your
application, be sure to consider its feasibility, potential
market, and the price point it would need to be sold at to turn a
profit with a few thousand purchases.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Does it make sense to extend your idea into a piece of desktop software, a
web application, or onto the iPad? See if there are opportunities to take your
ideas beyond the iPhone.
1,2,3 
When traveling to exotic, quirky or surreal locations, it’s common to send
postcards off to your friends and loved ones that capture your experience. But
instead of trolling the touristy gift shops around Mount Rushmore or Wall Drug for
two-dollar postcards, you can snap a photo with this iPhone application by frog
design and 
voilà
, send a custom digital postcard to as many people as you desire.!
57
Biodegradable Backyard
120 minutes          
 Product design, research
Lying in the backyard, reading a book and relaxing in the sun one day, I was
suddenly struck by how practically every product within eyesight was
designed to outlast me.
Green plastic deck chairs, rippled to simulate wood grain. A plastic bird
feeder—a popular speakeasy for the starlings and robins. In the garden, a pair
of purple Crocs shoes were lurking near the tomato plants, whose vines
wound happily around black plastic stakes. Even the snakelike garden hose
tucked between the bushes has been explicitly designed to resist the elements,
no matter the long-term environmental cost.
For this challenge, rethink the logic that governs how we produce products
for outside our home.
“Until man duplicates a blade of grass,
nature can laugh at his so-called scientific
knowledge.”
—Thomas Edison
CHALLENGE
Pick an item that you’d generally find in your backyard
—such as one of the items in the above list—and
redesign it so it could gracefully biodegrade. As an
example, consider the bird feeder. Could you make such
a thing that also wouldn’t be torn asunder by hungry birds over a
single season, or ravaged by the elements? Or is that part of theconceit, that you want the feeder to eventually be eaten?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Think about how you would brand and market your new product to
encourage people to choose biodegradable products for their backyard. Or, if
you’re feeling adventurous, construct a physical mockup of your idea, place it
within your garden and document over time how it returns to nature.
1,2 
In tackling this challenge, designer Brian LaRossa came up with BirdBloom, a
birdhouse that is water-resistant on the outside, but when inverted and left out in
the garden, naturally biodegrades and returns to the earth. The bright colors would
be sure to attract our fine feathered friends.
3 
One of the inspirations for this challenge was “Bird Seeder” by industrial
designer Jan Habraken. She says her birdhouse, which is made entirely of birdseed, is an example of “super functionality.” In her design, she “strip[s] away
everything unnecessary to function—and leaves something lyrical. Function
becomes foundation becomes façade.”58
More Is Less
90 minutes          
 Packaging, paper engineering, physical
prototyping
Living within your means can often be hard, especially in a society that
courts consumerism. Concepts like portion control, green living and thinking
local for our weekly produce needs seem entirely feasible in our minds.
Then we find ourselves wilting when confronted with a Costco-sized bargain.
Of course I need twenty rolls of paper towels.
Whether we like it or not, we contribute to this dialogue between the
consumer and the consumed. Far too often, we abdicate our societal
responsibility in the name of design. And as consumers ourselves, we find it
hard to resist splurging on what might be—for our world’s future—a wasteful
purchase.
For this challenge, help to reduce that waste!
“Globally we are approaching the point
when the only sustainable way forward is to
want less. Indeed, the choice element may
be removed from us and we will just have to
have less.”
—Don Johnston, chair, Solent Energy & Environment Group
CHALLENGE
Choose a product that you regularly use as part of your day-to-
day life—food, drink, cleaning supplies, paper products, etc.—!
and determine a way to redesign or repackage it so
consumers will want to use less of it.
How can you use your design skills to make more out of
less, and encourage people to use that reduced quantity in
a more mindful manner?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Create a physical mockup of your packaging idea, and see if your new
packaging format helps you and others use less of 
the product.
1,2,3 
The inspiration for this challenge came from industrial designer Tithi
Kutchamuch, whose project “My Sweets” reimagines our relationship to bargain
food. “I buy Twix Extra because it’s only ten pence more expensive than theregular one. I finish it in one go, and feel guilty for the rest of the day… Bargain
food persuades people by playing with the value of money, which has brought a lot
of problems to society: over-nutrition, eating disorders, obesity, illness, guilt,
wasting food, wasting resources, over-production, etc. Can design make people
buy food that offers 
less
?” In this project, Tithi proves that this is possible in an
aesthetically pleasing way.
4,5 
Designer Katie Greff considered ways for people to use less paper when in the
bathroom. By rethinking how toilet paper is dispensed—in individual two-ply
circle-shaped wipes that have a half-fold on the back—people will be encouraged
to use it more sparingly.!
59
Veni, Vidi, Vino
30 minutes          
Packaging
When I shop at the corner store for a wine to go with dinner, I’m always
drawn to a grand display of artful bottles. Witty wordplay, embossed and die-
cut labels, colored glass and paper substrates, hand illustration and
calligraphy—the ways a designer can customize wine packaging are endless.
So, what about when I’m selecting a cheap wine that I plan on using in the
meal as part of the recipe? That’s a little easier, though I may not be satisfied
if I try to 
drink 
it. Why isn’t there an affordable wine that’s great to sip, but is
cheap enough that you feel fine about pouring a glass into the stir-fry?
In the following challenge, create the packaging for this elusive wine buy.
“I cook with wine, sometimes I even add it
to the food.”
—W.C. Fields
CHALLENGE
Create the packaging for a red table wine that balances
taste, affordability and visual wit. Come up with the
name of the winery, sketch out a label idea and choose
the bottle substrate. Ideally, your bottle design should be
simple enough that it can be versioned based on different
varietals (Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Malbec, etc.). No matter
how good the wine tastes, the label has to be tasty enough to our
eyes for a purchase to make sense.TAKE IT FURTHER
Your new wine is so cheap—and high quality!—that your distributor wants
to provide it to consumers in bulk. How can you package your design so the
bottles can be distributed and sold in units of six? Or do you need to rethink
your initial packaging concept as a box or 1.5L magnum?
1,2 
In a twenty-minute class brainstorm, Michelle Cormack and I quickly hit upon
the idea of placing two different kinds of wine in one container: 250ml for cooking
and 500ml for drinking. This presented some mechanical challenges for us, as we
wanted a paper container for easy recyclability. And it was also interesting to see if
we could include white wine and red wine in one container—this was a risk, as the
customer would have to be comfortable with the red wine being chilled. We
thought of way to sidestep this, however, by explicitly asking the customer to use
the lower-grade wine for meals such as 
coq au vin 
and 
beef bourguignon
, the
recipes for which were printed directly on the package. Once that design strategy
was put into place, the logo and design of the package came together quickly.3,4 
Donnie Dinch and Mark Notermann conceived of Flowers Wine, whose simple
modern style hints at the fresh, fragrant nature of the affordable wine within.
5 
Vingt-et-un 
means twenty-one in French—and it’s also the name of a popular
game of chance. But designer Aynex Mercado chose this motif because “my
birthday is on March 21, and we believe in my family that the number 21 is
important… I decided to go with this design because I thought it was the most eye-
catching on the bottle, even though [my initial explorations that] used 21 as the
shape of the label were more interesting.”6 
Having a little fun during a twenty-minute collaborative brainstorm with Meg
Doyle, she and I sketched out a series of wine bottle labels that showed the
mishaps that ensue when having drunk a little too much wine. Hence, Wine-Oh!
It’s unlikely that they’ll let us stock this brand at the convenience store.60
E.V.O.O. to Go
30 minutes          
 Product design, research, packaging
What do the words “simple luxury” mean to you? Is it a hop in the Bentley
for a journey down Rodeo Drive, seeking a new $20,000 handbag? Or does it
mean that at dinner you like to dredge your focaccia in olive oil mixed with
balsamic vinaigrette and fresh-cracked black pepper?
The concept of luxury has changed dramatically over the past decade. People
are seeking out smaller, more meaningful ways of pampering themselves—
and they’re willing to spend more on incremental purchases and everyday
luxuries, rather than big-ticket items.
Which brings us back to olive oil. You can spend a few bucks for a bottle of
common olive oil at your local supermarket, or throw down a few larger bills
for a tiny vial of the cold-pressed high-grade oil made by Italian nuns who
stomp the fruit with their feet.
Both a commodity product and a simple luxury, the act of buying quality
olive oil is becoming much like the high-end salt market. Did you know there
are foodies who carry around little wood boxes containing special high-grade
salts to enhance the flavor of their meals? They may be on to something.
For the following challenge, you’ll help people carry around their high-grade
olive oil, too.
“Olive oil? Asparagus? If your mother wasn’t so fancy, we
could shop at the gas station like normal people.”
—Homer Simpson
CHALLENGE
A local Italian restaurant wants to roll out a product that allows!
gourmet eaters to sprinkle their exceptional olive oil onto
their favorite dishes while they’re at home or on the go—
and they need a product designer to help them figure out
how to make it happen.
While this may seem like a simple problem on the
surface, there are many issues that need to be considered.
Since olive oil is perishable, how much oil can be stored and
used before spoilage occurs? What will keep oil from oozing out
of the package and soiling what’s around it? What would make
this product refillable? What materials would you select to make
it sustainable?
And, most importantly—what attributes of your design will make
the product feel like a desirable luxury item?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design a print advertisement for a luxury magazine that shows your proposed
bottle design in action.1,2 
Over twenty minutes in class, Donnie Dinch and I brainstormed the idea for the
Drizzler, an easy-to-grasp olive-shaped container with a pop-out spout that would
make it easy to pour olive oil without it getting all over the product.3 
In contrast to the sleek sophistication of the Drizzler, Mark Notermann and Meg
Doyle came up with a simple idea: Repurpose Visine-style bottles designed to
squeeze out a few drops of a liquid substance, silkscreen them with the appropriate
product information, then for an added bonus toss in Mr. E.V.O.O.’s good friend
B.V.61
TechnoYoga
120 minutes          
User interface design, information architecture
My daily yoga routine begins with the 
Dandasana
, or Staff Pose—in case
you don’t understand Sanskrit. This is followed by a series of Sun
Salutations, ending in Downward-Facing Dog with a transition into a series
of standing poses (Warrior 1, Side-Angle Pose and Triangle Pose). And the
sequence always ends with a meditation in Corpse Pose, or 
Shava-asana
.
No matter whether you’re a frequent practitioner of yoga or a beginner, there
is a specialized language—both spoken and physical—that must be learned to
develop a yoga practice. Most of us start through in-person instruction as part
of a large group. Our teacher guides us through the details of specific poses.
Over time, we learn how to string those individual poses together into a
sequence. We can then take our practice anywhere and conduct it on our own.
I enjoy practicing yoga at home, but there are great benefits that come from
interacting with a teacher and class. Is there a way that I could practice yoga
at home with the help of a (digital) personal instructor? Find out in the
following challenge.
“A photographer gets people to pose for
him. A yoga instructor gets people to pose
for themselves.”
—Terri Guillemets
CHALLENGE
Create the user interface for a web application that wirelessly
communicates with your yoga mat and tracks what poses you’ve!
attempted over the course of your daily practice.
This application could also suggest to you what poses
you’ll like best for variety based on what discipline of
yoga you enjoy (Hatha, Vinyasa, Iyengar, etc.), or a
blend of different disciplines, or even what people similar
to your body type or lifestyle have also enjoyed.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Design the mat that would go along with the web application. What material
and technologies would be required to create seamless communication with
your computer?
1,2,3,4 
I first articulated the following principles to help frame the execution and
steer my sketching.
You will be guided when using this yoga application, but you also need to be in your body and
focused.
You want the input of others, but don’t want to be forced into having their physical presence in
the room.
The application would need to see how you settle into the practice and would adjust over time.
I began sketching and had the idea to portray each yoga session as a mandala pattern. The
person using the app and the specially wired yoga mat would be able to track her movement
from pose to pose by breath (not time), and she could easily pause, move to the next pose or
shift back into child’s pose. The app would then adjust the routine based on actions, changing
the number of breaths per pose necessary to complete the entire session.
Small infrared sensors in the corners of the mat would track the user’s body movements when
her hands or feet were not on the mat, and after the yoga session, the user could see whether
there were any poses that exhibited mechanical issues that could lead to injury.62
I Think, Therefore I Shop
90 minutes          
 Store design
Wandering through an open-air mall on a blustery spring day, you can’t help
but notice the window shoppers lingering outside a chef’s store.
In the window displays, silicone cake pans stacked in a bold pattern jockey
for space alongside a stainless-steel mixer that looks like an 
objet d’art
.
Observing the ways the shoppers around you graze the information contained
in the display, you can see how effective display design isn’t solely about the
product. First, you need to sell an idea of what lifestyle could be attained 
with
that product.
But what would happen if you were only selling the idea itself—not tangible,
physical things?
“If the financial crisis was caused by the
over-consumption of things we couldn’t
afford and the environmental crisis is being
caused by the over-consumption of things
we can’t afford and the health crisis is
being caused by the over-consumption of
things we can’t afford, then it points
toward there being a bit of a problem with
endless consumption. So what’s the
alternative?”
—Tim Brown!
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked to plan and create a retail store that
sells ideas instead of physical, take-away objects. In your
explorations, consider its naming, overall branding and
signage.
Exactly what kinds of ideas would exist there, and how would
they be made manifest for “purchase”? How would you approach
constructing such an experience? What role would design take in
making it? Finally, how would you want visitors to change their
behavior after visiting such a place?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Create a physical prototype of the experience, including an elevation of the
store experience and examples of what artifacts would be necessary within
the space to make people “consume” the ideas 
in an expedient fashion.
1,2,3,4,5 
An inspiration for this challenge was the WANT store created by Donica
Ida, Terry Liu, Francis Luu, Ivy Sa and the teacher Kristine Matthews in the
University of Washington’s environmental design class. WANT is a store
experience designed to help college students develop smarter spending habits and
become more savvy about their college finances. In WANT, goods are substituted
with advice on how college students can save money. The “merchandise” inside
the imaginary store is constructed from laser-cut cardboard, and includes
everything from coffee to electronics to apparel, each printed with a different tip on
how to save money on that item. As in a regular store, visitors are invited to flip
through clothing racks and browse the shelves at their leisure. Visitors come away
not with lighter wallets, but with better buying power.6,7,8,9 
A team of students from one of my classes—including Shimon Alkon,
Michelle Cormack, Jake Rae, Jessica Thrasher and Katharine Widdows—took on
this challenge and created Knowcery Food Detectives, an integrated in-store and
online experience that shows food allergy sufferers how to grocery shop with
confidence. Modeled after a neighborhood grocery store, visitors can roam the
aisles at their leisure and scan the barcodes of packaged and prepared foods,
cleaning supplies, toiletries and pharmaceutical products to see full details
regarding possible allergens.63
Ready When You Are
90 minutes          
Interactive media
In this age of Internet-enabled gadgetry, I wouldn’t be surprised if my
refrigerator started talking to my toaster. Formerly dumb devices that
crowded our kitchens and bedrooms are now driven by embedded operating
systems instead of rudimentary circuit boards. This allows us a level of
unimaginable integration between all of the things that surround us.
Which brings up a great question: What will we do with all this power? Most
of us couldn’t program our VCRs, let alone these newfangled digital video-
recorders, and I just had a five-minute argument with my microwave
regarding how to defrost vegetarian chili. (I lost.)
It’s up to us—the designers of the world—to help shape the future of how
humans interact with these fancy machines. And we should start with the
most important appliance known to man: the espresso maker. With this
challenge, put all this newfound connectivity and control to great use.
“In Seattle, you haven’t had enough coffee
until you can thread a sewing machine
while it’s running.”
—Jeff Bezos
CHALLENGE
You’ve been asked by Nespresso, the manufacturer of classy
espresso makers that depend upon coffee capsules instead of
loose grounds for their perfect output, to create a web application
that lets people control their espresso maker via the Internet.!
What kind of ways would you 
want 
to provide this kind
of power to the everyday espresso drinker? What would
this web application look like? How would it be
deployed? Would it be just for you, or would you be able
to participate in a virtual espresso-loving community?
Pour yourself a cappuccino and get to work.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Determine how you would promote the rollout of this web application for the
greater Nespresso community. Would you tease it on their web site? In their
stores? And how would your overall grand vision translate into other
cultures, languages and markets?
1,2 
Mark Notermann created an iPhone application, the iBarista, which “extends
the coffee connoisseur’s experience beyond the last sip. The espresso capsule
would leave a digital stamp when utilized in the brewing machine. This would be
sent via Wi-Fi to the owner’s online account where data would accumulate about
the user’s drinking habits. The user can rate his brews, and orders can also be
automatically created with this data. Another feature would enable meeting invites
to be synched to their calendar, with the guest able to pick from a menu of espresso
choices.”3,4 
Donnie Dinch’s solution exploits the touch interface of the iPhone to allow
anyone with his app and the appropriately equipped espresso maker to pinch and
choose the level of foam, milk and espresso desired in their latte, cappuccino orother coffee beverage.!
64
Let’s Dish
120 minutes          
Product design
The plain white bowl rests all alone on the kitchen table, awaiting your
desired input. In the morning, you fill it with strawberry yogurt, nuts and
granola. In the evening, your spoon clinks against the rim as you slurp down
red lentil soup drizzled with mint-infused olive oil.
When designing products for our kitchen, such as plates, bowls and cups, we
intentionally create shapes humble enough to fit any context. We are trained
how to utilize them at an early age. And over time, we learn to adapt the use
of those products to more narrowly defined needs. In this challenge, consider
how you can do just that—and create something artful and extraordinary as a
result.
“Products never speak for themselves.
Someone had to teach us that a chair is
meant for sitting on, that a spoon is for
putting food into the mouth.”
—Paul Mijksenaar and Piet Westendorp, 
Open Here: The Art
of Instructional Design
CHALLENGE
You are a famous ceramics designer tasked with an
unusual request: Come up with a way to reinvent a dish,
cup, bowl or glass for one extraordinarily specific use.
Don’t aim for maximum utility. Instead, fulfill a need for
dining ware you’ve always wanted in your cupboard, whether it’sa plate designed to manage your portions at dinner or a cup with
a lemon squeezer included for your lemon tea.
While you’re at it, try to incorporate sustainable materials into
your design, so your creation can return to the earth after it
outlives its use.
TAKE IT FURTHER
After you’ve determined your ideal dish design, how could you brand,
package and sell it in a sustainable manner? Does your initial idea suggest
any further ways to extend your thinking into flatware?1,2,3,4 
Industrial designer Tithi Kutchamuch provided the structure for this
challenge with her project “A cup of…” In this project, Tithi created teacups
whose forms were contingent on specific types of tea: lemon tea, rum tea, iced tea
and so on. “Each drink has its own typology of vessel, e.g., beer mug, wine glass,
coffee cup, milk bottle, etc. [But] how about when we mix the drinks? [Mixing]
two typologies creates a new function and ritual of drinking… [and] symbolism at
the bottom of the cup.”!
65
Listen Up, Write It Off
90 minutes          
 Out of home advertising
No matter how hard we try to tune out its siren song, advertising has a role in
our society. The Ad Council, the largest national nonprofit producer of public
service announcements (PSAs), is the undisputed king of wielding the
copywriter’s pen for public interest. Participating advertising agencies are
tapped by the Ad Council to use their same techniques of persuasion
employed in ads for everything from Snuggies to SUVs to asking us to stop
forest fires and reduce the spread of H1N1.
Want to pitch in? Take part in this challenge and use your advertising savvy
to create a worthwhile campaign that would fit in with the Ad Council’s
legacy.
“I always wondered why somebody doesn’t
do something about that. Then I realized I
was somebody.”
—Lily Tomlin
CHALLENGE
The team at your office came up with an idea for a
“volunteer bank.” This would be a web site where you
can register your personal information and causes that
you’d like to support. Then, nonprofit organizations can
“check out” people who are interested in donating their time to
those causes. In return for your time donation, you’d receive
donated awards from the web site.Now, you don’t need to design the actual web site. What’s more
important is the question: How would you advertise it?
Determine how you’d describe the volunteer bank—including
name and identity—and then create a bus shelter advertisement
that encourages people to go online and start donating time.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Write a thirty-second radio spot that describes the experience of checking out
a volunteer.
1,2,3 
Tim Aidlin, a user experience designer at Microsoft, took on this challengeand designed his advertising concept around 
JustCauz.org
. “Currently,
JustCauz.org
 is a charitable organization based in Seattle geared toward social
events with the proceeds going to two specific charities. It’s our hope to move in
the direction that this challenge describes in the near future, with 
Justcauz.org
becoming a service and site dedicated to connecting volunteers with organizations
who need help.
“The site would feature simple, straightforward methodologies to provide potential volunteers a
way to specify their preferences on how they volunteer or help. For instance, volunteers might
want to donate time or money. Volunteers might want to donate only one time, while others
would like to be part of a group that meets every week. Volunteers might want to help with
specific causes, such as children, the elderly, the homeless; or they might want to volunteer
with particular organizations such as groups that are focused locally, rather than
internationally.”4 
Tim Aidlin continues, “The service provides charitable organizations a way to
connect with interested potential volunteers who have expressed interest in criteria
that fits your charitable organization.
“JustCauz could also work with all sorts of organizations to procure donated ‘rewards’ with
which we then can award volunteers, based on some criteria, such as number of hours
volunteered, amount of money gifted, number of members you’ve referred, etc.
“There is also the potential for auctions, both silent and public for items. Think eBay for
charity.”INTERPRETATION
Think outside the… wait, where’d that box go?
Reinvent the dollar store. Start a sock frenzy.
Diapers gone wild! See what other people aren’t.
Gaze into that arty crystal ball. Make illustrations
that look cheap. Is fancy Antarctic bottled water
really such a good idea? Get in touch with your
Buddhist blogger. Don’t be blind to sunburn.
Hearing-impaired people can rock out too.
Welcome to the Museum of Smell. Turn up that
television. That transit map took a weird turn. Just
call it Twitterpedia. You wrote the book on it.
66 
I’d Buy That For a Dollar
67 
What’s in Store?
68 
Urban Diapers
69 
Out of Gamut
70 
Future-Casting
71 
This Is for Your Health
72 
Paper, Plastic, Glass, Vapor
73 
Free Tibet Blog
74 
Blinded by the Light
75 
Touch Screen of Deaf Rock
76 
Sniff Test
77 
Can You Hear Me Now?78 
Bending Geography
79 
What Do I Know?!
66
I’d Buy That For a Dollar
90 minutes          
 Store design
Say the words “dollar store,” and what comes to mind isn’t high design.
These booming businesses are the undertakers of retail, reselling what didn’t
shift from store shelves for pennies on the buck: packets of one hundred
plastic straws, red and blue rubber balls dusted with glitter, half-gallons of
milk and orange juice, and so forth. In a dollar store, you might find things
you need, but your purchase is unlikely to be something you’d be proud to
own.
Can you change that? Take on the following challenge and find out.
“America is the country where you can buy
a lifetime supply of aspirin for one dollar
and use it up in two weeks.”
—John Barrymore
CHALLENGE
A startup incubator has tasked you with rethinking the
very concept of a dollar store. Consider ways in which
you can rebrand, restock, and otherwise reinvent a dollar
store to provide products that are essential, sustainable
and desirable.
After you’ve done your initial brainstorming, you should be able
to describe the overall positioning of your store, provide a name
and identity for the store, and visually describe what the store
space would look like.TAKE IT FURTHER
If you choose to create physical products for your store, design a consistent
packaging system for them, considering what kinds of substrates would be
affordable and recyclable.
1,2,3,4,5 
Designer Brent Williams conceived of Greenie’s Attic, an eco-friendly
dollar store “that provides an affordable alternative to the mass-produced,
chemical-heavy household items that we use every day. In addition, [the store]
stocks hundreds of useful materials for use in your own DIY projects… from
chicken wire and precut wood, to seedlings and succulents. Our monthly mailer has
all the resources you need to do them yourself. Leave a smaller footprint on the
environment and your wallet.”6,7,8 
In a thirty-minute class brainstorm, a team that included Michelle Cormack,
Jake Rae, Jessica Thrasher and Katharine Widdows came up with the idea of
Nectar, a store that sells reusable, recyclable containers for a dollar that can be
filled with a wide variety of cleaning, beauty, body and bath products—also
available for a dollar per set amount of fluid ounces. The store interior would be
arranged to resemble the shape and structure of a four-petaled flower, with plenty
of space for customers to buzz about.67
What’s in Store?
30 minutes          
 Retail store experiences
When you think of high-end retail store design, what companies come to
mind? Perhaps Barneys New York, where you see dramatic displays that
mingle high-end clothes with handmade sets that would look more at home in
the Guggenheim Museum than a window overlooking Madison Avenue? Or
is it the Apple Store, with its sleek modern lines and open spaces providing
an architectural backdrop to the stunning industrial design of their products?
These companies specialize in creating visual poetry through artful
arrangement. Foot traffic slows as shoppers stroll past. The doors beckon you
to peek inside. It’s almost like an invisible hook has snagged your elbow and
hauled you face-to-face with a cashmere sweater that you don’t need, but
might want.
With the following challenge, prove that a well-crafted display can sell
almost anything.
“A man is about thirty-eight before he
stockpiles enough socks to be able to get
one matching pair.”
—Merrily Harpur
CHALLENGE
Can you create a store display that has the same stopping power
as those examples noted above—but solely for high-end socks?
As you work on your window display, decide on the name of the
shop and the general look and feel of the entire storefront,!
including use of signage, awnings, logos or etchings on
the windows, and any other important considerations that
will contribute to the store’s overall experience. And
make sure your design will function cross-culturally.
After all, markets such as Japan are sock-crazy.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Once you have the window display completed, devise a space plan for the
store and how the store’s contents could be arranged around your display.
1,2 
Katharine Widdows and Michelle Cormack created a plan for Knit Wit, whose
window display and hand-woven logo treatment is literally “off the wall.”3 
In the allotted time frame, Mark Notermann and I brainstormed the name, logo,
and overall design concept of Toe 2 Toe, a store that specializes in selling bright-
hued socks woven from sustainable materials. The storefront would be floor-to-
ceiling glass, and the centerpiece of the store would be a foot chandelier that
illuminates a wide range of sock colors. The “sock boxes” shown stacked along the
floor are made of 100% post-consumer waste and can be purchased to accompany
gifts—and the proceeds could go toward charities that provide socks and shoes to
those in need.!
68
Urban Diapers
60 minutes          
 Identity development, packaging
If you’re a parent, you know the joys of taking care of a child’s needs until
they’ve been potty trained. You are part of an elite brigade whose common
bond is the ability to talk on the phone with one hand while taking care of a
diaper with the other. As a designer, I’ve always wondered if there was a way
to elevate the chic factor 
and 
the usability of what is otherwise a messy,
multi-year responsibility. Can you be a new parent and look really good
while taking care of number one and number two?
“The reason we design things is to make
them more effective and useful. It’s about
beauty, yes, but it’s also about providing
the client and customer the solution to their
problem. Desire should emerge from the
appropriate solution.”
—David Conrad
CHALLENGE
A client has approached you with an unusually creative
brief (pun intended). You’ve been tasked with branding a
line of baby diapers that caters to urban parents seeking
an edgier feel to their baby care. Invent the name and
logo for this new brand, then apply your identity to the diaper
product itself, thinking through what type of packaging would bemost appropriate for your target audience.
Can you take an accoutrement for an unappealing activity and
make it more useful, sophisticated and cool?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Work out the finer details around the form factor, materials used, overall
visual language, color palette, copy tone and description, and any other
critical attributes of your new brand. Then marry all those details into a visual
narrative to sell retailers on your visionary approach.
1,2,3,4,5,6 
“Cry babies aren’t dry babies.” One of my classes, consisting of Donnie
Dinch, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Mark Notermann, took on this challenge and
created a brand of diapers called Dry as part of a thirty-minute brainstorm. They
envisioned the following messenger bag/diaper dispenser as a way to make diaper
transport more hip. On the inside flap is a handy chart where you can keep track of
when your baby does his or her thing. As part of their creative process, the team
split apart and each person individually tackled a portion of the design: the identity
design (1, 2, 3), the color palette and pattern (4, 5, next page), copy tone and brand
voice, and the physical form factor of the bag (6, next page). Thanks to Jill
Vartenigian for providing the initial idea that brought this challenge to life.!
69
Out of Gamut
90 minutes          
Research, identity development
Do you see what I see?
As designers, we incorporate certain assumptions into our printed or online
solutions. We work with the belief that certain words, images and colors will
evoke predictable responses in the eyes of those who view them.
For the following challenge, this is definitely not the case.
“In visual perception a color is almost
never seen as it really is—as it physically is.
This fact makes color the most relative
medium in art.”
—Josef Albers
CHALLENGE
You’ve been hired by the National Association of the
Color Blind to help them rethink their brand direction.
Conduct the appropriate research, then present to your
client for review the following deliverables: a new name
for their nonprofit organization, a tag-line that succinctly
describes their new brand direction and a logo treatment that
holds up in both solid and color-based executions.
Be prepared to speak to how their membership will view and
interpret the brand materials. The most important thing your
client wants to express in the new identity: “Helping people seethe world through your eyes.”
TAKE IT FURTHER
Put together a color study that explains how those with different types of
color blindness will see your logo. Be sure to explore any potential variations
between printed communications (reflected light) and online media (projected
light).
1 
Mark Notermann’s solution to this challenge was to create a logo and color study
for the Chromalliance, whose tagline is “Color is a relative state.” Mark said, “Oneimportant goal of this mark is to communicate an aspect of color blindness to
normally sighted people.” He recommended Vischeck (
www.vischeck.com
), which
has a utility to test designs for color blind perception.
2 
Full Spectrum: “Looking beyond the limits of vision.” Jake Rae’s take on this
challenge was to have the logo assume the form of an Ishihara Color Test that was
flying apart. His color scheme for the logo causes intentional friction with his name
choice, as the red hues he used resemble those seen most differently by colorblind
people.
3 
Michelle Cormack’s design solution was for Spectrum—“Colour for all • all for
colour.” The letterhead and business papers provide a solid white space balance for
a logo defined by a ribbon evoking the range of the visible color spectrum.4 
C-Lab: “Where seeing minds align.” My approach to this challenge was to create
a prism whose range of colors, in the overlaps and wobbly imbalance between
primary hues, incorporated the more limited palette that would appear to someone
who may be partially color blind. The black pupil in the center implies the shape of
an eye.!
70
Future-Casting
60 minutes          
 Trade show
All too often, our clients are trapped in cold, hard business realities. Sell a
million more widgets by Q4 and bring in twenty cents profit on the dollar.
Conduct this rebrand so we can reap a 10 percent increase in our overall
customer satisfaction rating. Keep up with the Ciscos and Coca-Colas of the
world, and we’ll be barely surviving.
Then there are clients whose aim is to not only participate as a day-to-day
leader in their market, but also to anticipate their role in shaping the future.
Part of the reason that these clients succeed is because they use the power of
design to help determine their overall business strategy.
Never thought about what the future holds for your clients? Think creatively
to form a possible long-term vision for a nonprofit institution in your area.
“My interest is in the future, because I am
going to spend the rest of my life there.”
—Charles F. Kettering, engineer and inventor
CHALLENGE
You’ve been tapped by a modern art museum in your
region to help them brainstorm a booth for next year’s
Art Basel Miami Beach, the most important art show in
the world. The booth needs to sell to collectors, donors,
artists and investors what the vision of the museum will be 
five
years in the future
.
Take thirty minutes to brainstorm big-picture concepts, thenspring into action and execute your best idea as an architectural
rendering, being aware of what materials and inputs are
necessary to fabricate the experience.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Determine the logistics necessary, both in dollars and time, to ship, build and
staff the booth for the four days of the show.
1,2 
Designers Mark Notermann and Jill Vartenigian brainstormed the following
ideas for a Seattle Art Museum exhibit in thirty minutes, which Mark then
executed. “The concept for presenting a future for SAM is based on combining the
element of random play as an act of creation, and digital media as a means of
participation and connection. A kiosk with ‘dirt boxes’—magnetically charged
dirt-like material—would be the interface to control audio and visual output. Each
participant would need to spend time in play, learning the interface, before
becoming more deliberate with their audiovisual compositions. Two touchpad
controls would allow them to wipe the display or save a static image to their e-mail
address or phone as a keepsake.”3,4 
In Jake Rae and Jessica Thrasher’s take on this assignment, the future looks
more like a dark alley filled with trash painstakingly recreated within the confines
of a completely modern building.!
71
This Is for Your Health
60 minutes          
Illustration
When looking at a gorgeous magazine illustration, have you ever had a
feeling that it looked too good for the lack of an idea behind it?
Clever magazine illustrations, conducted with a high level of polish, can
require elaborate, multi-day executions. But without a strong concept, there’s
no reason to spend eons on execution. The resulting work won’t
communicate anything past its surface attributes. The best illustration work
conveys an idea artfully, while leaving traces of the artist’s hand clearly
visible in the work. Otherwise, what is there for the audience to connect
with?
Take part in the following challenge, and seek the human element in a piece
of conceptual illustration.
“The real fight is about what should be in the marketplace
and what should not. Should education be a marketable
commodity? Should health care?”
—Susan George
CHALLENGE
You’ve been commissioned to draw three spot
illustrations for an upcoming magazine article about the
new movement toward membership-based, flat-fee health
care clinics. In the case of the clinic being featured in this
piece, they charge fifty dollars a year for unlimited visits during
business hours, and your cost per visit is only twenty dollars—
with no appointment required and only a brief wait to meet witha doctor.
The art director wants you to make the illustrations look “low
cost but very high quality,” to support the idea in the article that
inexpensive does not necessarily mean cheap.
If you’ve never done conceptual illustration work for a magazine,
this challenge should be a treat. Be sure to focus in on the ideas
first to ensure that they are solid before you start producing the
final product.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Lay out the article in the magazine with the illustrations in place. How can
the illustration style be extended into the type choice and used through the
entire piece?
1,2,3 
Designer and illustrator Lisa Stewart, after completing this challenge, noted
that “this new movement [in affordable health care] requires an understanding of
the general level of care offered at these clinics. Quality service [should be]
reflected with sophisticated imagery, augmenting the presentation for overall well-
being and contentment… The sophisticated calligraphic linework reflects the level
of sophisticated services… Friendly, color-coded images promote basic mnemonic
assistance for non-English-speaking consumers… Beyond the membership article,
the imagery can be utilized within the care clinic as signage as well as additional
print and web collateral.”4 
Your brief wait for treatment should be just as simple as turning and opening a
pill bottle. This simple hand-rendered illustration is from a series by designer Jake
Rae.72
Paper, Plastic, Glass, Vapor
120 minutes          
Research
A large percentage of the human body is made of water. Over seventy
percent of the Earth’s surface is covered by water. In most nations, access to
clean drinking water has only increased. Safe, clean tap water continues to
flow in more than a billion homes worldwide.
Yet if we look just twenty years into the future, the forecast is cloudy. With
the lack of potable water for hygiene, as well as heavy consumption of
freshwater by agriculture and industry, many countries are seeing the
potential for long-term risks to their citizens. The long-term fear is that we’ll
be drowning in scarcity, especially with the reduction of fresh water in
icecaps and glaciers melting due to climate change.
In this challenge, you’ll need to take an ethical stance regarding our society’s
long-term access to fresh water—and back your decision with a well-
designed rationale.
“I think it’s going to be quite hard to make an impact [as a
designer] if your aim is to improve people’s quality of life by
producing aesthetically pleasing graphics alone. If you see
your purpose as communicating a message, then you’ve got to
have something to say.This inevitably means you have a
perspective, which does make [design] a political activity.”
—Delyth Morgan, “Politics” (from 
Good: An Introduction to Ethics in Graphic
Design 
by Lucienne Roberts)
CHALLENGE
A client contacts you with a novel proposition: Help them create
the overall brand position, market strategy and packaging for a!
new bottled water that is likely to be sourced from the
Antarctic. Would you take on the project?
If your answer is yes, clearly describe how would you
name and bottle the project, considering its overall
environmental impact.
If your answer is no, recommend an alternative solution.
No matter which answer you provide, your final deliverable for
this challenge is a polished one-sheet, complete with
infographics, that will persuade your client to accept your
recommendation.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Based on your recommendation, further help your client by crafting a “vision
document” that they can provide to investors to help raise venture capital.
1,2 
Katharine Widdows decided not to draw water for consumption from the
Antarctic/Arctic regions. She then researched alternative technologies that
wouldn’t rely on extracting water directly from fragile ecosystems and created a
one-sheet for atmospheric water generators (AWGs), which “extract moisture from
the atmosphere through a condensation process and transform it into absolutely
pure, healthy drinking water.”3 
In the process of wrestling with this challenge, designer Jessica Thrasher came
up with the idea for Sorce, “Locally sourced water infused with electrolytes,
essences, vitamins and/or caffeine… Anyone who is sick of having to rely on
bottled water due to convenience and portability as well as those wanting to reduce
their environmental footprint… will have the choice to use their own bottle or
purchase a reusable and trendy canteen-style bottle from the vending machine. At
the machine, consumers can choose from chilled/ room-temperature water and then
add or omit electrolytes, herbal/fruit essences, vitamins and/or caffeine. What they
get is a water choice that rivals other flavored and unflavored bottled waters on the
market… Every vending machine will include an informational plaque on the side
displaying a map with the location of the water source for that particular machine
as well as the nutritional values of the infusion ingredients. Facts about bottled
water could also be displayed, if desired.”73
Free Tibet Blog
60 minutes          
 Web site design
Remember the glory days, when a solid brochure-ware web site was the cost
of entry for success in the Internet age?
The days of the static web site, laden with bland descriptions of your
products and services, have been replaced by living conversations.
Nowadays, a single Google search can bring you to the doorstep of
practically any thought leader or media guru, alive or dead. Their blogs and
Twitter feeds dispense all sorts of free wisdom and advice. Many of them
hope to foster and spread their ideas, and in return, they’ll receive input and
collaboration around how those ideas can be advanced.
But even with high-quality blogging systems, it takes a designer’s deft hand
to make an impact in a cluttered online space. Otherwise, what you’re saying
may be lost in the visual noise of Blog Template #487, “Stripes and
Shadows.”
When it comes to blog design, this challenge will push you to transcend the
ordinary.
“There is no need for temples, no need for
complicated philosophies. My brain and my
heart are my temples; my philosophy is
kindness.”
—The Dalai Lama
CHALLENGE!
The Dalai Lama is well represented on Facebook, but
what he really needs is his own blog. The problem is,
there are dozens of “unofficial” blogs out there that could
be confused with the musings of His Holiness.
How can you differentiate the Dalai Lama’s blog
experience? What content would make it the most
meaningful for frequent visitors? Would you seek up-to-the-
moment updates, or weave together material from his many
books, lectures and teachings in order to explain his beliefs? And
most importantly, what kind of communication would you want
to foster between the Dalai Lama and his readership, and how
would it be visually represented?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Based on your overall design strategy, consider how to localize this new blog
for the Dalai Lama’s worldwide audience.1,2 
Designer and illustrator Nicholas Nawroth used elements associated with the
Dalai Lama to design his web site. “I started out by doing some research on the
Dalai Lama’s current official web site as well as a couple of books I have in my
library. I also looked at some of the other Tibet-related blogs. I then developed my
criteria for what the Dalai Lama’s official blog should include: the colors yellow,
red, black; the typeface Trajan Pro (which is used on his official web site); and it
should be clean, simple and convey happiness… I decided to add a hand-drawn sun
and moon (I saw them on the Dalai Lama’s official web site) to balance out the
header. My final touch was to add a bit of texture to the background to tie the
whole page together and complete the handmade aspect of the layout.”3 
Jon Bell at frog design and I timeboxed ourselves for 17 minutes and came up
with ideas for this challenge. We settled upon the notion of having a horizontal
navigation that you could use to move through the wisdom of the various
incarnations of the Dalai Lama. The page would then filter to show the appropriate
entries. I took 10 minutes after that ideation to put together this rough sketch,
implying the ways in which conversations could happen through time in the blog.
The main visual motif that would tie the layout together is the bodhi tree—some of
which take up to 3,000 years to fully mature.4 
Thinking about the wit exhibited by His Holiness, Donnie Dinch’s approach to
this challenge was to propose the “Daily Dose of the Dalai Lama,” with tweet-
sized bites of text that express what’s on his mind.!
74
Blinded by the Light
120 minutes          
Design research, product design
Designing for disability requires great empathy and a willingness to dive
wholesale into the worldview of your audience through deep research and
observation. Yes, you can tie a blindfold over your eyes and experience what
it’s like to be visually impaired. But your sojourn is but a brief interlude
compared to the difficulties of living in a world crafted for those who can see.
Those with visual impairment have little context for the way we’ve
constructed our communities. They construct their own systems for
navigating the world, and as a result, they have unique problems that can be
solved—by design.
In the following challenge, use your powers of design thinking to help solve a
common problem that has unique considerations for those lacking sight.
“There is a condition worse than blindness,
and that is, seeing something that isn’t
there.”
—Thomas Hardy
CHALLENGE
Invent a method for blind people to discern when they’ve
been in the sun too long, thereby helping reduce their risk
of sunburn and skin cancer.
Is it through education? A product? Adapting a piece of
technology they already use? Who will tell them about your
solution, and how will they adopt it?Be aware that no matter what solution you choose, you’ll need to
execute it in a manner that will be consumable by the appropriate
audiences. As an example: If you’re going to provide educational
outreach tools for doctors to use during patient visits, you could
design a brochure with both visual text and Braille. But if you’re
going to reach out directly to visually impaired people via the
Internet, you will need to be aware of how they’re going to
consume your design solution through that medium.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Would your design solution still function if you were to provide it to
someone who is both visually impaired and deaf? Would it be possible to
adapt your solution for those who cannot hear as well?
1,2,3 
I gave this challenge to my Spring 2009 class, but told them to spend their
first hour of brainstorming starting to understand emotionally what it’s like to be
visually impaired. We walked over to the Olympic Sculpture Park in downtown
Seattle, where two students tied cloths over their eyes and spent half an hour being
questioned by the class regarding how it felt to be out in the sun on a hot day.Out of that initial brainstorm, the group gravitated toward creating a physical product that could
be used by blind people without requiring that they carry around an extra object all day. This
prototype for Sunsmart was the result—solar alert sunglasses for the blind.75
Touch Screen of Deaf Rock
120 minutes          
Interaction storyboarding, exhibit design
I live near the Experience Music Project, a museum in Seattle dedicated to
rock music from Chuck Berry to Jimi Hendrix to Sleater-Kinney. One of the
most amazing exhibits in the museum is a sound laboratory. Want to learn
how to play bass? The frets light up, helping teach you the notes. How about
the drums? A full kit, wired up with robotic arms, will guide you through the
rudiments of a funky beat.
Spending a few hours in this exhibit will fulfill the dreams of any tone-deaf
rock aficionado who’s wanted to play a hot lick from a Rolling Stones tune or
sing along with a synth-laden track by the Eurythmics. (And I’ve spent many
an hour there jamming out “Louie Louie” on the guitar.) But the last time I
was there, I realized that enjoying the exhibit was contingent on one specific
thing: the ability to hear.
So, in the following challenge, bring music to those ears that 
can’t 
hear.
“Hearing is a form of touch. I hear it
through the body, by opening myself up.
Sometimes it almost hits you in the face.”
—Evelyn Glennie, a profoundly deaf Scottish solo
percussionist
CHALLENGE
Create a novel exhibit experience at your local children’s
museum that lets deaf people feel different kinds of music. The
exhibit should also accommodate hearing children and parents!
who want to understand what it’s like to experience
different kinds of music physically, not aurally.
What kinds of music would you want to share with these
audiences? How would you prompt deaf children to
interact with the exhibit? What technology would you
use to manifest sound physically?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Find a friend to help you create a paper prototype at the size of the actual
exhibit experience. Then test it in a walkthrough and see how your ideas can
be improved with their feedback.
1,2 
Mark Notermann, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Donnie Dinch tried this
exercise as a team, designing and refining their initial interaction ideas through a
paper prototyping exercise. After forty-five minutes, I attempted to use the
interface without any aural input, then the team clarified various features of their
exhibit based on the feedback.3,4 
This is the first screen of the interface. When you walk in, instructions describe
what will happen when you use the exhibit, and prompt you to choose a single
instrument or a style of music. Once you’ve made a choice, this screen doesn’t
appear again unless you hit the “start over” or “back” button on the exhibit
interface. Using tracing paper makes it easy to swap screens in and out and quickly
revise interface elements.
5,6 
The user sees footprints on the floor. If they stand there, vibrations from the
music will carry up through their legs. The users are prompted to “feel the music”
by putting their hands on the handprints. The entire surface may be vibrating, but
the visual cues will draw the user to start here.
7,8 
The main exhibit interface has a large video player with a scrub bar so you can
see the progress of the video. To the left of the video is an “about” panel with text
that describes the music or instrument being played. Donnie and I discussed the
usability considerations about reading long-form text in touch screen interfaces.
How could the user easily scroll the text without a mouse? Should you use your
hand to scroll the text up and down by touching the screen and dragging the text
downward? That would obstruct a portion of the screen with your arm, blocking
out content. However, if there’s an arrow at the bottom of the screen, content won’t
be covered and you won’t strain your arm by reaching up to keep moving text.9 
The first version of the interface had a large box that overtook more than half of
the exhibit screen. This box contained either single instruments or styles of music.
In the next revision of this part of the interface, the buttons were collapsed into a
menu that was at the bottom of the screen.
10 
What if you aren’t deaf? What if you don’t want to feel the vibration? In the
end, we added on/off toggles for the vibration and audio, as it’s likely that a
mixture of deaf and non-deaf people will play with the exhibit.11 
After the class, Claire Kohler visualized what the exhibit could look like. LED
lights glow and pulse, pointing the exhibit visitors toward use of the touchscreen
interface. The walls could also vary in color, texture and pattern in time to the
music.!
76
Sniff Test
90 minutes          
Exhibit design
Walking through a department store is olfactory assault and battery. Here,
place this sample of Di Patchouli #8 on your wrist, inhale deeply and then go
scrub your arm for a good half hour to rid yourself of the scent memory.
It can be difficult to think clearly when your nose is provoked by
manufactured scents. And an unpleasant aroma provides us with such visceral
emotional feedback that any encounter outside our range of comfort can be
completely overwhelming.
Most designers I know are perfectly comfortable with manipulating visual,
tactile and auditory feedback to create compelling brand experiences. But
when it comes to managing a person’s sense of smell, all bets are off.
In the following challenge, see how you can use your design prowess to
create a scent-focused museum experience that won’t stink for everyone
involved.
“I would rather smell of nothing than of
perfume.”
—Marcus Aurelius, Roman emperor
CHALLENGE
Create an exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution’s
National Museum of Natural History about the history of
perfume. It is critical that each exhibit participant be able
to sample and smell various perfumes in a non-wasteful
manner.Think of a way to control the experience by design so museum
visitors won’t be overwhelmed by too many scents in the exhibit
environment.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Name and brand the exhibit, then determine how you’d advertise it—both in
print ads and in a guerrilla experience that takes your exhibit idea into the real
world.
1,2,3,4 
As part of an in-class brainstorm, Jessica Thrasher, Katherine Widdows,
Michelle Cormack and Shimon Alkon created prototypes of colorfully designed
masks that museum patrons could borrow for their journey through the scent
exhibit. The design of the masks would vary in size and shape, mimicking both
human noses and the noses of various animals—such as the toucan shown here.Jessica then took the class brainstorm notes and sketched out her vision of how the
exhibit design could integrate with the masks.77
Can You Hear Me Now?
90 minutes          
TV commercials
I remember visiting my grandmother on Sunday afternoons when I was a
child. While sitting on the couch in her Baltimore apartment and munching
away at sugar-free raspberry thumbprint cookies, the television would always
be switched on—with the sound off—to keep her company.
As visuals for varying products interwove with golf tournaments and travel
programs, I noticed the importance of sound as part of a broadcast advertising
message. Happy men in their fifties and sixties were silently singing the
praises of prescription drugs via bold italic sans-serif type. Ed McMahon
hawked participation in a multimillion-dollar sweepstakes. Most of those
mid-afternoon commercials were intelligently constructed to work entirely as
visuals, for the hearing impaired. (And vice versa: If you only heard what
they were saying, the message would still be conveyed.)
In the following challenge, you’ll find ways to convey a powerful television
spot without sound. But unlike the examples I noted above, the lack of music
or voiceover in your commercial is critical to the message’s conceit.
“If you’re trying to persuade people to do
something, or buy something, it seems to
me you should use their language, the
language they use every day, the language
in which they think.”
—David Ogilvy
CHALLENGE!
Create storyboards for a thirty-second TV spot
advertising an adoption service that specializes in
locating parents for deaf children. The spot may have no
sound or voiceover whatsoever, only on-screen text and
visuals, plus a title card. As part of your story-boards,
you will need to devise a name and mark for the adoption
service.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Is your concept strong enough to be communicated in any medium? See if
you can translate your spot into print advertising, billboards, radio, or a
guerrilla-marketing campaign for the target audience.
1 
Michael Anthony, a Buffalo-based designer, solved this challenge with thefollowing twelve-frame story-board for 
Signs of Love
.
Frame 1
 (Open to off-white screen soft-focus, some blurred figures in the far distance… At the
same time, sound effects of a pleasant conversation that is muffled and distant, such as a
profoundly deaf person might hear. Sound trails off quickly. No voiceover. There is no sound
again until the final frame.)
Text comes into focus from the distance, then moves across the screen right to left, in
fragments, each at its own medium slow pace: “For someone who can’t hear the words ‘I love
you’…”
Frame 2
 Visual: Indoor medium/ tight shot of a mother—soft daylight all around. She is
reading from a children’s book while projecting a gentle and playful attitude. We don’t see the
child yet.
Frame 3
 Text again moves across the screen right to left: “It doesn’t take much to see love.”
Frame 4
 Visual: Cut to tight shot of the child responding—a naturally charming giggle, not too
intense, they are sharing a bonding moment. (We see the child has a hearing aid.) Visual: Pull
back to reveal both mother and child lying on their tummies or sitting at a small desk sharing
the book.
Frame 5
 Visual: Full shot from a distance, father and child (approx. six years old). Soft
daylight outdoors. Maybe along a shore or at a kids’ sporting event. Interaction: Father and
child are playing; during the action, dad signs and speaks. The child smiles and laughs.
Frame 6
 Text again moves across the screen right to left: “It doesn’t take much to feel love.”Frame 7
 Visual: Cut to tight shot of their hands; the big hand gives the little hand
a soft loving squeeze. Wait a beat… The child’s hand squeezes back.
Frame 8
 Text again moves across the screen right to left: “It doesn’t take much to taste love.”
Frame 9
 Visual: Full shot of an ethnic family in a middle-class kitchen around the dinner table,
sharing a warm moment and meal. Mother, father, sister (around age nine) and child (boy or
girl around age five, with hearing aid). One person may use sign language and speak at the
same time, clearly telling a funny story to all.
Frame 10
 Visual: Child’s bedroom, medium shot of toddler in printed footie pajamas from
behind as she runs into the arms of her parent. The parent scoops up the child, crossing her
arms over the child’s back to embrace her, making the international sign for love.
Frame 11
 Text again moves across the screen right to left: “It doesn’t take much to make a
child with special needs… feel special.”
Sound effects: Sound comes back up muffled. We hear a “mmm” sound that people make when
hugging.
Frame 12
 Voiceover: “Just a simple ‘sign of love.’”Visual: The parent-and-child hug dissolves into the logo that is in the same spot on the screen.
Insert contact info.78
Bending Geography
90 minutes          
 Information design
“Not to scale. Some detail has been omitted.” And that’s how it should be.
Not all maps must precisely render exact street locations in perfect scale and
proportion to be useful to readers. In fact, as information designer William
Bardel points out, distortion and detail omission is often used to produce
better maps. Bending geography can enhance legibility and improve
findability for specific uses. For example, most New York City transit maps
show the island of Manhattan much wider than it actually is to add space for
complex route labeling. Yet this distortion doesn’t seem to bother
commuters. Maps can be stunning examples of information design that are as
much art as pieces of functional utility.
Interested in trying your hand at making one of these maps? Take on the
following challenge by William, which will have you bending the geography
of where you live.
“The virtue of maps, they show what can be
done with limited space, they foresee that
everything can happen therein.”
—José Saramago, 
The Stone Raft
CHALLENGE
Find a map of your town, city or neighborhood and see how
much you can remove from it (such as secondary streets) and
how much you can abstract features such as parks, rivers, roads
and train tracks by using simple geometric forms: squares,!
rectangles, triangles, circles and simple lines.
Can you accomplish this without your map losing its
recognition and function for navigation? What does the
result look like? You may be surprised how beautiful
your town, city or neighborhood looks in a simplified
graphic form.
TAKE IT FURTHER
What if you push your design even further, to a higher level of abstraction?
See what new design opportunities suggest themselves.
1,2,3 
William Bardel says, “Start by studying reference materials to identify major
roadways, parks, natural features and key building footprints. Create a draft sketch
and then modify by smoothing out lines and replacing real-world shapes with
geometric ones. The key to simplified maps is to start with major features and
work your way down to smaller ones. Average your lines between their real
locations, and those that conform to basic geometric proportions.”4,5 
This is an icon map of Rome on dinnerware. Joel Katz’s 
Urban Icons 
project
“was inspired by a visit to the museum under the parvis of Notre-Dame in Paris in
about 1990, which modeled the earliest Paris: a roughly circular wall; in the middle
of which the arc of a river; in the middle of the river an island; in the middle of the
island a church. What could be simpler or more iconic? The very blueprint of the
concept of a city.
“So was born the notion of re-mapping cities (which I have always loved) in circles (which I
have always loved)—sun, moon, earth, plates. I imagined a dinner party with each place setting
a different city, and myself as the Joel Chicago of urban plans. I set myself some objectives and
some constraints: They would be geometric, and axial or radial or concentric, but in any case
’organized,’ as so many cities, whether planned or unplanned, are; while taking enormous
liberties with geography, relationships would be relatively true. A vocabulary of icons began to
emerge—stars for museums, crosses for churches—as did the cities—Philadelphia, London,
Rome, Paris (complete), Kyoto, Bruges, Venice, Florence, Siena, Barcelona.”79
What Do I Know?
120 minutes          
User interface design, research
Remember using the 
Encyclopedia Britannica 
and the 
Oxford English
Dictionary
? These hefty tomes were once considered static repositories of the
“final word” on history, language use and modern culture. They have been
supplanted by ever-evolving online resources such as Wikipedia. Communal
wikis now provide human-curated content that is more relevant than most
other knowledge resources. If you have a question about anything
knowledge-related, an answer is probably somewhere on Wikipedia.
(Including the 
OED
’s definition of the word “knowledge”—in the entry on
knowledge.)
People also send out queries for information to human networks, such as
those that exist on Twitter and Face-book. In a few minutes, you can probe
the knowledge or opinions of your followers and get an almost instant
response without having to seek out that information yourself via search
engines. This is a kind of information acquisition enabled by technology that
had never existed before—what we now call the lazyweb—that leverages our
collective knowledge as people.
“I have a dream for the web [in which computers] become
capable of analyzing all the data on the web—the content,
links and transactions between people and computers.A
‘Semantic Web,’ which should make this possible, has yet to
emerge, but when it does, the day-to-day mechanisms of trade,
bureaucracy and our daily lives will be handled by machines
talking to machines .”
—Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web, 1999
CHALLENGE!
Is there a way to bring the benefits of wikis and the
lazyweb together in one destination on the web? In this
challenge, come up with an idea for a web application
that balances both methods of acquiring meaningful
information—human-curated and human-solicited
information and opinion—in a novel fashion.
Here are some questions you’ll need to answer along the way:
What mechanisms are in place to ensure that the provided
information is accurate? When querying a topic, will you need
results that reference facts, opinions or both? And the thorniest
question of all: What kind of knowledge do you want your web
app to provide users—and will it evolve over time to understand
our needs?
TAKE IT FURTHER
Once you’ve devised your idea and checked the Internet to see if it’s already
been made, try designing the user interface.You may not be able to come up with a feasible solution for this challenge in thetime allotted. Countless designers, scientists and philosophers from antiquity to
present have struggled with the ideas presented here. But do not fear—even two
hours spent thinking about this problem may provide you with surprising insights
and a new point of view on the stated problem.!
80
Well, in My Book…
60 minutes          
Book design
I can’t count how many people I’ve met, especially designers, who say that
they “don’t have a book in them.” I couldn’t disagree more.
My home is crammed full of books of all shapes and sizes. Since an early
age, I’ve spent at least an hour every day curled up with thought-provoking
reads. And if there’s one thing I’ve discovered from my devotion to the
written word, it’s that we have an infinite capacity for learning from other
people’s experience.
Endless blog posts and conversations online may provide us with information
and insight, but the art-fueled moments that strike deep into our hearts more
frequently occur when we delve into books. So, with this final challenge, use
your design talent to share with the world your irreplaceable point of view.
“Regretting my past keeps me from moving
on.”
—Hyun-Jung Hwang, in response to Stefan Sagmeister’s
Things I Have Learned in My Life So Far
CHALLENGE
Design a book that highlights what you’ve discovered
over the course of your life. Use the time limit to write
the outline of your book, and to decide what kinds of
material it will contain. Then, while you’re designing the
book, think about how you will provide readers with a view into
how you see the world—both in your copy and your choice ofillustration style.
TAKE IT FURTHER
Now that you’ve finished your book, think outside it. Could this also be a
stand-up calendar for your desk? An animated screensaver for your
computer? A digital billboard on the street outside your home? How can you
share what you have learned with the world?
1,2,3,4,5,6,7 
This challenge was inspired by Stefan Sagmeister’s 
Things I Have
Learned in My Life So Far
, as well as this lovely project by London-based designer
Alex Ostrowski. Here’s what Alex says about his 
Note to Self 
project: “Every now
and then I am struck with a refreshing clarity of head, a lovely moment in which I
can see a thought so plainly that it offers me a simpler perspective on things. I try
to write them down but usually lose the note—hence this rather large book of tear-
out posters! Each one is designed to help me remember something that I usually
forget from day to day.”Acknowledgments
A good number of people have devoted thousands of hours collectively to
this project, and I must thank them here.
The largest thank-you goes to my wife, Mary Paynter Sherwin. She was a
substantive collaborator with me—from the first glimmerings of this project,
to brainstorming the actual challenges, to helping me edit, proof and source
quotes for the text of the book. Her name should really be on the spine next to
mine.
This book would never have been possible without the participation of the
nine students that partook of my “80 Works for Designers” seminars through
2009, both at the Creative Academy at Seattle Central Community College
and as a class held at Worktank Brand Storytellers. My student
s road-tested
almost every challenge in this volume, with good spirits and only minor
grumbling, and their conceptual work illustrates a good portion of this
volume. They are: Shimon Alkon, Michelle Cormack, Donnie Dinch, Meg
Doyle, Claire Kohler, Mark Notermann, Jake Rae, Jessica Thrasher and
Katharine Widdows. Katharine Widdows deserves the gold star as being the
only student to provide complete solutions for all eighty challenges, through
hell or high water. Mark Notermann also warrants attention for his boundless
creativity and tenacity, which served as inspiration for everyone involved.
All of the working and student designers who solved challenges for this book
deserve praise. Much of their work is within these pages, and what I couldn’t
squeeze in here I will share on the Creative Workshop web site
(
www.CreativeWorkshopTheBook.com
).
The research for this book was initially conducted via a survey that I sent out
to a number of working designers, creative directors and studio principals.
Special thanks to Carrie Byrne, David Conrad, Duane King, Jon Lindstrand,
Wendy Quesinberry, Andy Rutledge, Daniel Schutzsmith and Michel Vrana
for taking part and helping to guide this project.
I have to single out for special thanks the following people: Jill Vartenigian
and Marc Salverda of the Creative Academy at Seattle Central Community
College, who supported me in teaching the first incarnation of this text intheir program; Scott Scheff, who co-taught one of my classes and contributed
ideas that wended their way into a number of challenges; Melinda Partin and
Leslie Rugaber at Worktank Brand Storytellers, who provided me ample time
and space at the office to teach; Dave Fletcher of theMechanism, who
graciously agreed to take on extra projects and help me find designers for the
more difficult challenges; my friends and colleagues at frog design, who
road-tested a number of the challenges involving physical prototyping and
provided ongoing encouragement throughout the publication process; and all
of my family and friends who have supported this project from the beginning.
A special thank you also goes out to Megan Patrick at HOW Books, who saw
the shape of this book in a brief post I’d included on my blog, ChangeOrder:
Business + Process of Design. And to my editor, Amy Schell Owen, who
helped me shape the material into the book you see here today.Resources
Adams, Sean, Noreen Morioka, and Terry Stone. 
Logo Design Workbook: A
Hands-On Guide to Creating Logos
. Gloucester, Mass.: Rockport Publishers,
2004.
Barry, Pete. 
The Advertising Concept Book
. London: Thames & Hudson,
2008.
Bly, Robert W. 
The Copywriter’s Handbook: A Step-By-Step Guide to
Writing Copy That Sells
. 3rd ed. New York: Henry Holt, 2005.
Bringhurst, Robert. 
The Elements of Typographic Style
. 3rd ed. Point
Roberts, Wash.: Hartley & Marks, Publishers, 2004.
Cooper, Alan, Robert Reimann and David Cronin. 
About Face 3: The
Essentials of Interaction Design
. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 2007.
de Bono, Edward. 
Six Thinking Hats
. Boston: Back Bay Books, 1999.
Donaldson, Timothy. 
Shapes for Sounds
. New York: Mark Batty Publisher,
2008.
Dougher, Sarah and Josh Berger. 
100 Habits of Successful Graphic
Designers: Insider Secrets on Working Smart and Staying Creative
.
Gloucester, Mass.: Rockport Publishers, 2003.
Elam, Kimberly. 
Grid Systems: Principles of Organizing Type
. New York:
Princeton Architectural Press, 2004.
Fletcher, Alan. 
The Art of Looking Sideways
. London: Phaidon, 2001.
Garrett, Jesse James. 
The Elements of User Experience:User-Centered
Design for the Web
. Indianapolis: New Riders, 2002.
Gibson, David. 
The Wayfinding Handbook: Information Design for Public
Places
. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009.
Harrison, Sam. 
IdeaSpotting: How to Find Your Next Great Idea
. Cincinnati:
HOW Books, 2006.
Lidwell, William, Kritina Holden and Jill Butler. 
Universal Principles ofDesign
. Beverly, Mass.: Rockport Publishers, 2003.
Lupton, Ellen. 
Thinking With Type: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers,
Editors, & Students
. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2004.
MacKenzie, Gordon. 
Orbiting the Giant Hairball: A Corporate Fool’s Guide
to Surviving With Grace
. New York: Viking, 1998.
McAlhone
, 
Beryl and David Stuart. 
A Smile in the Mind: Witty Thinking in
Graphic Design
. London: Phaidon, 1998.
Meggs, Philip B. and Alston W. Purvis. 
Meggs’ History of Graphic Design
.
4th ed. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Michalko, Michael. 
Thinkertoys: A Handbook of Creative-Thinking
Techniques
. 2nd ed. Berkeley, Calif.: Ten Speed Press, 2006.
Millman, Debbie. 
How to Think Like a Great Graphic Designer
. New York:
Allworth Press, 2007.
Mollerup, Per. 
Marks of Excellence: The History and Taxonomy of
Trademarks
. London: Phaidon, 1999.
Mollerup, Per. 
Wayshowing: A Guide to Environmental Signage Principles
and Practices
. Baden: Lars Müller Publishers, 2005.
Saffer, Dan. 
Designing for Interaction: Creating Innovative Applications and
Devices
. 2nd ed. Berkeley, Calif.: New Riders, 2010.
Saffer, Dan. 
Designing Gestural Interfaces
. Sebastopol, Calif.: O’Reilly
Media, 2009.
Samara, Timothy. 
Making and Breaking the Grid: A Graphic Design Layout
Workshop
. Beverly, Mass.: Rockport Publishers, 2002.
Samara, Timothy. 
Typography Workbook: A Real-World Guide to Using
Type in Graphic Design
. Gloucester, Mass.: Rockport Publishers, 2004.
Shaughnessy, Adrian. 
How to Be a Graphic Designer, Without Losing Your
Soul
. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005.
Shedroff, Nathan. 
Design Is the Problem: The Future of Design Must Be
Sustainable
. Brooklyn: Rosenfeld Media, 2009.Sherin, Aaris. 
SustainAble: A Handbook of Materials and Applications for
Graphic Designers and Their Clients
. Beverly, Mass.: Rockport Publishers,
2008.
Spiekermann, Erik and E.M. Ginger. 
Stop Stealing Sheep & Find Out How
Type Works
. 2nd ed. Berkeley, Calif.: Adobe Press, 2003.
Sullivan, Luke. 
Hey, Whipple, Squeeze This: A Guide to Creating Great Ads
.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
Visocky O’Grady, Jennifer and Ken Visocky O’Grady. 
The Information
Design Handbook
. Cincinnati: HOW Books, 2008.
Wheeler, Alina. 
Designing Brand Identity: An Essential Guide for the Whole
Branding Team
. 3rd ed. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
Yamashita, Keith and Sandra Spataro. 
Unstuck
. New York: Portfolio, 2007.Permissions
©2009 Sean Baker/Pictoric and Lenny Vella/‘peeps creative
Prototype ©2009 Mark Notermann, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Donnie
Dinch. Photographs ©2009 David Sherwin
01-1 
©2009 Claire Kohler
01-2,3 
©2009 Mark Notermann
01-4 
©2009 David Sherwin
02-1 
©2009 Donnie Dinch
02-2 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
02-3 
©2009 Claire Kohler
03-1 
©2009 Michel Vrana. Car photograph ©2009 Stephen James Nesbit.
Volkswagen logo © Volkswagen of America
03-3 
©2009 Jake Rae
03-2 
©2009 Donnie Dinch. Apple logo © Apple, Inc.
04-1,2,3 
©2009 Meta Newhouse
04-4 
©2009 Jake Rae and Katharine Widdows. ©2009 Photograph by David
Sherwin
04-5 
©2009 Erik Borreson
05-1,2,3 
©2009 David Sherwin
05-5 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
05-4 
©2009 Jake Rae
05-6 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
06-1 
©2009 Mark Notermann
06-3 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
06-2 
©2009 Jake Rae
06-5 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
06-4 
©2009 David Sherwin06-6 
©2009 Subarna Ghoshal
07-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Jake Rae
08-1,2 
©2009 Brandon L. Dawley
08-3,4,5 
©2009 Richard B. Wallace 09-1 ©2009 Michelle Cormack. Text ©
Slow Food
09-3 
©2009 Mark Notermann
09-2 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
10-1 
©2009 Michel Vrana
10-3 
©2009 Michelle Cormack and Shimon Alkon. ©2009 Photographs by
David Sherwin
10-2 
©2009 Katharine Widdows and Jessica Thrasher
10-4,5,6 
©2009 Jake Rae and David Sherwin. ©2009 Photographs by David
Sherwin
11-1,2,3 
©2009 Manda Szewczyk
11-4 
©2009 Lisa Stewart/ ECStewart Designs
11-5 
©2009 Erik Borreson
12-2 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
12-1 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
12-3 
©2009 Jake Rae
13-1,2,3 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
14-1,2 
©2009 David Sherwin
14-3,4,5,6 
©2009 Donnie Dinch, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Mark
Notermann. ©2009 Photograph by David Sherwin
15-5 
©2009 Jake Rae
15-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
16-2 
©2009 Mark Notermann
16-1 
©2009 David Sherwin
17-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Sean Baker/ Pictoric and Lenny Vella/ ‘peeps creative
18-1,2,3 
©2009 David Sherwin. Wikipedia content modified under a CreativeCommons Attribution-ShareAlike license. Album cover is in the public
domain.
19-2 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
19-1 
©2009 Mark Notermann
19-3 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
20-1,2,3,4,5,6,7 
©2009 Donnie Dinch, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Mark
Notermann
21-1,2,3,4,5 
©2009 Dave Fletcher
22-1,2,3 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
22-4 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
23-1,2,3 
©2009 Mark Notermann
23-4 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
23-5 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
24-1 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
24-2 
©2009 Donnie Dinch
24-3 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
24-4 
©2009 Mark Notermann
24-5 
©2009 David Sherwin
25-1,2 
©2009 David Sherwin
25-4 
©2009 David Sherwin
25-3 
©2009 Britta Burrus Design
26-2 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
26-1 
©2009 David Everly
26-3 
©2009 David Sherwin
27-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 
©2009 Nicholas J. Nawroth
28-4 
©2009 David Sherwin. Film images ©2009 Wes Kim
28-1,2,3 
©2009 Grace Soto
29-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Jerry Lofquist29-5,6 
©2009 Mark Notermann
29-7 
©2009 Donnie Dinch
30-1,2,3 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
31-1,2 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
31-3 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
32-1 
Design ©2009 Jake Rae. Concept ©2009 Jake Rae and Michelle
Cormack
32-2 
Sketch ©2009 Katharine Widdows
33-1,2,3 
©2009 Cody Moore / Waking Illustration
33-4,5 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
34-1 
©2009 Mark Notermann
34-3 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
34-2 
©2009 Jake Rae
35-2 
©2009 Jake Rae
35-1 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
35-3 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
36-1,2,3,4,5,6 
©2009 Jarred Elrod
37-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Dave Fletcher
37-5 
©2009 Lawrence Miller
38-1,2 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
38-3 
©2009 Jake Rae
39-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 
©2009 Cody Moore, Waking Illustration
40-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 
©2009 Melanie Gilliam
41-1,2,3 
Design ©2009 Mark Notermann. Logo ©2009 Woodland Park Zoo
42-2,3,4 
©2009 Tom Price
42-1 
©2009 Artists for Humanity
44-1,2 
©2009 Carrie Byrne
44-3 
Artwork ©2009 Ethan Martin. ©2009 Photograph by Kariann Burleson44-1 
Video ©2009 Scott Scheff and David Sherwin. Logo ©2009 Mark
Notermann
45-1,2,3,4,5 
©2009 Grace Cheong
46-2,3 
©2009 Melanie Noel
47-1 
©2009 Mark Baskinger
47-2 
©2009 Jason May
48-1,2 
©2009 Claire Kohler
48-3,4 
Concept ©2009 Mark Notermann and Claire Kohler. Design ©2009
Mark Notermann
49-1 
Concept ©2009 Shimon Alkon. Photograph ©2009 David Sherwin
49-2 
©2009 Jake Zukowski, Abdullah Shaikh and Jeff Glasser
49-3,4,5 
©2009 David Sherwin
50-2 
©2009 Meg Doyle
50-1 
©2009 Claire Kohler
50-3 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
50-4 
©2009 Lisa Stewart, ECStewart Designs
51-1,2,3,4,5,6 
©2009 Grace Cheong
52-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Katharine Widdows. Photographs ©2009 David Sherwin
53-1,2,3 
©2009 Katharine Widdows. Source photographs ©2009 Claire
Kohler
53-4 
©2009 Mark Notermann. Source photographs ©2009 Claire Kohler
53-5 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher. Source photograph ©2009 Claire Kohler
54-1,2,3 
©2009 Mark Notermann
54-4,5 
©2009 Tom Takigayama
54-6,7 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
55-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Dave Fletcher
56-1,2,3 
©2009 frog design
57-1,2 
©2009 Brian LaRossa57-3 
Photo ©2009 Jan Habraken
58-1,2,3 
©2009 Tithi Kutchamuch
58-4,5 
©2009 Katie Greff
59-1,2 
©2009 David Sherwin and Michelle Cormack
59-3,4 
Design ©2009 Donnie Dinch. Concept ©2009 Donnie Dinch and
Mark Notermann
59-5 
©2009 Aynex Mercado
59-6 
©2009 Meg Doyle and David Sherwin
60-1,2 
©2009 Donnie Dinch
60-3 
©2009 Meg Doyle and Mark Notermann
61-1,2,3,4 
©2009 David Sherwin
62-1,2,3,4,5 
©2009 Donica Ida, Terry Liu, Francis Luu, Ivy Sa and Kristine
Matthews
62-6,7,8,9 
©2009 Shimon Alkon, Michelle Cormack, Jake Rae, Jessica
Thrasher and Katharine Widdows
63-1,2 
©2009 Mark Notermann. ©2009 iPhone template elements from
www.teehanlax.com/blog/?p=447
63-3,4 
©2009 Donnie Dinch
64-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Tithi Kutchamuch
65-1,2,3,4 
©2009 Tim Aidlin
66-1,2,3,4,5 
©2009 Brent Williams
66-6,7,8 
Design ©2009 Jessica Thrasher. Concept ©2009 Michelle Cormack,
Jake Rae, Jessica Thrasher and Katharine Widdows
67-1,2 
Design ©2009 Katharine Widdows. Concept ©2009 Katharine
Widdows and Michelle Cormack
67-3 
©2009 David Sherwin and Mark Notermann
68-1,2,3,4,5,6 
©2009 Donnie Dinch, Meg Doyle, Claire Kohler and Mark
Notermann
69-1 
©2009 Mark Notermann69-2 
©2009 Jake Rae
69-3 
©2009 Michelle Cormack
69-4 
©2009 David Sherwin
70-1,2 
©2009 Mark Notermann and Jill Vartenigian
70-3,4 
Concept ©2009 Jake Rae and Jessica Thrasher. Sketch ©2009 Jake
Rae
71-1,2,3 
©2009 Lisa Stewart/ ECStewart Designs
71-4 
©2009 Jake Rae
72-1,2 
©2009 Katharine Widdows
72-3 
©2009 Jessica Thrasher
73-1,2 
©2009 Nicholas J. Nawroth
73-3 
©2009 Jon Bell and David Sherwin
73-4 
©2009 Donnie Dinch
74-1,2 
Concept and design ©2009 Jessica Thrasher, Katharine Widdows,
Michelle Cormack, Jake Rae and Shimon Alkon
75-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 
Prototype ©2009 Mark Notermann, Meg Doyle,
Claire Kohler and Donnie Dinch. Exhibit visualization ©2009 Claire Kohler.
Photographs ©2009 David Sherwin
76-1,2,3,4 
Design ©2009 Jessica Thrasher. Concept ©2009 Jessica Thrasher,
Katherine Widdows, Michelle Cormack and Shimon Alkon
77-1 
©2009 Michael Anthony
78-1,2,3 
©2009 William Bardel
78-4,5 
©2009 Joel Katz
80-1,2,3,4,5,6,7 
©2009 Alex OstrowskiWe hope you enjoyed reading this Simon &
Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus,
get updates on new releases, deals, recommended
reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to
sign up and see terms and conditions.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we
can register this ebook and send you more of what you
like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers
in your inbox.