CREATING A
BRAND IDENTITY
®CREATING A
BRAND IDENTITY®
A GUIDE FOR DESIGNERS
CATHARINE SLADE-BROOKING
LAURENCE KING PUBLISHINGPublished in 2016 by
Laurence King Publishing Ltd
361–373 City Road
London EC1V 1LR
Tel +44 20 7841 6900
Fax +44 20 7841 6910
Email: 
enquiries@laurenceking.com
www.laurenceking.com
© 2016 Laurence King Publishing Ltd
Catharine Slade-Brooking has asserted her right under the Copyright, Designs, and Patent Act 1988, to
be identified as the Author of this Work.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978-1-78067-562-6
Design by Lizzie Ballantyne
Printed in China
Special thanks to:
Richard and Elliott and to all my students – past, present and future. This book is dedicated to them.CONTENTS
Introduction
Chapter 1: Branding Basics
Consumer culture – why do we buy?
What is a brand?
Why do we brand?
How does branding work?
The history of branding
How are things changing?
The future for brands
Maintaining beloved brand status
Case study:
 Uniqlo
Chapter 2: Brand Anatomy
Logos
Case study: Eurostar
Straplines/taglines
Appealing to the senses
Brand architecture
Brand families
Internal and external branding
Branding terminology
Chapter 3: Brand Strategy
Standing out from the crowd
Unique selling point (USP)Semiotics
Exercise
: Brand analysis
Case study
: Apple Mac
Semiotic toolbox
Case study
: Milka chocolate
Naming brands
Exercise:
 Creating a mood board
The use of emotion
Brand personality
Target marketing and brand positioning
Brand revolutions
Cultural branding
Rebranding
Case study:
 Lucozade
Trend forecasting and analysis
Brand failures
Brand ethics
Chapter 4: The Design Process
Why use a design process?
How does the design process work?
The stages of the design process
The design team
The creative process
The design process in the academic environment
Exercise:
 Student exercises
Chapter 5: Research
Why do we need to research?
Research methods
Researching the audience
The use of social media in researchCase study: Proctor and Gamble
Visual research boards
Exercise:
 Designing a consumer-profile board
Other forms of research
Chapter 6: Analysis
Defining the USP
Market sector analysis
Product 
category analysis
Competitor brand analysis
Exercise:
 Conducting a simple competitor brand analysis
Analyzing the brand environment
Case study:
 Fazer café
Future forecasting
Analysis of data and interpreting opportunities
Exercise:
 Designing visual analysis boards
Brand creation strategies
Research and analysis in an educational setting
Chapter 7: Concept Development
Inspiration
The big idea
Visualizing and analyzing inspiration
Initial concept ideas
Organizing your source material
Chapter 8: Delivering the Final Design
Choosing the best concept
Exercise:
 How to develop an assessment strategy
Final refinements
Presentation materials
Designing effective communication boards
Digital versus print presentation
sThe client presentation
Testing the final brand identity
Design development
Launching the brand identity
Beyond delivery
Glossary
Recommended Reading
Index
Picture CreditsINTRODUCTION
Why should you read this book?
We are very fortunate that there is now a host of books covering branding
from a wide range of perspectives, including advertising, design
management, business and marketing. There are, however, only a few written
from the designer’s perspective and no others that explore the complex
practical creative processes involved in creating a brand.
This book has therefore two main aims. The first is to introduce you to
branding, a complex and fascinating area of visual communication that spans
the practical skills and techniques of graphic design as well as aspects of
social and cultural theory. The second is to provide you with the creative
tools – both theoretical and practical – that will enable you to tackle
designing your own brands, from researching the target consumer to
considering the name, as well as how to apply the final brand identity.
Who should read it?
The book is designed to appeal to anyone who aspires to or works in this
fascinating area of design. You may be a degree-level student looking for
guidance and inspiration or a lecturer sourcing course materials. This title
will also benefit graduates and postgraduate students seeking insights into an
industry that they are considering. Finally the book also aims to appeal to
design practitioners needing a refresher and companies embarking on
commissioning a brand for the very first time.
Branding is a global phenomenon, with the growth of the discipline
particularly evident in developing nations. For these emerging economic
powers the importance of branding in helping to secure new markets for their
products both at home and internationally is clearly understood. Therefore the
book also aims to encompass issues of cultural design, with the intention ofdeveloping a wider international readership.
What will you learn?
The book is divided into two key sections. The first places branding into a
theoretical and historical context, highlighting how and why we brand and
branding strategies. Focusing on key theories related to consumerism, it
explores issues of brand identity, why we buy and how branding is changing
in the twenty-first century. You will also be introduced to the anatomy of
branding, helping you to gain an understanding of the vocabulary and
terminology used in the industry. Finally you will develop an appreciation of
the strategies used by designers to create successful brands, including the
application of semiotics to enhance meaning and how to identify unique
selling points to ensure successful sales.
The second section of the book introduces you to the practical branding
design process used by industry to create a brand. It highlights key activities
undertaken by designers to ‘manage’ the creation of a successful brand
identity and to ensure that they stick effectively to the client’s original brief.
You will learn how the design process works by exploring the ‘step-by-step’
methodology used by design agencies to research, define an audience, create
a unique name and logo and test a new identity.The desire to visualize an identity is not a modern phenomenon. These beautiful impressions left by our
ancestors in the Cueva de las Manos (Cave of the Hands) in Argentina date back 13,000 years
.
How is the book designed?
As designers we are primarily visual animals, so the book uses images
throughout to illustrate the text, including examples of professional design
concepts, brand case studies and diagrams. Flow-charts are also used
extensively to highlight the step-by-step methodology applied by industry
professionals to create a brand. Other examples of how to undertake practical
design processes, such as the creation of consumer and mood boards, are
explored through creative exercises. ‘Tips & tricks’ sections give guidance on
how to undertake a variety of creative assignments.
What was the inspiration for the book?
The content of this book has been derived from two main sources. The first
was experience of entering the world of branding as a graduate and having to
learn the hard way, ‘on the job’. The years of creating brands for both small
independent start-up businesses and multinational corporations has in turnenabled me to develop teaching materials for undergraduate and postgraduate
students on the Graphic Communication course at the University of the
Creative Arts.
Many of the diagrams, exercises and flow charts you will see in the book
have been developed through my own creative practice and tested by my
students. It is my alumni that I have to thank for many of the other images
within this publication. With careers ranging from Junior Designers to
Creative Directors and from Studio to Account Managers, they have provided
me with an invaluable resource of information on current industry practice.
They have been generous in not only offering examples of their own work,
but also personal insights into their own creative practice, for which I am
exceptionally grateful.
Finally I hope that this book will not only help to serve as a resource and
support for teaching, offering a window into this fascinating area of graphic
design, but will also inspire and guide those whose ambitions are to enter it.Celebrity branding has become ubiquitous in our modern consumer society. The creation of a unique
identity enables stars to promote not only themselves but also a whole range of consumer products.CHAPTER 1: BRANDING BASICS
Brands have become an integral part of modern consumer society. They
are used to promote everything from jeans to the British Royal Family.
However, arriving at a satisfactory definition of a ‘brand’ is far from
simple.
A brand is much more than a product you buy. Brands are as relevant to
businesses as to services, and they can be applied to ideas and concepts
as well as to products – a brand can even represent an individual
celebrity. To be able to define what a brand is and does in its simplest
form, it is helpful to 
consider first why people buy, and what influences
their choice of one product over another.
CONSUMER CULTURE – WHY DO WE BUY?
‘Women usually love what they buy, yet hate two-thirds of what is in their
closets.’
Mignon McLaughlin, American journalist and author (1913–1983)
Being a consumer is about identifying one’s needs and satisfying them by
choosing, buying and using a product or service. These needs can be as
varied as comsumers themselves, although there are basic requirements that
are fundamental for all humans, namely food, clothes and shelter.
These basic necessities are then followed by more subjective needs, defined
by a person’s particular lifestyle, which is, in turn, predetermined by their
culture, society, social group and class.
These purchases are often driven by more than basic need, as aspirations and
desires also influence what people choose to buy. Social pressures can play
an important role in this, as the need to fit in, or appear more successful thanthose around us, can be highly influential in our buying decisions.
Understanding why people buy and the triggers that make them choose one
item over another is key to designing appropriately and successfully for
today’s brand-savvy consumer.
What we buy is determined not just by our basic needs, but also by what our chosen brands 
say about
us. Brands therefore position themselves to become integral to consumers’ lifestyles, whatever their
social aspirations.
What is Consumerism?
The 
Oxford English Dictionary
 first featured the word ‘consumerism’ in its
1960 edition, defining it as an ‘emphasis on or preoccupation with the
acquisition of consumer goods’. However, more modern critical theory often
describes it in relation to the tendency of an individual to define themselves
in relation to the products and services they buy or consume. This trend is
most evident in the perceived status of owning certain luxury goods, such as
cars, clothing or jewellery, with some people willing to pay a premium to
own a product that has been made by a particular brand.
1
Consumer culture theory argues that people buy one brand over another
because they feel it reflects their own personal identity, or one that they wishto create.
2
In her book 
Consumer Culture
, Celia Lury explores the way an individual’s
position in social groups – structured by class, gender, race and age – affects
the nature of his or her participation in consumer culture. She highlights the
powerful role consumption plays in our lives, and how our highly
sophisticated modern consumer culture provides new ways of creating
personal, social and political identities. One of the conclusions she reaches
has a direct relationship to the role played by design; she argues that as
consumer culture has become increasingly stylized, it has come to provide an
important context for everyday creativity.
Whether it’s a second-hand VW campervan or a Mini Cooper, the car you drive is an obvious indicator
of both your personality and lifestyle.
WHAT IS A BRAND?
‘Products are created in a factory. Brands are created in the mind.’
Walter Landor, designer and branding/consumer-research pioneer (1913–1995)The practice of branding is far from new. Early man began the custom of
leaving a mark on objects to signify ownership of property, to reflect a
person’s membership of a group or clan, or to identify political or religious
power. The pharaohs of ancient Egypt left their signature in the form of
hieroglyphs all over their temples, tombs and monuments.
The ancient Norse branded their animals with hot irons – a practice continued
today by American cowboys, amongst others. However, the term ‘brand’ in
its contemporary sense is relatively new, being principally the attachment of a
name and reputation to something or someone, primarily to distinguish it
from the competition.
A brand is also far more than the name, logo, symbol or trademark that
highlights its origin; it is imbued with a set of unique values that defines its
character and works as an unwritten contract, promising to deliver
satisfaction by providing consistent quality each time it is bought, used or
experienced. Brands also seek to connect emotionally with their consumers,
to ensure that they are always the first and only choice, creating lifelong
relationships.
The whole brand creation process – its design and marketing – has
consequently become vital to the success of any new product, service or
venture. Indeed, in the twenty-first century the manipulation and control of a
brand’s image has become, in many cases, more important than the ‘real’
thing the brand represents, with the design of the product now often acting as
a vehicle for the brand’s values. Rather than a brand existing to sell more of a
particular product, products are now developed to extend and reinforce a
brand success, and the ‘image makers’ – designers, ad agencies and brand
managers – have become central to our modern consumer culture.Marking systems have always been important conveyors of information, especially in societies with
restricted literacy. In ancient Egypt, carved oval cartouches were used to indicate a royal name.Branding is said to have started in Sweden during the Middle Ages. A brand in this context was the
action of burning a symbol into the flesh of an animal in order to signify ownership.It might be argued that branding has changed very little in the last 3,000 years. Gabrielle ‘Coco’
Chanel’s iconic ‘cartouche’ logo has made her name immortal in the world of high fashion.WHY DO WE BRAND?
‘The primary function of brands is to reduce our anxiety in making
choices. The more we sense we know about a product, the less anxious
we feel.’
Nicholas Ind, writer and partner in Equilibrium 
Consulting
Trust is one of the key reasons why we brand. As a result it has become
central to the marketing of almost all products and services, used to build
awareness and extend customer loyalty. Why we brand therefore goes
beyond just a logo and encompasses the whole product concept, as well as
the promise to deliver quality and predictability.
A successful brand uses its unique set of values to drive a successful
business strategy – to encourage consumers to choose it over its
competitors. Therefore a successful brand is one that achieves a high
degree of recognition by consumers. However, this relationship is based
upon reputation, so for a brand to retain its position, it must ensure that it
continuously fulfils the customer’s expectations.
HOW DOES BRANDING WORK?
‘Branding is principally the process of attaching a name and reputation to
something or someone.’
Jane Pavitt, Head of the History of Design Programme at Royal College of Art, and author of
Brand.New
In its simplest form the practice of branding is about creating differentiation,
making one product or service seem different from competitor products.
Brand values are the core beliefs or philosophy that a brand upholds, and
which differentiate it from its competitors. Another way of characterizing a
brand is by identifying its brand personality. One way of identifying this is by
using social psychologist Jennifer Aaker’s ‘Dimensions of brand personality’
framework, which uses a set of human characteristics to characterize a brand.
These are grouped into five core dimensions:1.
Sincerity: domestic, honest, genuine and cheerful
2.
Excitement: 
daring, spirited, imaginative, up to date
3.
Competence: Reliable, responsible, dependable, efficient
4.
Sophistication: glamorous, pretentious, charming, romantic
5.
Ruggedness: tough, strong, outdoorsy
This technique can be used to distinguish between brands that otherwise
belong to a similar product category – for instance, Land Rover falls into the
rugged category, while Ferrari represents the sophisticated – and is often used
by design agencies to underpin the creation of unique brand values. Its use
has helped to transform the way designers consider communicating with
target audiences, and plays an important role in the creation of techniques
that drive today’s vibrant, social-network driven brand communities.
3
If successful, a branding strategy will create the perception in the mind of
consumers that there is no other product or service on the market quite the
same. As a brand is ultimately a promise made to a customer to deliver
consistently, branding is therefore the act of creating a physical set of
attributes – a brand name, brand identity, strapline and so on – along with
less tangible assets, such as the emotional benefits offered by the brand.
To succeed in branding you must understand the needs and wants of your
customers. There are many different ways to create a successful branding
strategy, but most design agencies start with research. The practical step-by-
step processes involved in designing the final brand are covered in detail in
the later chapters of this book, but they can be reduced to five key stages:
1.
Customer research and visual enquiry
2.
Concept development
3.
Design development
4.
Design implementation
5.
Testing
Many branding agencies use this staged design method as it incorporates aholistic approach to developing an identity, i.e. it considers the needs, desires
and aspirations of the target consumer, the current market and competitive
products or services, and it ensures that the client is involved in making key
decisions during the process.
THE HISTORY OF BRANDING
‘In some ways life has not changed much over the last 2,000 years. The
fundamentals of living, our instinctive human needs, are essentially the
same.’
Robert Opie, consumer historian and founder of the Museum of Brands, Packaging and
Advertising
Perhaps the most popular marketing myth is that branding began in the great
unfenced prairies of America’s Wild West, where cattle men would literally
‘brand’ their stock with a red-hot iron, signifying ‘This cow belongs to me
and is my property’. However, Giles Lury, author of 
Brandwatching: Lifting
the Lid on Branding
, traces branding back to much earlier – around 9,000
years ago – when a Roman oil-lamp maker began stamping the word ‘Fortis’
on his lamps, thereby providing the first-known use of a trademark.
Lury suggests, though, that the modern approach to branding was not
developed until the nineteenth century, when a rapid rise in the standard of
living due to the Industrial Revolution led to the development of a new mass
market. As populations grew rapidly and moved from the countryside, where
families had been able to grow their own food, into towns and cities, they lost
their ability to be self-sufficient, and so a new market for manufactured goods
was born. Mass distribution, via the development of the railways, ensured the
viability of the mass market, while a substantial rise in literacy led to the
growth of newspapers and other forms of mass communication, creating a
platform for advertising. Manufacturers began to develop successful
communication strategies, giving birth to the modern concept of branding.
Lury quotes Wally Olins and his description of this simple, but highly
original process:
It was to take a household product, a commodity, no different
fundamentally from any other made by any other manufacturer, andendow it with special characteristics through the imaginative use of
name, packaging and advertising … They advertised them heavily and
distributed them widely. The achievement of those companies was
prestigious.
The success of some of these early branding pioneers continues even into the
twenty-first century. For instance, Kellogg’s first filed its company papers in
1906, after inventing its corn flakes almost by accident in 1898; it is now
considered the most successful cereal company in the world. Del Monte has
been the leading manufacturer in canned fruit since 1892. The year 1893 saw
the introduction of Juicy Fruit, the oldest brand in the Wrigley family of
chewing gums, launched just a few months ahead of Wrigley’s Spearmint.
And jars of Marmite were first placed on the shelf in 1902.
‘Firmalampen’ (factory lamps) were one of the first mass-produced goods in Roman times. These
examples, found in Modena in Italy, clearly show their brand names stamped in the clay bases.Possibly one of the world’s best known brands, Kellogg’s was founded in 1906 by two American
brothers, Will Keith Kellogg and Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, who changed breakfast forever by
flaking wheat grains.The Wrigley’s Spearmint wrapper design has remained remarkably unchanged since its introduction
in 1893. The design incorporates the distinctive single-headed spear emblazoned with the word
‘spearmint’.Del Monte created its ‘shield’ brand in 1909. Putting their brand promise right at the heart of the
logo, the company reassured its customers with a seal that was, in their words, ‘Not a label – but a
guarantee’.Marmite is a dark, tangy yeast-extract spread. Originating in the UK in 1902, the packaging was
similar to a French casserole dish known as a 
marmite
 (pronounced MAR-meet) – possibly the
inspiration for the brand name
.
The use of clever marketing and advertising was one reason that these brands
became so successful. However, they still retained their position more than a
hundred years later because they also offered a real consumer benefit. Buyingproducts in the nineteenth century could be a highly risky exercise – many
were contaminated by cheap ‘fillers’, used to pad out the goods and increase
profit. Some of these products were harmless, but others could lead to serious
ill health. As Lury explains, ‘Brands, with their superior packaging and
promise of consistent high standards, could offer a persuasive alternative – an
easily recognizable and reassuring guarantee of quality.’
Bernd Schmitt and Alex Simonson, in their book 
Marketing Aesthetics
,
propose an alternative origin for modern branding practice – the creation in
the 1930s of consumer packaged goods by manufacturers such as Procter and
Gamble. They argue that the modern concept of branding was then fully
realized in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when marketing managers realized
that short-term financial targets were not offering the support brands needed
to help them gain status in the marketplace. As a result, companies started to
reject an ad hoc approach that responded to changes in markets and
consumers in a reactive way, and began to create proactive, long-term ‘brand
strategies’, supported by complex research into consumer purchasing choices.
HOW ARE THINGS CHANGING?
‘The Internet and in particular the advent of social media means that the
number of contact points a customer has with a brand has proliferated.’
Jane Simms, freelance business journalist
In the last few decades there have been significant changes in the way
individuals communicate and are communicated to. Traditionally our
purchasing decisions were made in-store, often influenced by television,
radio, billboard or magazine advertising. Brands reinforced their message
through beautiful packaging, clever sponsorship and product placements in
television programmes and films.
However, as Glen Manchester, CEO and founder of global technology
company Thunderhead.com explains: ‘There is a fundamental shift taking
place in the way that brands build relationships with consumers, driven by
the combined forces of social and mobile technologies.’
4
 The Internet has
provided the perfect platform for two-way communication between
individuals and brands, with instant opportunities for consumers to capture‘real time’ experiences through the use of social media such as Facebook
and sites including Instagram, Snapchat and Tumblr. These forms of
communication also allow brands to engage with their customers 24 hours
a day, allowing consumers to be involved with a brand in ways traditional
‘static’ media can’t achieve.
The advent of smartphones and tablets has revolutionized the speed and
volume of messages which brands can communicate to consumers, and
emails, instant messaging, RSS feeds and social media offer a dazzling
array of digital contact points. These points of contact between a brand and
a customer are known as 
touchpoints
, and these help brands to maintain a
prominent presence in the minds of consumers.
THE FUTURE FOR BRANDS
‘… for long-term value, brands need emotional as well as technological
appeal. Indeed, [forward-looking companies] will have to invest in their
brand as their major sustainable competitive advantage.’
Rita Clifton, branding expert and previous 
chairman of Interbrand
Brands have now been given the chance to transform themselves again.
These new technologies enable them to exist beyond advertising and the
products they produce. They can even become a part of an individual’s
lifestyle, thanks to Twitter and Facebook. In the last decade these new forms
of global mass communication have allowed billions of conversations
between consumers previously unknown to each other. They enable
interaction between tens of millions of people everyday, and generate billions
of website hits each month.
It is not only how we now interact that has changed but where and when. The
mobile phone is now far more than a two-way communication device. The
convergence of mobile technology, the Internet and location-based systems
such as satellite navigation now offer us immediate and continuous access to
entertainment, news, information, our friends, family and colleagues
wherever we are, at any time.
Smartphone users can now use a whole host of personally defined apps, toperform tasks ranging from financial transactions to bird-spotting, and the
advent of NFC-enabled handsets for mobile payments means consumers will
soon no longer need to carry a wallet. Experts are predicting the next big
step-change in technology to be the arrival of multiscreen services that allow
consumers to seamlessly move from phone to tablet to computer to TV,
providing cloud-based syncing of content, experiences and online purchases.
Bar code and QR code marketing will become more sophisticated too,
designed to make consumers aware of what a product is and how to use it.
Samsung has now even designed a wearable digital device (the Gear 2 and
Gear 2 Neo) that removes the need to carry a phone at all. These devices
provide ‘enhanced wearable experiences’ for fitness, shopping, social media,
music, news and even sleep management, all offering the opportunity of
enhanced brand experiences and new touchpoints.
We are living in an age where we can be always on, always connected, and
consumers are becoming increasingly sophisticated and educated, consuming
only what is relevant to them. The challenge for brands, therefore, is to
become part of the big link by offering immediacy, flexibility, portability,
interactivity and ownability, engaging with their customers at deeper and
even more emotional levels.From fashion to cleaning product manufacturing, top brands in many different categories are utilizing
Twitter to help ‘humanize’ their brand, facilitating a more personal connection with their followers.
MAINTAINING BELOVED BRAND STATUS
Rather than simply avoiding failure, what a brand ultimately aspires to is to
achieve a strong emotional connection with its customers – to become, and
remain, what is often referred to as a ‘beloved brand’. Even once this status
has been achieved, it is important to ensure that it is not taken for granted.
There are a few strategies that can be followed to help ensure this:
1.
When thinking about who you are, keep the brand’s promise front
and centre in your mind. You need to be either better, different orcheaper. Challenge yourself to stay relevant, simple and compelling.
2.
Keep challenging the status quo to maintain an experience that over-
delivers the promise. Create a culture that attacks the brand’s
weaknesses and fixes them before the competition can attack. With a
beloved brand, the culture and brand become one.
3.
Keep the brand story clear and simple, through great advertising in
paid media, but also through earned media either in the mainstream
press or through social media.
4.
The most beloved brands have a freshness of innovation, staying one
step ahead of their consumers. The idea of the brand helps, acting as
an internal beacon to help frame research and development. Every
new product has to back that idea.
5.
Make focused strategic choices that start with being honest with
yourself. Find a way to listen to your consumers and stay ahead of
trends. Watch for dramatic shifts because they can really open a door
for a competitor. It is easier said than done, but do not be afraid to
attack yourself even if it means cannibalizing your current business. A
good defence starts with a good offence.This Camper store in Santander, Spain is part of the Camper Together project, in which leading
architects and designers create Camper stores that reflect their own vision of the brand. In this case,
Tomás Alonso designed the store using his two guiding principles – a sparse use of materials and an
understanding of our relationship with objects – while also reflecting Camper’s brand values of
freedom, comfort and creativity.
Uniqlo
Over the last few years, switched-on brands have extended their
communication into designing their own branded apps. Uniqlo, a Japanese
clothing company, has produced a number of notable app options.
Designed to support and improve consumers’ daily lives by making
everyday routines more fun, engaging and joyful, ‘Uniqlo Wake Up’
(pictured here) ‘Uniqlo Calendar’ and ‘Uniqlo Recipe’ have been created
in the hope of becoming indispensible tools. The goal is for the brand to
achieve ‘beloved brand status’ in the hearts and minds of their consumers.
Are these just gimmicks, though? Why has Uniqlo invested so much in a
range of apps that have little connection to their sales of fashion apparel?The answer is simple – they are conveying brand values. By creating
useful lifestyle utility apps, Uniqlo is subtly conveying a concept – perhaps
best summed up as ‘simple things’ – that captures their essence and plays
to their core values. When we wake up, cook a meal or check our to-do list
on the calendar, Uniqlo’s message is being delivered. It will be interesting
to see what follows next, and whether this strategy will work.
Uniqlo Wake Up offers a peaceful rousing from bed, using calming vocals and music influenced by
the weather, composed by Yoko Kanno.If it’s raining, your wake-up music will be sombre. If it’s sunny, the app will play a happier tune.
The app also sings the time, date and weather outside when the alarm goes off, and it comes with
multiple language options.
An inside view of Google’s new headquarters in France demonstrates the importance the company
places on the design of ‘internal branding’, used to build a holistic experience for its employees.1
The above explanation for self-branding summarizes M. Joseph Sirgy’s self-congruity theory – 
Self-
congruity: Toward a Theory of Personality and Cybernetics
 (Greenwood Press, 1986).
2
For more on consumer culture theory see Don Slater, 
Consumer Culture and Modernity
 (Polity
Press, 1997).
3
See pivotcon.com/research_reports/whitli.pdf which shows how a new tool extends the power of
brand personality to create powerful new options for brands.
4
Glen Manchester, 
Raconteur Magazine for the Times Newspaper
 (supplement to 
The Times
), 17 July
2012CHAPTER 2: BRAND ANATOMY
This chapter looks at the key components and structure of a brand and
its audience – its internal and external anatomy – together with the
terms used in the industry to define these. This is then followed by a
discussion of the key practical considerations for design agencies and
their clients before embarking on the creative process of developing a
new brand identity.
LOGOS
A logo, brand mark or brand icon is a deceptively simple device. It employs a
combination of shapes, colours, symbols and sometimes letters or words in a
simple design that symbolizes the values, quality and promise offered by the
manufacturers of a product or service. The Greek word 
logos
 appears in the
first line of John’s Gospel in the Bible and translates as ‘word’. The use of
logos has a long and distinguished history, having been applied to coats of
arms, coins, flags, watermarks and the hallmarks found on precious metal.
Traditionally, a logo was used to record the origin of a person or object in
order to highlight its value through its connection with a prestigious family,
place or maker.
Modern trademark laws date back to the late nineteenth century. The advent
of large national corporations selling their goods to a growing consumer
market created an issue of identity. How could they signify the quality of
their products, and distinguish them from inferior goods or commercial
rivals? The answer was a unique ‘trademark’, as a logo is sometimes known.
This legal system enabled companies to register a name and designed identity
(similar to a patent for product designs), which then enabled them to take
legal action against any unauthorized use of their mark.The red triangle of the Bass Brewery was the first trademark to be registered
in the UK under the Trademark Registration Act in 1876. A registered
trademark is signified by a small symbol ® next to the logo or brand.
A logo can take almost any form. Some use words made unique by a bespoke
typeface, others use pure symbols; many use a combination of the two. They
can be defined according to a number of general categories, including:
Bass, founded in Burton upon Trent in the UK by William Bass in 1777, was a pioneer of international
brand marketing. Its distinctive red triangle was the first ever to be registered.
Ships were first legally required to carry flags showing their nationality during the Age of Sail in the
seventeenth century; these evolved into today’s national flags.In medieval times, a coat of arms was used by knights to help identify themselves. These were symbols
unique to an individual, family, corporation or state.
A hallmark is a unique set of markings applied to a sterling silver object that is to be sold
commercially. They are used to indicate the purity of the silver and the mark of the manufacturer or
silversmith.Pictorial marks.
 The Apple and WWF logos are examples of this
approach, where a well-known object has been stylized and simplified.
Abstract or symbolic marks.
 A symbol that embodies a big idea, as used
by the multinational corporation BP and car company Toyota.Symbolic letterforms.
 Where a letter is designed into a stylized form that
communicates a specific message, as with multinational corporation GE
and consumer goods company Unilever.
Word marks.
 Probably the simplest form, where the name of the company
becomes the logo through the use of a unique typeface, as with retailer
Saks Fifth Avenue and chemical company DuPont.Badge marks.
 Where the company’s name is connected to a pictorial
element, such as TiVo’s smiling television set and Innocent’s haloed face.
Brand accessories.
 A range of logos that can be used independently to
allow flexibility of design, as used in this design by 2x4 for the Brooklyn
Museum. This approach is increasingly popular as it allows for
communication strategies across many 
applications.Eurostar
The Eurostar brand created by the design agency SomeOne demonstrates
the agency’s ‘brand world’ approach – highlighting the need for brands to
be distinctive, simple, practical and unforgettable. The key driver for this
complex design project was to ensure the flexibility of the brand, future-
proofing it to enable it to adapt to our changing world.
The approach taken was not to rely solely on one idea, but on many: to
develop an identity that could morph to any communication environments
in which it was placed. In the words of SomeOne’s co-founder, Simon
Manchipp, ‘This rebrand was about creating symbols of change, not a
change of symbol.’ The strategy saw the creation of multitude ways for
Eurostar to create exciting experiences for their customers and staff – one
brand, many ideas.
The Eurostar ‘brand sculpture’ was used to inform three-dimensional
typography. The inspiration for the sculpture came from the architect Zaha
Hadid and the exploration of movement, capturing the speed of a train
through a tunnel, leaving a wash of air in its wake. The sculpture became
the basis for the aesthetic of the brand, and the adaptive logo. Thesculpture acted as a source of inspiration, used to guide the design of a
bespoke typeface, the aim being to develop brand communication without
the need for a traditional logo. By using the typeface with its signature
swash characters, its use alone could then express the brand.
Eurostar’s ‘Fresco’ typographic family, with its long flowing line
representing the idea of effortless travel, includes swash characters for both
upper and lower case, as well as special characters and numerals. In
addition to the typography and brand icon, the team also designed a range
of pictograms.
The response from Emma Harris, Director of Sales & Marketing at
Eurostar, summarizes the success of the final design: ‘I didn’t consider a
bespoke typeface to be part of the end result … but now we have it I can’t
imagine not having one. It’s incredibly useful to have it as part of the brand
toolkit, and it looks beautiful.
’
Whatever the approach that is chosen, though, the strength of a brand identity
ultimately lies in how successfully it embodies the desired meaning of a
brand, and the speed of recognition by the target audience. On its own, a logo
is just a mark. For it to become more than a graphic device it must acquire
meaning in the mind of the consumer.
Using historical or cultural devices may enhance meaning, but a logo must
also reflect the time in which it lives, remaining fresh and up to date. The
perfect logo needs to be distinctive, simple, flexible, elegant, practical and
unforgettable. It must be distinct from its competitors, avoid clichés and
never infringe another brand’s trademark. A strong logo that employs a
distinctive design can also cross national and cultural boundaries, as images –
unlike text – are a universal language.
In addition to emotional impact, a logo must also be functional, since it will
likely be used on a whole host of designed promotional materials, depending
on the product or service it is representing. From large storefronts, billboards
and signage, to magazines, online advertising, TV and printed matter such as
packaging, direct mail and stationery, the brand logo must remain both
legible and consistent. Where typography is used, the letterform needs not
only to be unique and distinctive but also clear, as the logo may appear in
reduced form on small items. If it includes illustrated elements, these alsoneed to remain strong when reduced in size, and not fill or merge. Many
brands use a limited colour palette for this reason – too much detail can result
in lost definition when reduced in size.
TIPS & TRICKS
Always ensure that the brand logo is developed and saved as a high-
resolution image, at a minimum of 300 dpi. This will ensure that the
quality does not deteriorate when reproduced in large formats.A brand identity must not only be a great piece of design, it must also be functional, since it will be
used on a whole host of designed promotional materials.
This brand identity for Skywatch was created by the Los Angeles-based agency Ferroconcrete. Here
they demonstrate how they have applied the brand across web-based promotion, where the brand’s
strong, masculine personality is used to guide the choice of colour palette and images.
STRAPLINES / TAGLINES
A successful brand identity is made up of a series of interlinked elements that
all aim to communicate the values of the brand. Alongside the brand icon or
logo, the most memorable is perhaps the strapline – also known as a tagline
or slogan. (The word ‘slogan’ comes from the Gaelic 
sluagh-ghairm
, the war
cry of Scottish clans.) Made up of a few words designed to link in some way
with the logo, the slogan is frequently used in promotional media to reinforce
a brand’s unique qualities in the minds of the public. A slogan or strapline
may highlight unique elements of a product or service being branded, or
reference particular promises the brand wishes to make to the consumer.
Currently sustainability and other green issues are a key consideration for
consumers, and have therefore become a driver for many brands, such as
IBM, who have rearticulated their marketing to address this, highlighting
their green credentials with the strapline ‘A smarter planet’ – a simple but
motivating idea that is now at the heart of their organization’s ethos.
A strapline needs to be memorable and offer insights into the values,
personality or experience that the brand offers the consumer, distinguishing it
from its competitors. It is usually a short sentence that defines what the brand
does, how it does it or who it does it for, created to have an influence onconsumers’ emotional relationship with the brand. Sometimes the designers
themselves will create the strapline as part of their own creative outcomes; at
other times the task will be given to a copywriter or specialist agency, and
they will need to define and develop a unique written tone of voice to link
with the visual one created by the designers.
There are several categories that can be used to define different
communication approaches:Descriptive.
 This helps to describe the product service or promise, such as
Innocent’s ‘Nothing but nothing but fruit’.Superlative.
 This defines the market position as top of its category, for
instance BMW’s ‘The ultimate driving machine’.Imperative.
 Usually a command or direction for action, such as Nike’s ‘Just
do it’.Provocative.
 This may use a thought-provoking question, or irony, for
example, VW’s ‘Think Small’.Specific.
 This defines or expresses the business or the brand’s product, such
as chemical company DuPont’s ‘Better things for better living through
chemistry’.
TIPS & TRICKS
When considering the aesthetics of a strapline or tagline as part of the
designed communication strategy, the quality of typography, its scale in
relation to the logo and the colour used all need to harmonize with the
design of the brand icon so that it can be easily trademarked along with the
choice of words.APPEALING TO THE SENSES
It is important to remember as a designer that branding is not solely a visual
form of communication – appealing to all the senses is a far more powerful
way to communicate a message effectively. From the feel of the dimpled
effect on an Orangina bottle to the distinctive smell of a particular airline
interior, branding designers can appeal holistically to a consumer’s senses.
A recent study on memory and the senses carried out at the Rockefeller
University revealed that in the short term we remember just 1 per cent of
what we touch, 2 per cent of what we hear, 5 per cent of what we see, 15 per
cent of what we taste and 35 per cent of what we smell. Smell is the most
sensitive of all our senses, and its links to pleasure and wellbeing, emotion
and memory have a huge influence on mood. In the late 1990s Singapore
Airlines were one of the first brands to take advantage of this by
commissioning a unique fragrance, called Stefan Floridian Waters, which
was worn by the cabin crew, used on hot towels and sprayed throughout the
cabins. The fragrance became familiar to frequent flyers, triggering positive
memories of previous experiences with the airline.
Sonic branding – traditionally known as ‘jingles’ – is no longer restricted to
television advertising. Examples are now heard everywhere, with or without
words. Sometimes also known as ‘earworms’, these bits of melody worm
their way into our consciousness to manipulate our emotions and connect us
to a brand. They have become a vital tool in the arsenal of brand
communication techniques, and the sonic branding industry is now worth
millions. Nokia’s ringtone, Intel’s four-note bongs and the McDonald’s ‘I’m
lovin’ it’ refrain are all well-known masterpieces of sonic branding. Creating
a few sections of music is not as easy as it sounds, though, and can take many
months to compose. Elisa Harris from Cutting Edge Commercial, a
consultancy providing sonic branding for the likes of Disney, McDonald’s
and Mercedes, explains a sonic brand is created by taking a word or concept
and then turning it into sound. ‘It’s rare that we get a word or a value that we
can’t put a piece of music to.’Supermarkets and shopping malls demonstrate their appreciation of the importance of smell in
connecting with their customers, by placing their floral departments at the entrance to their retail
environments
.
Taste also plays a crucial role in our lives, at a social, physical and emotional
level. It is often employed in branding in simple ways, such as sampling or
free-tasting promotions. Gustative branding techniques, as they are known,
are also used in advertising, as with the 2007 Skoda Fabia television
campaign, which featured a cake that looked exactly like the real car. The
idea was to project Fabia as a ‘sweet and tasty’ car, and within the first week
of the campaign sales grew by 160 per cent.
Touch can induce a highly personal association with a product and, in turn, a
brand. It is no accident that the metallic surface of the iPhone has been
developed to create a unique surface that has become associated with the
brand even without seeing it – Apple appreciates the power of a multisensory
brand experience more than most. Famous for creating a unique brand
experience in its store environments, it uses all the senses to enable a holistic
customer experience. The Apple ‘concept store’ provides the opportunity for
the customer to see, touch, listen and even smell Apple, as well as interact
with its carefully trained Apple ‘geniuses’, tasked to support every Appleneed.
Research has found that an experience involving as many of our senses as
possible is far more effective at building brand recognition than an approach
involving just one sense, so it is not surprising that the use of sensory
branding has grown rapidly since the millennium, aided by new technologies
and materials, and is predicted to play a major part in future strategic
branding.
BRAND ARCHITECTURE
Brand architecture is a way of describing the hierarchy of brands within a
single company’s portfolio. A common model will consist of an overlying
master brand (also called a corporate, umbrella or parent brand), with a
number of separate, unique, trademarked sub-brands beneath it. (A good
example of this is Microsoft, who operate a range of sub-brands, including
Word and Xbox.) This strategy enables an organization to target many
different customers by developing a variety of brands using different
names, colours, imagery, logos, promises, positions and personality traits.
Ultimately, brand architecture is about organizing the relationships with
different brands and customers to reach business objectives.
The term brand architecture can also be used in a broader sense to define
all the attributes that make up a brand’s communication strategy –
including physical design elements, such as the logo, and the emotional
elements that define the brand’s characteristics. To develop a successful
sub-brand, it is important that these elements remain consistent, to retain
the focus and strength of the original brand.
BRAND FAMILIES
Once an individual brand has achieved a level of success it will often look to
grow by extending into new products or services. The original brand thereby
becomes a parent, and the new subsidiaries become sub-brands, with a
number of sub-brands constituting what is termed a brand family. Eachmember of the family has its own unique identity, while also reflecting the
original values of the parent brand.
Strong brands are created by capturing the minds and emotions of a target
audience with a particular product; great brands are those who are able to
transcend their original category and come to represent a larger, more
powerful meaning or experience. Once a brand has been able to develop this
sort of iconic status it is able to ‘procreate’. The Orla Kiely story is a great
example. Starting her career as a hat designer, her line of products now spans
wallpaper, cars, radios and fragrances.
A successful brand extension requires a company to understand clearly how it
is perceived by its customers. It must then define products or services that
will secure a wider audience, but also retain the original essence of the brand.
A strong communication strategy that highlights the purpose of the new
brand, and links it clearly to the existing parent brand, is crucial, and the
brand identity is where this can be expressed most clearly.Orla Kiely, an Irish designer working in London, started her career designing hats. Harrods launched
her MA collection, and her designs now include homewares, stationery and even cars.
Creating a brand family that is able to reference successfully the parent brand within the identity is not
an easy task. This example of six of the BBC’s ‘sub-brands’ demonstrates a successful integration of
the parent brand within a clear set of individual identities for a range of television channels. The use of
a strong colour palette and a range of unique typefaces enable each individual channel to create a strong
personal identity, whilst still signifying its relationship to the BBC
.
The use of brand identities
A great example of a ‘brand family’ is the identities created for the British
Broadcasting Corporation. Key to the success of their branding strategy has
been the ability to maintain the strength of the parent brand by seamlessly
integrating it within their range of sub-brands. The bold, upper case sans serif
face, with each of the three letters of the BBC brand contained in a separate
box, gives the parent brand a strong, fundamental identity. The strength of
this icon ensures it maintains its dominance in the hierarchy when applied to
the sub-brands, even though it appears in a smaller font size. Each sub-brand
is then developed to give it its own unique identity by the use of a range of
typefaces and colours.
In some cases a brand can become even more than a family, developing its
own dynasty, as with Virgin. In this case a consistent visual identity covers a
range of distinct categories, from music to financial services, radio and air
travel.The Virgin brand demonstrates a different strategy for the creation of its sub-brands. Although the
parent brand is still referenced, each sub-brand is quite distinct.
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL BRANDING
Brands do not only communicate with their customers; it is vital to the
success of a brand that the values externally communicated are shared with
those who make, develop and market it. This facilitates a full engagement
within the company, ensures a higher level of commitment and enhances
performance. Sharing key aspects of a communication strategy with
employees also helps synchronize the personality of a brand and its corporate
culture, as does keeping employees informed and involved in new initiatives.
This can be done most effectively through a strong internal communication
strategy that helps to explain and reinforce the brand promise. Employees are
now more open than ever about their work life, ‘chatting’ on Twitter and
Facebook to share and amplify their messages. As a result, companies like
Nokia are taking advantage of this form of communication to enhance theworking experience and attachment to the brand through brand evangelist
programmes that use volunteers within the company to bring the brand to life,
both within the workplace and the wider community.
Graphic communication can play a key role in the way a brand is
communicated internally, whether via intranet sites (internal websites only
viewable by employees), monthly newsletters or brand language guides,
exploring the appropriate tone of voice for emails and other correspondence.
Even the way offices are decorated and configured will influence the way the
employees feel about their role in promoting the brand.
Employees themselves can also be directly influential in how the brand is
perceived. Brand champions are individuals who are responsible for
cultivating support for a brand, internally and externally, by spreading its
vision and values. The more employees with this sense of identity with their
brand, the stronger the brand equity becomes. Nike and Singapore Airlines
emphasize this approach within their corporate structure, and demonstrate
how much an organization can benefit from strong and dedicated brand
champions.
Another company that is well known for using this ‘from the bottom up’
approach is Google. Founded in 1998 by Larry Page and Sergey Brin, Google
gave its employees a clear vision of how it wished to operate, with the
corporate motto, ‘Don’t be evil’. This is understood as a moral code, guiding
relationships and undertakings within the organization. Google’s employees
also enjoy a high level of individual accountability; they must spend 70 per
cent of their time on current assignments, but are then free to spend 20 per
cent on related projects of their choosing, and 10 per cent on new projects in
any area they desire. This preserves the spirit of innovation the company was
founded on.Garmin, the navigation company, commissioned BrandCulture to create a new office environment for
their Australian headquarters. Meeting rooms are marked with GPS coordinates, and a triangulation
treatment for the walls, images and typography reinforces Garmin’s commitment to improving GPS
technology.
BRANDING TERMINOLOGY
Having a shared understanding of the terms used to define the various aspects
of a brand is important for both the design team and client. For instance, how
do brand 
values
 differ from the 
promise
? The following section provides
definitions of key common branding terms.
The philosophy
Before the physical designing of a new identity begins, some fundamental
questions need to be asked of the brand – including, simply, ‘Who am I?’ At
this early stage the designer needs to probe the client to uncover the key
functions of their product or service – put simply, what it does. Anunderstanding of the brand’s philosophy will then begin to emerge.
In most cases the first stage in developing the brand philosophy is to research
the company’s own corporate philosophy. This is primarily a distillation of
its culture or ambience, developed into a group of core values that inform all
aspects of its business practices. The philosophy both guides employees as
part of internal branding, and provides the structure for external brand
communication strategies.
Google is a great example of a company that makes their philosophy explicit
to all stakeholders, by listing on their website ‘10 things’ written when
Google was just a few years old. This set of key values is revisited regularly,
ensuring their philosophy remains true to their principles. The list includes
statements such as ‘It’s best to do one thing really, really well’, and ‘Great
just isn’t good enough’.
The promise
This usually summarizes what the brand promises to deliver. It is written to
help the designers develop the emotional characteristics of the brand that will
help it to communicate directly with its audience and differentiate it from the
competition. If the design is for an existing brand, the promise needs to
remain consistent with the brand’s previous offer.
A brand promise is not the same thing as a strapline or slogan. Coca-Cola’s
promise, for example, is ‘To inspire moments of optimism and uplift’,
whereas its slogans – which are regularly updated to keep communications
fresh – include ‘Life tastes good’ (2001).
Virgin’s promise is similar to Coca-Cola’s in that it does not describe what
the company does or provides. Coca-Cola doesn’t talk about selling the best
soft drinks in the world, and Virgin’s promise – ‘To be genuine, fun,
contemporary, and different in everything we do at a reasonable price’ – does
not reveal anything about its travel credentials. Good brand promises like
these only talk about how a company promises to deliver a solution to a need
or desire, or to fulfil an aspiration. A good brand promise will stand the test
of time. For a brand to have longevity, the promise needs to be delivered time
after time to create a strong, loyal consumer base
.
‘Living the brand’Consumers are increasingly purchasing brand ‘experiences’ as opposed to
just branded commodities or things. Therefore the creation of successful
brand stories, attributes and associations, which are all largely intangible and
often symbolic, is becoming increasingly important in the development of a
successful brand strategy. A brand that achieves iconic status is one that has
been taken into the hearts and minds of its consumers, with the ultimate
success being the existence of a brand tribe – a formal or informal group of
like-minded people who share the same passion and loyalty for a brand,
adopting its values and applying them in their own lives. Brand tribes also
have a strong influence on how a brand is perceived and ranked by other
groups.
Brand tribes often grow up around small, specialist brands that have a
specific set of values, appealing to a niche market. The organic clothing
brand Howies, and the online eclectic homeware store Pedlars, are two
examples. However, big brands can achieve this sort of brand loyalty too,
particularly in youth markets. For instance, luxury fashion brand Burberry
has recently embraced the use of social media to communicate to its existing
followers, and to cultivate new fans in places like China. According to the
Financial Times
, the company spends over 60 per cent of its marketing
budget on digital channels. It is now officially the most popular luxury label
on Facebook and Twitter, with more than 600,000 followers on the latter.
Brand values
There are two key definitions of brand value. There is the value of a brand on
a balance sheet, which obviously has key importance to the owners of the
brand. However, probably more importantly, there is the perceived value of a
brand by its consumers. These values are less tangible and refer to the
emotional attributes associated with a specific brand. In the twenty-first
century the question of authenticity has become increasingly important –
consumers want to know what a product contains, how it works, whether it
fulfils its promises. Brand values highlight why and how a brand does what it
promises.
Andy Green, brand consultant and author, describes brand values as ‘things
you do even when it hurts.’ He helps his clients to identify their values in
simple steps: ‘On my creativity, brand story and brand workshops I always
advise delegates to identify their five top values.’ Andy also champions thework done by Jackie Le Févre, a values specialist and founder of Magma
Effect who created AVI, an online interactive profiling resource that is fast
becoming one of the leading values tools around the world.
A good example of a highly successful outcome of defining key values to
define a brand’s unique promise is the Innocent Drinks company. Founded in
1999 by three Cambridge University graduates, who started by selling
smoothies at a music festival, the brand now sells more than 2 million drinks
a week, with Coca-Cola currently owning a 90 per cent stake in the company
.
Innocent, as its name suggests, uses natural ingredients in its products, and
espouses key values of healthy eating and sustainability, marketing products
with the tagline ‘Nothing but nothing but pure fruit’. The brand values of
sustainable nutrition, sustainable ingredients, sustainable packaging,
sustainable production and sharing profits are clearly defined on the website,
so the brand needs to ensure that it not only fulfils these values practically,
but also backs them up visually – through the brand mark itself as well as in
all promotional and communication strategies.
How Innocent ‘lives’ its brand values:
•
By using green electricity at its headquarters, Fruit Towers
•
By sourcing fruit from suppliers who look after their workers and the
environment
•
By sourcing all bananas from Rainforest Alliance-accredited farms
•
By donating 10 per cent of all profits each year to charities, primarly
through the Innocent Foundation, which funds organizations working
around the world on issues including sustainable agriculture and food
poverty
The Innocent product range has now expanded into other healthy-eating
areas, including veg pots and squeezy fruit tubes for children, and the key
values of the company have grown to accommodate this expansion. Innocent
not only encourages healthy eating, but also takes advantage of the popularity
and leverage of the brand to support sustainable projects in the
underdeveloped world.The style and ‘tone of voice’ created for Innocent emphasizes the company’s philosophy and values.
All their brand communication is designed to highlight its ethical stance, but in a fun and engaging
manner
.
Brand equity
‘Brand equity’ is a marketing term used to describe the commercial value
derived from consumer perception of a brand name, rather than the product
or service it provides. This is witnessed whenever a consumer is prepared
to pay additional money for a branded product over a cheaper store-brand
alternative. Brand equity can become a highly valuable commodity,
enabling companies to expand by marketing new products under the same
label. The stronger the brand equity, the more likely that existing
customers will buy any new product, associating it with the existing,
successful brand. Brand loyalty of this kind is often perceived as one of the
most financially valuable aspects of a brand.
However, brand equity is not always positive. A bad reputation will result
in negative brand equity, and once a brand has made a poor association in
the minds of consumers it can be very difficult to shift. In this case, all the
traditional advantages of branding will be inverted. The 2010 BP
Deepwater Horizon disaster demonstrated this clearly.
In April of that year, an explosion sank one of BP’s offshore drilling rigs,
killing 11 workers, and causing one of the largest environmental disasters
in history. The financial implications for the company were immense, with
end-of-year profits in 2013 down to $13.4 billion, compared with $17.1
billion in 2012. However, the long-term effect on customer and
shareholder perception of the brand may last for years to come.
Michael Kaiser from Kaiser Associates, an international strategy
consulting company, defines the issues facing brands in managing their
equity:
In our rapidly evolving economy, with greater and greater information
flow and rapid innovation cycles, the speed with which customer
selection criteria changes and brand equity shifts between competitors
is astonishingly fast, and significant damage can be incurred. In a
surprisingly large number of cases, however, brand recovery is
possible by directly confronting weakness … A useful starting pointfor companies in determining their strategy to Brand Equity
management may start with a thoughtful examination (and a properly
aggregated quantitative measure) of a number of simple yet powerful
questions: What do customers want? How do customers think? Who
are we beating, and why? Who are we losing to, and why? … In the
end, the only thing that matters is what customers think today, and the
actions they will take tomorrow.
Brand equity can be determined by measuring seven key aspects of how a brand is perceived by
consumers
.The brand story
A brand story gives meaning to a brand and defines what it is and what it
does. Consumers are becoming increasingly educated about retailing, and
often demand to know where their products come from and how they are
made. Brand stories that offer a background to products being sold are
therefore an effective way of engaging with customers. These stories can be
highly personal, exploring the lifestyle of the individual maker; they can be
also be fun, educational or even challenging. It is important, though, to
determine the right tone of voice for the target audience.
Brand stories are not fixed; they can develop over time to capture and
respond to changing customers and markets. Key to the development of a
successful brand story, though, is defining the core truth about the product or
service concerned, as this will become the heart of the message. As in a fairy
story, this truth is the moral that will make the story endure.
So, can a successful brand story make one object more valuable than another,
even if the two objects are fundamentally the same? In 2006 Rob Walker, a
New York Times Magazine
 columnist and his friend Joshua Glenn put this to
the test with a project called Significant Objects. The pair visited flea markets
and charity shops, where they bought a large selection of worthless objects,
including an old wooden mallet and a plastic banana, spending an average of
$1.28 per object. They then asked 100 talented writers to create short stories
about each object. The experiment concluded with the objects being offered
for sale on eBay, using the story as the object descriptor. The average price
paid was an increase in value of over 2,700 per cent. The mallet – bought for
33 cents – sold for $71 and the banana (25 cents) fetched $76.
The obvious lesson from this is that brands and their packaging, where
appropriate, should tell a story. Stories that clearly and creatively reveal the
essence of a product, its history or creation, can capture and engage the
emotions of the consumer.
To return to the example of Innocent Drinks, the text on the bottle of each of
their smoothies demonstrates the benefits of this approach. Innocent are well-
known for having pioneered a new way of addressing consumers using a
clear story, communicated on packs and through advertising. The brand
promise is exploited in a simple and friendly manner, enabling the company
to explain who they are and what they do, in terms that speak directly to theirconsumer.
Susan Gunelius, President & CEO of Keysplash Creative, Inc., explores the
importance of narrative in brand communication, ‘Stories are the perfect
catalyst to building brand loyalty and brand value. When you can develop an
emotional connection between consumers and your brand, your brand’s
power will grow exponentially’. However she highlights the importance of
understanding the style of this type of writing as ‘different from standard
copywriting, because brand stories shouldn’t be self-promotional. Instead,
you’re indirectly selling your brand.’ She explains that there are key points
that need to be considered, the first being ‘showing not telling’ that uses
descriptive words to evoke emotion. She also highlights the need to develop
‘plot’.
If you tell the complete story in one shot, you lose the opportunity to
build a long-term relationship with your audience. Instead, pique their
interest but don’t provide resolution immediately. Leave them hanging
with a promise of more, just like the best fiction authors do at the end of
each chapter.
Finally she warns against confusing the consumer: ‘If your target audience
doesn’t understand how your story relates to their perceptions of your brand
and their expectations for it, they’ll turn away from your brand in search of
another that does consistently meet their expectations.’Before any creative activities can take place, the design team need to bring together a range of research
findings that will guide the brand creation process. These may include marketing statistics, competitor
analysis and consumer demands.CHAPTER 3: BRAND STRATEGY
Creating a successful brand is a highly complex activity, undertaken by
a team of professionals skilled in different aspects of the process,
including brand managers (who oversee all aspects of a brand’s
promotion, sales and image), account handlers, creative directors, media
buyers, marketing experts and, finally, designers. Before any creative
work can commence the team develops a clear strategy that will guide
the design process. Research is fundamental to gaining a clear
appreciation of issues such as the needs and demands of particular
consumers, the current market situation, trends and competitors.
A ‘brand strategy’ defines the how, what, where, when and to whom the
brand plans to communicate, alongside highlighting the client’s specific
goals for the brand. A well-written and implemented brand strategy will
encompass all aspects of brand communication, such as identity,
packaging and promotion. Particular attention is given to consumer
needs and emotions, in addition to considering the competitive
environment into which the brand will be launched.
STANDING OUT FROM THE CROWD
One of the key challenges when developing a brand strategy is to define how
the design will create a strong and unique identity. The designer will need to
develop a clear visual communication system that will attract the target
consumer and differentiate the brand from its competition.
For branded packaging the competition is enormous, with more and more
new products vying for attention, particularly in supermarkets. When a new
brand hits the street or goes online, the challenge to catch the consumer’s eye
is equally challenging. So how can a new brand cut thorough the ‘visualnoise’ and make itself seen? The first thing that attracts a consumer tends to
be colour, followed by shapes and symbols. The text or the brand is usually
the final element to be understood.
Colour, shapes and symbols
On average, at a distance of 1 to 2 metres (3 to 6 feet), shoppers take just five
seconds to find and select a given product. Therefore an appropriate use of
colour can increase brand recognition by some 80 per cent, while also serving
as an important brand identifier.
Symbols are a nearly instantaneous means of communicating meaning, as
with McDonald’s ‘Golden Arches’, the Mercedes star and Nike’s swoosh.
The associations derived from symbols also become imprinted in consumers’
minds through repeated exposure. Often the brand selected has a family
connection, having been bought by the consumer’s parents, demonstrating
that shoppers intuitively gravitate towards familiar symbols.
Words
Packaging cluttered with too much text fights for attention and often creates
confusion. Therefore keeping the design simple is often the best approach,
focusing on a single competitive point of difference that distinguishes a brand
from its main competition. While colours, shapes and symbols tend to
enhance on-shelf visibility, generally the more text used in a design, the less
effective these other elements become.Visual ‘noise’ is a constant issue for packaging designers. With so many brands competing for attention
on the supermarket shelves, often the simplest designs create the strongest impact.
M&M’s USP is the hard candy coating that guarantees the chocolate ‘melts in your mouth, not in your
hands’.
UNIQUE SELLING POINT (USP)American adman Rosser Reeves first coined the term ‘unique selling point’ in
the 1940s. Initially an advertising and marketing concept, it was used to
explain a pattern among successful advertising campaigns, where unique
propositions were made to customers, convincing them to switch from their
usual brands to the one advertised.
The USP – or sometimes ‘unique selling proposition’ or ‘point of difference’
(POD) – are all critical in defining a brand’s competitive advantage over its
competitors, and fundamental to a successful branding strategy. In addition to
ensuring that there is a clear differentiation from the existing market, the USP
must also include attributes or benefits that consumers will strongly, uniquely
and positively associate with the new brand.
Determining the USP for a new product or service demands considerable
research of the subject, existing market, current consumer needs and trends.
(This may be undertaken by the design agency, or by a specialist research
company, as explained in detail in Chapters 5 and 6.) Currently authenticity,
environmental concerns and sustainability, food miles and healthy lifestyles
are issues that brands are exploiting to help them define their unique
qualities. However, to develop strong loyalty from its customers and enjoy
continued success, a brand must be honest and able to deliver the promise
offered.
When researching the brief, the creative team will also develop an emotional
selling proposition, or ESP. This is used widely in advertising, and is similar
to a USP, but focuses on the emotional triggers to purchasing.The packaging redesign for Plum Organics’ ‘Just Fruit’ range draws attention to the delicious product
inside by keeping the typography to a minimum. It also helped the agency win a Dieline Award.
SEMIOTICS
‘What does it all mean?’
Semiotics is the science of understanding signs. As part of a degree
curriculum this subject is often delivered separately from design practice;
however, the creation of a successful brand relies not only on good creative
design, it also needs to ‘mean’ something. How we build meaning into the
brands we create is a complex art and involves the design of three key
elements – the brand name, the icon and often a strapline, or slogan. In our
graphic toolbox we have the use of typography, colour, image and style, and
our choices for these will be determined by the message we wish to
communicate.
Appreciating and manipulating the level of meaning contained within a brand
identity, and the consequential subliminal effect this has on consumers and
their buying decisions, is the key objective of branding design. This can be
explored effectively by studying the layers of meaning captured within an
existing brand, and such ‘brand analysis exercises’ therefore play a key rolein the early stages of the design process.
EXERCISE
Brand analysis
To analyze a brand successfully you must first deconstruct it into its main
characteristics. For example: What typeface does it use? What colours?
Does it include a logo or an icon and what does it represent? How is it
constructed? The next phase is to ask why for each of these questions.
Analyzing the meaning within each part can help to determine not only the
designers’ original intentions, but also the subtle qualities of the brand that
has been created, and its intended audience.
A simple way to explore brand semiotics is to undertake a similar
deconstruction exercise to those featured here.
1.
Choose an existing brand that is made up of an icon and a typeface, and
has a strong use of colour. Find a good-quality image to download and
print it out.
2.
Take each element in turn and research the meaning behind it.
3.
Document your findings and analysis by adding your comments to the
sheet and using arrows to define your points.
4.
Add additional images you find during research to highlight the source
of the meanings; this process can also help to define your points.
This exercise is extremely useful (especially for students) as it helps in
gaining a greater understanding of the depth of meaning necessary to
develop a successful brand. They can then also use the same method,
having completed their own brand, to rationalize their ideas and
demonstrate 
their creative thinking.
AppleIn Walter Isaacson’s biography of Steve Jobs, published a few weeks after
his death, the co-founder of Apple is quoted as having thought the word
behind his iconic symbol and brand name sounded ‘fun, spirited and not
intimidating’. However the semiotic meaning of the apple goes far deeper
in human civilization. For example, one of the Twelve Labours of the
Greek mythological hero Heracles was to steal some golden apples
belonging to Zeus, while the forbidden fruit mentioned in the Bible has
been depicted in Renaissance art as an object symbolizing knowledge.
An apple is therefore a highly symbolic object. It can signify the highly
cherished object (‘the apple of one’s eye’), or the gesture of a favoured
pupil towards a special teacher. The bite in one side of the Apple icon
could even symbolize the opening of Adam and Eve’s eyes after they ate
from the Tree of Knowledge. What additional meaning is therefore
communicated through Apple’s brand identity?
The use of colour
Historically the Apple logo used a rainbow colour palette. The current
symbol has a highly reduced palette of cool, translucent greys, which give
the mark a sense of purity and modernity, and highlights its roots in
technology.
The use of style
•
The icon has been developed in a pure and symbolic manner, not
dissimilar to a road sign in its simplicity, although far more sophisticated
in style.
•
It is interesting to note that the stalk of the apple does not appear. The
leaf therefore has prominence, giving the impression of growth.
•
The reflective qualities echo the type of modern materials used by the
brand, as well as the feel of the brand’s technological products.
•
The three-dimensional elements, including highlights and drop shadows,
give the brand dynamism and life.The symbol of the ‘bitten apple’ used by Apple has many possible connotations, including both
biblical and mythological. Although the use of semiotics within a design is clearly apparent, this
does not mean that consumers are conscious of these messages. Rather, their meaning is perceived
unconsciously, having been shaped in our minds by cultural and historical forces.
SEMIOTIC TOOL BOX
As stated earlier, there is a range of tools that can be utilized when designing
a brand, to ensure that it conveys the desired message.
Typography
The simplest definition of typography is the art and practice of arranging
type. Typography has ancient roots, originating in the first punches and dies
used for creating seals and currency. The first moveable metal type was
invented in Korea during the twelfth century. The arrangement of type then
developed further in the fifteenth century, with Johannes Gutenberg’s
invention of the printing press.In modern design the use of typography is very broad, covering all aspects of
letter design and application, including typesetting, type design, calligraphy,
inscription, signage, advertising and digital applications. An extensive
knowledge of typography and typefaces is therefore a fundamental
requirement for the professional graphic designer, and an understanding of
the historical importance of each face and how it has been used in the past
can guide appropriate use.
However, there is more to knowing about type than understanding the font
families. It is important to appreciate that existing ‘languages’ appropriate to
specific products and services have been built up over time. For instance,
pharmaceutical packaging features typefaces that express the medical nature
of its contents, while IT brands have developed a style of type that expresses
the technical nature of their services, and food and cosmetic brands choose
from a range of fonts that communicate the fresh or indulgent qualities of
their products. A good understanding of the current semiotic languages used
by existing brands will ensure that the appropriate visual language is
considered when creating new concepts.
The first known moveable-type system was created in China in around 1040, but it was the Koreansthat developed this technology, making the first metal moveable-type system for printing in around
1230.The Gutenberg Bible was the first major book printed in the West using the system of moveable
type. Published in the 1450s, it marked the start of the age of the printed book in Europe.
The packaging for T/Gel uses an interesting cross-reference of visual languages. Neutrogena
employed a clean, pared-back pharmaceutical style to give consumers the impression that their
shampoo has been ‘scientifically’ tested and developed.In contrast, this elegant packaging for organic olive oil toiletries has used beautifully crafted, hand-
rendered typography to enhance its femininity and reflect the products’ luxury credentials
.
Colour
Colours have long been used for symbolic effect. Countries have utilizedcertain colours for their flags and military uniforms, and aristocratic families
have employed specific colours for their coats of arms.
Certain colours have also, over time, come to represent particular moods or
thought and can therefore be used as visual shortcuts; for instance, yellow or
red will communicate a warning. Designers can exploit the symbolic use of
colour to express meaning in this way, helping brands to communicate even
more effectively. An example is the use of the colour purple.
The pigment used to create purple dye in ancient times came from a mucus
secreted by the banded dye-murex snail. Because it was so costly and
difficult to produce, it was only used on the most expensive fabrics, and worn
by emperors. As a result, it came to be known as ‘royal purple’. The colour
has continued to signify luxury and, as a consequence, has been chosen by
brands such as Milka and Cadbury (which always uses the same Pantone
colour: 2685C) to reinforce the quality of their products.
Red is one of the most common colours used on national flags, representing the blood spilt by those
defending their country. It has been associated with left-wing politics, and is the colour that symbolizescommunism.
In the nineteenth century, the colour blue became associated with authority. Since it was perceived as
both serious and authoritative, without being menacing, it was chosen as the colour for police uniforms.
Purple is a colour used by many chocolate brands to express luxury. This association has developed
from its use in garments worn since ancient times by persons of power, such as Roman emperors
.Image
Images can also hold specific meanings, as was seen with the apple. Often
objects develop strong symbolic significance over time, so they must be
considered in their past historical context. For example, eagles have been
used extensively within national symbolism from Napoleon Bonaparte to the
Great Seal of the United States, and the double-headed eagle of the Byzantine
Empire to the Ghanaian coat of arms. Within branding the eagle has also
been used to denote patriotism, particularly by American companies.
In 1856 Gail Borden patented his invention of sweetened condensed milk, a
product designed to combat food poisoning and other illnesses related to lack
of refrigeration. Condensed milk became a popular staple, but it was the
American Civil War that made the Eagle Brand a household name – during
the war the military needed milk that could be easily transported and would
not spoil; Borden’s Eagle Brand milk fulfilled all their patriotic and dietary
requirements.
When considering the inclusion of an image it is therefore extremely
important to have a full appreciation of any historical or traditional meaning
so that it is used sensitively and appropriately.The eagle used on Gail Borden’s tins of condensed milk reflects its patriotic relationship with the
United States of America. The brand played a key role during the Civil War, providing the military
with desperately needed foodstuffs that were nutritious but did not need refrigeration
.
Style
Photographers and illustrators develop unique styles to ensure that their work
has a creative differentiation, but the styles they use can also have semiotic
significance. Cartoons are an interesting example. The simple, rather naive
style used by illustrator Lauren Child for Charlie and Lola is usually
considered most appropriate for children, and if used on adult products would
insinuate that the consumer was juvenile. However there are comic styles that
have been developed specifically for adults. Photography can also employ
styles to add symbolic meaning, such as the mimicry of hand-tinting, to
express nostalgia or tradition. Understanding the meaning your image
conveys is vital when choosing a style for your brand.Lauren Child’s distinctive illustrations combine drawing, photography and collage to create a style that
has a childlike, naive quality, perfect for its intended readership of 3 to 7-year-olds.Double Fine Productions, an American videogame company, employs a quirky, eccentric but
sophisticated cartoon style for its brand, appealing to adults rather than children.The retro shoe brand Swedish Hasbeens have employed a hand-tinted effect for this promotional image,
to reflect their vintage brand personality.
Milka chocolate
The first Milka chocolate bar, with its distinctive cow, was launched in
Switzerland in 1901. Since then the cow has become as much an icon of
the brand as the distinctive lilac colour of the packaging.
The icon
Since being domesticated in the early Neolithic Age, cattle have played a
unique role in the development of the human race, having provided us with
food, leather and labour for thousands of years. The dairy cow hasparticular significance, as the provider of one of our simplest, purest and
most useful products – milk.
In this illustration, created for the rebrand of Milka in 2000 by Landor
Associates in Hamburg, a Montbéliard cow (known for its quality milk)
has been depicted in a semi-realistic style, with its horns, udders and nose
highlighted, and the facial details and texture of its coat and tail clearly
depicted. The usually brown-and-white Montbéliard, though, has become
lilac. She also sports a bell around her neck, used by dairy farmers in the
Alps to locate their animals.
The meadow
Although lilac in the illustration, the lush Alpine meadow that the cow
stands in symbolizes the fresh grass from which the cow will create the
milk used to make Milka chocolate.
The mountains
Jörg Willich, Landor’s Creative Director in Hamburg, who led the rebrand
in 2000, highlighted the significance of the mountains, explaining that the
Alps symbolize nature, an unspoilt environment and purity, signifying the
Swiss heritage of the brand and the wholesomeness of the product.
The use of colour
During the rebrand the creative team identified the colour lilac as the most
significant element in communicating the brand’s heritage. This colour has
been associated with the Milka brand from the start, although over the 100
years of the brand’s history the shade has changed, finding its final tone in
1988. The impact of this symbolic brand language was revealed a few
years ago in an art competition in southern Germany; when 40,000
children were asked to draw a picture of a cow, almost a third of them
painted it lilac!
The typeface
The Milka typeface is as unique to the brand as the lilac colour, and has
been associated with the product since 1909. The white, soft, curved scripthas the appearance of being created from a puddle of spilt Alpine milk,
given enhanced three-dimensional qualities by a drop shadow of darker
lilac.
NAMING BRANDS
A brand name is one of the most important elements of a brand identity, as it
needs to define a unique offer, communicate effectively to a particular
audience, capture a set of specific values, and look and sound good! It is
therefore probably the most difficult aspect of creating a brand, and should
not be undertaken lightly. The final decision always rests with the client.
However, this will usually be based on a great deal of research by
professionals, including designers and brand managers. Considerable
attention is given to new trends and market conditions, too, as a brand must
be current and relevant to be successful.
Dragon Rouge identified the need to create a strong cultural link for Danone’s sub-brand of Greek-style
yogurt. The name Oykos was perhaps a derivation of the Greek word 
oikos
, meaning house, family or
household.For Divvy’s brand creation, IDEO applied the slang term divvy, meaning ‘to divide evenly or to share’
– highly appropriate for this bike-share system providing Chicagoans with eco-friendly transport.
There are a number of key approaches that can be taken to help ensure a
successful brand-naming strategy:
1.
Descriptive.
 This is the simplest naming strategy, using words that define
or highlight key aspects of a product or service, such as Royal Mail or
American Airlines.
2.
Acronyms.
 Using the first letter of each word of a name, such as KFC
(Kentucky Fried Chicken). A similar approach is to use syllabic
abbreviations, an abbreviation formed from (usually) initial syllables of
several words, such as ‘FedEx’, which is an abbreviation of the name of
the company’s original air division, Federal Express, used from 1973 until
2000.
3.
Fanciful.
 This approach uses words that either look or sound good but do
not necessarily have any relationship to the product or service that the
brand represents, such as the telecommunications brands Orange and O2.
4.
Neologisms, or Make it up!
 Creating a word that reflects the values orunique nature of a brand but has no actual traditional meaning. The brand
Gü was created by James Averdieck, given its unique brand identity by
design agency Big Fish. Pronounced ‘goo’, it was created to evoke the
gooey, oozing nature of their puddings.
5.
 
Onomatopoeia.
 Using a word to imitate or suggest the sound associated
with a product can be a very effective way to develop a unique name.
Many highly successful brands have employed this deliberately. In the
case of Schweppes it was a happy accident. Johann Jacob Schweppe, an
amateur scientist and entrepreneur who founded the Schweppes Company,
was blessed with a delightfully onomatopoeic name that chimes with the
‘hiss’ as you prise the cap from the bottle of carbonated drink.
6.
Use of another language.
 Researching words in different languages can
add another dimension to your brand’s appeal, although you must be
careful to research all interpretations. The Gü team played with the word
‘gout’, which means ‘taste’ in French. However, in English ‘gout’ means
an unsightly disease often associated with over indulgence – not such a
great name for a pudding.
7.
Personal identity.
 This is often taken from the name of the inventor or
founder of the company, for instance Disney or Cadbury.
8.
Geography.
 Defining a brand in relation to its geographical location can
be a way to define its cultural heritage, particularly in relation to food and
beverages, such as Newcastle Brown Ale, Yorkshire Tea and Jacob’s
Creek wine.
Since the birth of brands in the late nineteenth century there have been some
key trends in the way brand names have been created.
Traditionally many brands took the name of the founder or inventor of the
product, as in the case of Kellogg’s and Heinz. Then, in the 1930s, Procter
and Gamble became the first company to professionalize and manage brands.
In the mid-1990s, using words that were either made up (neologisms) or
fanciful became common practice, such as the name Orange, created for UK
mobile phone network Hutchison Telecommunications in 1994.
Then in the late 1990s in the UK there was a trend to rebrand many
traditional firms. The Post Office became Consignia, Andersen Consultingbecame known as Accenture, and Diageo was formed by the merger of
Guinness and Grand Metropolitan. This approach had patchy success, and in
some cases the companies reverted to their original name – such as
Consignia, which reverted to its older name of Royal Mail.
Designed by Big Fish, the Gü brand has been highly successful since its launch in 2003. Its success is
due in part to how effectively the product reflects the brand name, being truly gooey.
EXERCISE
Creating a mood board
1.
Consider a mood or feeling you would like to explore – in this case,
‘traditionally British’.
2.
Using a thesaurus, look for related words that will define your mood in
more detail.
3.
Search for images on the Internet that express the emotion you are
trying to capture.
4.
Now design your board either by hand or on the computer using
packages such as InDesign or Photoshop.This mood board captures the essence of British rural life using a range of appropriate images and
words. Note the various typefaces that develop this mood, and the overall layout and design.
THE USE OF EMOTION
The key to making a brand successful is to make sure it ‘speaks’ to its
audience. A designer must understand the consumer in detail – their lifestyle,
needs and desires – before starting on the creative process, so that they can
target their audience with the most appropriate message, using the right 
tone
of voice
 (the way a brand uses language to express its personality and connect
with its audience).
The designer starts with a range of words that defines the direction, followed
by what is known as a mood board. Developed from images and words, these
visual research tools are used extensively in the early stages of the design
process as they can be shared by the design team, brand managers and clients,
ensuring that the focus of the emotion is relevant and 
appropriate.Loyalty to a traditional brand identity that has built up over time can create strong emotional ties for
consumers. The Two Horse jeans patch has been part of the Levi’s brand since 1886, a style that has
changed very little.
Brands that wish to express a nostalgic emotion may therefore apply typefaces that have a historical
feel, along with traditional illustration styles, as with Crabtree & Evelyn’s use of a wood-engraved
illustration in this older version of their logo.
Once the approach has been determined using a mood board, exploring
colours, images and styles of typography can also underline the emotional
feel of a brand. The choice of colour is usually a very personal one, although
as already discussed, certain colours come with established connotations, and
any choice will need to be appropriate for both the product and the intended
consumer. Various colour theories, and the trusty colour wheel, can be
helpful, but ultimately decisions will be based on the feel and impact the
design needs to have.
The appropriate use of imagery can also help reinforce your message. For
instance, developing a brand that expresses nostalgia could use a woodblock
illustration alongside traditional typefaces similar to those found on old shop
signage. Developing a successful brand identity also demands an
understanding of how fonts convey emotion and meaning, which is as
important as knowing font metrics. Each typeface has its own distinct
character, like the roles within a drama. One may perform the ‘drama queen’,
theatrical and flamboyant, demanding attention (Chopin Script); another may
play the ‘general’ – strong, assertive and powerful (Times New Roman),
while the ‘professor’ will convey a trustworthy and impressive command of
advanced science and technology (Bank Gothic).The Times
 newspaper was the originator of the Times New Roman typeface developed by Stanley
Morison. A letterform that could be characterized as a ‘General’, this typeface commands the viewer.
The typeface used by Agent Provocateur could be described as a ‘drama queen’ – theatrical and
flamboyant, demanding attention.
‘Professor’ brands, although perhaps a little geeky, do impress us with their command of science and
technology.
BRAND PERSONALITYBrand personality theory was originally developed by Stephen King of
communication agency J. Walter Thompson, who recommended assigning
human personality traits to a brand to achieve differentiation. This has
become essential practice in the advertising toolkit and has evolved into
more complex personality forms, known as brand archetypes. These
include the hero, the explorer, the villain and the underdog. Think about
what archetypes resonate for you in particular brands. (See also Aaker’s
‘Dimensions of brand personality’ framework, on page 14.)
TARGET MARKETING AND BRAND POSITIONING
A brand strategy must also define a brand’s market position, and the type of
consumer who will purchase it. Target marketing is a method used by
companies to identify their intended customers in detail so that the design
team have an understanding of their buying decisions, based on income and
taste. This research may consist of drawing up a broad view of the consumer,
or more in-depth research may be undertaken, analyzing real people in their
homes and lives.
Research carried out by planners and marketers will break the overall target
market down into manageable segments. These should not just be convenient
to the company, but ones that allow the brand to communicate to one specific
target market. This will be determined by:
•
The type of product or service defined by the brand
•
The target audience or consumer who would buy that product or
service
•
The other competitor brands within the market
•
The brand’s aspirations
•
The environment the brand will be marketed in, i.e. the type of store,
street, city
The team will then thoroughly analyze the findings to determine theappropriate market position for the brand.
Giving visual clues as to the market position of a brand helps to communicate effectively to its target
consumer. Strong, bold sans-serif fonts and primary colours have become associated with value brands.
Mid-range brands often develop more complex communication systems, using a wider range of visual
imagery, colours and typography
.Market positioning and visual language
Just as specific languages for certain product categories have developed
within the design of brands, packaging and other graphic communication, the
market position of a product or service is also communicated through the
style of type, use of colour, layout and imagery. These techniques are termed
‘visual cues’; often difficult to discern, they nevertheless determine how a
consumer appreciates the worth or value of a product. Broadly the visual
languages can be defined in the following ways:
Budget/cheap and cheerful/value for money
Simple, strong, often capital letterforms; one-colour backgrounds (often
white); strong colour statements, often using primary tones; very little
imagery or illustration; basic packaging.
Mid-range/affordable quality
More decorative typography; a wider range of colours and tones, with full-
colour illustrations and photographs; quality packaging.
Luxury/exclusive/upmarket
Stylish, often very simple typography using wide kerning; limited colour
palette; stylized illustrations and photography; luxury packaging using high-
quality materials.Conversely, upmarket brands such as Harvey Nichols revert back to simplicity. The design of luxury
brands often employs a clean, minimalist, uncluttered style
.
Niche marketing
This term describes a way of classifying products and services into distinct
segments, or niches, of the market. Brands can be organized by price,
demographic or purpose. Products that target the widest demographic are
often those that are sold at a lower price and are known as mainstream. The
narrower or smaller the niche the brand occupies (targeting specific or
specialized needs, tastes or demographic), the higher the perceived value and
therefore the price.
A brand strategy will need to consider how to develop clear brand drivers.
They may consider a new, or specific need that the product aims to meet –
such as prestige, practicality, value, luxury or sustainability – in order to
develop the brand within an existing market, or possibly within a whole new
niche.
Research is fundamental to finding the illusive niche, and involves the
exploration of several areas:
•
The existing brandscape.
 Just as we inhabit a natural landscape, brands
are said to live within a ‘brandscape’ of competitor brands. The first stageof research is to develop a visual analysis of the brands within the niche
market being considered. This can be done in relation to price (with the
lowest price on the left of the diagram, and the highest on the right),
perception or category.
•
Visual analysis.
 Using the same diagram, analysis can also be carried out
on the perceived value given to a brand through its design by using a brand
analysis exercise, as described in the Visual Audit section on page 115.
•
Demographic characteristics.
 This will include research into the age,
gender and social class of the target consumer.
•
Lifestyle analysis.
 This defines the consumer in more detail, and will
include all aspects of their lives including their family situation, where they
live, how much they earn, the other brands they buy, what car they drive,
the places they go on holiday, restaurants they eat at, TV programmes they
watch, books and magazines they read, and how they relax.
•
Lifestyle conclusions.
 From gaining an understanding of the consumer, the
analysis will be clarified to understand the needs, desires and aspirations of
the target market to develop a clear set of aims for the brand strategy.
•
Trend forecasting
. Researching the social or economic factors influencing
consumer demand can help to define a unique niche for a new product or
service.
Final analysis and triangulation of the findings will define the brand’s USP,
providing the design team with an accurate idea of why the target consumer
would wish to buy the brand. The USP will also help to define the aesthetic
‘feel’, which will enable the brand to provide stiff competition to the other
brands within its niche market.
BRAND REVOLUTIONS
Within certain product categories, such as chocolate or toothpaste, distinct
‘product languages’ – or systems of colours, type styles and symbols – have
developed. When creating a new brand a design team will undertake
extensive research to explore the existing language used by the competitors in
order to define the appropriate use of these elements. However, although thisis a tried and tested strategy, it will create a ‘safe’ design outcome that may
not give the new brand strong shelf impact.
In the last few years, however, there has been a revolution as some brands
have rebelled against tradition. This can be a risky strategy, and will only be
undertaken by the bravest of brand managers, but in some cases it has been
highly effective, as in the case of Tango and Vanish.
Traditionally, the product language of soft drinks has referenced either the
refreshing fruity qualities of the product, or used images that appeal to
children. In 1987 UK drinks company Britvic bought the fizzy orange Tango
brand from the Beecham Group, who had owned it since the late 1950s. Over
the following few years the packaging was redesigned twice, using the
traditional product language of orange and oranges. In 1992 the packaging
changed again, but this time the designers were to revolutionize the soft drink
market by using black as the dominant background colour. This colour had
traditionally belonged to the product language of alcohol packaging, and so it
had always been almost taboo to use it on products targeted at children.
Tango had, however, decided to reposition the brand, targeting the teen
market, and the use of black gave the product a bold and daring new
personality. Along with memorable, bizarre, humorous and often postmodern
advertising, featuring the strapline, ‘You know when you’ve been Tango’d’,
the brand has become as well-known today for its marketing campaigns as
for the actual drink.
Known for its stain-removing qualities, Vanish (part of the Reckitt Benckiser
group) is another brand rebel. The washing powder/fabric-care market had
traditionally employed white as the predominant colour on packaging, with
highlights of blue, red and green. With its strapline ‘Trust Pink, Forget
Stains’ Vanish introduced a new vibrant colour, revolutionizing the product
category and energizing the supermarket shelf.Tango repositioned their brand from one targeted at children to one that appealed instead to the teen
market. The use of black endows the product with a bold and daring personality.With its strapline ‘Trust Pink, Forget Stains’, Vanish introduced a bright new colour to a supermarket
shelf that had traditionally been based on white.
CULTURAL BRANDING
As our commoditized world becomes ever more dependent on the economies
of all nations, branding as a means to communicate value and market
products and services effectively has also become a global discipline. As a
consequence many of the larger design agencies have spread their business
globally; Interbrand, for example, operates 34 consultancies in Europe, Asia,
the Pacific, Africa and the Americas.
As designers, however, we are most familiar with our own visual language,
just as we are with our own native spoken language. Different cultures,
though, use very different visual languages – sometimes so different that we
have no idea what is being communicated to us. Therefore designing for
other cultures can be like learning a foreign language; it is not just a matter ofgrammar – you also have to understand the nuances and the etiquette. In the
advertising industry there has also been a significant shift away from the use
of words in advertising, giving rise to an increase in the number of ‘global’
ads that work across more than one country and culture.
The visual language of a country will be affected by many factors, including
the history, geography, climate, culture and, in countries where religion is an
integral part of everyday life, the customs and rules that accompany it.
As with many of the design issues explored in this book, there is a very
effective process that will enable a non-native designer to tackle designing
for another culture. The key to a successful result, however, is to involve an
educated ‘cultural advisor’ – someone from the culture being explored who
understands its design aesthetics, and who will be able to determine whether
something is effective rather than offensive.
Designing for other cultures
When designing for other cultures consider the following checklist:
•
How different is the culture from your own personal culture?
•
Where will you look for research? Luckily, many of us live in multicultural
societies, where there are many small specialist shops or supermarkets that
import foodstuffs for homesick nationals, direct from the parent country.
These can be an invaluable resource for exploring the branded packaging of
a particular country.
•
Do you know anyone from this country? They may be able to act as your
cultural advisor, helping with any language translation and providing
crucial background research.
•
What is the general geography, history, climate, population, language,
religion, etc. of the country?
•
What is the range of retail environments – chain stores, supermarkets,
online retailing, small family-owned shops?
•
Who is the consumer? Who does the shopping? This will involve gender
roles. Do those who live in the cities have the same shopping habits as
those who live in rural areas?
•
What is the lifestyle of the consumer? What are their needs, desires and
aspirations?
•
How are their brands designed? Can you discern the culture in the design ofthe graphics and other visual communication?
•
When considering food brands, the culture of food will also need to be
explored. What are the national dishes? How and when are they eaten, and
by whom?
The Pret a Manger sandwich chain has enjoyed great success in the UK, where its French name alludes
to Continental eating. This approach has helped the brand develop a stylish and desirable presence on
the high street
.
The following procedures will also be useful:
•
Detailed analysis of the brands and other visual communication. The brand
analysis procedure (see Visual Audit on page 115) can be used to determine
the meaning behind the aesthetics.
•
Design direction and conclusion. Compile your findings to create a design
direction or brand strategy, determining how they will have an effect on the
visual language to be used.
•
Visual direction. Using images to guide the creative process will ensure
that the appropriate aesthetics are used in the final design. Ensure that this
includes type references, colour choices, appropriate imagery and any other
relevant inspiration.
Language considerationsThe Pret a Manger chain has been extremely successful in the UK, where the
name (‘Ready to Eat’) has fairly neutral connotations. The use of a French
phrase may even allude rather positively to the renowned cuisine of that
country, tying in neatly with the stylish, upmarket presence that the brand has
cultivated. However, in a French context the name may risk hinting at
something more downmarket – perhaps even fast-food.
The English language has borrowed so many phrases from other languages
over the centuries that sometimes we feel we have a good understanding of
what certain words or phrases mean, but you should never assume you know
something until you have proved it to be true!
 
TIPS & TRICKS
There are now many forums on the Internet that discuss cultural aesthetics,
where student designers can undertake research and ask for feedback. It is
worth taking the time to search them out, as they can be invaluable. If you
are really lucky they may even do some of the groundwork research for
you. The following are a small selection:
www.creativeroots.org
twitter.com/creativeroots
www.australiaproject.com/reference.html
www.designmadeingermany.de/
www.packagingoftheworld.com
REBRANDING
What is rebranding?
Rebranding is the creation of a new name, term, symbol, design – or acombination of any or all of these – for an established brand, with the
intention of developing a differentiated (new) position in the minds of
consumers and competitors.
Why rebrand?
The challenge for all branded products or services, from technology
companies to airlines, is to keep up with the demand from customers to
constantly improve their offer and deliver improved service. Brands must
therefore battle their competitors to demonstrate that they are continually
enhancing both their products and services.
As a company communicates and is perceived through its identity, it is vital
that their brand or brands are regularly reviewed to ensure they continue to
reflect the current values of the company. If not, then the product or service
needs to be rebranded, either to reflect a new company strategy, new products
or changes in consumer focus, or in response to changing social or cultural
trends.
The rebranding design process
A successful rebranding should be part of a new overall brand strategy for a
product or service. This may involve radical changes to the brand’s logo,
brand name, image, marketing strategy and advertising themes, typically
aimed at repositioning the brand.
Research
•
Brand history.
 Find out as much as you can about your brand. When was
it first produced? By whom? For whom? Where was it sold?
•
Brand analysis history.
 How has the brand changed through time? Create
a visual timeline with any images you can find of the brand, along with the
dates of the design.
•
Market analysis.
 How is the brand positioned currently? Who is the
consumer? What is the market? What do people think of the brand? (You
can ask them!)
•
Brand visual analysis.
 Deconstruct each element of the current design to
identify the graphic communication tools used, such as colour, font, designof logo, style. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the current design?
Now bring together all the findings of your research to define the issues that
the current brand is suffering from
.
Strategy
You can now start to consider how you might rebrand, through repositioning
and redesigning the identity to help it communicate more effectively to its
consumers. The following questions may help by giving your strategy a
direction:
•
Could the brand be targeted at a new consumer?
•
Could the brand be targeted at a new market, for example,
repositioned as a luxury or everyday essential product or service?
•
Could the brand be recreated with an updated name? (This is not
absolutely necessary, but if the name is completely wrong then this
could be a consideration.)
•
Could a new strapline aid in the brand communication?
Conclusions
In addition to your research findings, the answers to these questions will help
you develop a rebranding strategy to direct and guide the creative process:
•
Who is your chosen consumer?
•
Why would they use the service or buy the products they sell?
•
What tone of voice/personality will your new refreshed brand have?
•
Where will you position it in the market?
•
Who will be its main brand competition, and how will you make yours
stand out from the crowd?
•
What will be the brand’s new USP?Commissioning designers to refresh or rebrand a product or service is more common than developing a
completely new brand, so this is an important skill to learn 
and develop.
LucozadeLuozade, with its promise to replace lost energy, was originally sold in large glass bottles with a
yellow cellophane wrap packaging design that did not change significantly until the 1980s.Lucozade was first produced in the UK in 1927 as Glucozade, by a
Newcastle chemist, who had experimented to produce a source of energy
for those suffering from minor illnesses. With its refreshing taste, golden
colour and specialist glucose syrup it was successful, and soon became
available throughout the country.
By 1929 the drink had been rebranded as Lucozade, with its strapline
defining its USP – ‘Lucozade aids recovery.’ The product was sold in large
glass bottles with a yellow cellophane wrap packaging design that did not
change significantly for another 50 years.
During the 1980s markets began to respond to a new consumer desire to
become healthier and fitter; this was the era of the headbanded jogger, and
brands like Nike were on the ascendant, producing new stylish sports
products for ordinary people. This new sports and fitness market provided
the perfect opportunity to reposition Lucozade, shifting its reputation from
a product geared towards convalescents to an energy drink, or ‘pick me
up’, designed for the fit and healthy. Olympic decathlete Daley Thompson
was recruited to advertise the rebranded product and the glass bottles were
replaced with plastic.
In 1990 the Lucozade brand diversified further with the launch of
Lucozade Sport, a range of isotonic sports drinks. With Lucozade Sport the
brand’s values were brought closer to those of real sportsmen, the brand
promising to ‘get to your thirst, fast’. Lucozade Sport was in fact the first
brand to launch with a sports sponsorship deal, namely with British
Athletics and the FA Carling Premiership, and the brand continues to be
endorsed by some of Britain’s leading athletes including Michael Owen
and Jonny Wilkinson
.
It was in 1996, however, that the brand underwent its greatest
repositioning, reconsidering its USP with a massive relaunch of Lucozade
Energy. This included the introduction of the curvy bottle — its ergonomic
shape and light-weight plastic aiming to promote the brand as an aid to
sports-focused people — as well as the new Lucozade Energy logo and
advertising.
Lucozade Sport Hydro Active further defined the target market. Launched
in 2003, its design and communication positioned it as a fitness water for
people who exercise or go to the gym. This approach continued thetradition of Lucozade Sport by creating a new sector in tune with changes
in lifestyles and reflecting the development of sport and physical activity in
modern society.
These two distinctive bottle designs demonstrate how far the Lucozade brand has come from its
original target consumer, packaging design, structure and brand – a great example of a revolutionary
approach to rebranding.
TREND FORECASTING AND ANALYSIS
Trend forecasting, or future forecasting, is a research methodology that
studies changes in society. These can include technological change, fashion,social ethics and consumer behaviour. Often this can be statistical
information or market analysis that is then studied in an attempt to spot a
pattern or trend.
However, in the early 1990s a new breed of trend analysts started to define an
innovative future forecasting methodology, known as ‘coolhunting’. Working
mainly within the area of fashion, the ability of coolhunters, or trend spotters,
to uncover or predict new cultural trends has become increasingly important
to all fields of design. And the rise of blogging has enabled many coolhunters
to provide almost minute-by-minute updates of their observations.
There are companies that also offer this service, often to global corporations.
These agencies conduct in-depth research and compile this into reports that
define trends and emerging or declining markets. Reports are then bought by
interested parties, including design agencies. This type of research is
invaluable to brand managers and designers during the development of
innovative creative strategies.
BRAND FAILURES
This book is focused on how to design successful brands. However, it can be
useful to study the history of brand failures too – to gain insights into the
factors behind those failures.
Common reasons for brand failures
There are three key points at which brands might fail: they may be a new
brand development, an existing brand that has already carved a successful
niche in the market, or a brand extension.
New brand failure
An example of a new brand failure is the case of bottled water for pets. The
twenty-first century has experienced an explosion in both the bottled water
market and new products for pet owners who treat their animals as child
substitutes, so the launch of a specialist bottled water for pets does not seem
that far fetched – or so the makers of Thirsty Cat! and Thirsty Dog! must
have assumed. Despite the fact that the water came in gourmet flavours toappeal to even the most fussy animal, such as Crispy Beef and Tangy Fish,
the brand never caught on.
Big brand, big mistake
It is hard to believe that a brand with the research and creative power of
Coca-Cola could possibly make a big branding mistake. However, in the
1970s and early 80s, Coke faced stiff competition from a range of other soft
drink producers. To retain its number one spot Coca-Cola decided to cease
production of their classic cola in favour of a new recipe – New Coke – to
update the brand and 
connect to a new consumer. Unfortunately the public
was outraged at the loss of the familiar drink, and Coca-Cola was forced to
relaunch its original formula almost immediately.Understanding the needs of your consumer is the first rule of successful branding. Unfortunately it
appeared that pet owners did not see the need to buy bottled water for their animals.Knowing why your customers buy your product over another is vital to the continuing success of a
brand. Any change or rebrand must be undertaken with the greatest care to prevent alienating the
existing consumer base.
A stretch too far
Extending your brand can not only create a new market for your brand but
also capture your existing consumer base. However, great caution needs to be
taken in determining this new offering, as can be seen in the case of Clairol’s
innovation in hair care products. Launched in 1979 Clairol’s Touch of Yogurt
Shampoo was not a hit. The hierarchy of information on the pack placed the
word ‘Yogurt’ in the most prominent position, which possibly lead to
consumer confusion over whether you eat it or apply it to your hair.
Why do big brands fail?
Brands like McDonald’s, Disney and Heinz have managed to stay at the top
across the globe for many generations. But these examples are rare. It seems
that most brands that reach this type of megastatus stay at the top for around
one generation at most.There are several key reasons why big brands typically fail:
•
Brand ego
. Brands can overestimate their importance to their consumers
and to the market.
•
Brand amnesia
. Over time, companies can forget who they are and what
they stand for.
•
Brand megalomania
. If a brand overestimates its power it may overstretch
its reach across as many services, products and consumers as possible.
•
Brand fatigue
. Over time companies may become bored of their brands, or
forget that they need regular attention. Brands then become dated, and lose
their edge.
•
Brand deception
. Via the media and pressure groups customers are now
able to subject brands to close scrutiny, and the immediacy of
communication offered by the Internet gives them the power to damage or
even destroy a brand that does not keep its promises.
•
Brand obsolescence
. A brand becomes irrelevant by failing to appreciate
that new technology or changes in consumer habits can have a huge
influence on their market share.
•
Brand anxiety
. A brand may become so concerned about its design or
communication that it undergoes redesign regularly, thereby losing its
sense of identity and confusing its consumers.
BRAND ETHICS
The history of brands, as explored in Chapter 1, is long and complex.
However, no society has ever witnessed the power of branding as it exists
today. Brands are prevalent in every aspect of human life, from what we
consume to what we wear, how we construct our personalities and lifestyles,
and branding is as important to politics as it is to pop culture. Branding is no
longer solely about differentiating between products; brands themselves have
become cultural icons.
In the last 50 years or so this form of communication has proved to be both
powerful and lucrative, with the biggest brands earning similar profits to thegross national product of some countries. Therefore the ultimate objectives in
branding have become the domination of the market, and the elimination of
competitors. In this ruthless world competition for market share has taken
priority, with consideration of moral issues being the last concern for many.
It seems that the more successful a brand is, the more likely its branding
strategy is to be ethically questionable. Brand advertising reflects this clearly,
with 99 per cent of messages consisting of ‘Consume more’ or ‘Shop ’til you
drop!’ So are consumers happy with the status quo? Or is there a sense that
there should be another approach?
Canadian author Naomi Klein’s book 
No Logo
 (1999) is considered by many
to have been the genesis of the anti-globalization, anti-branding movement.
Klein explored the struggle taking place at the time between corporate power
and anticorporative activists, as well as the various cultural movements that
had sprung up, including 
Adbusters
 magazine and the culture-jamming
movement, and Reclaim the Streets. She also discussed the McLibel trial that
had had a devastating effect on the reputation of McDonald’s.
In this, the longest-running English trial in history, two environmental
activists from London (Helen Steel and Dave Morris), who had written a
pamphlet making claims against McDonald’s, were taken to court by the
company to face a charge of libel. Although Steel and Morris were found
guilty of libel on several counts, the judge also ruled that many of their
claims (relating to issues such as misleading advertising, cruelty to animals,
low wages and high-fat foods) were true.
Klein was not the only voice questioning consumer culture at this time. Other
critics of modern society and the new world order included the linguist and
philosopher Noam Chomsky, and the sociologist Anthony Giddens, who
published his book 
Runaway World
 in 1999 and edited 
On the Edge
 in 2001.
Both titles explored the impact of contemporary capitalism on our daily lives
and questioned its compatibility with social cohesion and justice.
So how can ethics become a driver within a brand strategy, and what are the
ethical issues that need to be considered by designers? These are not always
easy to define. It is often difficult to distinguish between ethics and legality,
and values can vary between individuals, organizations and cultures – they
can also change over time. So why would a brand wish to involve itself in
these murky waters? Ultimately it is because an ethical brand strategy cansignificantly enhance a firm’s reputation, while unethical behaviour can
severely damage or even destroy a brand’s carefully created but intangible
assets, as evidenced by high-profile corporate scandals
.
An example of this was the Nestlé’s infant-formula scandal in the 1970s and
80s. The World Health Organization had found that children in developing
countries being fed Nestlé’s infant formula had mortality rates five to ten
times higher than those fed breast milk. A promotional campaign had been
set up by the company to distribute the formula to poor mothers for free,
using uniformed nurses. Lactating mothers were encouraged to use the
powdered milk long enough for their own milk to dry up. They then became
entirely dependent on the formula, which many could not afford. The result
was that children received an insufficient quantity of milk. The powdered
formula also required clean water, which was not accessible in most of the
areas targeted by the campaign.
So are brands now more enlightened, ethical and respectful of consumers’
needs and sensitivities? Consumer advocate Martin Lindstrom is
championing a new way of addressing the needs of consumers. In his latest
book 
Brandwashed: Tricks Companies Use to Manipulate Our Minds and
Persuade Us to Buy
, he exposes the extent of the psychological tricks
companies have devised to get us to part with our money. Through his
publications and website he is leading a campaign to demonstrate how ethics
can become a driver within brand strategy, and which issues need to be
considered by companies and designers. ‘The New Ethical Guideline for
Companies of the Social Media Age’ was developed based on research and
votes from more than 2,000 consumers who identified the ten ethical rules
they would most like companies to follow:Whether on the high street, or via a mailshot or emotive poster, charities have become experts at
encouraging us to give, with a considerable amount of this success due to great branding and strong
communication.
This identity, created for Shelter by Johnson Banks, has enabled the charity to reposition itself in the
minds of the public and attract new and more powerful corporate supporters
.
•
Don’t do to kids what you wouldn’t do to your own. Don’t do to consumers
what you wouldn’t do to your closest friends and family members.
•
Secure an ‘ethical’ sign-off from your target group each time a campaign,
new product or service is about to be launched in the market. Develop your
own independent consumer panel (a representative target audience) and
disclose the perception of the product, as well as the reality. Let the
consumers make the final call.
•
Always align perception with reality. Your talents might lie in brilliantly
creating convincing perceptions, but how do they stack up against the
reality? If there’s a mismatch, either one must be adjusted in order for them
to be in sync.
•
Be 100 per cent transparent. Nothing less. The consumer must know what
you know about them and they must be told exactly how you intend to use
the information. If they don’t like what they see, they need a fair and easy
way to opt out.•
Almost any product or service has a downside – don’t hide the negatives.
Tell it as it is. Be open and frank, and communicate it in a simple way.
•
All your endorsements and testimonials must be real – don’t fake them.
•
Does your product have a built-in expiration date? If so, be open about it
and communicate it in a visible, clear and easily understood manner.
•
Avoid fuelling peer pressure among kids.
•
Be open and transparent about the environmental impact of your brand
(including its carbon footprint and sustainability factors).
•
Do not hide or over-complicate your legal obligations to be placed in your
ads or on your packs. These should be treated just like any other
commercial message on your pack, using simple, easy-to-understand
language.
Bluemarlin are a great example of an agency that has offered its branding skills and expertise to a truly
worthy cause, through their design for Forces Sauces. Combining entrepreneurial energy and charitable
spirit, the premium sauces range makes it simple for the British public to give back to those who haveserved.
As graphic designers we create a bridge between information and
understanding. Much of the world we experience around us – the spaces we
inhabit, the products we consume, the media that comes to us through our
televisions and computers – has been designed. In this period of
unprecedented environmental and social change, we have a great
responsibility – we can continue to invent deceptions that encourage
unsustainable consumption, or we can help to find solutions to society’s ills.
Most designers know from early on in their careers who they aspire to design
for, and who they would prefer to avoid. For example, would you create
campaign posters for a far-right political party, a brand for a fashion label that
employs child labour in a developing nation, or a website for an arms dealer?
The decision should lie with the individual, depending on his or her own
morals and belief system. In the case of freelance designer Mickey Gibbons it
was with the campaign for a major cigarettes brand, who were going to roll
out across several developing countries, that he drew his ethical line in the
sand:
I felt uncomfortable being asked to encourage young African and Asian
men and women to smoke cigarettes based upon an idealised decades-
old image of the American dream
.
I turned the job down … I was never asked to work with them again. But
I was happier in the knowledge that I would be putting my skills as a
designer to better uses that did not result in the harm or even death of my
chosen audience. Even if those uses were a lot less financially
rewarding.
Most designers would agree that the opportunity to work on a brand that has
a strong ethical stance offers both a rewarding creative challenge and a
personal ‘feel good’ factor. Bluemarlin London, for example, worked on the
development of such a brand with Stoll, a charity that provides rehabilitative
support to vulnerable and disabled ex-service men and women. The design
team was commissioned to work on a range of sauces created by Bob Barrett,
a veteran from the Queen’s Life Guard who, along with other veterans, had
begun to sell burgers at London football grounds to help raise money for the
charity. The brief was to design a new brand for Forces Sauces, whichdonates at least 6p per bottle of sauce purchased towards supporting
beneficiaries of The Royal British Legion and Stoll.
MAKING YOUR OWN DECISION
These are difficult decisions for any professional to make. However,
perhaps being a conscious designer makes one a better designer. When you
need to make a difficult personal decision, be aware of what you are being
asked to do, and ask yourself two simple questions:
1. Am I hurting others? We have a responsibility to design products
and brands that work, but do not forget that the consumption of
brands can influence the world – both its people and the environment.
2. Am I delivering an honest message? There are many examples of
companies that promise to be helpful, original, organic, etc., but are
they? Will your brand stand up to its promises?
If the answer is yes to the first and and no to the second, you need to
consider why you want to continue working on the project.In the same way that using a grid to lay out type on a page, or a line to define the baseline of text, isvital in successful typesetting, so there are systems and rules that are used to capture innovative ideas
and ensure professional results when it comes to the branding design process.CHAPTER 4: THE DESIGN PROCESS
Many of us can often create a clear picture of the final outcome of a
project immediately after being briefed. Surely, then, all we have to do
is sketch it out, do a bit of computer rendering and our job is done? The
problem with this sort of instinctive approach is twofold. Firstly, such
outcomes are frequently kneejerk reactions, limited to the finite number
of pictures we have stored in our imaginations. Secondly, there are the
real-world considerations, such as proving to your client (or tutor) that
you have met the brief, in time and on budget.
A standardized design process has therefore evolved within the industry
that provides the designer with the resources and framework for
producing their most innovative and creative work within a reasonable
timeframe. This chapter provides a general overview of this structure
and its benefits; the specifics of the activities involved will then be
covered in detail in subsequent chapters.
WHY USE A DESIGN PROCESS?
In the past, the desire of companies to fix or control their image led to the
development of the ‘corporate identity’. However, this principle – conceived
and reared in the corporate sector – has now been adopted by all sorts of
organizations; today, even charities and arts institutions share the commercial
ambitions of their corporate sponsors. A design practice may undertake work
for a museum, gallery or publisher, and find itself immersed in any subject
from art and architecture, to theatre, music, history, science, politics and
literature. Likewise, designers today are highly familiar with business
practice in fields such as banking, insurance, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing,
retail, the automotive industry, sport and government. A graphic designer willoften even be required to use their creative skills to develop separate, highly
distinct and yet related identities for the same brand. In response to these
demands, many design agencies have honed their design process into an
almost scientific methodology. This will often be highlighted in their
promotional material and on their websites, demonstrating to prospective
clients the process they use to facilitate creative success.
Although the design process can be represented on paper as a clean, linear
progression of steps – and tends to include broadly the same steps in each
case – it is interesting to explore the creative approaches of different agencies
to see how working methods can differ. For instance, some large agencies
may use a set approach for each client. Devised through trial and error, this
system will be designed to maximize both brand design and profit for the
agency. However, other agencies may use a more flexible approach,
establishing a specific procedure for each new project. Johnson Banks, a
brand and identity agency, helped create the More Th>n brand (a direct
insurance company) from scratch. It showed that blue-chip brand creation did
not have to be a stuffy and conservative business. The same agency also
worked on the rebrand of Shelter, demonstrating that a charity could also take
branding seriously; almost overnight it confirmed them as a major player in
their sector.
The client’s role within the design process
Now more than ever, the design process is influenced heavily by clients, who
demand profitable outcomes from the creative process. Today’s businesses
are highly aware of the importance of building on their brand and
communication, and will therefore commission design that is on their own
terms. Correspondingly, design agencies frequently seek to involve them
throughout the research and creative stages, enabling them to shape the
creative brief and define goals.
In some cases companies have demonstrated the importance that they place
on branding and communication by creating their own in-house design
agency, as in the case of the supermarket Waitrose or retailer Marks and
Spencer, both in the UK. Other companies may take the approach of creating
positions in-house for high-level brand managers.The Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) demonstrate their understanding of the importance their
brand communication plays in their success, by employing their own in-house design team to
produce an extensive range of promotional materials, which are based on a system for the consistent
treatment of images and type designed by Pentagram.
Johnson Banks, the design agency that created the elegantly simple More Th>n brand, has
demonstrated over the years an innovative use of design and creative processes, including asking
children to draw the typefaces for the identity for Save the Children.
HOW DOES THE DESIGN PROCESS WORK?
The design process has been developed and extended considerably in the
industry over the years into quite complex and detailed approaches (an
expanded 13-stage model is provided on page 78), but this simple generic
model gives a quick overview of the major stages undertaken by many
branding agencies around the world to develop a brand identity.
This 
comprehensive infographic, designed by Jason Halstead to aid his clients’ appreciation of his
process, articulates the way that each stage of the branding process builds through from research to thefinal design outcomes.
This approach not only helps organize the creative process, but also allows
design agencies to demonstrate how a client’s money will be spent, as well as
helping to demystify what, for many, can be perceived as a magical process.
When developing a brand identity it is difficult to predict how the creative
process may develop, but it is essential that the identity goes through all of
the key stages. It must be checked against goals, refined and questioned to
ensure that the final designs will meet the original brief. The process is the
same, whether creating a new brand, or facilitating a rebranding.
This four-step process can also be applied to any student design project. Its
structure will help you creatively by making sure you allow adequate time
and space to think, experiment and apply your imagination. It will also
harness your problem-solving skills if you run out of ideas. Finally, it will
ensure that you demonstrate:
•
Your design decisions, which will help justify the final concept
•
The depth and breadth of your research, highlighting your knowledge of
current markets and practice
•
Good project management skills – answering the original brief and keeping
to budget
•
Time management – allowing each stage of the process the necessary
development to ensure a successful creative outcome
For their Virgin identity project, the challenge for the design team at Johnson Banks was how far to
take the existing brand – whether to attempt wholesale revolution, or to carefully evolve the existing
brand elements.The first step was to undertake an exhaustive audit, a detailed process to define what the company
stood for, both in the mind of the client and the target consumer.
From even the earliest designs, the team agreed on writing the company’s name in full and as large
as possible down the fuselage.
The requirements of an airline identity are myriad, and cover all shapes and sizes, from full-colour
fuselage, to screenprinted catering packs, to tiny logos on travel comparison sites.GlaxoSmithKline’s ‘Shopper Science Lab’ is a research facility that aims to uncover the factors that
determine consumer decision-making.
Stage 1
Analysis
Stage 2
Discussion
Stage 3
Design platform
Stage 4
Briefing the designers
Stage 5
Brainstorming
Stage 6
Independent research
Stage 7
Concept development
Stage 8
Analysis of design concepts
Stage 9
Refining the final concepts
Stage 10
Client presentation
Stage 11
Finishing/prototyping the final design
Stage 12
Testing/market research/consumer reactions
Stage 13
Delivery of final artworkTHE STAGES OF THE DESIGN PROCESS
Once the client has commissioned an agency to work on their brief, and after
the brief has been received, the senior design team will work together to
structure the design process they will use to create the new brand. This next
section provides a brief introduction to each of the key stages that make up
this process.
Stage 1: Analysis
Analysis is a detailed examination and evaluation, which involves asking
questions and seeking evidence. Prior to this stage, extensive consumer
research will have been carried out, and the aims and methods of this are
covered in Chapter 5. Chapter 6 explores product and market analysis; this
includes examining both visual properties and marketing successes.
Aspects that can be subject to analysis include:
•
The age and history of the brand•
The current market position
•
The target market/consumer/audience
•
The existing brand properties
•
The overall aims of the project, 
timeframes/ deadlines and budget
Stage 2: Discussion
Discussion takes place in order to explore the findings of the analysis and the
client needs. This helps to determine the drive, or the direction the new
design needs to take. It also gives the designers the opportunity to challenge
the brief.
Stage 3: Design platformThis constitutes a fuller form of brief. The senior creatives produce a
summary of the analysis, as well as the direction requested by the client. This
leads to a process of linking the findings of the analysis to the design strategy
developed by the designers.
Stage 4: Briefing the designersAt this stage the senior creative team present their findings to the creative
team. This will cover:
•
The design platform
•
The analysis of and information developed on the competitors
•
An analysis of the failures and successes of any previous design
Stage 5: Brainstorming
Ideas will now be ‘brainstormed’, or discussed collectively, so that the
designers can fine-tune their perception of the brand’s identity. This approach
will include:
•
The brand’s equity (see page 38), history and heritage
•
A semantic understanding of the symbols, colour and other iconography
that will be used to build up the brand’s unique personality (see Chapter 2)
•
The development of a project vocabulary, or words that describe the brand,
personality, emotional attributes, etc
.
Stage 6: Independent research
Research will now be undertaken by the individual designers, or by the
design team, exploring a wide range of sources to inform and inspire initial
ideas. (The creative process employed in the creation of a brand identity is
covered in detail in Chapter 6.)
Stage 7: Concept development
This involves the creation of many different ideas, including names,
straplines (slogans), brand marks and any other elements demanded by the
client. This stage may be undertaken by an individual designer or by a designteam. The number of ideas generated will depend on the time available and
the budget allocated. Students are often surprised to discover that this can run
into hundreds.
Thumbnail sketches
At this point the ideas are based on initial thoughts. ‘Thumbnails’ are small,
quick and unfiltered sketches, often still drawn with pen and paper. The goal
is to explore as many ideas as possible without becoming attached to any one
in particular. For concept origination and development, start with ‘free’
sketches – a record of thoughts and potential, and a means of rationalizing
and furthering ideas. These initial sketches do not need to be to scale, have
the correct perspective, or be very polished, but as the idea development
process progresses, there is an exponential need for accuracy in these
drawings in order for a concept’s potential to be assessed. The ability to try
out ideas on paper at speed is valuable. In a meeting, being able to
occasionally draw a solution to make a point rather than retreating to a
computer can really help.Rough concepts
The design team then review all the sketches, testing them against the
creative brief/design platform. Those that show potential are explored further,
with pen and paper or on the computer
.
Stage 8: Analysis of design conceptsThe ‘rough concept’ ideas are now reviewed by the design team, in light of
all the research and analysis undertaken, and referencing the original brief set
by the client. These concepts are reduced to a few key options, which are
then offered to the client. This creative approach allows the client a chance to
view the possible outcome of a project from different perspectives.
Stage 9: Refining the final conceptsThis stage ensures that the concepts chosen by the design team clearly
communicate the final desired message and, therefore, meet the brief. The
ideas will be further developed to show a range of creative approaches.
Design teams will work to produce a range of ideas along a creative scale
such as ‘mild to wild’ (working with ideas ranging from the understated to
the outrageous) or ‘evolution to revolution’ (where the solution is either
closely aligned with existing businesses, or creates a whole new category for
itself). The design team will also show how the identity works when scaled
large and small, in reverse, in black and in colour. However, these concepts
are still in a raw form; more time will need to be spent refining the
typography, use of colour, etc., before the finished artwork stage.
Along with the semi-finished artwork created to visualize the final designs,
other presentation materials will also be created to demonstrate the chosen
design solutions to the client.
Stage 10: Client presentationThe creative director, senior designer or client handler may undertake this
stage of the process, depending on the management structure, size or
organization of an agency. This is the culmination of often hundreds of hours
of work, as well as the opportunity to demonstrate to the client how and
where their money has been spent. The outcome of this stage will define the
final outcome of the project as only one concept will be chosen.
In an academic environment this stage is often mimicked by a formative crit,
where tutors take the place of the client to give feedback on the quality of the
final designs and their relevance to the brief
.
Stage 11: Finishing/prototyping the final designThe concept chosen by the client (or tutor) will now undergo the final
development stage, with any changes that have been discussed with the client
incorporated into the final identity. All the elements of the brand identity and
any other supporting design work are created to finished artwork stage.
Stage 12: Testing/market research/ consumer reactionsThis vital stage ensures that the final design achieves its most important aim
– that it ‘speaks’ effectively to the desired audience. Small tweaks to the final
design may be necessary after this phase.
Various methods are used to test the success of a final brand identity, such as
consumer focus groups (see page 96). A brand identity at this stage, though,
is highly sensitive and will be protected by nondisclosure agreements, created
to ensure that all working on its development maintain a level of secrecy (see
page 152).
Stage 13: Delivery of final artwork
All the creative outcomes developed in response to the client’s original brief
are now signed off by the designers and delivered to the client.
For students this stage will take the form of a summative crit, where tutors
will assess the final designs, grading them on the basis of their quality and
their relevance to the original brief set.
Beyond delivery
The responsibility of launching a brand is traditionally undertaken by the
client, working together with a marketing or advertising agency. However, a
design agency may be asked to produce marketing literature for the brand or,
in the case of packaging, elements of launch communication such as point ofsale.
Effective branding is a marathon not a sprint; it often takes years to
effectively communicate the brand values and grow the consumer base. For
many large brands the continuing development of an individual brand is the
job of the brand manager, working from inside the parent corporation. It is
their job to police the communication and marketing of the identity,
involving designers when the brand needs to be refreshed or extended.
THE DESIGN TEAM
Who is responsible for the practical creative processes involved in creating a
brand depends predominantly on the size of the agency and how many
designers it employs. In smaller agencies there may be a lot of overlap
between the various tasks involved, which will range from working with the
client to research, concept development, final artworking and making the tea.
In larger agencies, teams are constructed hierarchically. A number of junior
designers will be supervised by a designer, who in turn is supported by a
senior designer responsible to the creative director. A senior creative may be
responsible for client liaison, or in a large agency a client handler may be
specifically employed to take on this role. Job titles and structures may also
vary, depending on the focus of the agency or its management structures.This diagram shows the typical management structure of a small to medium-sized agency, and the
various roles and responsibilities within it.
The benefits of working in a team
There is a popular concept that highly creative people enjoy and benefit from
working alone. Although it is true that solitude can fuel a creative mind,
boost productivity (and attracts fewer distractions), it can also be
counterproductive. Human beings are social animals. We are designed to
mingle and work collaboratively, and have evolved to transcend challenges
by sharing our experiences with others. Ultimately design is a creative
challenge, and creativity requires dynamics. For instance, if you have a
creative idea, how can you ensure that it is successful if you are the only one
judging it? All you will have to gauge your ideas by will be your own point
of view.
Creative teams, on the other hand, offer the chance to ‘mind map’ or
brainstorm – to discuss ideas and explore far wider possibilities than are
possible for an individual. Good teamwork helps us create and share ideas,
and harnessing the unique creative strengths of individuals within a team can
produce a final result that surpasses what any individual could produce alone.
Surrounding yourself with a team of great people and remaining open to
suggestions will enhance your creativity not distract it.Working on your own can be both lonely and frustrating, particularly when you have an uncreative day.
THE CREATIVE PROCESS
This chapter has so far explored the practical steps that take place when
creating a brand identity. This process is visible, measurable and explicit.
However, there is another process vital to the quality of the final outcome;
this hidden, almost magical process is known as the creative process – or the
role played by the imagination. This very personal internal process reflects
the individual personality of a designer and can be highly logical, emotional
or instinctive.
One of the earliest models of the creative process is attributed to English
social psychologist Graham Wallas, who in his 1926 book 
The Art of Thought
proposed that creative thinking proceeds through four phases:
1.
Preparation
 – initial work on a problem that focuses the mind and
explores the scope or dimensions of the problem.
2.
Incubation
 – the problem is internalized by the unconscious mind and
nothing appears to be happening.
3.
Illumination
 (or the ‘eureka’ moment) – the creative idea bursts forthfrom preconscious processing into conscious awareness.
4.
Verification
 – the idea is consciously verified, elaborated and then
applied.
Graham Walla
s
Many decades later, in a 1988 essay entitled ‘The Nature of Creativity as
Manifest in its Testing’, the American psychologist Ellis Paul Torrance
pointed out that Wallas’s model still forms the basis of most creative-thinkingeducational and training programs today. The inclusion of incubation
followed by sudden illumination in this model may also help to explain why
so many people outside the arts continue to view creative thinking as a
mysterious, subconscious mental process that cannot be directed.
While the design process is a highly linear approach, involving clear steps
arranged almost like stepping stones, the creative process is highly personal
and is experienced differently by each individual designer. This makes it
much more difficult to define.
One way of representing the process is via a simple four-step cyclical model
that highlights how thinking evolves from uncertainty to certainty through
stages of questioning and answering throughout a project.
Damien Newman, of Central Office of Design, has come up with an
alternative way of respresenting the process. His ‘Design Squiggle’ charts the
creative experience as it moves from the abstract, through the concept phase,
to emerge at the final design solution.
A simple four-stage cyclical representation of the creative process.This diagram is based on Newman’s licensed Design Squiggle, which maps out the creative process of
design, from uncertainty to eventual clarity.
THE DESIGN PROCESS IN THE ACADEMIC
ENVIRONMENT
This chapter has explored how the design process is used within the industry,
but it can also play a key role for design students completing an
undergraduate programme. Firstly, learning about the processes used in the
professional sphere will introduce you to the depth and breadth of research,
critical thinking, analysis, creative problem-solving and graphic skill
demanded by agencies. Secondly, these very processes will also provide a
clear working framework for any curricular work, by breaking up the
requirements of an initial brief into sequential steps that will both guide your
project and support time management. Used in conjunction with an accurate
personal timeplan, this will not only help you keep to deadlines, but will also
allow you to allocate an appropriate amount of time to each stage of the
process.
Documenting all your work, too – either through a ‘process book’ or a blog –
will enable you to record and, later, justify any design decisions, making the
final submission a much simpler process. Justifying your decisions by
demonstrating the process you used to reach them proves you are both
creative and a design professional.As you gain a greater understanding of your own personal creative processes,
you may find it helpful to map out a flow chart for future reference. The
example on the right was developed by a group of Graphic Communication
students to summarize the creative process they had used to complete a
particular exercise, and demonstrates just how many steps may be involved in
any personal creative journey.EXERCIS
E
Student exercises
The following are some examples of the kind of exercises you may be
given as a student. For each brief an understanding of the design process
will inform a successful outcome.
Exercise 1: Mimicking the structure of an industry team
Groups of five students or more are set the challenge of working together
on a single brand creation. Each student is given a job title that reflects the
roles within an agency team: creative director, senior designer, designer
and two junior designers. A member of staff then acts as the client,
attending briefings and presentations. The step-by-step design process is
therefore used to structure the project, both creatively and practically.
Exercise 2: Concept creation using the ‘mild to wild’ or ‘evolution to
revolution’ method
This exercise involves taking an existing brand and redesigning it for a
new market. After researching the brand and its current consumers,
students must identity the drive needed to make it appropriate to its new
market. This will involve firstly creating a range of ideas that would move
the brand a small way from its current position, followed by other concepts
that would take it on a more revolutionary journey. Students can then
explore their concepts further by calculating their perception of the amount
of change reflected in their ‘refreshed’ brand.
Exercise 3: Using blogs to document the design process
Blogs can be a very useful way for students to document their design
process. However, clear rules as to how they are structured will make
reviewing and assessing easier for tutors. Again, the design process can be
used to support this – for example, in the form of clear titles for the
different tasks undertaken. Students must also include commentary,conclusions and clear justification of their design decisions, as well as
images of reference material and personal creative content.
Tips:
1. Think of categories as being like the contents page in a book. Limit the
categories to around five. Readers use categories to navigate to posts they
are interested in, and categories also help the writer to define their points
clearly.
2. Think of tags as being like the index in a book. Tags are keywords that
highlight what is being documented and are useful to speed up a reader’s
navigation around the blog.
Understanding the needs of individual consumers and what motivates them to make their purchasing
decisions is a key area of brand research, whether those decisions are made individually or as a result of
pester power!CHAPTER 5: RESEARCH
There are a number of key research methods used by professionals
within branding agencies. This chapter explores some of these in order
to give a clear picture of the depth and breadth of enquiry that needs to
be undertaken, as well as to explain why adopting a strategic approach
is so important. We will explore the methods used to identify and
understand the type of consumer that a new brand is to target.
An explanation of how the final design direction is clarified, by
analyzing this research in combination with information about the
competition and the environment in which a brand will be marketed,
then follows in Chapter 6.
WHY DO WE NEED TO RESEARCH?
Research is the first, and possibly most important, stage of the design
process. For contemporary brand design practitioners it plays a key role in
achieving original and distinctive work. Rather than stifle creativity,
research actually empowers it, and without good research findings your
design work will lack focus and direction. Any time invested in research
will help you to make confident design decisions, moving through the
design process quickly and with conviction. In an industry context, too,
clients are always reassured when they are able to see how and why
designs were created.
RESEARCH METHODSThe various research methods used to collect data can be divided into two
main categories – information that is collected first-hand from a particular
source (primary research) and pre-existing information (secondary research).
Primary research methods
Primary research aims to produce new data using either direct methods such
as case study interviews (see page 104) or indirect methods (such as
observation). The data collected is specifically related to the question posed
by the researcher and has not been previously analyzed. It is important to
remember that whatever approach to research you plan to use, the methods
should be applied in a systematic and disciplined way, which can be easily
communicated to others. Primary research can be further divided into
qualitative and quantitative research.
Qualitative research
Qualitative research deals with subjective qualities of things. It is an
exploratory research method, often using language rather than numbers to
assess information, with an emphasis on the participants’ interpretations of
the issues being addressed. This method is used to gauge motivations, trends
or reasons for actions such as purchasing decisions, and is a method
traditionally used in market research.
Data is usually collected from a small number of carefully chosen cases, in an
unstructured or semi-structured approach. Some of the key methods used
include:Talk to your market! Design undertaken without knowing the needs and perceptions of your target
audience will lead to aesthetically driven design. It may look pretty but will it work?
Case study interviews
Individual consumer profiling
Observations
Group discussions
Internet focus groups
Being more exploratory in nature, the outcomes of this type of research are
not statistical, but rather help to develop an initial understanding of a topic.
This can provide valuable insights into consumer perception.
Quantitative research
Quantitative research deals with quantity and measurement. Its focus is on
numerical outcomes and statistical analysis, aiming to produce objective and
reliable data. Typically, various views and opinions in a chosen sample aremeasured – usually consisting of a large number of randomly selected
respondents. Structured data collection techniques are used, such as
traditional questionnaires or, more recently, online survey sites such as
SurveyMonkey, Zoomerang and Polldaddy. The outcomes collected are then
usually analyzed in statistical tables, and are considered to be reliable as long
as large enough numbers of respondents have been involved.
SurveyMonkey is an online research facility providing free, customizable surveys, data analysis,
sample selection, bias elimination, and data representation tools.
Research Methods
Initial ProcessSecondary research
Secondary research involves collecting existing information from online
sources, libraries and other archives. It often utilizes data collected by
professional research groups and made available either for a fee or, in some
cases, for free, and involves the collation and analysis of this data to explore
the question at hand. Secondary research materials can include previous
research reports, books, newspapers, magazines and journal articles, and
government and NGO statistics.
This type of research is often undertaken at the beginning of a project, as it
helps to determine what is already known about the current situation, and will
highlight what additional knowledge is required.As secondary research is based on the work of others it is vital that all work
is credited using appropriate citation methods, such as the Oxford or Harvard
system (see page 138). By doing so you not only avoid any possible issues
relating to plagiarism, you also strengthen the findings and validate your
conclusions.
Combining research methods
Successful research involves collecting elements from both qualitative and
quantitative sources, followed by analysis, in which the outcomes are
combined and compared to gain conclusions. This approach of using two or
more research methods – for example, questionnaires and observation – is
sometimes known as triangulation, and engenders more confidence in the
findings.
RESEARCHING THE AUDIENCE
The modern world offers us a seemingly endless array of goods and
services, as brands jostle to stand out in a densely crowded marketplace.
Companies are therefore constantly seeking to make stronger emotional
connections with their customers, to become irreplaceable in their lives and
create long-lasting relationships. Understanding consumer’ basic needs,
desires and aspirations, as well as developing an appreciation of cultural
issues where appropriate, is vital in determining how to achieve this.
The first step in identifying the target audience of a particular product or
service is to ask a set of simple questions:
Who would need this?
Who would want this?
Why would they need it?
Who might aspire/desire to have this?
The answers to these questions will create a simple framework from whicha more detailed profile will need to be developed. There are two main
techniques used in the marketing industry to identify the market for a new
brand, known as demographic and psychographic profiling
.
A demographic profile is created to gain statistical information about a
particular group within a population – for instance, middle-class, college-
educated male professionals between the ages of 25 and 45 living on the East
Coast of America. The aim of this type of research is to gain enough
information about a typical individual within this group to be able to create a
representative profile of the group as a whole. The areas generally researched
are age, gender, income level, occupation, education, religious and ethnic
background, and marital status. Where specific information is required more
detailed market research may be commissioned to provide information on
more niche markets.
A demographic profile defines a group statistically, with the outcomes of the
research being generally numerical. While this information can be important
for a design team, it does not necessarily inspire creativity. It is for this
reason that a psychographic profile is generated. This defines group attitudes,
values, interests and chosen lifestyle. These considerations will also differ
from one culture to another, so market researchers will often employ a
globally appropriate segmentation technique, based on Maslow’s hierarchy of
needs.
In his 1943 paper A Theory of Human Motivation’, American psychologist
Abraham Maslow suggested that humans have five categories of need, which
can be arranged in order of importance. These categories – physiological,
social, safety, love/belonging, esteem and self-actualization – are now usually
represented as a pyramid, with the most fundamental (physiological) needs at
the bottom, narrowing to the need for self-actualization at the apex of the
triangle.
Maslow’s research into human motivation was the inspiration behind
advertising agency Young and Rubicam’s Cross Cultural Consumer
Characterization model (the 4Cs). This model characterizes people into
recognizable stereotypes that reflect seven human motivations: security,
control, status, individuality, freedom, survival and escape. From these core
values, a set of relatively stable lifestyle profiles have been created.Psychographics are any attributes relating to personality, values, attitudes, interests or lifestyles.
This diagram shows the data collected from AutoPacific’s New Vehicle Satisfaction Survey, which
determines the psychographic profile of each brand and model.This diagram represents Maslow’s hierarchy of needs arranged as a pyramid. Maslow used his
‘categories of need’ to describe the path that human motivations generally move through, starting
with the most basic needs represented at the bottom, and finishing with the highest desire – self-
actualization, or ‘reaching one’s potential’ – at the top.
Demographics
Cross Cultural Consumer Characterization by Young and RubicamYoung and Rubicam’s 4Cs technique is an example of a psychographic marketing research tool used to
discern the number and types of people in a particular population
.
The aim of this model is to define universal human values, regardless of
culture or nationality. The various segments were created through the
analysis of data initially collected from seven European countries, but which
has now developed into a global database, identifying values found in
cultures spread as wide as Iceland, Thailand, Lithuania and Kazakhstan.The VALS (Values, Attitudes and Lifestyles) system is another
psychographic market segmentation method, again inspired by the work of
Maslow. Created by Arnold Mitchell and his colleagues at SRI International
in 1978, this is also used to discern the number and types of people in a
particular population.
Since the development of these lead methods, many design companies and
agencies have also sought to create their own more detailed profiling
systems, enabling them to delve even deeper into people’s motivations and
buying habits. Key to these processes is turning broad statistical data into a
profile of someone you could ‘get to know’ 
–
 the aim being to develop a
‘language’ that allows a brand to ‘speak’ to them clearly and appropriately.
Focus groups
Focus groups explore the perceptions, opinions and beliefs of a group of
people towards an idea, product, service, package or brand. These groups of
people are chosen according to their demographics or buying habits. This
type of qualitative research uses trigger questions in an interactive,
unstructured group setting that encourages free discussion between
participants, and is usually conducted at the early stages of the development
of a product or brand, to gather insights into any potential opportunities or
problems with the design or the overall idea. Focus groups will highlight
relationships between consumers and existing brands, explore emerging
trends, gain insights into purchasing decisions and enable a new product to be
tested before being released to the public.
Un-focus groups
Unlike focus groups, where the participants are the likely users of a product
or service, an ‘un-focus’ group features participants who are chosen almost
randomly. This method typically employs an interviewer to conduct group
interviews with participants who are very different, in order to get a broader
range of opinions and feedback about a product. Participants may be selected
because they are an unlikely user of a product, have no use for it, dislike it, or
because they have a vested interest in it or are considered extreme users (at
either end of the spectrum).
The un-focus group is often used at the end of the design stage, after standardfocus groups have been conducted. The broader range of views can often help
tease out any problems inherent in a design, although since these are often the
views of non-users of the product, researchers may find the respondents
unable to define accurately what is needed to solve the problem.
Design agencies are seeking out a new type of focus group, made up of ‘extreme consumers’ – those
people whose needs go far beyond the average user. Such consumers offer richer insights as they are
the ones for whom the performance of a product matters most
.
Touchpoint analysis
Key to improving brand loyalty is an appreciation of the emotions evoked by
a customer’s contact with a brand. Companies must ensure that all these
points of interaction (touchpoints) are monitored so that the consumer
experience is as fulfilling as possible. Brand value is known to be built
through a series of positive experiences, and maintained by consistently
meeting the needs and expectations of the customer, from pre-purchase
considerations to post-purchase evaluation.
To appreciate fully how a consumer experiences a brand, research can be
undertaken to engage with their emotional journey. This is known as
touchpoint analysis, and it divides touchpoints into three distinct areas ofconsumer contact:
1.
Pre-purchase (marketing, advertising)
2.
Purchase
3.
Post-purchase (product use, after-sales care)
A touchpoint wheel is a visual framework that summarizes all the points of
interaction with a brand during which a customer may be influenced, directly
or indirectly, and this can assist designers and their research subjects in
evaluating the consumer journey.
Touchpoint analysis can be applied to both products and services, and it is
used to inform strategy and to plan advertising campaigns. It gives the
opportunity to delve deep into the consumer’s experience to learn more about
their relationship with the brand.
This example of a touchpoint diagram – created for Tony’s Chocolonely’s chocolate company –
illustrates the three stages of a customer’s brand experience journey, from pre-purchase through
purchase to post purchase.Some of the key questions asked will include:
•
How well does the experience measure up to the customer’s needs
and expectations?
•
Does each customer interaction live up to the experience that the
brand is trying to deliver?
•
Does the brand deliver a more consistent and relevant experience
than its main competitor(s)?
•
Which interactions are the most powerful in creating customer
loyalty?
The outcomes of this type of research can result in an all-round
improvement in the brand experience, better value for the consumer and
increased brand loyalty.
Brandwatch is a social media monitoring and analytics tool that permits the collection of socialmedia metrics, transforming them into actionable data to maximize a brand’s online presence.
THE USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN RESEARCH
In recent years there has been a marked increase in the use of social media,
and a resulting growth in consumer conversations relating to brands taking
place on the Internet.
With so much being discussed about brands online by their customers, and so
much information readily available, new research approaches are needed to
make sense of it all. There is an evolving demand for systems to analyze
social media data so as to be able to develop new communication strategies,
and companies are increasingly investing in advanced social media
monitoring tools such as Brandwatch to help them navigate this new
landscape
.
Of course, brands themselves must operate effectively within social media,
too, raising many new concerns. Brands have learned to utilize social media
to help drive awareness, and highly influential bloggers are invited to
introduce brands and drive online conversation through social channels such
as Facebook and Twitter. But if brands themselves have a blog, what are they
blogging about? What are the products and services they offer? What are
their special offers? Do they have any thought leadership?
Posts launching a product can generate thousands of ‘likes’ and comments on
Facebook, indirectly reaching millions via the connections of those who have
engaged with the brand. This kind of engagement has opened up new
research opportunities, such as using instant polling tools to fuel online
discussions, or connecting online discussion boards directly to an online
survey.
This type of research reveals a level of transparency that surveys and focus
groups would find difficult to capture – a result of the security users feel in
the relative anonymity of the online world, which can encourage a degree of
honesty that many people would not feel comfortable with in person.
Social media research does not require the physical cooperation of
respondents, so there are reduced financial and practical barriers to findingparticipants, too. A further advantage is the opportunity to work with a much
larger and more diverse number of people. This method also requires little
planning, is time efficient and therefore inexpensive. However, it does have
its disadvantages: the freedom of speech offered by anonymity of the Internet
can also result in responses that are either unexpected or negative. Due to the
openness of communication on the Internet, these responses can ‘go viral’ or
be widely circulated, causing damage to the reputation of a brand.If you can get your customer to ‘like’, ‘comment’, and/or ‘share’ content on Facebook, you are
indirectly marketing to their entire sphere of influence; one single ‘like’ may potentially be seen by
many friends on a person’s contact list.
Procter and Gamble
The twenty-first century has seen the use of ‘bottom up’ marketing grow
dramatically through the use of social media, where the focus is on
personal experiences of brands driven by consumers not marketers. Known
as ‘consumergenerated media’, the platforms used include blogs and
forums, which have helped supercharge word-of-mouth forms of
communication. One company that has used this type of marking in a
significant way is Procter and Gamble, which has been able to build a
massive focus group of over half a million mothers to help the company
problem-solve and drive sales. A good example is the campaign created for
Secret deodorant, which employed the Procter and Gamble-created
‘Vocalpoint community’ (through the website Vocalpoint.com). This
online strategy brings together a community of women employing
Facebook and Twitter to generate conversations, share opinions and offer
samples. This particular campaign resulted in 100,000 women receiving
samples and coupons for the new product, while 500,000 opted in to an
online weekly newsletter.
The Secret Clinical Strength national Vocalpoint word-of-mouth campaign was deployed to the
Vocalpoint community (mostly made up of switched-on mums) via Vocalpoint.com, Facebook and
Twitter. The campaign ran across 40-plus touchpoints over nine weeks.VISUAL RESEARCH BOARDS
The design industry uses a variety of visual enquiry boards to explore ideas
and capture emotions and styles. Traditionally these were created from a
range of photographs, illustrations, colours and sometimes textures, often
with accompanying descriptive words, to help capture a particular theme. The
images were printed and applied to a ‘board’ – usually an A3 (or 11 x 17 in)
sheet of card – hence the term. Some agencies still use this approach,
although many now create them digitally, maintaining them as a presentation
tool for clients and as part of their team research process.
There are three key types of board: mood boards, inspiration boards and
consumer-profile boards, each having a unique purpose within the design
process.
Mood boards
A mood board (sometimes known as a tone of voice board) is a visual collage
that projects a particular emotion or theme with a selection of pictures,
colours and other visual elements. This visual analysis technique helps to
define an aesthetic ‘feel’ or style, and is frequently used in the conceptual
phase of the design process.
Inspiration boards
Inspiration boards are also used as part of the idea-generation stage of the
process. They are created to collate and organize imagery intended to inspire
the design team’s creative process. Sometimes they include elements that are
close to the subject being explored, but they may also include elements that
take the designers out of their comfort zone, provoking new ways of thinking
and seeing.Mood boards enable the creative teams to start ‘visualizing’ their design strategy. Sharing a themed
approach in this way also allows them to stay close to the direction agreed in the brief.Inspiration boards can be used to collect graphic elements such as typefaces and colours to inspire
the creation of a brand identity, but they can also be used to help explore straplines or brand stories.
EXERCISE
Designing a consumer-profile board
Mini-brief 1
A simple but effective way to understand how to develop well-designed
consumer boards is to produce one for an existing brand. The original
design team has already defined the audience they wish to target, so all the
hard work is already done. This exercise is in analysis, unpicking from the
brand communication the type of consumer it is targeting and choosing
specific images to reveal their lifestyle. Swapping consumer boards with a
team member to see if they are able to identify the original brand can be afun way to test their accuracy.
Mini-brief 2
Exploring the contents of someone’s handbag, school bag or briefcase can
also be a highly effective way to learn intimate details about a target
consumer. The items can be arranged and then photographed with further
written analysis used to highlight thoughts and conclusions. Remember to
ask permission first though!
Consumer-profile boards
The consumer-profile board captures, through a variety of images, a visual
outline of the type of person the brand is targeting. As designers are
predominantly visual people, this type of research is usually better
represented through tangible characteristics, rather than a set of data or a list
of abstract descriptors. Consumer-profile boards are made up from a range of
images about the consumer, and will include details such as:
•
What they look like – age, gender, ethnic group
•
Their job – profession, skill, income
•
Their family and friends – children, wider family group, types of friends
•
Their lifestyle – the type of car they drive, house they live in, holiday they
go on
•
The brands they buy – choice of supermarket, clothing, grooming
accessories, homewares
•
Interests – sports, music, literature, art, films
There are no set rules when designing consumer boards; however, there are a
few considerations that will enhance their value:
•
Only choose a few key images – too many can create visual confusion
•
Consider scale, making important images larger than less important ones
•
Design the layout carefully, including negative space to give each image
breathing space
•
Use a white background – colour can introduce an unwanted subliminal
effect
•
Make sure that any typefaces are consistent. 
with the look of the board andreflect the personality of the consumer
•
Develop a range of boards rather than trying to explore all lifestyle choices
on one board
This example of a consumer-profile board is for a new fresh cold-pressed juice brand. Key to the
designer’s understanding of this niche beverage market was appreciating the various potential
consumer types.
Once this visual process has been completed, a design team will then often
capture their thoughts of the consumer in the form of a written profile.
Visual research boards not only help to establish a clear direction for the
design team, they can also improve client relations. Boards facilitate early
client participation, and can demonstrate that the team have listened to the
client’s thoughts and considered their input, which fosters trust. The client, in
turn, gains valuable insight into the thinking behind any creative ideas,
dispelling the notion that creativity involves simply plucking ideas out of theair. Openness at this stage will also prevent any unwelcome surprises.
A further benefit to designers is that the process of preparing boards can help
eradicate ‘white paper phobia’, or ‘blank canvas syndrome’ (see page 136),
as much of the very early concept generation phase is dealt with even before
pencil hits paper (or cursor moves on-screen).
Consumer/Audience Research ProcessOTHER FORMS OF RESEARCH
Case study interviewsQuestionnaires are a great way of gaining data from large numbers of
respondents, but they are not suited to in-depth research as they generate a
relatively superficial view of a person’s lifestyle. Case study interviews, or
profiles, allow you to delve much deeper into the life of an individual or
family, and can reveal insights in quite a different way. The researcher needs
to develop a small number of trigger questions relevant to the individual that
is taking part. These questions can be on any topic as long as it is relevant to
the area of interest. They will anchor a discussion topic, and the individual’s
responses can be recorded for future analysis, either as a sound file or as a
video. Photographs or film are also often used to record the individual’s
wider lifestyle, including their home, work environment, shopping habits and
leisure pursuits, which can be analyzed to gain further insights.
It is, of course, vital that the individuals concerned give their permission for
you to use images of their home and family as part of the research, and any
investigation needs to be done in a professional manner. Let any prospective
candidates know what the research will be used for, and ask them for formal
(written) permission for it to be seen by others as part of a design project.
The analysis from a number of case studies can be an invaluable way to gain
insights into lifestyles that are very different from your own experience,
offering opportunities to understand how different people live and define
their needs and aspirations.
Consumer observations and interviews
Point-of-purchase observations and interviews can be a highly revealing way
to explore who is buying what and why. Like case study interviews, this is a
form of ‘action research’ that can be easily conducted by students.
Undertaken in supermarkets and other retail environments, such observations
enable the researcher to see first-hand what motivates purchasing decisions,
how a consumer feels about a specific brand, product or packaging, and the
success of promotional/ merchandizing initiatives. These observations can
either be achieved by simply observing consumers in the setting, or by
arranging to accompany an individual during their normal weekly shop. Any
point-of-purchase observations can then be followed up with interviews to
gain insights into a consumer’s thoughts, feelings and motivations whilst they
are still fresh in their minds.Things to record:
•
How long people take to make their choices
•
The brands chosen, and the size and number of items purchased
•
Impulsive purchases versus planned purchases
•
Purchase motivations
•
Reasons for rejecting a brand
•
Shopping experience and store layout (retailer performance)
Again, a professional approach is required in these situations. If you want to
question people that you don’t know, it is important to receive permission
from a store manager before conducting any interviews. Offering personal
identification may also be helpful to prove the validity of your request.This example of a ‘brand perception map’ shows the key positioning approaches of the leading
smartphone brands in the Chinese market
.
Questionnaires
People’s time is very valuable, so if you wish to encourage them to take part
in any questionnaire, ensure that the number of questions is limited. Anything
over 25 becomes a chore, and the questionnaire should ideally only take
between 5 and 7 minutes to complete.
•
Make sure the questions are clearly written, short and unambiguous
•
The design of the questionnaire is also important for clear communicationof both questions and response boxes, speeding up the process
•
Avoid open-ended questions that mean a respondent has to provide a long
written reply
•
Try to write questions that will prompt a simple ‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘maybe’,
‘often’ or ‘never’ response, or use an appropriate numerical scale
•
Capture the interest of your respondents by explaining the project and what
the findings will support, as this can incentivize them to take part
•
Be persistent: many people may be interested in helping but may have
forgotten. Politely remind them and try to give them incentives or
encouragement
•
Finally, proofread and polish the questions with a friend or colleague to
ensure you have framed them to obtain the most accurate responses
SWOT analysis
SWOT analysis is a technique that can be used to evaluate any product or
service. Firstly the objective or aim has to be defined, and then the factors
that are favourable or unfavourable to achieving that aim are identified. This
type of analysis is useful because it enables researchers to not only identify a
brand’s unique selling point but also any existing threats to the brand.
•
Strengths: characteristics of the brand that give it an advantage over others
•
Weaknesses: characteristics that place the brand at a disadvantage relative
to others
•
Opportunities: elements that the brand could exploit to its advantage
•
Threats: elements in the retail environment that could cause trouble for the
brand
Personal research
In addition to the formal research explored in this chapter, many designers
also undertake personal inspirational research, often collected in journals and
sketchbooks or by using digital tools such as Pinterest (see Chapter 7).An example of a SWOT analysis diagram, used to highlight strategic unique selling points in an
existing brand or brand concept, as well as to identify any strengths and weaknesses, and any possible
threats.Where do you start? Asking questions is possibly the best place. Working as a team to develop a clear
direction and identify any further research activities will enable a strategic approach to the eventual
creative process.CHAPTER 6: ANALYSIS
The analysis stage of the research process involves design teams asking
some specific questions. These are used both to generate starting points
for design, and to help to identify where further research activities might
need to be undertaken.
This section explores a group of analysis techniques commonly used to
gain insights into brand competition and market segmentation. The
conclusions drawn from this process will then go on to determine the
style or tone of voice most appropriate to the product or service being
branded.
DEFINING THE USP
As has been discussed already in this book, the unique selling
point/proposition (USP) is what differentiates a brand from its competitors,
and what ultimately gives it its competitive advantage. The key to defining
this advantage is by asking the question ‘Why would the target audience
choose this brand over all the others?’. Much of the research described in
Chapter 5 can therefore be used to help determine the USP.
Once the USP has been identified, it is used to develop the positioning
statement – a sentence or two that summarizes the essence of the brand in
relation to its competitors, and is used to drive its communication strategy.
This, in turn, is used to generate a strapline or slogan that, over time, will
hopefully become synonymous with the brand.
This technique has proved to be a highly successful way of communicating
a brand’s uniqueness, as illustrated by Tesco’s ‘Every little helps’, which
transmits a helpful and money-saving message, or Stella Artois’controversially successful ‘Reassuringly expensive’ campaign, which
highlights its exclusive brewing quality. Microsoft identifies its unique
relationship with its users with the strap ‘Your potential, our passion’,
representing itself as a vehicle for human creativity. While MasterCard – a
brand that evokes an emotive reaction in each advert, print or broadcast –
highlight that they are the only real choice with ‘There are some things
money can’t buy. For everything else, there’s MasterCard’.
MARKET SECTOR ANALYSIS
Market sector analysis involves identifying the position a brand will aim to
occupy in consumer perception. There are three broad market sectors,
determined by their roles in satisfying either desires or needs. Satisfaction can
be achieved either physically, psychologically, socially or emotionally. Our
desires can sometimes seem endless, whether we consider ourselves wealthy
or not. Needs are easier to define, but they do vary according to a person’s
age, physical environment, health etc. These are usually the basic stuff of life,
such as food, water, shelter and warmth. The three market sectors are
described as value or economy, regular or mid-market and premium or
luxury.
Economy, value or necessity goods serve the satisfaction of basic needs.
They are the things we literally cannot live without, and which are difficult to
cut back on, even when times are difficult, such as food, electricity, water and
gas. The success of economy products and brands depends mostly on the
sales price. Their common ‘home’ is the discount shop or supermarket, DIY
shops, furniture outlets, and mail-order and online businesses.Regular or mid-market brands are generally designed for middle-class
consumers with an average income, and are priced at a midpoint accordingly.
These brands aim to offer good quality, but take care to show value for
money as well.
Luxury goods or services are usually associated with affluence. As they are
considered non-essential, they are usually targeted towards the upper middle
and upper income brackets. The concept of luxury is packed with multiple
layers of meaning, playing on consumers’ desires and aspirations. These
goods are commonly found in upmarket malls, airports and specialist stores.
Each of these three sectors has a visual language that is employed to trigger
particular reactions or emotions. For instance, economy brands tend to use
simple designs, basic imagery and a reduced colour palette, often using
primary colours. The choice of type is commonly bold and simple, as is any
packaging and marketing.
Mid-market brands in general are the most decorative of the three, using
more colour, a wider variety of type choices, quality photography and
illustration on pack and promotional materials.These cartons of orange juice successfully exemplify the market sectors that they have been designed to
appeal to: the Tesco carton is an example of value for money, Tropicana is mid-market, and Coldpress
is the premium brand.The strong typography, bold colours and simple, unfussy designs used for value-for-money packaging
is also often used for budget retail environments.Supermarkets targeting middle-class consumers often entice their target audience with displays of fresh
produce or flowers at the entrance; these aim to ‘prime’ the consumer to think of freshness as soon as
they enter.Mariano’s Fresh Market provides their consumers with a unique shopping experience, including a wine
bar, live music, and indoor and outdoor seating areas with a view of the Chicago skyline from the
second-floor windows
.
Luxury brands, however, revert back to simplicity, but handled in quite a
different way from the economy brands. Often minimal both in colour and
style, they appeal to our senses in other ways. These brands often explore
‘stories’ that enhance the brand’s exotic ‘lifestyle’, perhaps by relating it to
that of a distant land, or by emphasizing the feel of the handmade, reflecting
the superior quality of the product. Heritage is another reference used by
luxury brands, highlighting the customs and culture of a society passed down
through the product to a new generation of owners. Typography is carefully
crafted, sometimes using wide character spacing, decoration is usually
minimal and stylized, and colours are carefully specified, alongside other
printing techniques such as foil blocking, embossing and spot varnishing.
Questions and techniques
Some of the key questions that guide market sector analysis are:•
What value would a new product bring to a prospective buyer?
•
What price would they consider reasonable?
•
What reasons might they have for not buying?
•
What elements of the established ‘design language’ for this market
influence the consumer’s choice?
Commonly used market sector analysis techniques include:
•
Being your own customer. By imagining yourself as your own customer,
you can experience a product or brand from the consumer’s point of view.
•
Mystery shoppers
Having completed an analysis of the brand competition (see page 114) and
market sector analysis, the design team will then consider which of the three
market positions will be the most appropriate for the new brand. It is
important to remember, however, that within each of the three broad sectors
there is also a huge variation in price. Further consideration therefore must be
given as to where the brand will sit within the sector in reference to its main
competitors.
Three brands that explore the key visual languages employed to describe value for money, mid-
market and luxury brands.In designing the identity for Warner Edwards gin, one of the early steps taken by the design team at
Bluemarlin was an analysis of existing gin brands.
PRODUCT CATEGORY ANALYSIS
There are strong similarities between market sectors and product categories,
as both relate to differentiation within consumer markets. However, both
have been included to give an understanding of terminology even though
there are considerable crossovers between the two. Just as there are three
main market sectors, there are also predominantly three main product
categories: convenience goods, shopping goods and speciality goods.
In addition to the appropriate ‘market language’ that needs to be defined
before embarking on the development of a new brand design, a design team
must also gain an understanding of all relevant ‘product language’.
During the twentieth and twenty-first centuries unique visual languages have
come to represent certain commodities and services; these are defined by
choice of colour, type, shape and image. For example, dark, rich colours,
together with gold and italicized typefaces, tend to be seen on coffee
packaging, while bright primary colours with an extensive use of white are
typical for washing powders (see page 59). Before any creative work canbegin, the design team must therefore research the language specific to the
product category in which the new brand will be sited. This information can
also be displayed as visual analysis boards, which will give the design team a
visual overview of the current brandscape, as might be seen on a supermarket
shelf, for example.
Once the analysis is complete the team will then use the information to define
the new brand’s product differentiation strategy. This will determine how the
brand’s unique offering will be reflected in terms of quality, price, function or
availability – such as the time it is marketed (e.g. Christmas) or the venue it 
is
sold in (as with unique local produce).
COMPETITOR BRAND ANALYSIS
In today’s competitive consumer marketplace, a new brand will be entering a
sector already populated with powerful competitors. In order to gain a
competitive advantage, a new brand or brand extension needs to position
itself strategically, either by creating a new niche, or by competing within an
existing one by making a stronger offer to the consumer.
Competitor brand analysis is a method for evaluating and comparing a
brand’s main competitors. Recognizing who your main competitors are, how
they are positioning themselves, what products and services they offer and
how consumers are talking about them is a reliable way to ensure that your
brand is differentiated and makes a compelling offer. It is important to realize
right at the start that a clear differentiation should be made between what a
competitor sells (the product or service) and what they stand for (their
promise or philosophy), as this perspective can also help to highlight any
potential advantages for a new brand to capitalize on.The challenge for the design team at Bluemarlin was to create a premium gin brand that is unique and
desirable. To ensure differentiation from competitors, the research stage included a comprehensive
visual analysis of other brands
.
Phase 1: Competitive audit
Developing a successful brand strategy depends on gaining as many insights
into the competition as possible. This is not only vital at the early stages of
the design process, but can also be used as a tool to measure the success of
the final design.
Key questions used to guide this research process are:
•
Who is the competition?
•
Who is their target consumer/audience?
•
What market do they serve – luxury, economy or niche?
•
What is their price point? What is their market share? How popular
are they?•
What does their brand stand for? What is their key message?
•
What is their USP?
•
What are their strengths?
•
How do they position themselves?
•
What are their strategies across all consumer touchpoints (see page
97)?
•
What does their brand look like?
•
What emotional message does it communicate?
•
What is the brand’s tone of voice?
From the conclusions of this first phase of competitor research a brand
positioning strategy can be developed that will guide the design team and
inform the creative process, enabling them to understand the market into
which the new brand will enter. The second phase is to determine the visual
aspects of the competition.
Phase 2: Visual audit
Exploring how a competitor brand communicates to its consumers involves
looking into all the design aspects of that brand’s identity, including online,
advertising, packaging and promotion. This process aims to unpick the
hidden meaning behind all the elements of the design, as was demonstrated
with the semiotic deconstruction of the Milka brand in Chapter 2 (see page
51).
The key factors to explore are:
•
The tone of voice. Who is it addressing?
•
The look and feel. What visual message is it communicating? What
emotion is it expressing?
•
The typeface. What characteristics does it have and why?
•
The colour palette. How does this add to the feel and message?
•
The brand icon/logo. What is it and why does it use it?•
Any additional elements used in the advertising, copywriting and
promotion of the brand. How these are used to amplify the brand
message?
Analyzing the visual elements of the competitor brand will identify what its
designers intended to communicate and how they were able to achieve it.
This will create a clear understanding of how the current competition uses
visual triggers to communicate their message, and will ensure that the design
team approaches the creation of the new brand in an original manner,
developing a unique visual solution.
The first step in undertaking this type of analysis is to do background
research on how the brand was initially created. This information can often
be found on the website of the design agency involved
.
The second phase is to explore in detail the visual elements used by the
design team to create the unique aesthetic of the competitor brand and then
any textual information used to promote the brand.
In the case of premium gin Warner Edwards the design team creating the
identity of the brand was the Bluemarlin’s London studios, and it was the
unique brand story of friendship that inspired and guided the design. The two
founders of the brand Tom Warner, from England, and Siôn Edwards, a
Welshman, met at agricultural college. They became friends and, even
though their farms were geographically separated by the Welsh border, they
had an idea that would allow them to work together. The concept was to
create a premium gin sourcing the ingredients from each of their farms.
The designers wished to capture the brand’s story with iconography
representing the relationships behind the brand as well as its premium appeal.
The brand graphics depict a weather vane pointing west to Wales and east to
England, with the letters ‘E’ and ‘W’ standing for not only the orientations
and nations involved but also the founders’ initials. The same message is
communicated on top of the vane where a dragon, symbolic of Wales, shares
a glass with a lion, representative of England. The typography used has a
traditional feel, developing the sense of premium quality, and the use of
capitals gives the design strength. The brewers’ names are defined in
different typefaces reflecting the founders’ separate identities – the essence of
which is captured in the strapline ‘united in spirit.
’Although many of the elements of the design are traditional, the use of a
pared-back colour palette lends the overall design a modern feel, again
highlighting the premium nature of the brand. The strong geometric
triangular representation of the roof gable adds dynamism to the design and
underlines the importance of the brand story captured within the negative
space. The copper foiling defining the lion and dragon not only lifts the
simple colour palette but also reflects the qualities of metal used in the still, a
key unique selling point for the product.
The design team have also utilized three-dimensional elements to develop the
premium quality ‘triggers’ for the brand, including the application of copper
wire around the neck of the bottle as a link to ‘Curiosity’, Warner Edwards’
bespoke copper pot still. This unique piece of brewing equipment is used to
ferment the barley and features in an illustration highlighting its importance.
Finally the bottle is sealed with a unique number tag that also carries the
signatures of the makers, thus offering a personal guarantee and a sense of
origin and originality.
It is this type of in-depth analysis into the visual language used by other
brands that helps designers define existing aesthetics and gain an
understanding of how to develop novel and unique approaches for new brand
communication.It was Warner Edwards’ unique brand story and traditional distilling methods that gave the team and
Bluemarlin a brand story that enabled them to create this unique and memorable identity.
From the use of British symbolism – the Welsh dragon and English lion – to the personal signatures
guaranteeing the brand promise on the back label, this brand deeply imbeds the key aims of
successful brand creation.
EXERCISE
Conducting a simple competitor brand analysis1. Start by choosing a brand to research. You can search the Internet
for products and brands, or look through product catalogues or trade
magazines.
2. Identify five main competitors for your research. It is useful to ask
somebody else to review your list of competitor brands to ensure that
the most important competitor brands are represented.
3. Compare all of the competing brands to discover the strengths and
weaknesses of each one. Use the key questions listed above to guide
this analysis.
4. Add to this list one company that you consider to be the best
example of a brand. This one does not necessarily need to be a direct
competitor, but if it is more relevant to your chosen brand this will
help you to build useful data. This will be your benchmark example of
who you think is doing a good job of positioning themselves.
5. Write up a short summary detailing all of the competing brands and
their overall market position.
6. Finally, add one more business – not necessarily a competitor, but
one in your brand’s industry – that you think is not doing a great job
at positioning themselves. This will help you see what not to do with
your brand design.
7. If you want to carry this exercise further you can simply create a
longer list by searching for other brands to add to it. Doing this will
also have the benefit of showing you who else is out there, and what
they are saying.
Competitor Research ProcessANALYZING THE BRAND ENVIRONMENT
The environment into which a brand is introduced can have a marked effect
on its ability to communicate to its audience. Brands have to compete for
attention with other brands in complex retail environments and online, so a
design team developing a brand identity will undertake analysis of a brand
within a retail store environment, a company website and third-party retailers
to uncover how it communicates to its audiences in a variety of contexts. Key
questions to ask include:
•
How does the brand competition communicate to its audiences in
different communication contexts?
•
How do they grab attention? What are the key design elements they
use?
•
What is the level of ‘visual noise’? How many brands are in the retail
environment and how loudly are they shouting?
The answers to these questions will also be backed up by evidence gathered
by visiting retail stores, including photographs of store layouts. Analysis of
this material will provide an understanding of the consumer experience in
store. Design elements that can have a strong impact on the consumer include
signage, interior design, visual merchandising and point-of-sale areas.
Signage gives information and a greater understanding of the brand identity
and values. Interior design can affect the consumer’s physical and sensory
relationship with the brand. Visual merchandising increases consumer
awareness and 
boosts the product’s appeal.
Fazer Café
ChallengeThe original Fazer bakery business was established in 1891 by Karl and
Berta Fazer and has become one of Finland’s largest food companies. The
challenge for the design agency Kokoro & Moi was to develop a new
identity for its café chain, including the brand and merchandising as well
as a unique branded environment with the particular qualities of elegance
and leisure specified by the client.
Inspiration
The identity developed by the design team was based on original signage
that hung above Fazer Café’s Kluuvikatu store. Kokoro & Moi created
unique bespoke typefaces named Fazer Grotesk and Fazer Chisel. Creating
the visual identity from a custom typeface enabled the brand to offer a
modern café experience whilst making reference to the company’s
significant heritage.
Solution
The typefaces created by Kokoro & Moi are utilized everywhere from the
logo to the menu boards and price tags. The application of single
characters used on the packaging materials is particularly striking and is
continued in the design of clothing and the decor of the walls. Other
custom-made graphic elements from the identity, such as Kokoro & Moi’s
pattern designs, are used for wallpaper, napkins, take-away packaging and
staff accessories.
The spatial design created for the café was developed in collaboration with
the interior architecture office Koko3. The brand’s simple aesthetic, which
captures the company’s past heritage, has influenced key interior design
features such as the choice of light fittings, furniture and wall treatments.
These carefully considered elements all add to and develop the unique tone
of voice created for the café.
The first new Fazer Cafés were opened in summer 2013 in Munkkivuori,
Helsinki and in the Stockmann department store in Tampere. These have
been followed by two more in Helsinki, and other locations are in the
pipeline.FUTURE FORECASTING
Much of the analysis described in this chapter has involved exploring and
highlighting the current context in relation to markets, brands and consumers.
However, if a brand is to have longevity, the design team also needs to have
an understanding of any future influences that may affect it. This information
is based on a form of research and analysis known as ‘future forecasting’ or
‘trend forecasting’. Sometimes undertaken by specialist agencies, it explores
short- and long-term drivers that influence society and how they may impact
on businesses and consumers. Areas of focus include politics, economics,
technology, environment and law, in addition to less tangible forces such as
culture, lifestyle, consumption, well being, ethics and values.
The aim of future forecasting is to observe trends as they emerge and make
predictions for the future; these ‘future narratives’ are then used to inform the
activities of creative teams, as well as those working in many other fields too,such as politics, economics and academia. For branding designers this type of
research is invaluable – it enables them to integrate new ways of thinking that
may influence the final design of the brand and its methods of
communication.
ANALYSIS OF DATA AND INTERPRETING
OPPORTUNITIES
At the end of any research phase, the data collected needs to be analyzed
and evaluated. Conclusions are derived that form insights into the target
consumer, the market and possible ways to communicate a new brand
effectively. In the case of market positioning and product category
analysis, the key decisions to be made are where the new brand will be
positioned and how it will communicate effectively in the current
brandscape. These decisions will be used to underpin the brief and brand
strategy.As designers are primarily visual, creating research analysis that utilizes images is one of the most
successful ways to capture your findings and draw conclusions.This approach makes the data more accessible to both the design team and the client. For instance,
numerical statistical data can often be difficult to understand in its raw form; a diagram or
infographic can make its implications clearer
.
Visual analysis boards
As mentioned in Chapter 5, visual analysis boards are commonly used
throughout the research and design development phases of a project to
convey information to others: either the clients or other designers within the
design team. However, if poorly conceived and designed these boards can be
confusing or misleading. It is vital that they are concise and focused to show
encapsulated thinking and reveal real understanding.
Keep the design as simple as possible to allow the images to communicate
effectively, and ensure that all the images are chosen with care so that theyaccurately reflect the point being communicated. A badly selected image can
cause confusion and, once designing is underway, it can cause the designers
to be ‘off target’.
EXERCISE
Designing visual analysis boards
1.
Using the design guidance given on this page, choose a product you
wish to brand, consider which market sector is most appropriate
(luxury, mid-market or economy) and create your own visual
analysis board.
2.
Using the same product, develop a ‘product language’ board using
the example to guide the choice of images and the layout.
There are now online sites that help you create digital mood boards,
including Polyvore (
www.polyvore.com
), which is similar to Pinterest but
with the facility to create collages of images.
When designing an analysis board, use appropriate titles to ensure that the visual information
displayed is understood in its particular research category. This will aid both the design team and
client
.
Evaluating the data and reaching conclusions
The quantity of research that needs to be undertaken before the creative phase
of the design process can begin can seem rather daunting, and many larger
agencies will employ a professional team to undertake this work for them,
leaving them free to focus on creative development. However, each phase of
the research process plays an extremely important role in the successful
design of a new brand.
Before the brief and design direction is finally written, an analysis of all the
research must be undertaken, providing the design team with the following
information:
Consumer/audience
•
A clear understanding of the target audience, their lifestyle, needs and
aspirations
•
The appropriate way to communicate to them, verbally and visually
Competitors
•
A clear understanding of the competition, and their strengths and
weaknesses
•
How they communicate and interact with their consumer or audience
•
The key opportunities and gaps in the market
•
The threats posed by existing or emerging brands
Market sector
•
A clear understanding of the key visual commonalities across the market
sector
Product category
•
A clear understanding of the visual language related to the product/service
categoryFuture trends
•
What new insights could be utilized by the new brand related to emerging
trends, such as changes in consumer habits or perceptions, new
technologies or methods of communication
Product/Market Research Process
The design brief
The final step of the analysis stage is the creation of a ‘design direction’, or
design brief. It is a written explanation of the aims, objectives and milestones
of a design project. A clear and comprehensive design brief helps to cement
trust and facilitate understanding between the client and designer, and serves
as an essential point of reference for both parties throughout the duration of
the project. Above all, the design brief ensures that important design issues
have been considered and resolved before the designer starts work.
It is vital that the team reads and re-reads the brief regularly throughout the
creative process. Using visual analysis boards to support the brief also
ensures that the aims of the brief are met.
Developing a good written brief is an art in itself. Using a variety of headings
or trigger questions will ensure that all the information collected during the
research phase is integrated into the document. Key points to include are:
Background.
 Any information related to the project, including information
about the product or service to be branded, what it does, why it does it andhow it does it.
Aims and objectives.
 The problem the client wishes the team to solve and
any challenges that have been identified. All the key creative elements that
will need to be addressed, such as brand creation, extensions, methods of
communication and so on.
Target audience.
 All the information gathered on the intended consumer, for
instance age range, gender, social status, lifestyle, needs and aspirations.
Tone of voice.
 The style that has been identified as being the most
appropriate for communicating the brand message to the audience.
USP.
 The unique selling point and how it will be used to develop a clear
communication strategy. What will be the benefits of this brand for the
consumer? Why will they buy it rather than competitor brands?
Creative outcomes.
 All the creative elements, such as brand identity,
strapline (slogan), website, advertising, promotion, packaging etc.
Budget and delivery schedule.
 Sticking to the deadline is vital. The client
needs to know that the brand can be released onto the market on schedule. All
costings should be defined and detailed so that the client can see what they
are paying for. Any extra work demanded by the client can be added later,
ensuring clarity between the two parties.
Consultation process.
 A schedule of meetings with the client, to allow them
the opportunity of giving feedback during the creative process.
Remember that the design brief is a professional document that also acts as,
or supplements, a contract between the client and the design agency. It should
be written in a clear and precise manner, using appropriate language.
BRAND CREATION STRATEGIES
Once the findings of the research have been captured and the brief has been
written and agreed by the client, decisions need to be made about the type of
strategy needed to develop the new brand identity. Depending on theoutcome of the research, designers need to consider how to approach the
development of concepts.
Evolution or revolution
One way to undertake this development is an evolutionary approach where
the design relates closely to the existing market leaders. The second approach
is to revolutionize the market sector by creating an innovative new language
within the product category.
This ‘evolutionary or revolutionary’ distinction is also used with existing
brands that are undergoing a redesign, as it enables designers to demonstrate
how far their ideas have moved away from the existing identity. A useful tool
when demonstrating this approach is to use a linear scale from 0 to 100. This
is presented like a timeline, determining, for each potential design, the
amount of change the brand has undertaken, with the existing design placed
at 0.
A similar technique can be used in the creation of a new brand,
demonstrating the level of new thinking reflected in each design relative to
the market sector or product language.
Mild to wild
A slightly different approach is to use a strategy that creates a variety of ideas
that are either understated or outrageous – or ‘mild to wild’. This can also be
visualized in a similar way to the previous strategy, with the least outrageous
ideas at one end and the most outrageous at the other, with additional ideas in
relation to them along the line. This approach also helps to clarify for clients
how the designers have tackled some of the issues defined in the brief,
ensuring that they understand the process undertaken.This example of a ‘mild to wild’ concept strategy demonstrates three different design solutions for a
brand identity. It offers the client a range of approaches, stretching the original brief from safe to
imaginative.
RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS IN AN EDUCATIONAL
SETTING
This chapter has focused on how the design industry analyzes research to
inform and guide the creative process, revealing both the complexity of the
process as well as its extent. In an educational setting, this may seem to be
impossible to replicate. However, with the aid of new research opportunities
offered by the Internet, much of this work can be undertaken by staff and
students utilizing Google images and research tools such as SurveyMonkey.
Many of the research techniques used, such as focus groups and
questionnaires, are also viable in a student environment, as are all the visual
analysis aids such as mood boards and consumer profiles. Undertaking this
sort of personal research and analysis provides you with a ‘real life’ context
into which to set your own creative practice; it also adds to your awareness of
professional practice, which is valuable when seeking work experience oremployment.
What many students find difficult is not the research so much as the analysis
and evaluation of the findings, and how to implement them within their own
creative process. However, if you integrate the habit of making decisions and
developing insights at each stage of your research process you will find that
you gradually gain an understanding of the role this plays within the creative
process.
Writing the brief will highlight any issues, too, as each heading must be
addressed in turn. This will reveals any gaps in knowledge or understanding
before the creative process starts. In addition to the practical elements of the
brief, you may also want to include some personal objectives – things you
may want to improve upon during the project, such as project management
skills, time management, or IT skills (such as the use of Illustrator or
InDesign).
Inspiring and facilitating innovation is the key to creating great design solutions. This design team
includes both client (Brooks, a sports shoe manufacturer) and IDEO designers, collaborating side-by-
side from day one.CHAPTER 7: CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT
Having undertaken the necessary research and analysis to define the
brief or design direction, the next phase in the design process is to
develop a range of ideas or brand identity concepts. To create
outstanding work, designers need more than good software techniques
and typographical skills: fundamentally strong design is about ideas,
and lots of them.
Great design is defined as imaginative, daring, individualistic and
innovative, but where do these ideas come from and how can you
nurture them? This chapter explains why we need to look for inspiration
and how it can be used to support the creative process. It will identify
the different approaches to developing initial ideas, and explore the
techniques available to help pull these early ideas together into strong
brand identity concepts.
INSPIRATION
Most designers know that finding good sources of inspiration to feed the
creative process is one of the most important factors involved in developing
great design concepts, but finding a source of inspiration is not as easy as it
sounds, as what inspires each individual is unique to them. Inspiration may
be visual, three-dimensional, textural, musical or even involve some form of
physical activity. Most creative people usually know the types of things that
stimulate their ideas, but it is always useful to explore other alternatives to
find new triggers and ways of thinking. Simply noting down experiences and
collecting sources of inspiration in a journal can be a fruitful way to develop
strategies to enhance creativity, too. In the same way that athletes have to
train their bodies to achieve fitness for professional competition, designers
have to train their own imaginative strengths before they can successfully
become professional creatives.
How to find inspirationIn this section you will find suggestions that may help you to locate sources
of inspiration. Some of these techniques are tried-and-tested ways of sparking
off your creative process; others may be new to you. Remember that time
spent looking at images in print or on screen is only one approach to finding
inspiration, and it will rarely be as good as first-hand experience, where
colour, texture, movement, size and proportion can all make a strong
impression on you. A photo of a music festival will never replicate the
experience of actually being at one.
Looking
•
Other creative people are an invaluable resource and source of inspiration.
Start to follow the blogs of people you admire. Print out work that has a
resonance for you, as hard copy can give a reality to images that on-screen
viewing cannot.
•
Have a magpie attitude to inspiration. Seek it from all sorts of sources:
photography, textiles, ceramics, architecture, calligraphy and so on.
Observe people in the street, watch films, read, consider the gestures people
use or the colours they wear. Take in little everyday things and observe
them with a critical eye, and use all these elements to build up a sketchbook
or visual resource that you can draw on when you need to.Creating a resource of inspirational blogs, either as a source of general inspiration or as specific areas
of research for individual projects, ensures your work is both current and informed.Creating and maintaining a personal design journal or sketchbook is also essential for documenting
research and capturing ideas, reflections and concepts
.
Asking
•
Be collaborative. Gather inquisitive and reflective people from alldisciplines across education, work, and friends – a cross-pollination of
ideas makes for interesting and exciting outcomes.
•
Questions often open the doors of the imagination. Before searching for
any specific inspiration, ensure that the aim is clearly defined, through
either a single key question or set of questions. This will help to define the
journey.
Learning
•
As branding is ultimately about people, immerse yourself in the world of
your target audience to develop empathy with them. Observe them, learn to
understand what drives and motivates them, what their fears and desires
are. This will help you to appreciate their needs and identify the appropriate
language to use to communicate with them effectively.
•
Harness teamwork to help inspire you, as the rapid bouncing back and forth
of an idea can generate compelling concepts at amazing speed.
Brainstorming, or mind mapping, takes advantage of the power of the
group to explore new possibilities and achieve more collectively than any
one individual can. An added benefit of this way of working is that it
relieves the pressure on the individual to come up with ideas.
•
Listening to music is one of the most common ways used to inspire the
imagination, as it is incredibly evocative. Try to find a piece that reflects
the subject you are working on – one that relates to the ‘emotion’ of the
brand.
Evaluating
•
Analyze what you see and what you have collected. Take time to reflect on
why you have chosen certain pieces of inspiration. Ask yourself what they
mean. Understanding the meaning behind any images and making notes
helps to deconstruct and then appreciate an object of inspiration. This
approach allows the development of a new set of personal thoughts to
occur, which can lead to creative insights. Without reflection the
sketchbook is merely a collection of visual material that will provide little
inspiration.
•
Value mistakes – they too can be inspiring. Fear can shut down creativity,
as can the pressure to impress, so take risks and do what scares you.Embrace new challenges. When we are stretched we tend to be more
creative.
Teamwork is not only a creative way of working, it is also much more fun than working alone.
Collaborative concept generation also frequently results in a greater range and number of ideas than
individuals by themselves.There are a number of creative processes involved in sourcing your own visual research. The first
occurs in the initial collection, the second via collation, and finally, in analysis and reflection in order to
generate conclusions
.
And if you get stuck…
•
Daydream. Give yourself time and permission to do nothing. Bus and train
journeys are great opportunities to just sit. Turn your phone off! Hard work
is not always productive; the brain needs periods of inactivity to rest and
process previous thoughts and ideas.
•
Always carry a notebook and something to draw or write with; you never
know when an idea may strike! A pencil in the hand not only captures an
idea, it also helps the mind focus and aids thinking. What is seen in the
mind is ephemeral; the validity and success of an idea can only be explored
in reality through drawing.
•
Mobile phone cameras and digital cameras are also a great way to record
inspirational images immediately.
•
Doing can also be highly inspirational. You do not have to wait for a goodidea to come. Start by realizing an average idea – no one has to see it!
•
Try to remove any ego from the process, as it can get in the way of gaining
new insights and identifying new ways of working.
 
TIPS & TRICKS
Routine is really important. However late you went to bed the night
before, get up at the same time each day and get on with it.
If an idea over-excites you, take a break and come back to it later. It is
good to develop a critical eye.
Creativity is like a muscle: if you do not use it, it becomes flabby and
unfit. Use a creative journal to capture and keep ideas, and as a way of
collecting and analyzing inspiration.
Be constantly curious about everything. Always ask why.
Everyone has that small voice that tells us we are rubbish – learn when
to silence it.
Genius is 1 per cent inspiration, 99 per cent perspiration. Be
motivated, work hard and relish all opportunities.Many of us have been reprimanded for daydreaming as children. However, this activity actually allows
your imagination to expand and explore. Do it as often as you can!The quality of images captured on a phone camera is now far superior to even a year ago. Mobile phone
technology is developing every day, making it a highly effective research tool.
THE BIG IDEA
Sometimes also known as the ‘eureka’ moment or the ‘creative hook’, the big
idea is the point where research and inspiration meet the problem to create a
unique personal insight or idea. Sometimes experienced in a highly physical
way by creative individuals, it is usually accompanied by an image seen in
the mind’s eye, often in such detail that it seems that if only a screenshot of
the idea could be taken, the design problem will be solved in a moment. At
this stage it is vital that the idea is captured as quickly as possible, as such
images are highly ephemeral and can be lost or transformed in a moment if
you are suddenly distracted.
It is a common misconception that these moments come as if by divine
intervention, and only for geniuses. These experiences can, in fact, comesimply as a result of remaining open and thoughtful about what you observe
every day, and by collecting all sorts of inspirational material.
But what is a big idea? In the case of brand identity there are some key
aspects that can help define one:
A big idea feels like, or is built on, an authentic impulse.
It usually strikes an emotional chord although it has a rational appeal, is
powerful and has the ability to communicate to its target audience in a
meaningful way.
It must be distinctive and may represent a totally new way of thinking,
acting or feeling.
How will you know if your big idea is also the right idea?
Does it turn heads and demand attention? Are people compelled to
discuss it and share their thoughts and feelings about it?
Does it push the brand in positive new ways that do not strain its
authenticity or believability?
Is the idea universal? Will it allow the brand to transcend cultural and
geographical boundaries to speak to people at a fundamentally human
level that cuts across class and ethnicity?
These are key pointers that can help to differentiate a great branding idea
from a mediocre one. Remember: great ideas solve problems.
Personal / Design Team Inspiration
VISUALIZING AND ANALYZING INSPIRATION
Previous chapters have introduced the technique of using boards to convey
information to clients or others within the design team. To recap, there are
three key types of board that are used within the design process: consumer
profile boards, mood boards and inspiration boards. Here we will focus on
developing mood boards and inspiration boards, and how these visual
analysis techniques are used to generate ideas and concepts.
Mood boards
In the same way that people with strong personalities have a distinctive and
recognizable voice, a brand identity needs to be developed to reflect a strong
brand personality. A brand personality allows the consumer to engage with
the brand, communicating a clear set of values and attributes that are inherent
in the brand’s promise or offer, differentiating it from the competition. By
developing a unique brand personality and tone of voice, the design team
ensures that all subsequent elements of brand communication are consistent,
maintaining the brand’s credibility with its market.
A technique often applied by design teams is to consider the brand as if it
were a real person, the question posed being, ‘What would be their
personality, individual characteristics and how would they communicate?’ As
with a person, what the brand says should be dictated by its principles and
aspirations; how it expresses it is informed by personality.
Exploring how existing brands have developed their unique personalities is
always a useful way to understand how this process works. For instance,
compare the two well-known brands, Orange (the telecommunication
company) and HSBC (the Hong Kong and Shanghai-based bank).
When Orange launched in 1993 its use of everyday language flouted the
sector conventions applied by other telecommunication providers at the time.
Orange had made a decision to position itself as accessible, friendly, honest,
straightforward, humorous, people-based and optimistic.
By contrast, HSBC, as a global finance provider, wanted to create a voice thatwas solid, steady and reliable, offering customers a safe harbour in today’s
volatile financial environment. Although also supportive, HSBC has
developed perhaps a more formal persona than Orange, although it is careful
to remind us all of its friendly status as ‘the world’s local bank’
.
Applying this approach to developing the unique personal characteristics of a
new brand allows designers to create a set of descriptive terms, or brand
values, that will focus and direct the search for images that highlight and
communicate these terms.
By integrating a brand’s verbal identity with business objectives and by creating ‘language palettes’
reflected in visual communication such as adverts, brands can achieve a tone of voice that successfully
engages with their audience. The way a brand communicates therefore has to be as unique as the brand
itself, as exemplified by these two examples: HSBC conveys a sense of being friendly but authoritive;
Orange appears fun but reliable.
Inspiration boards
Inspiration boards are another visual analysis technique used to generate
ideas and concepts. Using the mood board as the source to define the
inspiration, this board then curates graphical elements portraying the brand’s
persona. Starting with colours, shades and tones chosen to define the
personality of the brand, this can then be developed into a brand’s colour
palette.
Fonts are chosen that match the look and feel the brand needs to
communicate. Typography is as sensitive as a facial expression in depicting
complex emotions. The brand’s mood can be defined through existing
typefaces, which may be developed further into a logotype – a unique andhopefully instantly recognizable visual rendering of the brand name.
Further inspiration can be found by sourcing other graphic elements, such as
illustration and photographic styles, movie posters, CD album designs, book
jackets, digital apps, website icons, buttons and layouts – anything that
highlights the personality traits of the brand. If appropriate, even furniture,
architecture, fashion, textiles and accessories can help to define the message
that the brand is expressing.
A key factor in the success of these boards, however, is that the design team
know why they have chosen the examples and are able to articulate the
reasons. Brands are based on clear communication and meaning, so each
stage of a development has to reflect the same focused thinking. A badly
conceived board can be worse than useless, giving false clues and confusing
the creative process.
 
TIPS & TRICKS
To understand how to design a successful mood board, develop one for an
existing brand. Examine the brand’s values and its personality, and create a
mood board that incorporates both images and words that reflect the
persona of the brand. Use stock image libraries such as 
www.123rf.com
 or
www.dreamstime.com
 to source appropriate images, or take your own.These inspiration boards created for Oykos Greek yoghurt by Dragon Rouge demonstrate how the
design team used images, colour, words and type to inspire three different tones of voice.The inspiration boards are then used to influence the concept development phase, as demonstrated by
these digital renderings of the new branded Oykos packaging.
INITIAL CONCEPT IDEAS
The process of exploring and developing initial ideas can be full of
frustrations and pitfalls. However, there are a range of different tricks and
techniques that can guide the development of successful concept ideas.
The benefits of sketching
Even in today’s computer-aided world many designers argue that the sketch
is still fundamental to the first stage of the design process, insisting that the
relationship between brain, hand and paper is still the best way to visualize
ideas seen in the imagination. But why apply an age-old process when there
is so much available to the designer using a computer? Consider these points
in favour of sketching:The first idea is rarely the strongest
The first thought that comes into your head is sometimes a mere knee-jerk
reaction, as it is based on an unconscious impulse. Do not disregard it,
however. This is just the beginning. Sketch it – it will only take a few
seconds and it will help get it out of your mind and onto paper. Now develop
more sketches, as the quality of the first idea has no context until there are
others to test it against. Often as the ideas progress there will be a whole host
of more interesting and creative approaches that would not have developed if
the first idea had been chosen. Do not be too quick to pick one however, as
even spending hours in Illustrator crafting the text and refining it will not
make it a better one. Give ideas time to grow and develop.
Sketching is physical
Our relationship with pencil and paper has developed over centuries, if not
millennia, and these still provide the most accomplished tools for drawing.
Learn to love what you can do with them – things that are not possible on
screen; the mouse is only a lump of plastic after all! Embrace pen, pencil and
paper, and watch how fast the ideas come. The experience of this, when
concepts seem to pour out of you, is sometimes known as ‘being in the flow’.
The freedom to just scrawl out unformed rough ideas is a great way to
continue the inspirational phase, allowing you to reach unimagined creative
places.However rough your first ideas may seem, they are a vital first stage in the creative process. What you
see in your head is ephemeral and will only exist if it is made explicit. Drawing is the natural extension
of your imagination
.
Sketching saves time
Involve the design team or creative colleagues in the early concept creation
phase – getting feedback at this stage can save hours of rethinking later on. If
the ideas have missed the brief or have the wrong tone of voice, it will only
take a few seconds to sketch a revision, rather than many wasted hours in
front of the screen.
Only artists sketch
But so do children! Do not be self-conscious about the marks you make. Be
happy to just rough out an idea, because that it all it is – ‘rough’! Renaming
this process can also be helpful as it removes the ‘fine artness’ from the
process; other terms include ‘visual note taking’ or ‘graphic recording’.
These techniques also use text, typography, personal comments, cut-and-
paste images, flow charts and diagrams, all designed to capture ideas inwhatever way works best for each individual. Choosing the right pen, pencil,
paper etc. can also enable the sketchbook to become a friend. Try to sketch
all the time, not just for work projects. Keep a personal journal that includes
this type of graphic recording – it is fun once you get over the old hang-ups!
White paper phobia
For students and professional designers alike, an expanse of virgin white
paper can often prevent the flow of ideas and cause ‘designer’s block’. There
are a number of reasons why this occurs, but there are also some very
practical ways for solving it.
The first is to return to the brief and the visual inspirational materials created
to support the project to ensure that the aim of the project is clear in your
mind. If this does not work, spend time searching for a new ‘creative hook’
by exploring inspirational material. If this does not prove successful, the
addition of inspirational images directly onto the concept sheet to act as a
visual catalyst can be a highly effective way of populating the white expanse
and giving the imagination something to build upon
.
Drawing techniques
Line-weight drawing is a technique that gives different ‘weights’ – darkness
or heaviness – to a line. This is achieved by the amount of pressure applied at
the point of the drawing tool, the size of the nib or the angle used. Traditional
graphite pencils come in a wide variety of hardnesses, the grade symbolized
by a letter and number usually given on the side of each pencil (‘H’ for hard,
ranging through ‘HB’ in the middle, to soft – ‘B’, or ‘black’ – at the other
end). The higher the number in front of these letters, the harder or softer the
pencil. Line-weight drawing can be employed, for example, to highlight the
importance of a line, define the direction of light or give prominence to
things in the foreground. Fineliner markers are perhaps the most common
tool used to achieve a variety of line definitions. In most drawings, applying
at least three different weights will give a sketch energy and dynamism.
Marker pens are widely used for drawing as they have a spontaneity and
directness of application that can produce a wide range of effects. Their ink is
semi-transparent, so colour intensity can be built up in layers, allowing for
the mixing of colours and the addition of darker tones and shadows. Thereare two main types of pen: solvent-based and water-soluble, and they all
come in a variety of nib sizes. A type of paper is made specifically for this
medium, similar to layout paper but designed to prevent bleed.
There are two basic styles of marker drawing. The first is used for quick
layouts and concepts, where the marker stroke is visible. The second
comprises finished visuals, where the strokes are blended into flat areas of
colour to give a more polished effect. The main aim of this type of
visualization is to capture light and shade, modelling form with simplified
tones, although markers can also be used simply to add colour or shadows to
a type concept.Practice makes perfect. Only through regularly undertaking this process will your skills and
confidence develop. This stage also allows time for personal analysis and reflection, which can be
recorded in a way that is not possible on a computer.
Graphite came into widespread use following the discovery of a large graphite deposit in
Borrowdale, England, in 1564, and the first mass-produced pencils were manufactured in Germany
in 1662. It is perhaps still the designer’s best – and simplest – tool.Taking advantage of the ‘erasability’ of a pencil to define an initial idea, and then confirming the
line with a marker by tracing over the sketch, is a highly effective way to develop initial type
concepts.This concept sheet demonstrates the various stages of building a marker rendering sketch. Starting
with a rough pencil outline, ‘washes’ of marker build up tonal variation, highlighting light and
shade
.
Lightboxes are often used with layout paper to trace and develop an early
sketch into a more finished idea. This enables an early sketch to be developed
into a more finished concept, which can be quicker than completely
redrawing the original idea. In a similar way, an initial pencil sketch can be
worked up using fine liners without the need to rub out any of the original
drawing.
Cut and paste is a particularly effective technique, used to develop a wide
range of ideas in a short space of time. Elements such as brand marks or
labels for packaging can be photocopied numerous times, cut and then pasted
onto concept sheets where additional elements can then be developed around
them, thus speeding up the concept process.A combination of techniques can also be a quick and effective way to capture a concept. Here the type
is printed in various sizes and layouts, and then cut and pasted into a fine liner sketch with marker
shadows.
 
TIPS & TRICKS
How to reference and credit sources
Developing the habit of always referencing sources may save hours of
searching later on in a project. Maintaining a professional and ethical
approach is important, as is safeguarding against accusations of plagiarism.
One of the most commonly used referencing methods is the Harvard
system (used here). Whatever system you use, the important thing is that it
is used consistently.
Books
Barry, Peter. 1995. 
Beginning Theory.
Manchester: Manchester University PressWebsites, blogs and Twitter
Smith, John. (2012). 
A Story About Art.
[Online]. BBC Website. Available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/99_43_33.htm
.
[Accessed: 20 August 2013]
Music track from an album
Gray, David. 1998. ‘Babylon’ on 
White Ladder.
London, IHT Records
Images and illustrations
Women of Britain say ‘GO!’
 (1915) [Poster] Available at:
http://www.vads.ac.uk/collections/IWMPC.html
 [Accessed: 25 February
2013]
Façade of a house
 [Oil painting] In: Comini, Alessandra. 
Egon Schiele.
Plate 43. London: Thames & Hudson
Photography
Walker, Spike. (2003) Dandelion Flower Bud [Photograph; Transverse
section through flower (inflorescence) bud of dandelion, viewed with a
light microscope, solarized.] Available at: 
http://images.wellcome.ac.uk
[Accessed: 24 June 2009]
ORGANIZING YOUR SOURCE MATERIAL
Keeping sketchbooks, scrapbooks or journals is a habit that should be
maintained throughout a creative individual’s lifetime; these do not
necessarily have to be connected to any one specific project. Sourcebooks
provide a neat place to store ideas and inspiration, and they can be referred
back to easily at any time. Traditionally they were created by cutting and
sticking found materials and images into a book and making notes. However,
it is now easy to store and organize any digital material on a computer, and
this archive can and should be used to complement any physical sourcebooks.
There are now also online systems that will sort and collate this material for
you, such as Pinterest, which enables members to share media by ‘pinning’images, videos and other objects. For designers, a key feature of the site is the
opportunity to create ‘boards’ where pins can be organized by topic, such as
‘brand icons’ or ‘hand-made type’. Boards can be public (allowing teams to
invite each other to pin, view and share inspirational material) or secret (ideal
for designers working on projects for sensitive clients).
Blogs, such as those found on Tumblr, can also be an effective way to
capture inspiration and make comments and analysis. This microblogging
platform allows the user to post multimedia and other image content to a
short-form blog. Users are able to follow others’ blogs, and can maintain
privacy for their own blogs if needed. Tags are perhaps one of the most
useful features of this site, as they allow the user to create tags linked to each
post to aid navigation among similar content.
Whatever system is used, however, there are some key techniques that can
make what could simply be described as a ‘scrapbook’, whether real or
virtual, into a useful design tool. These include referencing the source of
images or materials. It is always important to remember that although images
appear to be freely available on the Internet, if they are to be reproduced in a
professional context, the permission of the creator must be sought and
relevant fees paid for their use. When collecting images, proper referencing
also reminds a designer of where to find the original source.
How the images are presented can also aid in the usefulness of a sketchbook.
Making them aesthetically pleasing can make sharing them with colleagues
less likely to cause embarrassment, and for students this type of personal
research will often be requested as part of an assessed project. If care is taken
in the design and layout of these books, they can surpass the status of mere
scrapbook and become beautiful objects in their own right.An example of the final solution for a brand identity designed for a bike-sharing initiative. The artwork
presented to the client must convey all the options that the design team has created for the brand,
including colour variants, the brand logotype and the brand icon.CHAPTER 8: DELIVERING THE FINAL DESIGN
Chapter 7 explored the first stages of the creative brand design process
and how to develop a range of initial concepts. This concluding chapter
outlines the delivery of the final design solution, with information on
how to identify the strongest solutions, ensuring that the concepts are
appropriate as well as creative, and how to communicate these to the
client in a professional and effective manner.
CHOOSING THE BEST CONCEPT
Developing a wide range of design solutions is useful for the design team in
the earlier stages of creating a new brand identity, but these ideas will need to
be edited down for the final presentation to the client. Too many solutions at
this point will only cause confusion.
Knowing which ideas are the strongest can be difficult. Within a professional
design team these judgements are made on a daily basis, as the designers
have to respond to tight commercial deadlines. In many cases it is the lead
designer or senior creative who has the last word on which of the ideas
should be moved forward to the next phase of development. Having a fresh
pair of eyes to review the concepts ensures that ideas are chosen based on
their appropriateness to the original brief rather than a personal attachment.
In a professional studio, for instance, with three designers working on
developing initial ideas, many tens of concepts may be created. Informal
discussions often take place between the individual designers on the subject
of how to generate new and stronger solutions. These early ideas are then
assessed in a more formal way by the senior creative. The number of ideas to
be taken forward will also depend on the delivery deadline and the allocated
budget.The brand identity solutions created by the team will include a unique name
(defined by a carefully chosen typeface or a hand-crafted logotype), a brand
mark or small image, a strapline or tagline (slogan) and a colour palette. The
senior creative in the team will assess the success of the ideas by referring
back to the original brief, which will have been broken down into key areas
as described in Chapter 6 (see page 123). An assessment also needs to be
made of the uniqueness of each idea relative to any of the brand’s
competition. Finally, analysis will be undertaken in order to understand how
well the design communicates the USP that has been defined for the new
brand to ensure that it stands out from the crowd.
These creative concepts designed by Dragon Rouge for Warburtons bread, demonstrate a range of ideas
developed to explore different approaches; each design is unique.The concept development example for the same project shows how the next phase involves reducing
the approach to a few key ideas that are then developed even further.These first two images are examples of the creative concepts designed by Dragon Rouge to show the
‘lead’ brand concept for Organix, demonstrating how the identity would appear on a range of flavour
variants.In addition to the pack visuals, the team has also created a ‘brand equity toolbox’ that explores all the
separate elements designed for the new identity. The next phase involves testing the final design against
the original brief.
EXERCISE
How to develop an assessment strategy
In an educational environment it is often at this stage that lecturers step in
to act as the senior creative, critiquing ideas to help students define the
strongest solution. However, developing a personal strategy to assess the
success of concepts will enable you to strengthen your own critical
analysis abilities. Having a clear process that will quantify how well the
creative outcomes answer the original brief will also demonstrate
objectivity and critical awareness, and ensure that the final choice of
concept is not based purely on personal preference.
Start by interrogating the brief. What is the creative problem that is being
set? Who is the target consumer? What is the product or service being
communicated? These key areas need to have been addressed in each of
the concepts developed. With these in mind, the success of each individualidea can be judged. Making an assessment table (like the one here) can
highlight how well a design meets the requirements, and will ensure that
the results can be easily interpreted.
FINAL REFINEMENTS
Once the concepts have been checked against the assessment criteria, a
shortlist of the three strongest ideas should be chosen. It is imperative that
these concepts demonstrate a range of thoughts and approaches, and they
should define three distinct and unique identities. The selection of these may
often be based on a ‘mild to wild’ or ‘evolutionary to revolutionary’ scale
(see page 124). Offering one idea to a client is never advisable – if it is
rejected the creative team will have no fallback position.
The final designs are refined to ensure that any areas of weakness identified
during the assessment process are rectified. This will usually involve small
tweaks rather than complete redesigns. All creative solutions at this stage of
the design process are computer rendered. Most commonly designers use the
Adobe Creative Cloud package including applications such as Photoshop,
Illustrator and InDesign to artwork their concepts.
Particular things to consider at this stage might be: the quality of typography;
the layout and spacing of the letters (leading and kerning); a refinement of thecolour palette; the polishing of any images; and the overall balance of all the
elements used within the identity. Finally, tests need to be done to ensure the
brand’s name will be legible when the design is reproduced at a small scale,
on screen and in other relevant environments.
Even small tweaks to the final design of a brand identity can make a significant difference. This
example shows the addition of a link between the ‘O’ and ‘R’, giving the centre of the typography
more strength and personality.The final polishing of this identity demonstrates the care the designer is taking in ensuring that every
angle on both the brand icon and typography is the same. This will give the identity greater cohesion
between the various elements.
PRESENTATION MATERIALS
Within the industry the presentation of the final design to the client is perhaps
the most critical stage of a project. It is at this point that the creative team can
demonstrate their level of design thinking and creativity. Ensuring that the
idea is ‘sold’ effectively demands strong verbal and visual presentation skills
to highlight how well it answers the original brief. This is also the time when
the design team will be expected to explain the pricing, project management
and business protocol for the brand project.
Crucial to this stage is a clear communication strategy, usually involving a set
of visuals of the final designs. These ‘communication boards’, as they are
sometimes known, demonstrate to the client the success of the final designsolution in answering the original problem set by the brief. Traditionally
these boards were printed pages mounted on presentation board, but agencies
today are more likely to use digital presentation soft- and hardware to create
digital images (see page 147).
Key elements included in the communication strategy depend on the original
brief set by the client, but will usually include designed elements such as the
brand mark or logotype, showing the chosen typeface; use of colour; a brand
icon; strapline; and any brand accessories and graphics or brand standards.
Also presented will be the elements that demonstrate how the brand will be
reproduced, which could include advertising, packaging, print (such as
brochures), websites, social media, apps, retail environments and marketing
materials. Other points may also be visualized for the client, including
demonstrating the success of the brand in communicating to the target
audience, and how well the brand works in specific environments.
The communication boards created for Bluemarlin’s presentation to their client Warner Edwards
(see page 116) included the brand identity, colour palette and branded packaging, as well as a range
of other promotional materials.The identity was shown expressed as stationery, a website and a branded show stand. The visuals
allowed the client to appreciate the strength and flexibility of the design, enabling it to communicate
across a range of communication media.
DESIGNING EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION BOARDS
Firstly, consider what elements are necessary to demonstrate the success of
the final brand. When designing the layout of the boards, it is helpful to
group together relevant pieces of design to ensure clarity of communication.
For example, use one board to show the key designed elements such as the
brand, the brand icon and strapline, and a separate board to show how the
brand would appear in digital formats or retail environments. Keep the layout
simple; too much information on one board can be confusing. The style,
choice of typeface and layout of the boards need to be considered with the
same amount of care as the elements being presented, as the final
presentation needs to demonstrate the professionalism of all your graphics
skills.
Add headings and sub-headings to the boards to help identify the elements
being presented. It is important to remember that some clients may be new to
working with designers, so leading them through the process step-by-step
will help them appreciate what has been designed and why. In an educational
environment this approach will also demonstrate the strength of a student’s
skills, understanding and depth of knowledge – an important consideration
when the project is to be assessed.
The following points will help to ensure the professional quality of a visual
presentation:
•
Keep the design of the boards simple, whether they are physical prints or a
digital presentation. Do not add any additional elements such as decorative
borders or backgrounds – these will only be a distraction.
•
Do not be afraid of negative space. This helps give the images space to
communicate.
•
Give each board a clear strategy: what is being communicated and why?
This can be communicated through titles for each board.
•
Use a grid system to provide a layout theme that will link any separateboards.
•
Use a limited colour palette, ensuring that it aids rather than fights the
designs being communicated. If in doubt use neutral colours such as grey,
black and white.
•
Any images should be high resolution (at least 250 dpi) to avoid
pixellation.
•
Do not use any poor-quality photos or clip art, as this will detract from the
professional quality of the presentation.
•
Any type added as ‘dialogue’ on the boards must be kept minimal. It needs
to be legible but must not overpower the design elements. Remember that
text for digital presentations may need to be larger than for printed
communication boards.
•
Use the same typeface throughout, and one that does not conflict with the
brand or branded elements being presented. Never use the brand typeface
for any other elements on the boards.
•
Check for grammatical errors, spelling mistakes and typos.
•
Make sure every element on the boards works hard as part of the overall
communication of the final brand solution. If any element is unnecessary,
remove it, as it will only distract.
•
Digital presentations should also be kept simple. Do not use distracting
slide transitions or animated features, unless they are required to answer the
brief or they add to the communication of the design being presented.
DIGITAL VERSUS PRINT PRESENTATIONS
The creative industries, and brand design agencies in particular, always seek
to work at the cutting edge of digital technology and use the most current
software and presentation platforms available to communicate their ideas to
their clients. However, it is important to remember that some digital
visualization technologies can isolate or even ‘alienate’ the audience rather
than engage them. The use of large vertical screens can be more inclusive
than small-screen laptops, but they still force the audience to take a passive
role in the presentation as there is no opportunity for interaction. Over the last
few years technologies have advanced to enable a ‘shared screen’ experience
where the furniture itself hosts the content through the use of ‘digital tables’.
Hardware and software from companies such as nsquared encourages all theparticipants to touch and explore the content simultaneously. In this way the
conversation and content is shared by both designer and client, encouraging
highly creative and immersive presentation experiences.
By contrast, adopting a low-tech approach and using communication boards
allows the design team to connect with the people in the room on a more
personal level rather than stare at the back of the presenter’s head for the
duration of the presentation.
Using a variety of methods is perhaps the best solution. It varies the client’s
experience and makes the meeting more dynamic. Sections of the
presentation might be done on screen, with mock-ups of printed matter and, if
appropriate, branded packaging available to view in physical form.Using a range of presentation methods, both digital and printed, helps to engage the client more fully.
Sydney-based company nsquared integrate large digital tablets into table surfaces to facilitate
communication, as seen in the top image.Prezi is cloud-based digital presentation software enabling creation, editing and presentations from
browsers, desktops, iPads or iPhones, automatically syncing across all devices. Zoom in and out of the
image to focus on the area of interest
.
Finally, you might want to provide the client with something to take away at
the end of the meeting to remind them of the key aspects of the agency’s
presentation. This could be in digital form (stored on a CD or other media) or
a beautifully designed printed artefact, such as a brochure or book.
Types of boards
There are three general types of boards that you will need to prepare for a
presentation.
Brand standards
The final brand and its architecture need to be clearly specified as a set of
‘standards’, which will include the size and font(s) chosen for the brand name
and strapline; the spacing/kerning of the type; the size of the brand name in
comparison to other type and the brand icon, if used; the size and placement
of any brand icon; the Pantone, CMYK, spot and RGB colours used. The
boards need to include the dos and don’ts allowed for the brand use by the
original designer. These standards are useful for ensuring that all
communications, internal and external, uphold the brand’s design.
Specification boards
These will confirm other specifications relating to the design – for instance,
paper stocks chosen and any embossing, spot varnishing, die cutting or foil
blocking used. In the case of branded packaging, details will be given of
specific materials chosen. Specification boards will also include clear
diagrams and images of three-dimensional shapes for bottles, boxes or any
other designed elements created for the brand.Brand in context boards
When developing the final brand communication visuals, it is important to
include the contexts in which the brand will be seen so that both the client
and the designers can explore how the brand will work in real-life situations.This range of presentation materials was created for 7digital by the design agency Moving Brands.
The new identity needed to be flexible enough to perform across all communication platforms. The
design team therefore created a brand concept book, a brand-in-context board and, finally, a ‘brand
bible’ showing the brand standards.
THE CLIENT PRESENTATION
For the design team this can be an anxious time, as it is the point where often
months of painstaking work are put to the test. It is therefore vital that the
design solutions are presented in a professional manner. Many designers
know, through bitter experience, that even some of their best and most
creative ideas can be at best misunderstood by the client and at worst
annihilated, if the meeting is not conducted effectively. For the client, too,
this is a stressful time, as they have placed the responsibility for creating their
new business opportunity in the hands of others and often paid considerable
sums over many months leading up to this point.
In addition to the visual elements, consideration also needs to be given to the
verbal and practical aspects of a presentation. For instance:
•
How long has the client given for the meeting?
•
Who will be attending?
•
Where will the meeting be held?
•
What facilities are available? (e.g. Internet access, projectors etc. – this is
especially important if you are giving a digital presentation)
Understanding these practical issues will help the design team prepare
appropriately for the meeting.
Preparation
It takes time and experience to develop professional presentation skills, but
good preparation will ensure you have the best chance possible of things
going well. There are some basic approaches that will ensure the smooth
management and delivery of the meeting:
•
Practice in advance•
Organize any ‘leave behind’ materials for your client to take away
•
Ensure that any question can be answered – on brand strategy, market
research or design
•
Develop an agreed agenda with the client to be circulated in advance,
creating clear and agreed expectations
•
Arrive early to organize the meeting room, to put both you and the client at
ease
•
Test all presentation equipment, lighting and ventilation before the meeting
starts
•
Stay focused, keep to the agenda and keep the meeting moving and on time
The way a presentation is designed should be determined by the needs of the client. In many cases this
may be digital; however, there is still a place for the traditional printed approach for some clients.
Connecting with the client
A smooth and slick presentation should not be the design team’s only goal.
Perhaps one of the most important objectives for the design team or
individual creative is the connection they make with the client during the
presentation. It is vital to build trust so that the client will have confidence in
the solutions being proposed for their brand.Tom Leach, freelance creative previously of Partners and Imagination,
highlights the importance of clear and simple communication:
You need to build the story by presenting ‘the big idea’ bit by bit,
removing where possible any subjectivity, until finally they understand
that logically there really is no other solution 
…
Where jobs go wrong is when there is a lack of trust. Symptomatic of
this problem is the client demanding hundreds of new solutions because
they doubt your ideas.
Finally his tip to a successful client presentation is to ensure that you are
absolutely convinced in your solution, as great work drives confidence, ‘get
excited, enthusiasm goes a very long way’.
Although the design process that has been explored throughout this book
demonstrates how design agencies have been able to develop an almost
scientific methodology to creating a brand identity, the final outcomes are,
above all, visual and therefore appreciated in different ways by different
people, depending on taste. However clear the brand strategy may be, or how
professional the presentation is, this will not help you if you have based an
entire design on lime green and you present this to a client with a strong
personal dislike of that colour! An understanding of the client’s past
experience of working with designers can be crucial, therefore, for
determining in advance the correct approach to take.
It is important, too, to remember that many people are not visually literate
and can find making visual decisions difficult. It is therefore important to
tailor the presentation to the level of the client and not to baffle them with
inappropriate terminology. Many designers find that they have to guide their
clients and support their understanding of the process in order to engage them
fully in decision making.
The final decision as to which design is chosen is ultimately the client’s;
however, it is up to the design team to sell the idea that they feel is most
effective. A client may also decide that there are elements from a number of
the ideas that they feel could be incorporated into the final design solution.
The team will then use this feedback to guide the final stages of the design
process.Meeting strategies
Considering things from the client’s position is key in developing a
successful strategy for conducting the presentation. Here are some key points
for ensuring clear and effective communication:
•
Provide an overview of how the presentation will be organized, and in what
order the information will be delivered. This will help to provide a clear
overview and put the client at ease.
•
Define the aims of the project, providing a review of the decisions made
and clarification of the target audience, market sector and USP.
•
Present each of the design solutions in turn. It is important that the client
appreciates the unique qualities of each identity – what and how it
communicates to the consumer, and why.
•
Ensure that each of the solutions is provided with a real-life context to
show its effectiveness in reality, such as on-pack or online advertising.
•
Be ready to answer questions. Do not become trapped in a situation where
the design needs to be defended – always have a clear, nonemotional
answer to any question that highlights the strategy underpinning each
design. Avoid becoming trapped in discussions of aesthetics; return to the
original strategy to define market and consumer appropriateness and
appeal
.
•
Be convincing. This is difficult if there is no personal conviction, though –
if the designer does not believe in the solution it is likely that this will be
communicated to the client.
•
Have a strategy for the next step. Always offer the client more than they are
expecting. Going that extra mile demonstrates conviction and commitment
to the project.
•
Take minutes. Ensure that someone records the client’s comments,
suggestions and decisions. The whole process will be pointless if these are
forgotten or not remembered correctly. The client’s final decisions must be
carefully noted.
•
Agree on the next stage. It is vital that the conclusions of the meeting are
understood, and that the client agrees with what the next phase of theprocess will be. This can either be defined at the end of the meeting or
undertaken in a more formal way, by email or letter. It is important to
receive the client’s final approval before starting the next phase.
Taking the time to consider the best presentation strategy ensures that the client appreciates not only the
quality of the final design, and its effectiveness in communicating the brand values, but also the time
and effort it has taken to get it right!
 
TIPS & TRICKS
For many designers (and especially students), time management can play
an important role in how successfully they manage to develop their final
ideas, ensuring that they have the polish expected of a professional piece of
work. A useful tip is to design a timetable, using the step-by-step process
highlighted in Chapter 4 as a guide. Without careful crafting and attention
to detail, your final brand identity may look unconsidered and rushed.TESTING THE FINAL BRAND IDENTITY
After a client has approved a design or branding strategy, there are a
number of further steps that must be taken before the brand can be
launched.
The trademarking process
An agency is responsible for checking that there are no issues concerning
conflicts with existing brand marks. This work is usually undertaken by an
intellectual property firm engaged to work on the trademarking process.
Once the uniqueness of the new brand has been confirmed and no issues
with existing brands have been identified, it can then be trademarked.
All parts of the final brand can be trademarked, including names, symbols,
unique typefaces, straplines, product design, packaging, colour and sonic
branding. A legally registered trademark is identified by the small ®
symbol next to it, and enjoys several benefits:
•
A trademark makes it easier to take legal action against anyone who uses
the brand without permission
•
Trading Standards officers or the police can bring criminal charges
against counterfeiters if they use the brand
•
The brand becomes the property of the holder of the trademark, which
means it can be legally sold, franchised or licensed to allow others to use
it
Applying for a trademark is a reasonably cheap and generally
uncomplicated process. For more information on how to apply for a
trademark in the UK go online to the UK Intellectual Property Office at
www.ipo.gov.uk
. In the US contact the United States Patent and
Trademark Office (
www.uspto.gov
).
DESIGN DEVELOPMENT
Once the client has added their thoughts and opinions, the final design isproduced. This is, however, more than a ‘tweaking’ process as this phase
requires the designers to work at an obsessive level of detail to refine the final
design solution. All applications of the brand need to be identified by the
client and passed to the creative team, and any additional communication
elements developed. The final design will then be returned to the client for
the final sign-off.
Although this is the final creative stage of the brand development process, it
is not the end of the relationship between the client and agency. In order to
make certain that the brand is successfully applied and marketed, the design
team is often commissioned to manage the final stages to brand launch. In
some cases, these responsibilities also continue after launch to ‘police’ the
appropriate application of the brand, or to readjust and tweak it in order to
ensure its final success.
Client confidentiality
Although it is vital that the final brand identity is tested, these tests must be
done with considerable secrecy. Many projects are protected by
nondisclosure agreements, or confidentiality agreements – used to protect
valuable information. Typically, non-disclosure agreements are used in
circumstances where one party wishes to disclose valuable information to
another, while at the same time protecting the information from unauthorized
use or disclosure to others. A couple of well-known examples of this sort of
confidential information – ‘trade secrets’ – are the recipes for KFC chicken
and Coca-Cola.
Design agencies and individual designers will often have to sign this type of
contract when working on sensitive branding material, to reassure clients that
none of their new corporate strategies will be revealed to their competitors
before the project is completed. Students on work experience can also be
expected to sign this type of contract if they are given the chance to be
involved in large client projects. These contracts may also apply to
individuals involved in market research tests.
Market research
This stage is used by the client and design agency to ensure that the design
uses effective brand communication to ‘speak’ to the consumer. Testing alsoavoids costly mistakes or delays in bringing a new brand or rebranded
product to market. Ways of testing designs or brand identities may include
focus groups (see page 96) and questionnaires, perhaps asking consumers to
rate the image of a brand on a numbered scale.
Criteria applied in testing a final brand design include:
How strong is the identity? Does it offer impact or shelf presence?
How flexible is the identity? What is its size and application on different
communication materials? Is it still legible at a small scale?
How effective is it in communicating the brand’s values and USP? Does
it look like what it does?
Is it culturally sensitive? In our modern global market, brands need to
be promoted effectively both nationally and internationally.
Do all the elements of the brand identity work together effectively? Do
the brand icon, typeface and strapline type work holistically and sit
comfortably together?
Will it animate? Most brands now have a presence where there is a
possibility for animation, via the Internet or broadcasting, so this may be
an issue for the brand communication.
How well will the brand be able to extend? Brand extensions are a well-
understood way to develop an existing consumer base, therefore building
this opportunity into a new brand from the start – ‘future-proofing’ it –
will provide further longevity. How well will the brand work in five or
ten years’ time?
Conventional focus group testing can be expensive and time-consuming, but
techniques such as A-B testing on social media offer a new alternative.
Perhaps the design team has arrived at two strong brand logos and you are
not sure which one will produce the best response from the consumer. Instead
of following the conventional focus group route, you can test a design by
asking the consumers who are already fans of the product or service. People
who have liked a brand’s page on Facebook or followed a brand on Twitterare more likely to provide you with honest, useful answers.
This enables the design team to gain insights and to make adjustments to the
brand design based on the preferences, comments and reactions of the
intended audience. For the client, this approach can alleviate any fears about
launching a new brand or rebrand as they will know exactly how the market
will react. This feedback will then provide the last elements needed by the
creative team to complete the final designs.
A good example of the sort of practical research used to determine the
success of a final design was undertaken for a large organic-foods
manufacturer by the American strategic research company, Decision Analyst.
The challenge was to identify the optimal combination of brand name,
product form and packaging for a new range of organic children’s meals
targeted at mothers with young children. A new child-focused brand name
and innovative packaging that would make the product more fun and
convenient as well as generating strong shelf impact had already been
created, however the client wished to launch the new identity in the most
successful way. The primary objective of the research was to explore value
perceptions defined by the visual language created for the brand by
determining the most promising concept in terms of consumer acceptance.
The research method applied was to recruit mothers with young children
through the company’s American Consumer Opinion online panel, the 200
qualified respondents being primarily grocery shoppers and recent purchasers
of this category of food. Each respondent was shown one concept, including
a product illustration and description, and asked to complete an online
questionnaire to record their reactions. The concepts tested included all the
combinations of variables for production formulation (original and healthier),
packaging (traditional and new), and brand names (the current ‘flagship’
brand name and the new ‘child-oriented’ brand name).
The results of the research revealed that the concept that featured the
combination of new packaging, healthier formulation and the new child-
focused brand name was the most favoured by all the mothers. This concept
therefore generated the highest sales potential in relation to the suggested
purchase price.
The case study illustrates how well-designed and carefully executed market
research study can aid both client and designer in testing the success of a newidentity before making the costly decision to launch a new product. In
addition, the study also reveals important information about the buying
decisions of young mums and what compelling factors drive their purchasing
decisions.
Final polishing
This is usually the final stage undertaken by the design agency, involving
integrating any changes that have arisen and responding to feedback gained
during testing. The team will then hand over the final designs to the client. In
some cases, however, the team may also be engaged to be part of the brand
launch, creating the elements defined by the communication strategy.
LAUNCHING THE BRAND IDENTITY
The launch strategy for a new brand will ultimately depend on the type of
product or service that it represents. In the case of a new brand this can be a
considerable undertaking as it may be launched across a whole host of
different communication media, including building exteriors, interiors,
exterior signage, vehicles, uniforms, and marketing and advertising materials,
as well as online presences such as websites and social media.
It is important to remember that the launch of a new brand is not purely a
marketing exercise. A new brand may also mean new employees who have
been recruited to make the brand ‘work’. Creating an internal brand strategy
(see page 34) is a key stage in the rolling out of the new identity, and is
undertaken well in advance of the promotional and marketing strategy aimed
at target consumers or audiences. Ensuring that the team have a clear
appreciation of the brand’s values, its equity, and how it differentiates itself
from the competition and speaks to its audience is vital if the new brand is to
succeed. Employees may require training in understanding the new brand
identity – how it should be used, what it means and why it matters. The
challenge is to make them believe in it and become emotionally connected to
it.
A great example of a well-executed rebranding launch was demonstrated by
the company CSC, a business solutions service who worked hard to help theirnew team understand their roles and learn to ‘live’ the brand. The company
had created a comprehensive website, the CSC Style Guide, that offered all
the information internal and external audiences needed in order to understand
and use the CSC brand identity. The internal section of the website is
available to employees only and requires employee login to access it. CSC
took the time to understand how important internal ‘buy in’ is to its brand
success, and invested time and money in providing easy-to-access
information and educational tools.
Launching a new brand identity and then keeping it fresh in the minds of the consumer ensures that a
brand becomes integrated into the public consciousness.The design team Duffy & Partners had a clear aim for the bike-share initiative Nice Ride Minnesota: to
launch its distinctive branded lime-green bikes, and to create a range of branded promotional materials,
including T-shirts and posters.As additional promotion, they placed Nice Ride bikes, encased in blocks of ice, in strategic city
locations. As the weather warmed, the blocks melted, eventually releasing the bikes and heralding the
launch of Nice Ride season
.
Once the internal brand exercise is complete, the more obvious external roll-
out can start, targeting new markets and consumers. Depending on the type of
brand being launched, this may involve traditional communication materials,
although more and more brands are appreciating the power of new media and
communication platforms.
For example, in 2009, when AOL separated from Time Warner, the company
launched a new logo along with a preview video that they debuted on their
own unique AOL Brand Identity YouTube channel one month before the new
brand identity was officially launched. The video not only introduced the new
logo, it also made it clear that the new AOL image would be a far cry from its
previous identity. This ‘brand’ new identity was trendy, modern and young. It
was a highly successful rebranding exercise.
BEYOND DELIVERYIn the contemporary world, where new technologies mean that
communication is instant, and new trends and ways of thinking can travel
around the world almost as quickly, embracing change is vital if a brand is to
survive into the future.
Social media in particular provides more access to conversations, opinions,
commentary and complaints, impacting on brands in ways that were once
inconceivable, with opportunities for great gains lurking beside the potential
for catastrophe.
By undertaking careful monitoring of markets and media, new opportunities
can be presented and identified that can enable a brand to steal a march on its
competitors. But if a brand is not watching and listening, the competition will
likely get there first: complacency is the forerunner to extinction. Market
research – as outlined in this book – remains more crucial than ever, though
for many brands it has evolved into a continuous, daily activity.
Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, blogs, forums and videos can all be used to link
with 24-hour consumer touchpoint experiences, which can be hugely
advantageous to the ongoing health of a brand. Not only can a company
create its own opportunities, it can also join conversations, nudge them in the
right direction and correct erroneous complaints. By engaging with
consumers, it can bring the brand to life.
Better connected consumers are also better informed, more agile, less trusting
and from a brand’s perspective, more fickle: they will drop one brand in
favour of another if they feel they will get a better service 
or value for money.
Staying in position therefore requires a brand to constantly research, monitor
and listen to what their consumers want because, ultimately, brands are not
about companies, they are about people.Glossary
Alignment
Occurs when the physical identity, emotional and philosophical values of the brand all support each
other successfully.
Alternative Marketing
Uses new or innovative methods to promote a brand. These can include social networking, viral
campaigns, pop-up experiences and word of mouth.
Brand
A set of elements, both physical and emotional, used to evoke a desired response in the minds of
consumers or audiences. The aim of branding is to create a unique identity to differentiate a product or
service from its competitors. A brand usually includes a range of designed elements, including a name
and a distinctive visual style.
Brand Architecture
This can mean either the organization and structure of a single brand, created through a designed
system of visual elements, or else a system of related brands exploring the relationship between a
parent company and its products and/or sibling brands.
Brand Attributes
The associations, either functional or emotional, that an audience or consumer assigns to a brand, either
negative or positive.
Brand Audit
A comprehensive and systematic examination of a brand’s communication and marketing strategy.
Brand Awareness
The ability and speed at which customers recognize a brand’s name, logo and unique point of
difference.
Brand Equity
A measure of the value of a brand, this can be determined in two ways. One is by examining the
tangible assets (patents, trademarks) and intangible assets (differentiating qualities) that contribute to
the value of the brand. Alternatively, it is the financial premium derived from loyal consumers willing
to pay more for a branded item or service.
Brand Essence
The distillation of a brand’s core values into a simple, succinct concept that is fundamentally rooted in
customer need.
Brand Extension
The expansion of a brand through the creation of a new product or service. This usually entails
leveraging the brand’s existing value in order to enhance the consumer’s perception of the new offer.
Brand Guidelines
See Brand Standards
Brand Identity
A unique set of designed elements that identifies the brand and expresses the brand promise including
the name, type, logo/ symbols, icons and colours.Brand Loyalty
A measure of the strength of consumer preference for a particular brand.
Brand Management
The job of ensuring that the tangible and intangible aspects of the brand remain consistent.
Brand Mark
Also known as a logo or brand icon. It is a symbol or design element that allows consumers to identify
a specific brand and differentiate it from others. 
See also Logo
Brand Message
The primary statement used to express the brand promise, reflecting the desired personality and
position of the brand.
Brand Personality
The brand expressed in terms of human characteristics (e.g. power, caring, purity). A way to personify
the brand message, this application of human attributes is used to achieve brand differentiation.
Brand Position
The distinctive position created for an offering that ensures clear identification and differentiation by
consumers.
Brand Promise
A statement capturing a brand’s unique offer to its consumers. It highlights the brand’s unique selling
point and defines its position in the market, differentiating that brand from its competition.
Brand Repositioning
Developing a strategy to move a brand to a new market position. 
See also Rebranding
Brand Standards
Also known as ‘Brand Guidelines’. A document or manual exploring in detail the design elements that
constitute the brand identity, specifying typefaces, colours and visual elements. It also includes how to
apply the brand appropriately.
Brand Strategy
The plan created after research into markets, consumers and competitors, used to guide designers when
creating a new brand identity. It highlights the competitive advantages by defining the unique factors
identified for the brand.
Brand Tribe
A group of people linked by a shared belief around a brand. Its members are not simple consumers, as
their passion for the brand differentiates them.
Brand Value
See also Brand Equity
Branded Environment
The brand identity when applied to a three–dimensional physical space, typically a retail environment.
Branding
The process used by a company or organization to express its brand promise to a particular target
audience, which conditions that audience to prefer the given offer. This is achieved by manipulating the
tangible and intangible attributes that form the brand into a range of communication solutions.
Colour Palette
A set of colours created by a designer that expresses the qualities of the brand. These are then specified
in the ‘brand standards’ to be applied throughout the brand identity.
DemographicsStatistical data showing variables within a population, e.g. age, gender, income level. Often used to
guide research into market segmentation. 
See also Psychographics
Design Strategy
An outline of the design decisions made to define a brand’s aesthetic. Used in brand creation and
‘policing’, it ensures consistent application of the identity across all communication solutions.
Differentiation
The distinct and unique characteristics that differentiate a brand from its competitors within the same
category to give a competitive advantage.
Emotional Branding
The process of building brand value by creating an emotional connection between the intended
consumer and the product or service.
Family Brand
A brand that has been extended through a family of offerings. Often shown through a visual
relationship between the separate identities.
Global Brand
A brand operating internationally, such as Coca-Cola.
Logo
A unique symbol or design used as an identifying mark representing a brand. 
See also Brand Mark
Logotype
A custom typeface used to highlight the unique characteristics of the brand, sometimes trademarked, to
be used only by the brand.
Market Segmentation
A strategy that divides a broad market into sub-sets of consumers with common needs and priorities.
Niche Marketing
Considering and fulfilling the needs, wishes and expectations of a small, defined groups of consumers.
Parent Brand
A brand that acts as an endorsement to one or more sub-brands within a range.
Point-of-Sale
A marketing display that presents a product with additional information about the offer explaining the
benefits. Also know as point-of-purchase.
Premium Brand
A brand that is known to hold greater brand value than its competitors.
Psychographics
A market segmentation process that creates groups of customers according to their lifestyles, social
class and personality. Used to explore patterns of purchasing. 
See also Demographics
Rebranding
The revising of brand communication with the purpose of refocusing or updating an identity in
response to internal or external forces such as new market forces. 
See also Brand Repositioning
Semiotics
The study of symbolism and how people interpret meaning from words, sounds and pictures. In
branding semiotics is used in the development of meaning in identity systems.
Strap Line
See TaglineTagline
A short descriptor linked with the brand name. Its function is to define a brand position.
Visual Identity
The sum total of the brand’s visual aesthetic, comprising logos, logotypes, symbols, colours etc.Recommended Reading
Books on Brand Theory
Ind, Nicholas. 
Living the Brand: How to Transform Every Member of Your Organization into a Brand
Champion
, Kogan Page (2007)
Macnab, Maggie. 
Decoding Design: Understanding and Using Symbols in Visual Communication
,
HOW Books (2008)
Olins, Wally. 
Brand New: The Shape of Brands to Come
, Thames & Hudson (2014)
Pavitt, Jane. 
Brand.New
, V&A Publishing (2014)
Roberts, Kevin. 
Lovemarks: The Future Beyond Brands
, PowerHouse Books (2006)
Books on Practical Branding
Airey, David. 
Logo Design Love: A Guide to Creating Iconic Brand Identities (Voices That Matter)
,
New Riders (2009)
Evamy Michael. 
Logotype
, Laurence King (2012)
Gardner, Bill. 
LogoLounge 4: 2,000 International Identities by Leading Designers
 (illustrated edition),
Rockport Publishers (2008)
Hardy, Gareth. 
Smashing Logo Design: The Art of Creating Visual Identities
 (Smashing Magazine
Book Series), John Wiley & Sons (2011)
Hyland, Angus. 
Symbol
 (mini), Laurence King (2014)
Middleton, Simon. 
Build a Brand in 30 Days: With Simon Middleton, the Brand Strategy Guru
,
Capstone (2010)
Rivers, Charlotte. 
Handmade Type Workshop: Techniques for Creating Original Characters and
Digital Fonts
, Thames & Hudson (2011)
Wheeler, Alina. 
Designing Brand Identity: An Essential Guide for the Whole Branding Team
. John
Wiley & Sons (2012)
Books for Inspiration
Fowkes, Alex. 
Drawing Type: An Introduction to Illustrating Letterforms
, Rockport (2014)
Heller, Steven. 
Typography Sketchbooks
, Thames & Hudson (2012)
Ingledew, John. 
The A–Z of Visual Ideas: How to Solve any Creative Brief
, Laurence King (2011)
McAlhone Beryl, Stuart David. 
A Smile in the Mind: Witty Thinking in Graphic Design
 (new edition),
Phaidon Press (1998)
Rothenstein, Julian and Mel Gooding (eds.). 
Alphabets & Other Signs
, Shambhala Publications (1993)
Books on Theory
Lury, Celia. 
Consumer Culture
, Polity Press (2011)
Slater, Don. 
Consumer Culture and Modernity
, Polity Press (1998)
Sternberg, Robert J. 
The Nature Of Creativity
, Cambridge University Press (1988)
Wallas, Graham. 
The Art of Thought
, Solis Press (2014)
Watkinson, Matt. 
The Ten Principles Behind Great Customer Experiences
, FT Publishing International
(2013)Books on Professional Practice
Airey, David. 
Work for Money, Design for Love: Answers to the Most Frequently Asked Questions
About Starting and Running a Successful Design Business
 (Voices That Matter), New Riders (2012)
de Soto, Drew. 
Know Your Onions: Graphic Design: How to Think Like a Creative, Act Like a
Businessman and Design Like a God
, BIS Publishers (2014)
Moross, Kate. 
Make Your Own Luck: A DIY Attitude to Graphic Design and Illustration
, Prestel (2014)
Shaughnessy, Adrian. 
How to be a Graphic Designer, Without Losing Your Soul
 (second edition),
Laurence King (2010)
Shaughnessy, Adrian. 
Studio Culture: The secret life of the graphic design studio
, Unit Editions (2009)
Websites
Brand Blogs
Brand Flakes – 
www.brandflakesforbreakfast.com/
Seth Godin – 
www.sethgodin.typepad.com/
Viget – 
www.viget.com/blogs
Brand News
Brand Channel – 
www.brandchannel.com/home/
Branding Magazine – 
www.www.brandingmagazine.com/
Design Week – 
www.designweek.co.uk/
Cultural Design
www.creativeroots.org
twitter.com/creativeroots
www.australiaproject.com/reference.html
www.designmadeingermany.de/
www.packagingoftheworld.com
Inspiration
Its Nice That – 
www.itsnicethat.com/
Niice – 
www.niice.co/
Pinterest – 
www.uk.pinterest.com/Index
#
2x4 (agency) 
25
7digital 
144
, 
148
A
Aaker, Jennifer: ‘Dimensions of brand personality’ 
14
, 
56
Accenture 
53
Africa 
60
Agent Provocateur 
55
Alonso, Tomás 
20
American Airlines 
52
Andersen Consulting 
53
AOL 
155
Apple 
24
, 
25
, 
31
, 
45
, 
105
Greek mythology 
45
apps 
19
, 
21
, 
134
, 
145
Argentina, Cave of the Hands 
6
Asia 
60
AutoPacific
New Vehicle Satisfaction Survey 
94
Averdieck, James 
52
B
Bass, William 
24
Bass Brewery 
24
Beecham Group 
59
Big Fish (agency) 
52
, 
53
, 
53
Bluemarlin (agency) 
71
, 
113
, 
114
, 
145
Forces Sauces 
70
, 
71
The Royal British Legion 
71
Stoll charity 
71
Warner Edwards gin 
113
, 
114
, 
116
, 
145
blog(s)/blogging 
65
, 
86
–
87
, 
99
–
100
, 
128
, 
138
–
139
, 
155
, 
157
Bonaparte, Napoleon 
49
Borden, Gail 
49
Brin, Sergey 
34
BP 
24
, 
25
, 
38
Deepwater Horizon 
38
brainstorming/mind mapping 
78
–
79
, 
83
, 
130
BrandCulture 
34brandscape 
58
, 
113
, 
120
brandwatch 
98
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) 
33
British Royal Family 
9
Britvic 
59
Brooklyn Museum, New York 
25
Brooks shoes 
126
Burberry 
36
Burton on Trent, UK 
24
Byzantine Empire 
49
C
Cadbury 
48
, 
53
Cambridge University 
36
Camper 
20
Chanel, Gabrielle ‘Coco’ 
12
, 
13
Charlie and Lola 
50
Child, Lauren 
50
China 
36
, 
46
Chomsky, Noam 
68
Clairol 
67
Clorox 
19
Clifton, Rita 
19
Coca-Cola 
35
–
36
, 
66
–
67
, 
152
New Coke 
66
, 
66
–
67
Coldpress orange juice 
110
colour wheel 
55
Consignia 
53
consumerism 
11
coolhunter/coolhunting 
65
Cross Cultural Consumer Characterization (4Cs) 
94
, 
95
CSC business solutions/CSC Style Guide 
154
Cutting Edge Commercial 
30
D
Danone 
52
Decision Analyst research 
153
Del Monte 
17
, 
17
demographic(s) 
58
, 
93
–
96
, 
103
, 
156
Diageo 
53
Disney 
30
, 
53
, 
67
Divvy 
52
Double Fine Productions 
50
Dragon Rouge (agency) 
52
, 
134
, 
142
–
143Organix baby food 
143
Oykos yoghurt 
52
, 
52
, 
134
Warburtons bread 
57
, 
142
, 
142
DuPont 
25
, 
28
, 
29
E
Eagle Brand milk 
49
eBay 
39
Edwards, Siôn 
116
Egypt, 
12
, 
12
England 
116
, 
136
Equilibrium Consulting 
14
ESP (emotional selling proposition) 
43
Europe/European 
46
, 
60
, 
94
, 
96
Eurostar 
26
‘evolution to revolution’ 
81
, 
87
, 
124
, 
144
F
Facebook 
18
–
19
, 
34
, 
36
, 
92
, 
99
, 
99
–
100
, 
153
, 
155
Fazer Café, Finland 
119
Fazer, Karl and Berta 
119
Federal Express/FedEx 
52
Ferrari 
15
Ferroconcrete 
27
Financial Times
 
36
focus group(s) 
82
, 
91
–
92
, 
96
, 
99
–
100
, 
125
, 
152
–
153
font(s) 
33
, 
47
, 
55
, 
57
, 
62
, 
134
, 
148
; 
see also
 typeface
future forecasting/trend forecasting 
58
, 
65
, 
120
G
Garmin 
34
, 
34
GE (corporation) 
25
Germany 
51
, 
136
Gibbons, Mickey 
70
Giddens, Anthony
On the Edge
 
68
Runaway World
 
68
GlaxoSmithKline 
78
Google 
22
, 
34
–
35
, 
125
Green, Andy 
36
Gü 
52
, 
53
, 
53
Gunelius, Susan 
39
Gutenberg, Johannes 
46
Gutenberg Bible 
46H
Hadid, Zaha 
26
Halstead, Jason 
76
, 
77
Harris, Elisa 
30
Harris, Emma 
26
Harvard reference system 
93
, 
138
Harvey Nichols 
57
Heinz 
53
, 
67
Helsinki, Finland 
119
hieroglyphs 
12
Howies 
36
HSBC 
133
, 
133
Hutchison Telecommunications 
53
I
IBM 
28
Iceland 
96
IDEO 
52
, 
126
Illustrator (software) 
125
, 
135
, 
144
Ind, Nicholas 
14
InDesign (software) 
55
, 
125
, 
144
Industrial Revolution 
16
Innocent Drinks 
25
, 
28
, 
28
, 
36
–
37
, 
37
, 
39
inspiration boards 
101
, 
133
–
134
Instagram 
18
Intel 
30
Interbrand 
19
, 
60
iPhone 
31
, 
147
J
J. Walter Thompson (agency) 
56
Jacob’s Creek Wine 
53
Jobs, Steve 
45
Johnson Banks (agency) 
69
, 
74
, 
77
More Th>n 
74
, 
75
Shelter 
69
Virgin 
77
, 
77
K
Kaiser, Michael/Kaiser Associates 
38
Kanno, Yoko 
21
Kazakhstan 
96
Kellogg, Will Keith and Dr. John Harvey 
17
Kellogg’s 
16
, 
17
,
 
53
Keysplash Creative, Inc. 
39King, Stephen 
56
KFC (Kentucky Fried Chicken) 
52
, 
152
Kiely, Orla 
32
Klein, Naomi: 
No Logo
 
68
Kokoro & Moi (agency) 
119
Korea 
46
L
Land Rover 
15
Landor Associates, Hamburg 
51
Landor, Walter 
12
Leach, Tom 
149
–
150
Le Févre, Jackie 
36
Lindstrom, Martin
Brandwashed: Tricks Companies Use to Manipulate Our Minds and Persuade Us to Buy
 
69
‘The New Ethical Guideline for Companies of the Social Media Age’ 
6
9
Linkedin 
155
Lithuania 
96
Lucozade 
64
Lurie, Celia: 
Consumer Culture
 
11
Lury, Giles: 
Brandwatching: Lifting the Lid on Branding
 
16
, 
18
M
M&M’s 
43
Magma Effect 
36
Manchester, Glen 
18
Manchipp, Simon 
26
Mariano’s Fresh Market, Chicago 
111
market sector 
110
, 
112
–
113
, 
121
–
122
, 
124
, 
150
Marks and Spencer 
74
Marmite 
17
, 
17
Maslow, Abraham: ‘A Theory of
Human Motivation’ 
94
Mastercard 
110
McDonald’s 
30
, 
42
, 
67
–
68
McLibel trial 
68
McLaughlin, Mignon 
10
Mercedes 
30
, 
42
Microsoft 
31
, 
110
Word 
31
Xbox 
31
Middle Ages 
12
‘mild to wild’ 
81
, 
87
, 
124
, 
144
Milka 
48
, 
51
, 
115Mini Cooper 
11
Mitchell, Arnold 
96
mobile phones 
18
–
19
, 
53
, 
131
camera 
131
Modena, Italy 
16
mood board 
7
, 
54
–
55
, 
101
, 
121
, 
125
, 
133
–
134
Morison, Stanley 
55
Moving Brands (agency) 
148
Museum of Brands, Packaging and Advertising 
16
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), New York 
75
, 
75
N
Nestlé 
69
Neutrogena, T/Gel 
47
Newcastle Brown ale 
53
Newman, Damien: ‘Design Squiggle’ 
85
, 
85
New York Times
 
39
Nice Ride 
140
, 
140
, 
154
, 
154
niche/niche marketing 
36
, 
58
, 
66
, 
94
, 
103
, 
114
–
115
, 
156
Nike 
28
, 
29
, 
34
, 
42
, 
64
Nokia 
30
, 
34
, 
105
nsquared (software company) 
147
O
Olins, Wally 
16
Opie, Robert 
16
Orange (telecommunications company) 
52
, 
53
, 
133
, 
133
Orangina 
30
Organix baby food 
143
O2 (telecommunications company) 
52
Owen, Michael 
64
Oxford English Dictionary 
11
Oxford reference system 
93
Oykos yoghurt 
52
, 
52
, 
134
P
Page, Larry 
34
Pantone 
48
, 
148
Pavitt, Jane: 
Brand.New
 
15
Pedlars 
36
Pentagram (agency) 
75
Photoshop (software) 
54
, 
144
Pinterest 
106
, 
121
, 
132
, 
139
, 
157
Plum Organics’ Just Fruit 
42
, 
43POD (point of difference) 
43
Polldaddy 
91
Post Office, The 
53
Pret a Manger 
60
–
61
, 
61
Prezi (software) 
147
Procter and Gamble 
18
, 
53
, 
100
Secret deodorant 
100
Vocalpoint 
100
psychographic(s) 
94
, 
96
, 
156
profiling 
93
–
94
R
rebranding 
62
, 
65
, 
77
, 
154
, 
156
Reckitt Benckiser 
59
Reclaim the Streets 
68
research methods 
90
, 
92
primary 
90
, 
92
qualitative 
90
, 
92
quantitative 
90
, 
91
, 
92
secondary 
90
, 
92
, 
93
Rockefeller University, New York 
30
Royal College of Art, London 
15
Royal Mail 
52
‘royal purple’ 
48
S
Saks Fifth Avenue 
25
Samsung 
19
, 
105
Santander, Spain 
20
Save the Children 
74
Schmitt, Bernd and Alex Simonson, 
Marketing Aesthetics
 
18
Schweppe, Johann Jacob 
53
Schweppes 
53
semiotics 
6
, 
44
–
47
, 
50
, 
115
, 
118
, 
156
Shelter 
69
, 
69
, 
74
Simms, Jane 
18
Singapore Airlines 
30
, 
34
Sirgy, M. Joseph: 
Self-congruity:
Toward a Theory of Personality and Cybernetics
 
11
Skoda Fabia 
31
Skywatch 
27
smartphones, 
see
 mobile phones
Snapchat 
18
SomeOne (agency) 
26
SRI International 
96Stella Artois 
110
strapline/slogan/tagline 
15
, 
28
, 
35
, 
44
, 
59
, 
63
–
64
, 
80
, 
101
, 
110
, 
116
, 
118
, 
123
, 
142
, 
145
–
146
, 
148
,
151
–
152
SurveyMonkey 
91
, 
91
, 
125
Sweden 
12
Swedish Hasbeens (shoes) 
50
SWOT analysis 
106
, 
107
T
Tampere, Finland 
119
Tango 
59
, 
59
Tesco 
110
Thailand 
96
Thirsty Cat!/Thirsty Dog! 
66
Thompson, Daley 
64
thumbnails 
80
, 
86
Times, The
 
18
, 
55
, 
55
Times New Roman (typeface) 
55
TiVo 
25
Tony’s Chocolonely 
97
Torrance, Ellis Paul: ‘The Nature of Creativity as Manifest in its Testing’ 
85
touchpoint(s) 
18
, 
76
, 
97
, 
100
, 
115
, 
155
analysis 
97
wheel 
97
Toyota 
24
, 
25
trademark 
12
, 
16
, 
24
, 
27
–
28
, 
31
, 
151
, 
156
Trademark Registration Act 
24
Trading Standards 
151
Tropicana orange juice 
110
Tumblr 
18
, 
139
Twitter 
19
, 
19
, 
34
, 
36
, 
61
, 
92
, 
99
–
100
, 
138
, 
153
, 
155
typeface(s) 
24
–
26
, 
33
, 
44
, 
46
–
47
, 
51
, 
54
, 
74
, 
101
, 
103
, 
113
, 
115
–
116
, 
118
–
119
, 
122
, 
134
, 
142
,
145
–
146
, 
151
–
152
, 
156
; 
see also
 font(s)
typography 
26
–
28
, 
34
, 
42
, 
44
, 
46
–
47
, 
55
, 
57
, 
81
, 
111
–
112
, 
116
, 
134
, 
136
, 
144
U
un-focus groups 
96
Uniqlo 
21
Unilever 
25
United States
Great Seal 
49
Patent and Trademark Office 
151
University of the Creative Arts 
7
USP (unique selling proposition) 
43
, 
58
, 
63
–
64
, 
110
, 
115
, 
123
, 
142
, 
150
, 
152V
VALS (Values, Attitudes and Lifestyles) system 
96
Vanish 
59
, 
59
Versace 
10
Virgin 
33
, 
33
, 
35
, 
77
, 
77
‘visual noise’ 
42
, 
118
VW 
11
, 
29
, 
29
W
Waitrose 
74
Walker, Rob and Joshua Glenn: Significant Objects 
39
Wallas, Graham: 
The Art of Thought
 
84
, 
84
,
 
157
Warburtons bread 
57
, 
142
Warner Edwards gin 
113
, 
116
, 
145
Warner, Tom 
116
Wilkinson, Jonny 
64
Willich, Jorg 
51
World Health Organization 
69
Wrigley chewing gum 
17
WWF 
24
, 
25
Y
Yorkshire Tea 
53
Young and Rubicam 
94
–
95
YouTube 
155
Z
Zoomerang 
91Picture Credits
T
 = Top; 
B
 = Bottom; 
C
 = Centre; 
L
 = Left; 
R
 = Right
BACK COVER
: Branding: Kokoro & Moi; Interior Design: Koko 3 
7
 © Paul Souders/Corbis; 
8
 Image
Courtesy of The Advertising Archives; 
9
 iStock © Mlenny; 
10
 Courtesy BMW; 
12L
 Paul Vinten /
Shutterstock.com; 
12R
 iStock © BrandyTaylor; 
13
 iStock © winhorse; 
16
 Courtesy Soprintendenza per
i Beni Archeologici dell’Emilia-Romagna, Bologna, by licence of the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and
Activities, Italy; 
17TL
 Image Courtesy of The Advertising Archives; 
17TR
 Image Courtesy of The
Advertising Archives; 
17BL
 © Heritage Images/Glowimages.com; 
17BR
 © Heritage Images/
Glowimages.com; 
19
 ©2015 The Clorox Company. Reprinted with permission. CLOROX is a
registered trademark of The Clorox Company and is used with permission.; 
20
 Design Tomás Alonso,
Photo by Gonzalo Gómez Gándara; 
21
 Created by Projector for UNIQLO Co. Ltd; 
22
 © Jacques
Brinon/Pool/ Reuters/Corbis; 
24BL
 ArtisticPhoto / Shutterstock.com; 
24BC
 Courtesy of The
Worshipful Company of Haberdashers; 
24BR
 © Nick Wheldon; 
24TR
 Courtesy AB InBev UK
Limited; 
25TL
 iStock © kaczka; 
25TCL
 © 1986 Panda Symbol WWF – World Wide Fund For Nature
(Formerly World Wildlife Fund) / ® “WWF” is a WWF Registered Trademark; 
25TCR
 Courtesy BP
Plc; 
25TR
 Image courtesy of Toyota G-B PLC; 
25CL
 © General Electric company; 
25CCL
Reproduced with kind permission of Unilever PLC and group companies; 
25CCR
 Designed by
Pentagram Design Ltd; 
25CR
 Courtesy DuPont EMEA; 
25BL
 © TiVo. TiVo’s trademarks and
copyrighted material are used by Laurence King Publishing Ltd under license.; 
25BC
 innocent drinks;
25BR
 Brooklyn Museum logo designed by 2x4 inc.; 
26
 Courtesy Someone, Creative Directors – Simon
Manchipp and Gary Holt; Designers – Therese Severinsen, Karl Randall and Lee Davies; 
27
 The
Skywatch brand identity was developed by brand architect Gabriel Ibarra. The website
www.skywatchsite.com
 and retail environments were created by Ferro Concrete. Images and files
courtesy of I Brands, LLC.; 
29TL
 innocent drinks; 
29TR
 Courtesy BMW; 
29BL
 Reproduced courtesy
of Volkswagen of America; 
29CR
 NIKE, Inc; 
29BR
 Courtesy of the Hagley Museum and Library; 
30
Photo courtesy Roundy’s Inc.; 
32T
 Orla Kiely (Pure); 
32C
 Orla Kiely (KMI); 
32B
 Orla Kiely (Li &
Fung); 
33T
 BBC ONE, BBC TWO, BBC three, BBC FOUR, BBC NEWS and BBC PARLIAMENT
are trade marks of the British Broadcasting Corporation and are used under licence.; 
33B
 Courtesy
Virgin Enterprises Limited; 
34
 BrandCulture Communications Pty Ltd; 
37
 innocent drinks; 
40
 ©
Hitomi Soeda/Getty Images; 
42
 ValeStock / Shutterstock.com; 
43T
 iStock © evemilla; 
43B
 Plum Inc;
45
 iStock © Yongyuan Dai; 
46T
 © SSPL/Getty Images; 
46B
 iStock © Grafissimo; 
47T
 Neutrogena®
is a trademark of Johnson & Johnson Ltd. Used with permission.; 
47B
 Design: Harcus Design, Client:
Cocco Corporation; 
48TL
 iStock © PaulCowan; 
48TR
 Stuart Monk / Shutterstock.com; 
48BL
 iStock
© RASimon; 
48BR
 Courtesy Mondelez International; 
49
 Courtesy Boston Public Library, Donaldson
Brothers / N Y. Condensed Milk Co.; 
50TL
 From 
Charlie and Lola: I Will Not Ever Never Eat a
Tomato
 by Lauren Child, first published in the UK by Orchard Books, an imprint of Hachette
Children’s Books, 388 Euston Road, London, NW1 3BH; 
50BL
 The Double Fine Adventure logo is
used with the permission of Double Fine Productions; 
50R
 Swedish Hasbeens, spring/summer 2012; 
51
Courtesy Mondelez International; 
52T
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge and Danone; 
52B
 Courtesy of IDEO.
IDEO partnered with Firebelly Design, a local brand strategy studio, to collaborate on a solution.; 
53
Courtesy Noble Desserts Holdings Limited; 
54
 Mood board: Tiziana Mangiapane. Images:
Shutterstock. com (clockwise from top left: Songquan Deng, Stock Creative, symbiot, Xavier Fargas,
Cora Mueller, Legend_tp, Imfoto); 
55TL
 iStock © maybefalse; 
55TR
 The shown design is owned by
Crabtree & Evelyn and is protected by Crabtree & Evelyn’s trademark registrations. The modernized
version of the design is owned by Crabtree & Evelyn and is protected by Crabtree & Evelyn’s
trademark and copyright registrations.; 
55CR
 © Clynt Garnham Publishing / Alamy; 
55BCR
 Courtesy
Agent Provocateur; 
55BR
 IBM; 57TL JuliusKielaitis / Shutterstock.com; 
57TR
 Courtesy DragonRouge and Newburn Bakehouse; 
57B
 Courtesy Harvey Nichols; 
59L
 Courtesy Britvic Soft Drinks;
59R
 Vanish is a Reckitt Benkiser (RB) global brand; 
61
 Courtesy Pret A Manger, Europe, Ltd.; 
63
Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
64
 Image Courtesy of The Advertising Archives; 
65
 Jon Le-Bon /
Shutterstock.com; 
66L
 ©1000 Extra Ordinary Colors, Taschen 2000. Photo by Stefano
Beggiato/ColorsMagazine; 
66R
 © Todd Gipstein/Corbis; 
69
 Johnson Banks; 
70
 Bluemarlin Brand
Design; 
72
 Courtesy Hello Monday (Art Directors: Sebastian Gram and Jeppe Aaen); 
75T
 Courtesy
Pentagram. Pentagram designed the new identity, which established a system for the consistent
treatment of images and type (Paula Scher, Partner-in-Charge; Lisa Kitschenberg, Designer). All
pictured examples of the new identity were designed by Julia Hoffmann, Creative Director for Graphics
and Advertising at the Museum of Modern Art, and her in-house team of designers.; 
75B
 Johnson
Banks; 
76
 Courtesy Gist Brands; 
77
 Johnson Banks; 
78L
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge and Hero Group;
78R
 Pope Wainwright; 
79TL
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
79BL
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge and Hero
Group; 
79TR
, 
BR
 Courtesy of IDEO. IDEO partnered with Firebelly Design, a local brand strategy
studio, to collaborate on a solution.; 
80TL
 Courtesy of IDEO. IDEO partnered with Firebelly Design, a
local brand strategy studio, to collaborate on a solution.; 
80BL
 Courtesy Duffy & Partners LLC.
Branding & Design: Joe Duffy, Creative Director; Joseph Duffy IV, Designer; 
80R
 David Airey; 
81TL
©Glenn Wolk/ glennwolkdesign.com; 
81BL
 Courtesy of IDEO. IDEO partnered with Firebelly Design,
a local brand strategy studio, to collaborate on a solution.; 
82R
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
82TL
 Art
Direction : Edwin Santamaria. Design for : OSG a VML Brand.
www.elxanto3.co
; 
82BL
 Cathy Yeulet /
Shutterstock.com; 
83L
 Ameeta Shaw, Freelance Graphic Designer; 
83R
 baranq / Shutterstock.com; 
84
Imagelibrary/272, LSE collections; 
85R
 Damien Newman, Central Office of Design; 
88
 © JPM/Corbis;
91T
 Cathy Yeulet / Shutterstock.com; 
91B
 © SurveyMonkey; 
94T
 ©2012 AutoPacific New Vehicle
Satisfaction Survey; 
96
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
97
 Courtesy Sarah Bork, Janita van Dijk, Sandra
Cecet, Morten Gray Jensen, Basil Vereecke, TU Delft (Industrial Design Engineering). Method
developed by David and Dunn (2002); 
98
 Courtesy Runtime Collective Limited, trading as
Brandwatch; 
99
 Courtesy howies / howies.co.uk; 
100
 Quigley Simpson; 
101
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge
and Newburn Bakehouse; 
102
 Tiziana Mangiapane; 
105
 © Labbrand, a leading China-originated global
brand consultancy. Other copyright holders: Charlotte Zhang, Ryan Wang, Rachel Li; 
107
 ygraph.com
/ Source: BizStrategies; 
108
 © Matthias Ritzmann/Corbis; 
110L
 Courtesy Tesco; 
110CL
 Courtesy
Tesco; 
110CR
 iStock © Oktay Ortakcioglu; 
110C
 Courtesy Coldpress Foods Ltd.; 
111T
 Radu Bercan /
Shutterstock.com; 
111C
 iStock © ewastudio; 
111B
 Photos courtesy Roundy’s Inc.; 
112L
 Courtesy ibis
budget; 
112C
 Image courtesy Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. Design by Emma Quinn
Design (original sun); Philip Sisters (circle, wording and strapline); 
112R
 constructlondon.com,
Creative director: Georgia Fendley, Design Director: Segolene Htter, Design Director: Daniel Lock;
113
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
114
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
116
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
119
Branding: Kokoro & Moi; Interior Design: Koko 3; 
120
 The Future Laboratory; 
121
 Courtesy Dragon
Rouge and Newburn Bakehouse; 
124
 Tiziana Mangiapane; 
126
 Courtesy of IDEO; 
128
 Hannah
Dollery, Good Design Makes Me Happy; 
129
 © Johnny Hardstaff; 
130T
 Kane O’Flackerty; 
130B
Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
131L
 © Sara Zancotti. Model: Geoffrey Lerus; 
131R
 iStock © Lorraine
Boogich; 
133
 Images Courtesy of The Advertising Archives; 
134
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge and Danone;
135
 Brian Yerkes, Brian Joseph Studios; 
136
 Kane O’Flackerty; 
137T
 Kane O’Flackerty; 
137C
 Kane
O’Flackerty; 
137B
 Simon Barber; 
138
 Simon Barber); 
140
 Courtesy Duffy & Partners LLC. Branding
& Design: Joe Duffy, Creative Director; Joseph Duffy IV, Designer; 
142
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge and
Newburn Bakehouse; 
143
 Courtesy Dragon Rouge and Hero Group; 
144T
 Olly Wilkins; 
144B
 Moving
Brands; 
145
 Bluemarlin Brand Design; 
147T
 Dr Neil Roodyn, nsquared solutions; 
147C
 Bluemarlin
Brand Design; 
147B
 Heidi Kuusela; 
148
 Moving Brands; 
149
 Moving Brands; 
150
 Spiral
Communications (Leeds) spiralcom.co.uk; 
154
 Courtesy Duffy & Partners LLC. Branding & Design:
Joe Duffy, Creative Director; Joseph Duffy IV.