  
 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Developing Stronger Leaders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
What makes a great leader? How can leaders improve?  
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for both 
aspiring and accomplished leaders.  
 
Read this brief 8 -page report to learn:  
 
 Definition of Organizational Leadership  
 Difference between Leaders & Managers  
 Essential Leadership Qualities   
 Key Leadership Styles  
 Leadership Principles & Best Practices    
 
 
Read this report to identify opportunities to further develop and 
maintain strong leadership in your organization.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What is Organizational Leadership      3  
 
Leaders vs. Managers        3  
 
Essential Leadership Qualities       4  
 
Key Leadership Styles        5  
 
Leadership Principles & Best Practices      6  
 
Conclusion          8 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What is Organizational Leadership?  
Leaders vs Managers   
  
 
 
 
 
From an organizational perspective, leadership can be defined as: the 
ability to influence, motivate, and enable people to attain goals and 
contribute toward improving the effectiveness and efficiency of an 
organization.  
 
 
Why is developing strong leaders such a top priority?    
 
 
Leaders initiate and sustain the cycles of organizational change. Without 
encouraging and inspirational leaders, organizations are fragmented, 
unaligned, and demoralized. Top companies recognize that they are only 
as successful as their next great leaders,  and work to constantly groom 
and develop key staff.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
In 1977, Abraham Zaleznik documented some of the key differences 
between leadership and management. He viewed leaders as inspiring 
visionaries who are interested in prospects; while managers he viewed 
as planners who are concerned more with processes.  
 
 
Following in his path, Warren Bennis (1989) documented the 
leader/manager dichotomy to help organizations evaluate their key 
players.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Essential Leadership Qualities   
 
Leaders  Managers  
Power by Influence  Power by Position  
Inspire Innovation  Manage Administration  
Ask What and  Why Ask How and When  
Focus on People  Focus on Systems/Processes  
Do the Right Things  Do Things Right  
Inspire Trust  Rely on Control  
Long-term Perspective  Short -term Perspective  
Develop  Maintain  
Challenge the Status -Quo Accept the Status -Quo 
Eye on the Horizon  Eye on the Bottom -line 
Originate  Imitate  
Free Thinking  Rigid Thinking  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Many studies have shown that there are common traits or qualities that 
most leaders share. Review the following list of qualities and evaluate 
yourself to identify your areas of strength and opportunities for self -
improvement.  
  
 Vision  - the ability to ar ticulate a vision and outline the gaps 
between the current state and future state.    
 
 Confidence  - outstanding leaders are confident, determined, 
and persistent with reaching their goals.    
 
 Role Model  - leading by example and setting the standard by 
demon strating that goals are attainable.    
 
 Flexibility  - being able to quickly adapt and positively respond 
to changing conditions.    
 
 Optimistic  - leaders must have a positive attitude.    
 
 Talent/Technical Skill  - many leaders are selected because of 
their natural aptitude or ability to complete a specific task.     
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Key L eadership Styles   
 Initiative &  Drive  - having enthusiasm to do the job and 
displaying entrepreneurial tendencies are vital qualities of 
effective leaders.    
 
 Charisma - being attractive to others and leveraging this esteem 
to inspire and motivate others.    
 
 Dedication and Commitment  - being a top leader requires a 
firm commitment and can sometimes even consume much of the 
leader’s life.    
 
 Results -Oriented  - actions are prioritized and directed at 
achieving personal and team goals & objectives.    
 
 Able to Delegate  - encouraging others to grow by sharing 
responsibilities and credit for a job well done.    
 
 Self-Aware  - accurate understanding of abilities.     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
This section will differentiate 6 key leadership styles and discuss when 
each style is appropriate.  
  
 Visionary  - this style builds positive momentum by motivating 
people to accomplish shared dreams. Visionary leadership is the 
most positive style, and is best used when organizational 
changes require a new vision or strategic direction.    
 
 Coaching  - is the process  of aligning personal and corporate 
interests, such as earning commission by making sales. Coaching 
is a very positive method, appropriate when developing 
capabilities and skills.    
 
 Affiliate  - connecting people to each other can have a positive 
impact on  culture, such as arranging a company volleyball 
team.    
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Leadership Principles & Best Practices   Democratic  - a democratic style, by nature, develops 
commitment by leveraging the ideas of the constituents and is 
useful for driving consensus, or gathering feedback from staff.    
 
 Pacesetting  - this works most effectively with a motivated and 
competent team. Leaders communicate challenging goals and 
build an environment of excitement. Often, this style has a 
negative impact on culture, especially when the leader is unable 
to implement this strategy  properly. Set the pace when the 
engine is already running very smoothly.    
 
 Commanding - this style can be effective when clear direction 
needs to be given to deal with an crisis or when a massive 
organizational change needs to be made.  
 
The best leaders are able to seamlessly transition between styles as 
circumstances change. Work to understand each style and determine 
the appropriate time to pull it out of your leadership toolkit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“How to Win Friends and Influence People” by Dale Carnegie has sold 
over 30 million copies. Amazingly, this book was written 70 years ago. 
These leadership principles are time -tested and applicable in every 
country of the world.  
 
Following is a recap of t he 30 principles Dale Carnegie taught developing 
leaders. Periodically reviewing this brief listing is a beneficial exercise for 
new and seasoned, competent leaders.  
  
 
 
Fundamental Techniques for Handling People:    
 
1. Don’t Criticize, Condemn, or Complain.  
2. Give Honest & Sincere Appreciation.  
3. Arouse in the Other Person an Eager Want.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
 
 
How to Make People like you:    
 
4. Become Genuinely Interested in Other People.  
5. Smile.  
6. Remember that a person’s name is to that perso n the 
sweetest and most important sound in any language.  
7. Be a Good Listener.  
8. Talk in Terms of Other People’s Interests.  
9. Make the Person Feel Important; and do it sincerely.  
 
 
How to Win People to your Way of Thinking:    
 
10. The only way to get the best of an argument is to avoid it  
11. Show respect for the other person’s opinions.  
12. If you are wrong, admit it quickly and emphatically.  
13. Begin in a Friendly way.  
14. Get the other person saying, .Yes, Yes. Immediately.  
15. Let the other p erson do a great deal of the talking.  
16. Let the person feel that the idea is his or hers.  
17. Try to see things from the other person’s point of view.  
18. Be sympathetic with the other person’s ideas and desires.  
19. Appeal to the Nobler Motives.  
20. Dramatize your Ide as.  
21. Throw Down a Challenge.  
 
How to Change People without Arousing Resentment:   
  
22. Begin with Praise and Honest Appreciation.  
23. Call attention to people’s mistakes indirectly.  
24. Talk about your own mistakes before criticizing people.  
25. Ask questions instead of giving direct orders.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
Conclusion  26. Let the other person save face.  
27. Praise the slightest improvement and praise every 
improvement. Be “hearty in approbation and  lavish in your 
praise.”  
28. Give the other person a Fine Reputation to live up to.  
29. Use Encouragement. Make the fault seem easy to correct.  
30. Make the person happy about doing what you suggest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Becoming an effective and inspiring leader requires constant diligence. 
Focusing on people and opportunities, rather than systems and 
processes, is the key differentiator between a strong leader and a 
devoted “manager.”  
 
While processes are certainly crit ical for every business, rigid thinking 
about policy and procedure leads to stagnation and demoralized staff. A 
business needs to view its inner workings as an organic process where 
creativity and change invoke efficiencies.  
 
If you are in a leadership po sition, or are charged with developing new 
leaders, be sure to pay attention to the essential leadership qualities 
and styles. Challenge yourself to select one quality or style to improve 
upon each month and ask a close colleague for feedback.  
 
Finally, r emember to review the Dale Carnegie leadership principles for 
winning friends and influencing people. Remembering to apply these 30 
best practices is guaranteed to improve your ability to facilitate change 
in any organization.  
 
 
 