 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Develop Customer Centricity with CRM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for adopting a 
customer -centric business strategy. Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) is a top priority for mid -sized enterprises; leverage it effectively 
to differentiate your firm.  
 
Read this  brief 13 -page report to:  
 
 
 Understand the Definition of CRM  
 Develop a Return on Investment Strategy  
 Identify Implementation Costs & Benefits  
 Perform a Cost/Benefit or ROI Calculation  
 Differentiate CRM System Architectures  
 Learn CRM Features & Functi onality  
 Build a Business Case & Project Charter for CRM  
 Identify Risks & Key Success Factors  
 Provide Implementation Best Practices  
 
 
Read this report to learn how to make customer relationship 
management work for your organization.  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Introduction         3  
 
CRM Definition         4  
 
Return on Investment Strategy       4  
 
Implementation Costs        5  
 
Implementation Benefits        6  
 
CRM System Architectures       7  
 
CRM Features &  Functionality       8  
 
Risks & Key Success Factors       9  
 
Implementation Best Practices       11  
 
Conclusion          12 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Introduction    
 
 
 
 
Contrary to popular belief, Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is 
not a system, or a technology, or a simple application. CRM is a holistic 
strategy that places customers at the center of all business operations. 
Some call this customer -centricity; others coin this approach as listening 
to the “voice of the customer.”  
  
Regard less of semantics, CRM is the integration of people, processes, 
and technology, which allow a company to leverage its information 
assets to identify, attract, and retain profitable customers. CRM 
applications should not be viewed as the Holy Grail that wil l fix all your 
business challenges; they are simply facilitators.  
  
Effectively implementing a customer -focused business strategy requires 
a cultural shift that converts the focus from products to customer needs. 
Is your product management process support ed by empirical market 
research data? Do you ever stop to consider what the lifetime value of a 
customer is to your organization?  
  
Rather than heavily promoting products to create perceived needs, 
consider working collaboratively with customers to really  understand 
how you can help them. Advancements in customer self -service & 
support technologies are making it much more convenient for customers 
to help themselves, while simultaneously reducing costs.  
  
With the rise of software -as-a-service (SAAS), or “ on-demand” 
applications, which are hosted by the vendor and available over the 
internet, mid -sized organizations are taking advantage of the low start -
up costs, and rapid deployments.  
  
In a perfect world, your company would have the budget and resources 
to fully integrate CRM with ERP and/or financial systems, before the first 
user acceptance tests. Realistically, you will find more success by 
starting with a simple sales force automation (SFA), marketing 
automation, or customer service module. Eventually , you can add more 
functionality to your CRM platform, and perform back -end integrations, 
but to mitigate risks we recommend a structured approach.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Return on Investment Strategy  CRM Definition   
 
   
 
 
Info-Tech Research Group defines CRM as: “a term that encompasses 
how an organization manages its interactions with its customers. The 
end goal is to eliminate disparate departmental information systems, 
and have a 360 -degree profile of each customer…in order to hone and 
personalize each customer interaction in the future. CRM allows 
companies to make more meaningful contact with their customers, 
giving the customer access to the products and information they need 
when they need it.”  
Source : Info-Tech Research Group  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Developing a return on investment strategy is essential for determining 
initial & ongoing costs, and estimating returns or benefits from 
deploying a CRM system. The simplest method for demonstrating ROI is 
to ask each stakeholder for a key performance indicator (KPI) that they 
are looking to improve as a result of the project.  
  
Customers may want to reduce support ticket resolution time; Sales 
may have an eye on increasing win -rates; Marketing will likely want to 
reduce acquisiti on cost per customer; and Senior Management should be 
interested in benchmarking and improving the average Customer 
Lifetime Value (CLV) of your client base.  
  
When building your business case for the CRM implementation, it is 
important to clearly communi cate the up -front & ongoing support costs. 
These costs be amortized over 3 -5 years and be compared to the 
benefits derived in each functional department.  
  
Cost reductions for sales, marketing, and support, are the first areas to 
analyze when determining long-term return on investment. Increased 
revenues are hard to match directly to CRM initiatives, but can generally 
be expected. This section will help you demonstrate the impact that 
investing in CRM can have on your business.  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Implementation Costs   
 
   
 
 
What are the key implementation costs to consider?    
  
 
1. Hardware  - if you select “client -server” architecture, you will 
likely need to purchase a dedicated server.  
 
2. Software Licensing  - hosted CRM systems vary in cost from 
$20-100/user/month, depend ing on which edition is needed. If 
your organization has complex requirements, expect to spend 
$65-100/user/month.  
 
3. Implementation Consulting & Training  - business process 
workshops (5 -15K); system design &  construction (10 -20K); 
data migration (5 -15K); and user training (5 -10K) all need to be 
considered. These ranges are all estimates, based on client 
consulting projects .  
 
4. Support & Maintenance  - you will require a CRM Administrator 
to manage your system internally, or you may prefer to 
outsource the support function. Either way, it would be wise to 
budget 20 -40K/year for user support.  
  
5. Customization  - if extensive customization is required, be sure 
to add this cost to your ROI calculation. Given the nature of 
customization, it is difficult to provide an estimate without first 
understanding business requirements.  
 
6. Back -end Integration  - working with a systems integrator to 
perform a back -end or ERP integration can be expensive initially, 
but will provide a longer -term payback from process automation 
and streamlining. There are many “connectors” that have been 
specifically designed to integrate CRM systems with other 
software packages. Add middle -ware to your ROI.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Implementation Benefits   
 
 
 
 
Develop a CRM Project Charter  and CRM Business Case  with an 
accompanying  CRM Readiness Assessment  to internally communicate 
the cost/benefit of this project. Following are key benefits:    
  
1. Increased Revenue  - most organizations report an increase in 
annual sales revenue of between 5 -15% per sales representative 
following a successful CRM implementation. When completing 
your ROI, consider how much time will be saved due to 
streamlined processes, and how that equates to more time for 
selling.  
 
2. Boosted Margins  - knowing your customers implicitly reduces 
the need to discount offerings, helps identify new ways to add 
value to your products, and reduces the overhead required to 
cement new business.  
 
3. Higher Conver sion Rates  - an increase of 3 -5% in sales 
conversion rates can be expected, especially if you add an e -
commerce module to your system. Having a better 
understanding of your sales cycle will facilitate “no -bidding” on 
less profitable or low -probability deal s.  
 
4. Improved Customer Satisfaction  - as your organization 
becomes more customer -centric, satisfaction ratings can be 
expected to improve. If you don’t have a satisfaction survey  
process, strongly consider developing one.  
 
5. Reduced Sales, Marketing, & Support Costs  - a decrease of 
5-10% is reasonable for sales, marketing, & support 
administration costs. As you become more proficient with 
knowing your customers, se gmentation and more highly targeted 
marketing occurs, saving time and money.  
 
6. Informed Product Management  - placing customers at the 
center of the product management process will certainly provide 
the information needed to make better product management 
decisions. Strikingly, many companies are not leveraging focus 
groups, or customer advisory panels. Strongly consider doing so.  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
CRM System Architectures   
 
 
 
 
There are two major types of CRM system: in -house or hosted. Hosted 
software, or “on -demand” as it is often called, is delivered via the 
Internet. Examples of common hosted software systems include Google, 
Hotmail, & Travelocity.com.  
  
Demand Metric recom mends hosted CRM systems for most mid -sized 
enterprises, unless an existing ERP system with a built -in CRM module is 
available. Following are a few of the reasons why. To learn more, read 
our “ Evaluating Hosted CRM ” research note, which contains a brief 
profile of 6 leading hosted CRM vendors.  
 
 
Hosted CRM System Architecture Benefits:    
  
 Monthly Subscription -Based Pricing  – most hosted CRM 
systems provide a very attractive subscription -based pricing 
model. Ranging between $20 -$125/user/month, these systems 
are affordable for mid -sized enterprises.  
 
 Minimal I/T Resources Required  – organizations that have 
minimal I/T resou rces find exceptional value from the hosted 
model, as system users and administrators can have little or no 
prior technology experience.  
 
 Very Quick Implementation  – most deployments can be 
implemented within a few weeks. When compared to in -house 
deploym ents of 6 -18 months, the hosted model becomes a much 
more viable option.  
 
 High Availability  – hosted CRM Application Service Providers 
(ASP) deliver hosted systems with Service Level Agreements, 
which guarantee availability. Although these systems have be en 
known to go down from time -to-time, there is a better chance 
that your in -house system would be less reliable.   
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
CRM Features & Functionality   
 
 
 
What is available and what should I look for in a system?    
  
 Contact & Account Management  - tracking of activity history, 
key contacts, customer profiles, sales cycle history, current and 
future opportunities.  
 
 Sales Force  Automation  - account & contact management, 
opportunity management, sales pipeline forecasting.  
 
 Field Sales Support  - data uploading & order entry via mobile 
devices such as blackberries. Retrieving collateral, proposals, or 
other documents.  
 
 Simple User -Friendly Interface  - as adoption rates are one of 
your chief concerns, having a very easy -to-use system is 
essential for CRM success.  
 
 Security: Role Based Rights & Access  - in the age of 
Sarbanes -Oxley, it is critical that your system has inherent role -
based security sett ings. Ensure that only the right people have 
access to sensitive information.  
 
 Sales Management & Reporting  - look for forecasting, sales 
metrics, sales cycle analysis across teams, and other sales 
reporting features.  
 
 Marketing Management & Automation  - email marketing, 
campaign planning, campaign ROI analysis, customer 
segmentation, integration with web analytics, collateral content 
management, real -time messaging, lead capturing etc.  
 
 Customer Support & Self -Service  - incident management, 
tracking, and assignment, web -based order tracking & self -
service, resource library, warranty, SLA, and contract 
management.  
 
 Partner Relationship Management  - visibility into channel 
partner pipeline, partner recruiting, partner opportunity 
management, workflow, a nalytics.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
Risks and Key Success Factors   E-Commerce Features  - shopping cart & checkout, online order 
entry, request for proposal (RFP), request for information (RFI), 
email order confirmation.  
 
 Contract Management  - ability to create, manage, update, and 
renew contracts. Service Level Agreement (SLA)  creation & 
automated monitoring.  
 
 Quote Generation  - integration of quote generation 
applications, or inherent quote building capabilities.  
 
 Process Automat ion Technology  - lead & opportunity 
assignment and transferring, activity management, calendaring, 
HTML email, channel management, collateral delivery, campaign 
execution, help -ticket resolution, contract monitoring.  
 
 Scalable & Flexible Architecture  - it should be relatively 
straightforward to integrate new applications to expand the scope 
of your CRM system. Salesforce.com.s API called AppExchange 
houses over 500 applications that are ready to be tested and 
deployed very quickly. Be sure you system is sc alable.  
 
 Dashboards  - determine if your potential system will require 
visual dashboards that synthesize metrics to provide predictive 
insight. Different views (Senior Management, Sales Management, 
Marketing Management, Customer -Service Management) should 
be available for different users.  
 
 ERP Integration  - although it is not recommended that you 
complete a full ERP or back -end integration right away, knowing 
that the project is feasible is essential to making the right 
decision on a CRM platform.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Read our research note: “ Are you Prepared for CRM ” to conduct a 
CRM Readiness Assessment , which will identify your current 
capabilities and areas of weakness that need to be rectified to ensure a 
smooth deployment.  
  
 Senior M anagement Commitment  - your executives must 
understand that CRM is a complex, long -term initiative. They  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 10 
need to commit to providing the required budget, resources, and 
potentially upgrade backend I/T systems. Additionally, senior 
management must enforce C RM adoption or risk project failure.  
 
 Customer -Centricity  - is your business driven by customer 
needs? Have you profiled an ideal customer and communicated 
that profile across departments? Do customers typically deal with 
more than one representative? Are  you customer -centric?  
 
 User -Driven Project Management  - working with stakeholders 
from the beginning is essential for nailing business requirements 
and starting the adoption process on the right path. Engage a 
project team & sponsor.  
 
 Alignment with Goa ls & Objectives  - CRM must be on your 
strategic plan for organizational development priorities. Each 
department needs to document their requirements for the 
system, and indicate how the functionality will help them achieve 
current/future goals.  
 
 Process M aturity & Documentation  - defined, repeatable, and 
measurable processes need to be documented for Sales, 
Marketing, Customer Service, Billing, and Order Management.  
 
 Data Management & Accuracy  - customer and product 
information needs to be accurate. Have your system 
administrator diligently check data accuracy, re -train users when 
errors occur, and monitor data quality, to ensure your reporting 
is reliable.  
 
 Customization & Integration  – don’t make the mistake of 
trying to build the perfect system before it ever gets released. 
Most CRM projects that fail are the result of too much up -front 
integration. Ensure you customize your system to align to your 
processes & workflows, but don’t be afraid t o take a phased 
approach to back -end integrations.  
 
 System Training & Support  - appropriate resources need to be 
allocated for training system users and administrators. Consider 
creating a position for a Director of Sales Support  and/or a 
CRM Administrator  who can manage the CRM program, 
monitor adoption rates, and provide application support.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 11 
Implementation Best Practices   
 
 
 
 
1. Build the Business Case  - your CRM Business Case  needs t o 
address  the following key questions:  
 
 How does the business want to work with customers?  
 What business process re -engineering needs to be done?  
 How can technology be used to automate processes?  
 What are the key success factors & risks involved?  
 How pr epared is the organization for a CRM strategy?  
 What does the cost/benefit and long -term ROI look like?  
 Do we have executive sponsorship to make this work?  
 What impact will “customer -centricity” have on results?  
 Which problems can we solve by implementi ng CRM?  
 
2. Plan the Plan  - Use a Project Charter  to: identify an executive 
sponsor and use a stakeholder analysis matrix  to determine buy -
in; allocate a project manager; assemble a project team  & clarify 
roles; develop a project budget, determine timelines, define 
project scope; outline deliverables; identify milestones; provide 
cost/benefit analysis.  
 
3. Evaluate Business Processes  - document your current 
workflo ws and business processes; use maps if required. Next, 
isolate problem areas, bottlenecks, or areas that could be 
streamlined. Identify which process improvements will have the 
most financial impact and prioritize enhancements accordingly. 
Create a busines s impact report to document high -level 
recommendations and drive the requirements gathering phase 
forward. Consider using an expert consultant who can pull 
together stakeholders and facilitate a workshop.  
 
4. Identify Needs & Requirements  - use a CRM System RFP 
Template  to define your business requirements, before going to 
look at solutions. Most CRM projects that fail are the result of  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 12 
poorly defined requirements. P rioritize requirements into three 
categories: must have, nice to have, and do not apply.  
 
5. Research Potential Solutions  - there are numerous vendor 
reviews conducted by firms like Gartner Group , CRM Magazine, 
and Forrester. Demand Metric’s research note “ Evaluating 
Hosted CRM ” has a short -list of 6 key vendors that are working 
well for other mid -sized enterprises.  
 
6. Short Li st Candidates  - based on your research of potential 
solutions, make a short -list of 3 -4 key candidates who can 
deliver the functionality you require.  
 
7. Conduct Vendor Evaluations  - invite your candidates in but 
don’t accept a “dog & pony” show. Instead, us e your RFP to set 
the agenda and control the evaluation by having your key 
questions prepared in advance. Don’t forget to analyze the 
stability of the vendor. Are they a threat to be bought out? What 
is their current market share and position? What is thei r 
competitive advantage for customers in your industry? Use our 
CRM Vendor Evaluation  to help you with this process.  
 
8. Select the Right System  - the final stage o f the selection 
process involves meeting with all the key stakeholders to build 
consensus on which system to purchase. Negotiate near the end 
of the month or quarter to get the best deal on your licensing 
contract.  
 
9. Partner with a CRM Expert  - read Demand  Metric’ s research 
note, “ CRM Consulting Partners Revealed ” to understand 
their role in the CRM value chain, and use our CRM Consulting 
RFP Template  to determine your requirements from 
implementation, training, and support perspectives.    
 
10. Take a Phased Approach  - start with a modular  approach, 
perhaps with sales force automation, customer support, or 
marketing management. Once you have built momentum and 
bolstered adoption rates, consider performing back -end 
integrations with ERP, financial, or other reporting applications. 
Salespeopl e love to see how much commission they have earned!  
 
11. Roll-out & Train Users  - consider rolling out to a pilot group of 
users before conducting a wide -sweeping adoption campaign. 
This will help you develop “power users” who really understand 
how to use the  system and can help relieve some of the burden 
on your helpdesk in the first few months. Provide scenario -based  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 13 
Conclusion  training sessions to ensure each user understands how to use the 
system to complete their daily tasks and activities.  
 
12. Provide Support & Monit or Adoption  - keep tabs on user 
adoption rates and login history. Consider creating a Sales 
Growth Team  to share best practices and make CRM a 
successful endeavor. Identify new areas to expand the scope of 
your CRM system, and build a solid platform with customers as 
the foundation.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remember that CRM is not a technology; it is a business strategy that 
puts customers at the focal point of your business. People and processes 
are what will enable technology to streamline and automate workflows.  
  
Before you commit to CRM, review your bu siness goals & objectives, 
assess your preparedness, consider the return on investment, and 
analyze your current business processes. Once senior management has 
agreed to go down the CRM path, understand the marketplace, 
determine your requirements, evaluat e solutions, and find a consulting 
partner that can take your business to the next level.  
  
Product -centric companies will not exist in 20 more years. A global 
marketplace has shifted the balance of power from sel lers to buyers. 
Organizations that  plan to  survive and capitalize on this new business 
climate must adopt a customer -centric business strategy, or risk losing 
market share to those companies who excel at customer relationship 
management.  
 