Digital Marketing jargon buster
Analytics or Web Analytics Tools – The analysis of data 
generated by people’s activity on websites or mobile apps, for 
the purpose of discovering ways to improve websites and marketing campaigns.E.g. “I’m using web analytics tools to come up with ideas to redesign my website.”
App (Application) – A program designed to run on smart-
phones, tablets and other mobile devices.
E.g. “My house needs painting, so I used a local app to ﬁnd a reputable service near me.”
Banner Ad – A form of advert found on web pages and mobile 
applications, usually in image format.E.g. “I’m using banner ads to bring new customers to my website.”
Blog – A regularly updated website written by an individual, 
typically in a conversational style, and focused on a speciﬁc 
subject.
Browser – A computer program used to navigate the Internet 
on computers, tablets and smartphones. Examples include Chrome, Firefox, Internet Explorer and Safari.E.g. “I’m not sure why my website looks different depending on the browser a person is using.”
Clickthrough Rate (CTR) – The number of times people click 
on an item of interest, like an advert, in comparison to the number of times users are exposed to that item.E.g. “My clickthrough rate on ads about external painting is 2%, but my CTR on ads about indoor murals is less than 1%.” 
Content – The digital material available to users, via text, 
video, audio, images, etc.E.g. “I’m adding more image and video content to my site, so it’ll be more engaging.”
Conversion or Goal – The action you want visitors to perform.  
Examples include ecommerce purchases, form submissions, 
phone calls, and video views.E.g. “My main goal is for people to book a consultation on my website, but signing up for my email newsletter would also be a conversion.”
Conversion Optimization – The process of increasing the 
percentage of visitors who complete your goals.
E.g. “Once I add a new line of faux ﬁnishes to my website, I’m going to start focusing on conversion optimization.”
Conversion Rate – The ratio of conversions to visits, often 
used to measure digital performance.E.g. “I’m not sure why, but my conversion rate on external painting is very low for male visitors.”Cost-per-click – The amount of money required to produce a 
single click on a digital advertisement.E.g. “Cost-per-click prices seem to be higher during weekends, so I’m only running my campaigns during the week.”
Crawler or Spider – A program designed to systematically 
browse content on the Internet and collect information about it to help searchers ﬁnd what they’re looking for.E.g. “I’m scared of spiders, but not the ones that help my website appear in search engines.”
Desktop – A non-mobile device like a personal computer or 
laptop computer.E.g. “I prefer to use a desktop computer at home, but when I travel I use my tablet.”
E-commerce – The sale of products and services online.Email Marketing – The process of using email messages to 
share information and promote products and services.Homepage – The introductory or “main” page of a website.
E.g. “On my homepage, visitors can see examples of my most 
beautifully painted houses.”
HTML – Hypertext Markup Language. A language used by 
web developers to create websites.E.g. “My website was written using HTML.”
Impressions – The number of times an advert is displayed.
E.g. “My new marketing campaign for kitchen painting has received thousands of impressions, but I’m not sure if I’ve booked any sales yet.”
Index – A searchable catalogue of web pages and digital 
content used by a search engine to provide relevant results.
E.g. “Before my site appeared in the search engine’s index, people couldn’t ﬁnd my website when they searched for foyer murals.”
Keyword – A word or a phrase typed into a search engine, 
which businesses can target as part of their advertising campaigns.
Digital Marketing jargon buster
Landing Page – The ﬁrst page on a website that a person 
usually sees—not necessarily the home page of that website.
E.g. “I’m adding a coupon to my landing page so that my website visitors will be encouraged to buy.”
Link – A text or image that provides a link from one web page 
or website to another.E.g. “When a major home decor blog linked to my website, I got a lot more visitors.”
Mobile Device – A portable device, such as a smartphone or 
tablet, capable of connecting to the Internet and running applications.E.g. “Grandma got a tablet and a smartphone for her birthday, so now she’s using mobile devices just like her grandkids.”
Natural Listings or Organic Listings – Results from a search 
engine that are not paid adverts.
E.g. “The higher my website ranks in a search engine’s natural listings, the more website trafﬁc I’ll get.”
Paid Listings – Advertisements that appear on search engines 
results pages.E.g. “I’m thinking about paying to have my website appear in the paid listings, so that I can bring more customers to my website.”
Pay-Per-Click (PPC) – An advertising system in which 
advertisers pay for users to click on their advertisements.E.g. “I’m going to use pay-per-click adverts to promote my new faux ﬁnishes.”
Query or Search Term – The keyword or phrase a user types 
into a search engine in order to ﬁnd what they’re looking for.
E.g. “When people use the search term ‘hairdresser’ they might be looking for tips on how to do it themselves or a service to do it for them.”
Ranking – A listing’s position on a search engine results page.
E.g. “With a lot of work, I’m hoping to get my website to the #1 
ranking on search engines.”
Search Engine – A tool that indexes and returns relevant 
digital content in response to users’ keywords. Popular 
Internet search engines include Google, Bing, Yahoo, DuckDuckGo, Baidu, Yandex and more.E.g. “I use search engines to look for trends in home decor.”
Search Engine Optimization (SEO) – The practice of making 
changes to web pages, content, and the promotion of that 
content to improve visibility in the organic—or unpaid—search engine results.E.g. “Investing in SEO helped my website get a higher ranking in search engine results.”Search Engine Marketing (SEM) – A form of advertising that 
allows you to bid for your advertisement to show along with search results for keywords that people are typing in.  This lets businesses be seen by people at the very moment they’re searching for the things a business offers.E.g. “SEO is a long process, but using SEM helped me get a lot more website trafﬁc really quickly.”
Search Engine Results Page (SERP) – A list of results appear-
ing in a search engine in response to a user’s search query.
E.g. “After I searched for ‘buy high-gloss paint in bulk’ I noticed that the SERP had both natural listings and paid listings.”
Session or Visit – A group of interactions that take place on 
your website within a given time frame. For example a single 
session can contain multiple page views and e-commerce transactions.E.g. “My website got 2,000 visits last month, but what I really care about is whether those visits resulted in sales.”
Social Media – Content such as text, images, or videos, 
created by individuals and shared across the Internet.
E.g. “Social media changes all the time, so I hired my niece to help me create a social media strategy.”
Social Network – A community of individuals creating and 
sharing content.
E.g. “Social networks could be a good place for me to show-case my beautiful foyer murals and maybe get new customers.”
Trafﬁc Acquisition – The process of attracting visitors - often 
referred to as trafﬁc - to websites, mobile apps and other 
digital assets.E.g. “My acquisition strategy focuses on targeting people who have recently bought old houses.”
Unique Visitor – A single visitor to a website during a speciﬁc 
period of time.E.g. “No matter how many times Uncle Bob visits my website, he’s still just one unique visitor.”
URL or Uniform Resource Locator – The unique address of a 
page or piece of digital content on the Internet.E.g. “Aunt Sue, you can access my website by typing the URL into your browser.”