Leveraging Impression Tracking in Google Analytics to 
Understand the Full Value of Display Campaigns 
Why  activate? 
Every customer journey is different — a customer may see 
your display or video ads, receive an email, and then click 
through to your site from a search ad or organic search 
listing. 
Often, viewing display ads can attract your clients’ interest 
in your product and brand even if no click occurs . 
Traditionally, measurement technology separated out 
impressions from clicks, but this separation missed out on 
valuable data on the impact of display advertising . 
Thanks to our integration with the Google Display Network 
(GDN), Google Analytics can now show display 
impressions in the path to conversion and give a more 
complete view of the customer journey. 
Read the AdWords Blogpost about GDN 
Impression Reporting in GA - link goo.gl/CU54sA 
of customer journeys 
involve 
+1 channel of 
interaction 
38% 
Turning complex online user behavior into marketing insights: 
Source: Google Analytics - Conversions - Multi-Channel Funnels - Overview 
How to activate? 
Ask your Google contact to whitelist your Analytics account for the Beta with UA-code. Once you're whitelisted, activate: 
1Enable Advertiser Features [ link goo.gl/XKvW1e ]
Google Analytics Admin > Property > Tracking Info > Data 
Collection > Advertising Reporting Features 
Navigate to ‘AdWords linking’ in Admin, click the 
relevant link group and enable 'Additional Data' 
Property / AdWords Linking / Link Group Name / Additional Data 2
Leveraging Impression Tracking in Google Analytics to 
Understand the Full Value of Display Campaigns 
INSIGHTS - Visualize the presence of Display Campaigns 
in Conversion Paths 
Navigate to Conversions > Multi-Channel Funnels > Top Conversion Paths 
See the total number 
of  impression- 
assisted conversions 
& revenue 
1
Display 
Click 
Display Impression/ 
Rich Media Key
Display 
Impression 
- Impression of a display  image ads  
(does not include Smart Display 
Campaigns) 
- Impression of (1) responsive 
display ad , or 
(2) Rich Media ad  (Lightbox ad) 
Use advanced filters to: 
 2
2.1 Total volume of conversions / revenue inﬂuenced  by display clicks & 
impressions 
2.2 Total volume of conversions / revenue that was initiated by display 
clicks & impressions (aka, display-created demand ) 
2.3 Visualize how speciﬁc display campaigns  inﬂuenced conversions 
from other channels 
(direct) / (none) 
3_Intent Audiences 
1_Smart Display 
(direct) / (none) 
2.1Conversion paths containing a Display interaction 
2.3Campaign / Channel view of conversion paths 
3.1. Remove credit from Direct. Choose MCF Channel 
Grouping, select Direct, apply credit within “0” to “0.5” 
range 
Why? Direct conversions do not happen on their own : other 
marketing activities create demand & awareness of your business. 
However, if a Direct conversion cannot be attributed back to an 
online marketing activity, it will get full credit. Leveraging Impression Tracking in Google Analytics to 
Understand the Full Value of Display Campaigns 
Congratulations!  Tracking impressions of display campaigns is now available for you in Google Analytics. Now it's time to 
set up reporting that accurately reﬂect the role your advertising channels played in your business growth. 
3Set up a Full Value Custom Attribution Model 
Conversions > Attribution > Model Comparison Tool > Select model > Create new custom model 
Important! Once impression tracking is enabled, Attribution models in Model Comparison Tool will include impressions along with clicks .
Pick Data-Driven model if available. If not: 
Position Based  if your business is Growth-Oriented  (highest credit to 
channels creating demand AND driving ﬁnal conversions) 
Time Decay  if your business has a Conservative strategy (more credit to 
interactions closer in time to the ﬁnal conversion) 
    
Create a Custom Attribution model [How To goo.gl/WHULQb ]
As baseline model, pick one in line with your business goals 
[goo.gl/DR4s4D ]
A
Switch ﬁeld "Adjust credit for impressions"  ON to adjust 
credit for impressions: 
When GDN Impressions beta is activated, all impressions are included 
into attribution models at 100% credit along with clicks. We recommend 
the following adjustments: 
B
* 24 hours is the industry standard; adjust as needed 
* 0% credit to impressions >24 hours ago is a conservative approach; adjust as needed 
If impressions occurred more than 24* hours ago: 0%* credit compared to a 
click 
If impressions occurred less than 24 hours ago:  100% credit compared to a 
click "Apply custom credit rules" ON to apply viewability 
standards and exclude Direct channel 
C
3.1 
3.2 
3.2. Remove impressions that do not align with Google  
viewability standards .
a) Add a ﬁlter "Above the Fold", select "No" AND 
b) Add a ﬁlter "Interaction Type", selection "Impression" 
c) Apply credit of “0” 
This is a suggested setup of the custom model. Please adjust the credit for impressions as well as choose an attribution 
model as best suited to your business goals. Leveraging Impression Tracking in Google Analytics to 
Understand the Full Value of Display Campaigns 
INSIGHTS - based on Custom Attribution Model 
Once the Custom Attribution Model is set up:  
● Switch baseline model for comparison to Last Non-Direct Click. It's closest 
to reporting in the Google Ads account. 
● Switch to the right Dimension for analysis. By default, " Display " as a 
channel grouping contains all of display advertising. In order to isolate the 
results of Google Display, switch Primary Dimension to Source / Medium  
and analyze " google / display " 
1
2
Toggle between metrics: Conversions & CPA , 
or Conversion Value & ROAS 
 3.1
How to get to the Campaign-level view: 
- Click on " Display " channel in the list of channels to narrow down analysis to 
display campaigns. 
- Change Type from "All" to "AdWords"  - AdWords campaigns will be populated 
in the table, instead of channel-level view. 
4
What actions can I undertake? 
Can I import results of the Full Value model into 
Google Ads? 
No. Currently results of this model can only be 
viewed in Google Analytics, Model Comparison Tool. 
Does it mean I cannot leverage these results in 
bidding in display campaigns? 
Not quite . Here are a few options you can leverage: 
a. If you're also tracking conversions with a 
Google Ads conversion tracking pixel, you 
will see VTC in the Google Ads account. 
Consider Bidding to View-Through 
Conversions  (BETA )
b. Consider raising the tCPA  (lowering 
tROAS) in the Google Ads account, in order 
to boost the volume of conversions 
c. You can consider reallocating budgets if 
you see that certain campaigns / channels 
are driving a signiﬁcantly stronger or poorer 
results, disproportionate to the amount 
invested into them 
(e.g., consider what is the difference between % of 
conversions / conversion value the campaign is 
driving vs. % of spend of this campaign) 
Remember:  Results of Display campaigns are 
currently reported & optimized in Google Ads under 
Last-Click, click-only models only (even if model is 
changed to non-last click for Search). Therefore, the 
result of mid- & upper-funnel display reported by 
default is highly conservative and not reﬂective of its 
true value. 
