FAIRER ECONOMIES
Emerging markets must prepare for
the g ener ative AI revolution. Here's
why
Aug 8, 2023
Listen to the article 6 min listen
Generative AI has the power to revolutionize economies and people's daily lives.
Image: Getty Images/iStockphoto
Alejo Czerwonko
Chief Investment Officer, Emerging Markets, Americas, UBS AG
Generative AI tools like ChatGPT offer great potential for emerging markets, including
raising living standards and shortening their path towards achieving sustainable
development.
Not only can they lower barriers to entry and operating costs, they can also enhance
transparency of government and reduce corruption.
However, the benefits of generative AI will not materialize automatically and need public-
private cooperation to leverage its full potential.
The power of, and the range of opportunities presented by, generative artificial
intelligence (AI) tools such as ChatGPT become evident to a user after just a few
minutes of interacting with them.
For developing countries, tools such as these hold the promise of raising living
standards and shortening their economic path toward achieving sustainable
development goals through two main channels:
Empowered private sector initiatives: Generative AI tools can drastically lower barriers to
entry and operating costs for entrepreneurs, allowing them to create innovative and
scalable business models that can leapfrog traditional approaches. Some concrete
applications with immediate potential include access to credit and financial services for a
much broader part of the population, improved education outcomes through personalized
learning, optimized medical care thanks to early disease detection and virtual care, and
better crop yields via land use optimization, among many others.
Enhanced provision of public goods and services: The technology can be instrumental in
increasing transparency of government, improving control of corruption, overcoming
infrastructure limitations, deploying environmental conservation tools, instituting early
warning systems to manage natural disasters, and engaging with citizens.
These opportunities, however, will not materialize automatically. Harnessing the
power of generative AI requires active public-private cooperation. Without public
sector involvement, countries will lack the necessary amount of investment in
both human and physical capital.
Emerging markets often lack broadband
needed for generative AI
At this time, for example, most of the population in many developing countries do
not have the broad-based access to high-speed internet that advanced generative
AI applications require.
Broadband subscriptions per 100 people in countries such as India, Indonesia, the
Philippines, South Africa, and Peru are only a small fraction of that in developed
countries, according to the World Bank. A similar conclusion can be reached when
looking at data on the availability of 5G network architectures or data centres.
Emerging markets trail in key AI readiness indicators. Image: World Bank, Oxford Insights, UBS, as of July
2023
Yet in recent conversations with policy-makers from various emerging markets, I
have perceived no real sense of urgency and priority on these topics.
Questions about what concrete initiatives they are planning to adopt to take
advantage of the power of generative AI for the benefit of their country are
typically met with answers that either are generic – with plans that are hard to
distinguish from those applied to adopt other technological breakthroughs, for
example – or suggest a need for a fuller understanding and appreciation of the
present and future capabilities of the technology.
Similarly, without a dynamic private sector ecosystem, countries will lack the
ability to bring the benefits of generative AI to market – i.e., the spectrum of end-
users including individuals, businesses and government agencies and institutions
– in a timely matter.
In this regard, there is a lot of work to be done. The technology sector in many
emerging markets today scores poorly in terms of maturity and innovation
capacity, according to Oxford Insights’ latest Government AI Readiness Index.
AI preparedness needs to be a top priority in
developing countries
All these present ample opportunities for development. But first, improving AI
preparedness needs to come to the top of policy priorities in emerging markets.
A lack of immediate public-private cooperation would not only represent a failure
to take advantage of the promise of the technology, but also translate into
increased exposure to multiple related risks, which include:
Growing technological divide: A larger gap between those with knowledge of and access
to advanced generative AI tools and those without is likely to trigger increased income and
wealth inequality not only across countries, but also within countries, which in turn could
lead to more severe social tensions and conflict.
Job market disruptions: There are widespread concerns that generative AI may reduce the
value of certain skills, even as some new ones emerge as highly valuable. Customer service
– to name one area in which many emerging markets have benefited through offshore
outsourcing by developed countries – is at risk.
Diminished public trust and increasing political instability: Worries about false
information and fake news are at all-time highs in many emerging markets, according to
the latest Edelman Trust Barometer report. Generative AI may exacerbate these threats,
making the lines between real and computer-generated content even blurrier. No healthy
society can function without trust, and democratic systems seem most at risk of
disruption.
Many developed markets are already recognizing the potential and the risks of
generative AI, with their governments actively exploring ways to make the
technology work for both business and society. The stakes cannot be higher. The
time for emerging markets to prepare for the AI revolution is now.
License and Republishing
World Economic Forum articles may be republished in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public License, and in accordance with our
Terms of Use.
The views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and not the World Economic Forum.
Stay up to date:
Fairer Economies
Related topics:
Share:Follow
Fairer Economies Artificial Intelligence Generative Artificial Intelligence
THE BIG PICTURE
Explore and monitor how Artificial Intelligence is affecting
economies, industries and global issues
CROWDSOURCE INNOVATION
Get involved with our crowdsourced digital platform to deliver
impact at scale
GLOBAL AGENDA
The Agenda Weekly
A weekly update of the most important issues
driving the global agenda
You can unsubscribe at any time using the link in our emails. For more details, review our privacy policy.
Subscribe today
More on Fairer EconomiesSEE ALL
The 4 insidious phrases prevent the gender gap in leadership from closing
Angelique Krembs
November 21, 2023
How 'sponsors' can achieve gender parity in leadership
Angelique Krembs
November202023
This stubborn barrier is widening the gap for women in leadership
Angelique Krembs
November 18, 2023
Speaking Gen Z: How banks can attract young customers
Bob Wigley and Rupal Kantaria
November 17, 2023
Bhutan could prosper as a developed country with this trade pathway
Karma Dorji and Ratnakar Adhikari
November 14, 2023
Wh y the impact economy is a top priority for Brazil
Rodrigo Sobral Rollemberg, Gisela Maria Bernardes Solymos, Marcel Fukayama and Marisol Argueta de Barillas
November 10, 2023
ABOUT US
Our Mission
Our Impact
Leadership and Governance
Our Partners
Sustainability
History
Careers
Contact Us
EVENTS
Events
Open Forum
MEDIA
Press
Subscribe to our press releases
Pictures
MORE FROM THE FORUM
Strategic Intelligence
UpLink
Global Shapers
Young Global Leaders
Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship
Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
New Champions
