 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Enabling Enterprise Change Management  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for maximizing 
opportunity and reducing risk for change initiatives.  
 
 
Use this brief 7 -page Best Practices Report to learn:  
 
 
 Definition of Change Management  
 
 Four Key Types of Organizational Ch ange  
 
 Requirements for Effecting Change  
 
 Gathering Buy -in from Key Stakeholders  
 
 Change Management Best Practices  
 
 Change Management Tools & Techniques  
 
 
 
Read this report to understand why many change management efforts 
fail, and to learn best practices for effective change.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Change Management Defined       3  
 
Four Key Types of Organizational Change     3  
 
Requirements for Effecting Change      4  
 
Gathering Buy -in from Key Stakeholders     5  
 
Change Management Best Practices      6  
 
Change Management Tools & Techniques     7 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Change Management  Defined  
Four Key Types of Organizational Change    
 
 
 
 
Organizational change provides the opportunity for  organizations to 
build more focused, disciplined, and mature businesses. This opportunity 
comes with significant financial risk if changes are not planned and 
managed proactively.  
  
Change management is primarily concerned with how to understand, 
engage, respond, and communicate with PEOPLE. A solid vision, senior 
management sponsorship, and having the right people in the right roles, 
are the key success factors for implementing a successful change 
management campaign.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
There are four key types of organizational change:  
  
1. Process Change  - these focus on how workflows are managed 
with an effort to streamline business processes to increase 
efficiencies, reduce costs, and improve quality. For example, 
changing accounting systems and processes.  
 
2. Structural Change  - these focus on changing or ganizational 
structures such as reporting relationships, mergers & 
acquisitions, and centralization initiatives. Normally, these 
changes are top -down and geared to improve the overall financial 
performance of a business.  
 
3. Cost Containment  - these changes a re focused on eliminating 
any costs that are not essential for operation. Typically, cost 
containment initiatives are the result of a tight economy for a 
particular industry or poor sales results.  
 
4. Cultural Change  - as organizations move from a product -centric 
business to a customer -centric enterprise, changes to 
organizational norms and attitudes must be made.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Requirements for Effecting Change   
  
 
 
 
Use our Change Management Readiness Assessment  to ensure you are 
prepared for change. Before embarking on a major change initiative, 
ensure your organization has  considered these key requirements:  
  
 
1. Senior Management Sponsorship  - it is essential that a senior 
leader who is capable of communicating the strategic vision for 
the change has accepted responsibility for the effort. This leader 
must have access to all critical stakeholders, and have solid 
project management skills. Use our Stakeholder Analysis Matrix  
to evaluate key stakeholders willingness to change.  
 
 
2. Educate d and Engaged Employees  - employees must: 
understand why the change needs to occur; be involved in the 
planning & implementation of the change; be capable of 
participating in the change effort; and help others adapt.  
 
 
3. Alignment of Business & Personal Objectives  - it is critical 
that you positively reinforce the change by aligning business 
objectives  with personal objectives for each employees, 
manager, and seni or executive. For example, link performance 
reviews  and bonus structures to metrics associated with the 
goals & objectives  of the new programs.  
 
 
Ensuring that your change effort is aligned with the overall business 
strategy, links directly to employee career objectives, and is managed 
by a senior sponsor, will provide a solid foundation for implementing 
successful programs. Use our Stakeholder Analysis Matrix  to evaluate 
key stakeholders willingness to change.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Gathering Buy -in From Key Stakeholders   
 
   
 
 
 
It is safe to assume that the majority of your staff will NOT be 
evangelists of the proposed change. In most cases, senior management 
view change as an opportunity for the organization and for themselves. 
Conversely, change is often seen as disruptive, unnecessary, and 
frightening for employees . 
  
 
Research indicates that less than 20% of your employees will 
immediately recognize the need and value of the change, 50% will be sit 
on the fence, and around 30% will not initially be supportive of the 
change.  
  
 
Similar to government politics, your g oal is to leverage the supportive 
20% to influence the 50% majority, while minimizing the influence of 
the 30% who are likely to never agree with the change.  
  
 
Following are a few tips from Cynthia Scott and Dennis Jaffe who are 
regarded as experts in the  change management field:  
  
 
1. Have a Good Reason for the Change  
2. Involve People in the Change  
3. Put a Respected Person in Charge of the Process  
4. Create Transition Management Teams  
5. Provide Training in New Values & Behavior  
6. Bring in Help from Outside if Necessary  
7. Establish Symbols of Change  
8. Acknowledge & Reward People  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Change Management Best Practices   
 
 
 
 
1. Establish the Need for Change  - build momentum and 
urgency for the change by examining market conditions and 
competitive forces. Identify risks, potential crises, and 
opportunities for adapting the organization to the situation. Use 
our Change Management Readiness Assessment  to 
examine  your organizations readiness  for change.  
 
2. Work from a Steering Committee  - create a cross -functional 
steering committee  that has the power to invoke the changes 
that need to be made. This inter -departmental team must quickly 
gel and check their egos at the door.  
 
3. Develop a Vision & Strategy  - use a project plan  to articulate 
how the change will be managed. Communicate the vision of the 
goal-state, and devise strategies to accomplish the desired 
outcomes and objectiv es. 
 
4. Reinforce the Change Vision  - use all channels to 
communicate the vision. Create signs, slogans, and team 
charters. Communicate updates on your intranet, via email, and 
during staff meetings on a regular basis.  
 
5. Empower your Employees  - clear any obst acles to achieving 
the vision; change structures or systems that obstruct the 
required change; encourage risk -taking and non -traditional 
ideas, activities, and actions.  
 
6. Generate Short -Term Wins  - plan and monitor visibl e 
improvements in performance (wins ). When small achievements 
are made, recognize your employees in front of their colleagues 
and peers.  
 
7. Consolidate Gains & Produce More Change  - use increased 
credibility from short -term wins to change all systems, policies, 
and structures that don’t fit wi th the transformational vision. 
Hire, promote, and develop people who are agents of positive 
change. Reinvigorate the change program with new projects, 
themes, and change agents.  
 
8. Anchor New Approaches in the Culture  - improve 
performance by adopting a mor e customer -centric, and  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Change Management Tools & Techniques  productivity -oriented behavior. Articulate connections between 
new behaviors and organizational success. Develop effective 
leadership and succession processes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use our Change Management  Planning Tool  to assess your 
organizations readiness for implementing a major change initiative. This 
tool will ensure you have a sufficiently powerful  sponsor, and the means 
to enable successful change programs. You should also use our Change 
Management Strategy Scorecard  to document change objectives,  
initiatives, measures, and targets, for the next 12 -18 months. A project 
portfolio  can also be helpful in documenting roll out for change 
initiatives.  
 
 
 
 