 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Engage Targets with Market Research  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for gaining 
insight from market research initiatives.  
 
 
Read this brief 9 -page report to learn:  
 
 
 Market Research Defined  
 
 Benefits of Market Research  
 
 Primary vs. Secondary Research  
 
 Common Ma rket Research Projects  
 
 Market Research Tools & Best Practices  
 
 
Read this report to learn how to leverage your information assets to 
support decision -making, identify connections between actions and 
outcomes, and listen to your customers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Market Research Defined        3  
 
Benefits of Market Research       3  
 
Primary vs. Secondary Research       4  
 
Common Market Research Projects      4  
 
Market Research Tools & Best Practices      6 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Market Research  Defined  
Benefits of Market Research    
 
 
 
 
Market research is the process of systematically gathering, recording, 
and analyzing data regarding customers, competitors, and market 
conditions, to help organizations make better business decisions about 
the development and marketing of new or existing p roducts and 
services.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Drive Customer -Centricity  - use our Customer -Centricity 
Checklist  to learn 12 proven strategies.  
 
 Identify Market Opportunities  - read our report: Market 
Segmentation, Targeting, & Positioning , to learn how to 
identify new opportunities.  
 
 Reduce Time -to-Market  - leveraging the “voice -of-the-
customer” streamlines the product development, testing, and 
marketing processes, increasing velocity.  
 
 Monitor Competitive  Advantages  - regular competitive 
analysis  ensures that your organization will not lose or fail to 
communicate key advantages.  
 
 Provide Decision -Making Insights  - making decisions without 
adequat e market intelligence can be disastrous. Base your 
decisions on facts, not gut instinct.  
 
 Better Allocation of Resources  - by analyzing which products, 
programs, channels, and markets are most lucrative, 
organizations can focus their precious resources on  profitable 
activities.  
 
 Increase Profitability & Growth  - having a solid 
understanding of market needs is critical for meeting and 
exceeding customer expectations, and leads to customer 
retention, increased profitability, and growth.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Primary vs. Secondary Research  
Common Market Research Projects   
 
  
 
 
 
There are two categories of market research: primary research and 
secondary research. Primary research involves the collection of data that 
does not currently exist or is unavailable to an organization. Secondary 
research involves the collection, analysis, and summarization of existing 
data derived from third -party research firms or other sources.  
 
Many organizations do not have the resources in -house to conduct 
effective primary research campaigns, and glean insights from full -
service research firms such as Gartne r, Inc., IDC, Forrester , Harris  
Interactive , AC Nielsen , Datamonitor , Dun and Bradstreet , 
Millward Brown , NPD Group , or TNS.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Following are a list of common market research projects designed to test 
or validate assumptions made by the business:  
  
 
 Market Sizing & Segmentation  - how large is our target 
market? How should we segment our market? What are our 
customer profiles? Use our Market Segmentation Tool  to 
analyze market sizing, market segments and customer profiles  
 
 
 Competitive Analysis  - who are our direct/indirect competitors? 
What products/services are eroding our market share? What 
messages are competitors sending? Who is growing quickly and 
needs to be watched?  
 
 
 Product Positioning  - how much price power do we h ave? 
Where do customers position us? What is our price elasticity of 
demand?  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
 Product Penetration  - what is our market share? Are we 
gaining or losing share of wallet? What geographies are not 
penetrated?  
 
 
 Brand Awareness & Preferences  - what brand attributes are 
most important? How aware is our market of our brand?  
 
 
 Consumer Behavior  - how do our customers use our products? 
What products are usually purchased together? How does 
placement affect sales?  
 
 
 Customer Analysis  - how many customers do we have? What 
customers are most profitable? What is our customer lifetime 
value?  
 
 
 Customer Satisfaction  - what is our retention rate? How does 
customer satisfaction affect profitability? Are we getting 
referrals?  
 
 
 Demand Foreca sting  - what were our previous sales by product 
line? What staffing will we need to deliver on sales? What is our 
sales forecast?  
 
 
 Distribution Channels  - which channels are not producing 
results? How can we increase promotion of our products?  
 
 
 Decisio n-Making Process  - how do our customers prefer to 
buy? What are the top buying criteria? Is our sales process 
aligned?  
 
 
 Marketing Effectiveness - how effective was our last 
campaign? Where do the majority of our leads come from? What 
is the ROI from mark eting?  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Market Research Tools & Best Practices   
 
 
 
 
1. Define Responsibilities  - Use our Marketing Analyst Job 
Description  to define key responsibilities and set the direction for 
this function.  
  
2. Identify the Problem  - a clear statement of the problem is the key 
to effective market research. Examples of common research 
problem questions are:  
 
 What competitive advantages do we have?  
 Who is our target market? What makes them unique?  
 Where do our prospects position us in the market?  
 What is our market share? Is it being eroded?  
 How likely are customers to refer us business?  
 Which sales channels are most effective?  
 How can we improve our sales process?  
 What new products should we develop?  
 How effective are our marketing campaigns?  
 What is the optimal price for our products?  
 
3. Establish Research Objectives  - set objectives that once 
achieved provide the information required to solve the problem. 
Generally, your objective is to validate a working hypothesis. For 
example, your objective may be to test a cause -effect relationship 
such as: if we reduce our pric e, what will the impact be on sales 
volume and profitability?  
 
4. Set Research Project Timelines  - based on your problem and 
objectives, develop a project charter  to schedule resources and 
set timelines for execution.  
 
5. Select Research Design  - there are three main types of research 
design: exploratory, descriptive, and causal.  
 
Exploratory  research involves collecting information in an 
unstructured and informal way, s uch as reviewing competitors. 
websites to gain further understanding of their offerings.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Descriptive  research refers to methods that analyze marketing 
variables like consumer attitudes, behaviors, and intentions. 
Customer satisfaction  and brand perception surveys  are 
examples of descriptive studies.  
 
Causal  research is con ducted by controlling various factors to 
identify cause -effect relationships that affect the problem. Testing 
the effect of marketing campaigns on sales in a specific geographic 
region is an example of causal research.  
 
Causal research is most informative but can be very expensive and 
can require complex experiments to ensure validity. Start with 
exploratory and descriptive research designs if your organization 
does not have an existing market research function.  
 
6. Determi ne Data Requirements  - determine what information you 
will need to solve the research problem and estimate the cost of 
gathering that data. Primary research data is typically more 
expensive and time -consuming than secondary research data, but 
provides much  more accurate insight. Depending on your timelines, 
budgets, and resources, decide if purchasing an industry 
benchmarking report from an analyst firm will provide a better 
cost/benefit than conducting primary research for your project.  
 
7. Download Tools & Templates  - following are some market 
research reports, tools, and templates that you can download and 
quickly customize to suit your specific needs:  
 
 Advert isement Evaluation Matrix   
 Business Requirements Template  
 Brand Perception Survey   
 Competitive Ad vs. PR Analysis Tool  
 Competi tive Analysis Tool   
 Competitive Product Positioning Map  
 Competitive Website Analysis Tool   
 Customer Profile Template   
 Customer Satisfaction Survey   
 Market Requirement s Document   
 Market Research Report Template   
 Marketing Analyst Job Description   
 Market Segmentation, Targeting, & Positioning   
 Market Segmentation Tool   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
 Practical Product Management Tools Report   
 Product Development Charter   
 Product Development Schedule   
 Product Feature Priority Tool   
 Product Feature Request Form   
 Product Launch Checklist   
 Product Positioning Tool   
 Product Requirements Document   
 Product Sanity -Check Tool   
 Sales Analysis Tool   
 STEP Industry Analysis   
 SWOT Internal Analysis   
 
8. Choose a Research Method  - there are two methods for gathering 
information: observation or asking questions. The most common, 
and cost -effective tool is the questionnaire or survey. Structured 
surveys are quantitative and list close -end questions, such as 
multiple -choice, yes/no,  or scale rankings. Unstructured surveys 
gather qualitative data and allow respondents to answer in their own 
words. Depending on your research objectives and problem, either 
type of survey can be effective.  
 
Some organizations find that mixing these type s provides both 
measureable results and real -world insights that can be missed by 
setting specific questions. If you require primary research data, 
consider each of the following research methods:  
 
 Telephone Surveys  - consider Harris Interactive .  
 Online Surveys  - Question Pro , Key Survey , SPSS .  
 Personal Interviews  - use our Business Requirement 
Document  to collect data directly from discussions.  
 Focus Groups  - create a customer/prospect advisory panel 
that represents a cross -section of your target market and 
their needs.  
 Video Cameras  - watch consumers USE your product.  
  
9. Collect & Analyze Data  - once you have selected your research 
method, built your data -collection tool, and performed the study, 
gather all the data together to glean insights. The first step is the 
ensure data quality and accuracy; verify that raw data was correctly 
entered into the data -collection form and that there are no 
respondents who are looking to skew results.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
Next, aggregate the data to determine averages, slice -and-dice by 
demographics, and do other statistical analysis. Ensure that there is 
a large enough sample size to provide a real statistical 
representation and determine the  margin of error. For a survey of 
100 people, expect a margin of error of +/ - 10%. For a sample size 
of 600, expect +/ - 4%.  
 
10. Report to Senior Management  - based on your findings, create a 
report summarizing the research problem, objectives, research 
desig n & methods, information sources, and results.  
 
Focus on providing a high -level overview rather than getting into the 
low-level findings. Assess the implications of your results on 
business opportunities and risks, and make recommendations for 
improving b usiness operations. Send your Market Research 
Report  to the relevant stakeholders, and invite them to meet to 
discuss further.  
 
 
 
 
 
 