 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Establishing a Brand Scorecard  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for 
benchmarking and improving your branding capabilities.  
 
Read this brief 7-page report to learn:  
 
 Brand Management Defined  
 
 Principles of a Strong Brand  
 
 What is Brand Equity?  
 
 Capab ilities Required to Measure Brands  
 
 Establishing a Brand Scorecard   
 
 
Read this report to learn how to prepare your organization for effective 
brand management. Use our tools to develop a Brand Scorecard that 
demonstrates increased Customer -Base Value.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Brand Management Defined       3  
 
Principles of a Strong Brand       3  
 
What is Brand Equity?        4  
 
Capabilities Required to Measure Brands     4  
 
Establishing a Brand Scorecard       5  
 
Conclusion          7 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Brand Management  Defined  
Principles of a Strong Brand    
 
 
 
 
Brand management is the application of marketing techniques to a 
specific product, product line, or brand. It seeks to increase the 
product’s perceived value to the customer and thereby increase brand 
franchise and brand equity.  
  
Marketers see a brand as  an implied promise that the level of quality 
people have come to expect from a brand will continue with present and 
future purchases of the same product. This may increase sales by 
making a comparison with competing products more favorable. It may 
also en able the manufacturer to charge more for the product.  
  
The value of the brand is determined by the amount of profit it 
generates for the manufacturer. This results from a combination of 
increased sales and increased price.  
  
                     - Source : Wikipedia  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Proctor & Gamble PLC pioneered the concept of Brand Management as a 
result of a memo sent by Neil H. McElroy .  
  
Following are principles of a strong brand:  
  
 Distinguished  - is your brand “premium” or “economy”? Does 
your brand express the brand type adequately?  
 
 Enhance Image  - does your  brand accurately reflect and 
enhance the corporate/product image?  
 
 Benefit/Usage  - does your brand describe the benefits of your 
product, or how it is used? (i.e. Mr. Clean)  
 
 Simple  - is your brand recognizable and memorable?  
 
 Protectable  - can you leg ally protect your brand?  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
What is Brand Equity?  
Capabilities Required to Measure Brands   
  
 
 
 
Brand Equity can be defined as the value measurement associated with 
expected future revenues for the branded product. Many organizations 
use a Brand Scorecard  in conjunction with a Marketing Dashbo ard 
to measure their return on marketing investments. The metric that can 
be used to measure overall Brand Equity is Customer -Base Value.  
  
Customer -Base Value (CBV)  - the total number of customers 
multiplied by the net present value of those customers (gross profit 
contribution) over their average lifetime.  
  
Factors that influence the Customer -Base Value metric include:  
  
 Customer Retention Rate  
 Net Present Value for Each Customer  
 Brand Awareness & Preference  
 Corporate/Product Image  
 Purchasing Intentions  
 Customer Satisfaction  
 Customer Referral Rates  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
1. Senior Management Commitment  - it is critical that Branding 
is viewed as a strategic endeavor and is driven top -down from 
the C -level. Otherwise, investments to strategically improve 
brand equity will not be approved.  
 
2. Internal Brand Alignment  - have you conducted an internal 
brand survey ? Since much of branding takes place during 
conversations and via email, you need to know how your 
employees view the organization. If there is a gap between 
senior management’s and front -line customer service’s view, it 
needs to be resolved.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Establishing a Brand Scorecard  3. Market Research Data  - do you have any empirical data that 
demonstrates customer/market segment preferences, 
satisfaction, referral rates, purchasing intentions, and othe r 
important market research data.  
 
4. Data Management  - you need to be able to collect and 
manipulate marketing metrics and find causal links that connect 
them to high -level business metrics. For help in this area, read 
our report on Marketing Dashboards .  
 
5. Systems & Technology  - once you have built the discipline to 
collect the relevant brand equity data, consider housing your 
data in systems such as Customer Relationship Management  
(CRM), Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), or other enterprise 
applications. Next, use these applications to g enerate reports 
such as “total number of customers”, “net present value of 
current customer base”, or other brand equity reports.  
 
6. Brand Goals, Objectives, & KPIs  - once you have the 
information, systems, and skills required to measure your brand 
effectiv ely, take the time to strategically plan for brand 
improvements. Take a Balanced Scorecard approach  to brand 
measurement by selecting specific Objectives,  Measures, Targets, 
and Initiatives.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creating a simple Brand Scorecard does not have to be as intimidating 
as it may sound. This section will outline the steps required to build an 
effective tool to measure your brand.  
  
1. Achieve Brand Consensus  - have a meeting with key brand 
stakeholders  to ensure you have alignment on your corporate 
mission, vision, values, etc. Use our Branding Selection Tool  
for assistance.  
 
2. Dig up Historical Information  - track down any previous 
market research data, customer satisfaction surveys, and 
customer data such as: # of customers, average lifetime, 
average profit/customer, net pres ent value of current customer 
base, market share, etc.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
 
3. Gather New Information  - if you don’t have much information 
to go from, consider doing a small market research project to set 
benchmarks for brand awareness, preferences, purchasing 
intentions, etc.  
 
4. Set Branding Goals & Objectives  - your goals may be to 
improve C -level awaren ess of a specific product, to achieve 
commitment to brand values from customer -facing 
representatives, or increase understanding of value propositions 
amongst specific media sources.  
 
5. Determine Specific Targets & Actions  - this part of your 
scorecard deal s with HOW you are going to achieve your goals & 
objectives. For example, you may wish to target the Sales & 
Service organizations to improve collateral, presentations, scripts 
& messaging. You might want to target All Employees with a 
brand revitalization  effort.  
 
6. Define Measures of Success  - like all objectives, you need to 
determine how success will be measured, BEFORE you kick -off 
your initiative. These are the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
that will be monitored to demonstrate improvement. Using 
Primary and Secondary success measures will help you 
differentiate subtle improvements within a specific target area.  
 
7. Establish Goal Timeframe  - you last step is to break the 
larger, overarching goals into more manageable pieces. If you 
are targeting Sales to use a new presentation deck, set a goal 
like: “have 50% of sales team using new presentation deck by 
June 1st, 2007.”  
 
8. Build your Brand S corecard  - now that you understand each 
step of the process, use Demand Metric’s customizable Brand 
Scorecard Tool  to create your own framework.  
 
9. Benchmark Current Bran d Score  - take a snapshot of your 
current Customer -Base Value and other brand -related metrics to 
set a stake in the ground.  
 
10. Demonstrate Brand Scorecard Improvement  - revisit your 
Brand Scorecard quarterly and report on the success of your 
initiatives to demonstrate effectiveness.  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
Brands are intangible assets that are difficult to measure. That being 
said, it is not impossible for an organization to benchmark and 
demonstrate improvements to brand equity for a reasonable cost. If you 
do not have much experience with Branding and have  a strategic 
imperative to measurably improve your brand, consider getting help 
from a consultant.  
  
Based on the best practices described in this report, and tools provided, 
you should be able to get started with a branding program. If you need 
more clar ity, contact your Research Associate who can provide you with 
more tailored advice.  
 
 
 
 