Increasing Your Corporate Venturing 
Speed While Reducing the Cost Open 
Innovation  IESE Business School and BeRepublic   2
Contents
Executive Summary 5
1. What if my company is not yet doing corporate venturing? 9
1.1 An emerging trend 9
1.2 The seven lies of corporate venturing 10
1.2.1 Is corporate venturing only CVC? 11
1.2.2 Is corporate venturing only for very large corporations? 11
1.2.3 Does corporate venturing require a lot of investment to start? 12
1.2.4 Is corporate venturing financially unsustainable? 12
1.2.5 My corporation is better than any start-up. Why do I need them? 13
1.2.6 Will corporate venturing give me short-term results? 13
1.2.7 Is corporate venturing useful only for start-ups  
 at either an early stage or late stage? 14
1.3 How does my company start to do corporate venturing? 14
1.3.1 Preparing the organization to integrate value 14
1.3.2 Building your pipeline of growth opportunities 14
2. Benchmarking speed and cost by mechanism 16
2.1 Introduction: The case of AT&T Foundry 16
2.2 Definitions and clarifications: Speed, cost and innovation stage 17
2.2.1 Speed and cost 17
2.2.2 Stages of a corporate venturing project 17
2.2.3 Development stages of an external opportunity 18
2.3 What has been said, mainly about CVC 19
2.4 What we do not know and why the answer matters 19
2.5 The results 20
2.5.1 Speed per opportunity by mechanism 20
2.5.2 Tackling integration, usually the longest stage 21
2.5.3 Organizational agility: A competitive advantage 22
2.5.4 Ongoing cost per opportunity per mechanism per year 24
2.5.5 Connecting venturing mechanisms 
 and business units to reduce structural costs 25
2.5.6 Relationship among speed, cost and the opportunity stage 25
2.6 Consequences: What now? 26
3. Appendixes 283
Open Innovation 
IESE Business School and BeRepublic   4
Mª Julia Prats
IESE Business School
-- 
jprats@iese.eduJosemaria Siota
IESE Business School
--
jsiota@iese.eduIsabel Martinez-Monche
BeRepublic
--
isabel.mmonche@berepublic.esYair Martínez 
BeRepublic
--
yair.martinez@berepublic.esAuthors
Contributors
External experts*Celeste Saccomano, IESE Business School
Akiyoshi, Ippei (Mitsubishi)
Alliot, Jean-Baptiste (UEFA)
Alonso, Ángel (Sanofi)
Allo, Luis (Johnson & Johnson)
Anzai, Kiyoshi (Fujitsu)
Balseiro, Catalina (Suez)
Barahona, Claudio (Telefónica)
Brion, Alexis (Allianz)
Carvalho, Nuno (Bekaert)
Connolly, Tony (AT&T)
de Miguel, Álvaro (Engie)
de Palacio, Itxaso (Notion)
Díaz, Diego (Iberdrola)
Garbayo, Edu (BBVA)
Gaskell, Harry (EY)
Gimmy, Gregor (27pilots)
G. Subils, Javier (ICCUB)
González, Javi (Danone)
Jiménez, Juan (Santander Bank)
Kahl, Oliver (Osram)
Korotkova, Katerina (Warner Bros)
Korth, Karolina (Siemens)
Kropp, Rosie (Bisnode)Kutepov, Glip (Mercedes-AMG)
Lagarrigue, Emmanuel (Schneider Electric)
Martínez, Jorge (Santander Bank)
Mialet, Anna (CaixaBank)
Mohr, Bernhard (Evonik)
Monzó, Maria (Aigües de Barcelona)
Morais, Stephan (Indico Capital Partners)
Neves, Cristina (Santander Totta)
Olarte, Enrique (Enagás)
Panesar, Tej (British Patient Capital)
Pinto, Tania (Sonae)
Remaut, Wouter (Co.Station)
Ribeiro, Pedro (Armilar Venture Partners)
Roca, Miquel (Racc)
Sheehan, Patrick (ETF Partners)
Singer, Ken (Berkeley)
Stevens, William (TechTour)
Tresánchez, Manuel (Banco Sabadell)
Van Neerven, Simone (Vueling)
Varela, Borja (Liberty)
Wockatz, Philip (Volvo)
Wu, Michelle (General Electric) 
Published in January 2019
* The list is just a small selection of the external experts who have taken part in the 
study. They shared their personal insights and not those of their corporations.
5
Open Innovation Executive 
Summary 
Corporate venturing—the collaborative 
framework between established 
corporations and innovative start-ups—
has been emerging at speed (with a 
42% increase between 2010 and 2015 in 
some cases) through many mechanisms, 
such as venture clients, venture builders, 
scouting missions, challenges prizes, 
and corporate accelerators.
Firms’ chief innovation officers look 
for data so they can make decisions in 
this field backed up by evidence. How 
much will it cost (in time and money) to 
integrate opportunities’ value into the 
parent company using each corporate 
venturing mechanism? How can those 
costs be reduced, while increasing the 
speed? Do the costs differ according 
to mechanism? Which mechanisms 
are quicker? And which are the most 
cost-effective? How long should a chief 
innovation officer wait before killing an 
opportunity? These are data that these 
executives usually do not have because 
of the novelty of the concept and the 
lack of historical data.
Based on 121 interviews with firms’ chief 
innovation officers and those in related 
roles in the United States, Europe and 
Asia, the study sheds light on these 
questions. For instance, there are mechanisms whose opportunities cost 
around €250,000 (a venture builder) 
while others cost around €300,000 (a 
corporate incubator).
The conclusions will help leaders define 
their corporate venturing strategies 
more accurately and select a more 
appropriate combination of corporate 
venturing mechanisms. Additionally, 
the gathered data will help innovation 
managers to have a benchmark against 
which to compare themselves and 
check whether they are spending too 
much money or proceeding too slowly.
For corporate venturing initiatives such 
as AT&T Foundry, agility has become a 
competitive advantage to attract the 
best start-ups, with relationships usually 
established quickly because of the start-
ups’ scarce cash flow. The time span of 
the relationship between a corporation 
and start-ups starts with identification of 
the opportunity and collaboration, going 
on to the integration of value into the 
parent company and it is the integration 
stage that usually takes the longest. 
For example, the identification stage 
could require anywhere from one to five 
months on average, depending on the 
mechanism used, while the attraction 
and integration stages are much longer, ranging from one to 11 months for the 
attraction stage and four to 18 months for 
the integration stage. 
So, how can you improve your corpo -
rate venturing strategy, increase your 
speed and reduce your costs? The study 
provides several principles such as: using 
data (not intuition or media hype) when 
choosing the combination of corporate 
venturing mechanisms; identifying the 
stage in which your bottleneck is located 
(identification, collaboration or integra -
tion); adopting agile principles, especially 
in the longest stage (integration); fighting 
to become the player in your industry with 
which start-ups most want to work; using 
the “joint three pockets” rule to increase 
your innovation budget and other units’ 
involvement by sharing innovation costs 
with corporate, business and innovation 
units; and ensuring good communica -
tions among different corpore venturing 
initiatives.
Lastly, the study provides preliminary 
instructions to start doing corporate 
venturing, and describes some of the 
most common misunderstandings 
about corporate venturing such as the 
idea that it involves only CVC and large 
corporations, requires a lot of investment 
to start and is financially unsustainable.IESE Business School and BeRepublic   6
7
Open Innovation EXAMPLES OF COMPANIES USING CORPORATE VENTURING+120
Corporate venturing
is the collaborative framework 
between established firms
and innovative start-ups
THE SEVEN LIES OF CORPORATE VENTURING
It is only corporate 
venture capital
It will give short-term 
results
INCREASING SPEED AND REDUCING COST€ 310,000 € 255,000 € 47,0001
2
35
67 4
1.  Use data (not intuition or media hype) for choosing corporate venturing mechanisms
2.  Think twice critically about having a corporate incubator
3.  Share innovation costs with corporate headquarters and business lines
4.  Adopt agile principles, especially in the longest stage (integration)COST OF ONE OPPORTUNITY PER YEAR PER MECHANISMHOW MUCH WAIT BEFORE KILLING AN OPPORTUNITY
Corporate accelerator
on average, an opportunity requires 11 months
Venture builder
on average, an opportunity requires 10 months
Venture client
on average, an opportunity requires 8 months1. Identification
2. Collaboration
3. Integration
Months required per 
opportunity, stage
and mechanismIt is only for very large 
corporations
It is useful only for early- or 
late-stage start-ups
Corporate accelerator Venture builder Venture clientIt requires a lot of 
investment to startMy corporation is better 
than any start-up
Open Innovation: Increasing Your Corporate Venturing Speed
While Reducing the Cost 
Mª Julia Prats, Josemaria Siota, Isabel Martinez-Monche, Yair Martínez
© 2019 | https://goo.gl/h4tJKK*Ongoing cost per opportunity per year = internal FTE cost + managerial cost (excluding investment)Corporate Venturing
Increasing Speed While Reducing the Cost Based on 120+ interviews with CIOs
(and related roles) in US, EU and Asia
It is financially 
unsustainableIESE Business School and BeRepublic   8
9
Open Innovation 1. What if my company
 is not yet doing
 corporate venturing?
1.1 AN EMERGING TREND 
Corporate venturing—defined as the collaborative framework 
between established firms and innovative start-ups—has 
been emerging at speed.1 
According to our previous study, conducted in collaboration 
with chief innovation officers and those in related roles, 70% 
of firms were increasing investment in their innovation units, 
60% of which had been created in the previous five years. 
Corporate venturing mechanisms have continued to rise, with 
a 42% increase between 2010 and 2015.1
These tools—venture clients, hackathons, venture builders, 
scouting missions, corporate accelerators and more—are 
clear paths for attracting and adopting innovations by 
established firms, following the paradigm of open innovation, 
which assumes that firms can and should use external ideas.2
Source: Schneider Electric.Figure 1. Schneider Electric’s Innovation Center  
in Silicon Valley 
As Schneider Electric’s chief strategy officer Emmanuel 
Lagarrigue said: “Corporate venturing allows established 
companies to access forms of innovation that are difficult or 
impossible to produce internally.”3  
The first trigger for the increase of corporate venturing 
mechanisms in companies is the so-called VUCA environment Source: GV.Figure 2. GV’s (formerly Google Ventures) office
in Mountain View
in which we are living. This acronym describes the high levels of 
volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity of the 
modern-day business environment. As General Motors 
president Dan Ammann said: “We see more change in the next 
five years than there’s been in the last 50.”4 
The second trigger has been some successful stories such as 
the creation of Google Ventures in 2008, a move that was 
mocked by many. This venture has successfully grown into one 
of the largest corporate investors. This was (kind of) an 
endorsement by a successful innovative company.5
The third lever has been the high level of media attention 
received (the number of media articles referring to “corporate 
venturing”), which has grown by 3.1 times in the past four 
years.* 
Lastly, academics and publishers have also taken an 
increased interest in this practically unexplored arena, with 
many research questions waiting to be answered. In the past 
four years alone, the number of publications (in academic 
--
* Source: Analysis done by the authors using data from the Factiva database.IESE Business School and BeRepublic   10
Source: Samsung Electronics. Source: Henkel.
Source: Wells Fargo.Figure 3. Samsung Electronics’ Global Innovation Center
in Tel AvivFigure 4. Henkel’s Innovation Center
in Pune
Figure 5. Wells Fargo’s Digital Innovation Hub in San Francisco
and collaborating with partners are indispensable for 
success.” He said that corporate venturing complemented 
other options such as R&D, innovation, and merges and 
acquisitions (M&As).3
Nevertheless, since the model is emerging, there are a few 
misconceptions (and unanswered questions) that are 
preventing some chief innovation officers from leveraging 
corporate venturing mechanisms, which means they lose the 
potential growth such mechanisms offer. This echoes one of 
our previous studies, which found that just 23% of companies 
said their innovation units were delivering significant 
innovative solutions.7
In conclusion, though there are many ways of innovating in 
companies, corporate venturing is an emerging practice that 
allows a company both to source new innovative 
opportunities and to speed up a solution that is already 
showing successful results.
Executives must take a mid- to long-term view for corporate 
venturing to bear fruit, and they must be diligent when 
designing a model that will align in the most appropriate way 
with the firm’s objectives and culture.
Bipin Sahni, senior vice president of innovation and R&D at Wells 
Fargo, said that the company had launched its start-up 
accelerator program in 2014 “to spur innovation for our 
customers’ benefits and expand our vision of the future of 
financial services beyond the boundaries of Wells Fargo and 
banking.” He added: “When we pitched the idea to senior 
management, there was just one question: ‘Why aren’t we doing 
this already?’ ”8
Nonetheless, beyond these positive considerations, there are still 
firms that are skeptical of the model. Such firms’ executives 
usually share one or more of the following ways of thinking that 
act as brakes:1.2 THE SEVEN LIES OF CORPORATE VENTURING and nonacademic journals) has increased by 1.8 times, with a 
growth rate of 18%.*
However, this is not a new practice: large firms such as Intel, 
Siemens, Qualcomm, Xerox, GE, IBM, Lucent, Cisco, 
Samsung, Comcast and Merck have been developing such 
mechanisms since as far back as the 1960s.5
It is important to note that these venturing tools are not 
being used to supplant internal research and development 
(R&D) but to complement and encourage it. Existing 
examples illustrate this interaction in industries such as the 
media, technology and automotive sectors.6 For instance, in 
the case of the media, the R&D spending (as a percentage of 
sales) of companies that use a combination of corporate 
venturing mechanisms—such as corporate venture capital 
(CVC), corporate accelerators and corporate incubators—is 
2.4 percentage points higher, on average, than the R&D 
spending of the top 30 companies by market capitalization in 
the same sector.6
As explained by the Henkel Ventures head of corporate 
venturing, Thomas Schuffenhauer: “In a world of constant 
change that defines new value chains, acquiring new skills 
-- 
* Source: Analysis done by the authors using data from the Scopus database.11
Open Innovation 1.2.1 Is corporate venturing only CVC?
Corporate venturing is “a collaboration framework that 
acts as a bridge between innovative and disruptive 
start-ups and established corporations.” It was defined 
as the “mean through which corporations participated 
in the success of external innovation to help them gain 
insights into non-core markets and access to 
capabilities.”9 
The CVC model—having an internal venture fund to 
invest in start-ups—has existed since the 1960s. 
However, the first pioneer can be traced back to 1914, 
when DuPont invested in a six-year-old private 
automobile start-up called General Motors.5 
The aspects that are more current and growing 
are other corporate venturing mechanisms (e.g., 
venture builders and corporate accelerators) that 
make this collaboration more sophisticated. For 
instance, between 2010 and 2015, the top 10 
companies (by market capitalization) increased the 
number of corporate accelerators and incubators by 
42%.6
Having said that, corporate venturing not only is  
getting more sophisticated but also is finding new 
goals for CVC. While many people thought that CVC 
was useful only for financial returns, nowadays 
strategic goals are gaining in importance in the 
decision-making process. Therefore, examples of CVC 
can be found that are described in the literature as 
having mainly financial goals (e.g., Dell Ventures10 and 
GV or formerly Google Ventures11), strategic goals 
(e.g., Salesforce Ventures12,13  and Lucent Venture 
Partners10) and hybrids (e.g., Intel Capital14 and 
Qualcomm Ventures15).
As Varun Jain, head of the Qualcomm 
Ventures global early-stage fund, put it: “We’ve 
always believed that companies that aren’t 
financially successful on their own will lead to 
limited strategic dividend. So, we restrict our 
investment mandate to technologies/markets that 
are (or could be) strategically relevant to Qualcomm 
and then evaluate deals with same lens and 
emphasis on financial prospects as traditional 
venture investors.”15
CVC examples with more sophisticated strategies 
can also be found. For instance, the semiconductor 
company Intel was looking for ways to increase its 
revenue in the early 1990s and later found a way to 
increase its sales channels in an innovative way. Intel 
then decided to follow an investing strategy to enable 
indirect revenues.
The company invested in hundreds of start-ups, whose 
solutions included the use of the company’s powerful 
Intel Pentium chips. The CVC indirectly increased the 
demand for the company’s products and therefore 
received high financial returns.15Source: Salesforce.
Source: Investing in Global Innovation. Intel Capital  (2014).Figure 6. Salesforce Tower in Chicago (inside view)
Figure 7. . Goals of Intel Capital (strategic and financial)
Strategic, Long Term Investor
Intel´s Global Investment and M&A Organization
Our Mission
Enhance Intel´s strategic objetives by making and 
managing financially attractive investments.
Strategic FinancialIntel
Capital
1.2.2 Is corporate venturing only for 
 very large corporations?
Although the growing literature is providing more and more 
examples and data pertaining to large corporations, there 
are less-known cases of small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) that are implementing this collaborative framework 
successfully, such as the renewable energy company Fersa16 
and other European SMEs such as Lékué, Pro Earth, 
Dearman, BA Systèmes and Jenetric.17
Moreover, public entities are increasingly enhancing such 
collaboration between SMEs and start-ups through policies 
and funding—for instance, in projects of the European 
Commission’s current Horizon 2020 program and its 
forthcoming successor Horizon Europe (formerly FP9).18
Additionally, the mechanisms that are usually mentioned in 
the literature—such as hackathons, corporate incubators, 
venture builders and corporate accelerators—can be 
implemented perfectly by SMEs. Although such firms might 
IESE Business School and BeRepublic   12
Source: Open Innovation for SMEs. Inspire  (2016).Figure 8. Dearman founder Toby Peters receiving two awards at 
the annual UK SME Innovation Awards
have to focus in mechanisms that are faster and require 
less capital because of time and budget constraints, they 
are able to implement those. The number of times per 
year that such SMEs use the mechanisms may also vary. 
Lastly, to be effective, such companies should design an 
attractive value proposition carefully.
1.2.3 Does corporate venturing require a lot
 of investment to start?
As seen in one of our previous studies, building from 
scratch a corporate venturing mechanism ranges from 
investments of €10,000 for a hackathon to €30,000 for a 
venture client and for sharing resources.1
Additionally, some mechanisms require lower 
maintenance costs, as detailed later in this study. (See 
section 2.5.4)
1.2.4 Is corporate venturing financially   
unsustainable?
As in many business practices across sectors and 
geographies, some actors perform better than others. 
There are already many cases of companies that have not 
only successfully implemented the model but also 
achieved financial sustainability within their corporate 
units.1,9 (See section 1.1.)
Contrary to public belief, the traditional CVC model 
(according to Harvard Business School professors 
Gompers and Lerner) appears to be at least as successful as those backed by independent venture organizations, 
especially for investments in which there is a strategic 
overlap between the corporate parent and the portfolio 
firm.19 They also argue that corporations are more likely to 
benefit from indirect gains such as strategic alliances and 
a greater understanding of industry trends, as well as 
direct financial returns.
An interesting example is that of Xerox Technology 
Ventures. Between 1988 and 1996, it achieved excellent 
financial returns from investing in more than a dozen 
companies and by aggressively exploiting the technology 
and knowledge of its corporate parent. It achieved a 
profitable financial model.19
Yet, in addition to the traditional CVC model, which we 
already know has produced similar financial returns to the 
VC industry over the past five years,20 the number of 
success stories with other corporate venturing 
mechanisms has been increasing.
This is the case of the German conglomerate Siemens, 
whose innovation unit Technology To Business (in 
Berkeley) has run 70+ projects since 1999 and has 
launched 10+ new products (or entire product lines).21
It is also the case of the software corporation SAP, which 
brought more than 1,500 early adopters to a new 
product’s platform by creating a corporate accelerator 
immersed in agile principles.2
Thirdly, there is the case of the US conglomerate AT&T, 
which worked with the start-up Intucell through its 
Foundry program to improve the reliability and speed of 
the AT&T wireless network. The speed and reliability of the 
service increased by 10%, while tower overloading was 
reduced by 30% within a few months. (See Section 2.1.)
Furthermore, as seen in a previous report1, more and more 
CIOs are understanding the importance of designing 
venturing strategies that encompass a long-term vision 
rather than short-term deliveries, which in many cases has 
the potential to destroy long-term growth opportunities.
Last but not least, it is also particularly important to 
maintain financial sustainability in order to manage 
innovation with a portfolio mindset, as many  
companies do (e.g., IBM, Google, Intuit, 3M, Procter & 
Gamble, Apple).22 Having three baskets usually help 
business units to combine the strategic and financial 
goals. These baskets are disruptive, incremental and 
cash-out.
One basket is for disruptive-innovation projects—those 
that may change your business model (high risk). One is 
for incremental-innovation projects—those that are going 
to lead to some improvement in the organization (medium 
risk). One is for cash-out projects—those that are going to 
ensure medium-term financial sustainability so the 
company can continue to innovate (low risk). The weight 
to balance the three baskets will come from the venturing-
strategy goals.13
Open Innovation Figure 11. IBM’s Digital Innovation Center in Dublin
Source: Siemens.Figure 9. Siemens’ Technology To Business in Berkeley
1.2.5 My corporation is better than any 
 start-up. Why do I need them?
Firms that are successful in corporate venturing are those 
that regard the differences between corporations and 
start-ups as a source of opportunities. One organization may 
find a solution to its limitations in another organization. For 
instance, a start-up’s endemic lack of resources may be 
compensated by it being able to share the resources of a 
corporation.
The focused talent pool of a start-up may offset a 
corporation’s lack of knowledge in that area. As IBM Ventures 
managing director Wendy Lung said: “There has to be an 
awareness and acceptance within senior leadership that this 
is an absolutely vital ecosystem that we have to have a close 
relationship with.”8
1.2.6 Will corporate venturing give me 
 short-term results?
To understand the answer to this question, it is important to 
first define both “short-term” and “results.” Depending on 
whom you ask, you might be told that “short-term” means 
days, weeks, months or years (e.g., whether you ask a 
start-up or a financial corporation or a pharma company). The 
same happens with what is meant by “results,” which 
executives can understand as referring to many things such 
as revenues, knowledge or products (e.g., whether you ask a 
banking institution or a media company).
Firstly, some management frameworks have developed a time 
horizon to manage growth opportunities21 such as the 
McKinsey horizons of growth. Horizon 1 has a common time 
span of one to three years and refers to extending and 
defending your core business. Horizon 2 has a common time 
span of three to five years and refers to building emerging 
businesses. Horizon 3 has a common time span of five to 12 
years and refers to creating viable options.
Yet, as with many principles and frameworks in management, 
you have to adapt and tailor the learning to your specific 
scenario, avoiding a simplistic copy and paste. For instance, 
while a bank may think in terms of a time frame of three to Source: 3M.Figure 10. 3M’s Innovation Center in Delft
five years for building new ventures, a start-up may already 
die in that time (bearing in mind that three out of four 
start-ups disappear after three years).24
Also, the time required to launch a new product or service 
in the pharmaceutical industry is quite different from the 
time required in the tech industry. While a pharmaceutical 
company needs around 13.5 years from discovery of a new 
molecular entity to launch (preclinical, phase 1, phase 2, 
etc.),25 a tech company can launch a new product perfectly 
well in less than a year.
Additionally, some organizations are quicker than others 
and therefore are more agile when it comes to building and 
adopting new innovations, as explained in a previous 
study.26
Secondly, as will be seen later in this study (section 3.2.2), 
results can be many things—not only revenues but also 
knowledge, products and services, mind-sets, processes 
and business models.
Once we have a common understanding, we can segment 
the time span into two pieces of data: the time needed to 
build the corporate venturing mechanism (e.g., a venture 
client), and the time needed to go through the whole 
venturing process from identification to integration of the 
value.
Source: IBM.IESE Business School and BeRepublic   14
1.3 HOW DOES MY COMPANY START
 TO DO CORPORATE VENTURING?
1.3.1 Preparing the organization to integrate value
If a successful corporate venturing unit* is understood as being 
one that can efficiently add new value to a company (e.g., 
knowledge, a product or service, a mind-set, process, business 
model or revenue), the most successful approach the authors 
have seen is to launch it under the paradigm of organizational 
change. The logic behind this approach is that it will challenge 
the status quo of any particular organization. This would signal 
imminent organizational change rather than the unit just being 
yet another toy for the CEO.
Launching a unit that will provide value (in terms of 
opportunities) to the core or adjacent business implies doing 
things differently. This process is basically organized into three 
phases: unfreezing, moving and institutionalizing.1
The first step (unfreezing) consists of creating a sense of urgency 
for change within the institution, creating a group willing to lead 
change and communicating the new vision to internal and 
external stakeholders. This can also start in a small department of 
the organization, as a seed that will scale (step by step) across 
the institution.
The second step concerns the implementation of change 
(moving), which often amounts to a process of experimentation. 
During this phase, according to the new vision, new procedures 
are established in order to identify a solution. This may consist of 
rethinking objectives and systems of budgeting, planning and 
rewarding.
The final step is consolidating (institutionalizing) the 
improvements achieved in the previous phase. This is a pattern 
that was echoed in the interviews conducted in this study.1.3.2 Building your pipeline of growth opportunities
In parallel, in addition to being an organization that can 
integrate value and change, a company should be able to 
attract value through growth opportunities. Otherwise, it will 
be hungry for growth but have no food.
In this process of generating new growth opportunities, 
experts have recognized three fundamental challenges: 
encouraging outsiders to supply external innovation 
(identification), incorporating external innovation into internal 
development (collaboration), and designing ways to exploit 
internal innovation (integration).2,27 This framework of 
challenges was echoed by the interviewees in this study.
Copy and paste strategies are not a good practice in corporate 
venturing, as we spotted in our previous studies.1 Each 
corporate venturing mechanism requires a different set of 
resources, cost and time, and also provides opportunities 
during different development stages, so an opportunity may 
be more or less risky.
BUILDING THE PIPELINE 
OF GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES
1. Definition of your goal and objectives
2. Self-assessment of the company’s situation
3. Identifying the areas of your business more exposed  
to innovation
4. Checking the areas in your industry that are creating  
sustained growth opportunities
5. Setting up your preferred search fields, in line with  
the previous steps
6. Choosing the when and how (tools), to complement 
internal and external innovationIn our previous report, we shared the time spans per 
mechanism, which ranges from two to three months in the 
case of building a corporate venturing unit that will execute 
strategic partnerships and venture clients, and from 12 to 13 
months in the case of building a unit that will execute a CVC or 
acquire start-ups.1
This study will shed light on the time spans required to go 
through the whole innovation process.
In conclusion, corporate venturing mechanisms are designed 
for mid- to long-term horizons, bearing in mind the singulari -
ties of your industry and size. Having a short-term view may 
destroy long-term growth opportunities for corporations.1
--
* A corporate venturing unit is the oragnizational structure a company has to 
implement the interaction (i.e., identification, collaboration and integration) with 
innovative start-ups. This structure refers to the resources (e.g., team, budget, 
knowledge) and processes in place for that interaction.1.2.7 Is corporate venturing useful only for start-
ups at either an early stage or late stage?
The short answer is no, it is not.
It is a misconception that corporate venturing works only 
when collaborating with start-ups that are in their early days or 
with very developed start-ups. Our previous research found 
that there are mechanisms for each development stage (i.e., 
for discoveries, start-ups and scale-ups) (see Appendix 1) and 
there are success stories relating to each mechanism. For 
instance, CVC is usually applied to start-ups and scale-ups, 
while scouting missions and hackathons are usually for 
discoveries (very early stage).115
Open Innovation Therefore, it is necessary to design a tailored strategy for each 
organization for how to build this pipeline of growth 
opportunities. Below are the first steps to take into account. 
(See our previous studies1,9 for more details on the steps, costs, 
timings, challenges and best practices.)
Within the parameters of this study, several factors have 
surfaced as being critical for designing the right strategy and 
environment of a successful corporate venturing unit. Two 
previously unsolved challenges in particular are among the 
most salient.
First of all, it is necessary to understand the pros and cons of 
the corporate venturing unit’s autonomy (with respect to the 
parent company) to maximize the value integrated into the 
parent company. The authors will cover this in a forthcoming 
study.
Secondly, there must be historical data or benchmarks on the 
speed and ongoing cost per opportunity for each of the 11 
corporate venturing mechanisms. This is not only to select the 
combination of the most appropriate mechanisms to maximize 
the value generated by the corporate venturing unit but also to 
tackle the trade-off between time and cost that usually appears 
in management.
The concept of the Iron Triangle defines three criteria for 
success in project management: cost, time and quality.28 These 
criteria can also be applied to project management in 
corporate venturing activities. The ideal project is managed in 
the most cost-effective way, in the minimum time and with the 
best quality.
 
The time-cost trade-off sometimes creates operational 
problems relating to milestones, scheduling and cost 
optimization because those are calculated in advance, leading 
to problems of misalignment during the actual project 
implementation.28
In the literature, there is an assumption that the time-cost 
trade-off refers to the solution of this challenge: a project’s 
duration can be shortened by accelerating some of its 
activities at additional expense29 or, if necessary, the project 
can still be completed with fewer resources but over a longer 
time. However, is there a more effective solution? The next 
section will shed light on this question.IESE Business School and BeRepublic   16
2. Benchmarking speed 
 and cost by mechanism
2.1 INTRODUCTION: 
 THE CASE OF AT&T FOUNDRY
Jessica has been preparing her elevator pitch all night long. 
Today, she will present her idea to AT&T, a multinational giant 
with an annual revenue of $190 billion. She spotted an open call 
from AT&T Foundry for new solutions for a specific internal 
challenge the company wants to solve.
The program is a mixture of a challenge prize, a corporate 
incubator and a venture client, and it is hosted at the company’s 
innovation centers. Jessica knows the program has a track 
record of more than 500 projects and has deployed dozens of 
new products and services. The program can be the right 
catalyst to bring her idea to the market quickly.
Source: Martin, J., First Look: AT&T Opens New Facility at Texas 
Medical Center. Houston Business Journal  (June 7, 2016).Figure 12. AT&T Foundry’s office in Plano
When she started her preparation, she was a bit skeptical about 
the agility of the company because of its history (tracing its 
origins back more than 130 years), the high number of employees 
(more than 250,000), and the low percentage of start-up pitches 
that resulted in a joint project with the corporation (roughly 10%).
For all these reasons, she assumed that the innovation unit would be affected by its parent company’s “traditional” and nonagile 
mind-set, with complicated decision-making processes and high 
levels of bureaucracy. However, when one of her entrepreneurial 
colleagues told her about how the program was designed, she 
changed her mind.
Apparently, the AT&T Foundry’s “way of doing” is supposed to 
resemble that of start-ups as closely as possible. Each AT&T 
Foundry innovation center hosts an attorney with experience of 
working in fast-paced environments to take care of paperwork at 
start-ups’ speed. Then, each team has 12 weeks to present a 
proof-of-concept (POC) prototype to a business unit, without 
having to share equity or intellectual property (IP) with the 
established company.
After this initial validation is passed successfully, the start-up’s 
role changes to that of a regular technological supplier of the 
receiving business unit. Moreover, Jessica heard that a 
four-person start-up called Intucell had entered the program, 
claiming it knew how to improve reliability and speed in the AT&T 
wireless network. Within a few months, it had increased the 
speed and reliability of the service by 10%, while reducing tower 
overloading by 30%.
In one of our previous studies, the authors found the overhead 
costs for building different corporate venturing mechanisms (e.g., 
€10,000 for a hackathon, €125,000 for a corporate accelerator, 
and €350,000 for a venture builder).1,30
However, this study has looked ahead and explored all phases of 
a corporate venturing project opportunity: identification, 
collaboration and integration (section 2.2.2) to explore the 
managerial costs and speed of integrating value from an 
opportunity (section 2.5). This would help enterprises 
understand: the average time required to validate whether an 
opportunity is interesting and worth investing in; the time that 
must be put into attracting the selected start-ups; the time 
needed to incorporate any solution into the company; and more. 17
Open Innovation 2.2.1 Speed and cost
Innovation speed  refers to the rate at which innovation 
occurs in the different stages of a corporate venturing 
opportunity (see section 2.2.2), which differs between 
mechanisms.
Managerial cost  refers to the amount required to identify, 
collaborate and integrate value from one opportunity in each 
mechanism once it has been launched. It includes costs such 
as legal services, marketing, trips, databases and facilities. It 
does not include full-time equivalent (FTE) costs or the actual 
investment (e.g., capital principal or investment fees). In the 
case of mechanisms that have several “editions” during a year 
(such as some incubation programs), interviewees provided 
the cost of the whole year, unless there were more than three 
months between each edition.2.2 DEFINITIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS: 
SPEED, COST AND INNOVATION STAGE
Source: Prepared by the authors. The list of tasks is not exhaustive. Yet, it encompasses the most relevant aspects.Figure 13. Stages of a corporate venturing project 
1. IDENTIFICATION
• Detecting internal challenges
• Defining the research areas
• Choosing the search 
geography
• Scouting for a problem-
solution fit (e.g., databases, 
conferences, networks, 
partners)
• Signing a nondisclosure 
agreement (in some cases)2. COLLABORATION
• Seducing the start-up
• Conducting due diligence 
of the opportunity (e.g., 
interviews and data)
• Drafting a collaboration 
agreement
• Getting approval from legal 
departments
• Signing a collaboration 
agreement (a term sheet in the 
case of CVC)
• Implementing the program or 
the joint proof of concept3. INTEGRATION
• Deciding to internalize 
or continue the  external 
collaboration
• Determining the best corporate 
venturing mechanism to 
continue the collaboration
• Choosing whether investing 
either more time or a bigger 
budget in the start-up
• Identifying the best way to 
integrate the value generated
• Assimilate that value into the 
parent companyFull-time equivalent cost refers to the corresponding 
amount of money required to sustain the mechanism once it 
has been launched, in terms of how many full-time equivalent 
employees are required per year to maintain the mechanism. 
External employees have not been included.
2.2.2 Stages of a corporate venturing project
The three stages of every corporate venturing project  are 
identification, collaboration and integration.1,31 The authors 
have assumed this is a sequential process, as demonstrated 
by the majority of the cases analyzed. Taking a closer look at 
the three phases:
Identification  is the first stage and refers to the time span 
between the creation of the corporate venturing mechanism IESE Business School and BeRepublic   18
and the identification and prioritization of an opportunity. Here, 
the term “opportunity” refers to a discovery, start-up or scale-up 
that may create value for the company.
Throughout the analysis, the authors considered an average 
opportunity rather than the first opportunity created by the 
corporate venturing mechanism because, in the majority of the 
cases, it takes more time to generate the first opportunity, once 
the mechanism has been created. For example, in some cases 
in the sample, the company spent twice as long on generating 
the first opportunity as it did on generating an opportunity once 
(a) the company already knew how the venturing mechanism 
worked and (b) had generated enough opportunities to reduce 
the initial costs of learning.
During this first stage of opportunity identification, companies’ 
tasks generally include the following actions: defining the 
research areas and the internal challenges to be solved, 
defining the geography in which the company is willing to 
identify an opportunity, scouting for a problem-solution fit by 
analyzing databases, attending conferences, utilizing personal 
networks and those of their partners and finally, in some cases, 
signing a nondisclosure agreement.
In the identification part, the authors found two patterns among 
the analyzed companies, echoing previous research: those that 
were actively seeking opportunities, called “push-innovation 
companies,” and those that were more passive, called 
“pull-innovation companies.”23 
Collaboration  is the second stage and refers to the time span 
between the identification and prioritization of an opportunity 
and its attraction for a first collaboration test. A first collabora -
tion test refers to a POC: a joint effort completed by both 
stakeholders, the corporation and the start-up, to achieve a 
certain objective. 
This stage is characterized by some of the following steps: 
“seducing” the start-up with which the company wishes to work 
with, conducting due diligence of the opportunity through 
interviews and gathering further data, drafting a collaboration 
agreement and getting approval from legal departments. Other 
actions include signing a collaboration agreement (a term sheet 
in the case of CVC) and implementing the program or the joint 
POC.
Integration  is the third stage and refers to the time span 
between the beginning of a first collaboration test and the 
integration of the opportunity’s value into the company. With 
“value,” the authors refer to anything from which the corpora -
tion can benefit from: knowledge, products or services, a 
mind-set toward innovation, processes, business models and 
revenue sources.
This stage usually requires checking the results of the previous 
stage: determining whether to internalize the collaboration or 
continue with an external collaboration; deciding whether to 
continue collaborating through the current corporate venturing 
mechanism or to use another one; investing either more time or 
a bigger budget in the company; and identifying the best way to 
integrate the value generated and to assimilate that value into 
the parent company.2.2.3 Development stages 
 of an external opportunity
Although there are several accepted definitions of “entrepre -
neurial opportunity,” the authors have used these commonly 
cited definitions: “an idea that has developed into a business 
form” or “the possibility of introducing a new product to the 
market at a profit.”32
As described in some of the authors’ previous studies, 
opportunities can be engaged through a corporate venturing 
process at their different development stages (discovery, 
start-up and scale-up),9,1 depending on the maturity of the 
opportunity. Each venturing mechanism is suitable in specific 
ways for opportunities during the different stages of its 
development. 
A corporation with mechanisms at the discovery phase—such 
as scouting missions, hackathons, challenge prizes and sharing 
resources—is looking to catch opportunities at a very early 
stage, such as ideas or new technologies.
Mechanisms such as corporate accelerators, corporate 
incubators, strategic partnerships, venture builders and CVC are 
used instead to engage opportunities that are established, or 
ideas or technologies that need to be crafted. Crafting consists 
of developing and aligning a business model and designing the 
corresponding organization that could exploit the value of that 
innovation.9 Four of the mechanisms previously mentioned 
(excluding CVC) may also be useful in the ideation phase but are 
more relevant for their contribution to this phase.
In the crafting phase, the company would work with organiza -
tions that already have a business model, a prototype or even a 
well-developed working business.9
CVC, acquisitions and venture clients instead deal with 
well-developed opportunities that are in the phase of being 
scaled up and deployed.
Source: Prepared by the authors. For more details, see Appendix 1.Figure 14. Development stages of an opportunity
DISCOVERY START-UP SCALE-UP
Scouting mission
Hackathons
Challenge prize
Sharing 
resources
Strategic 
partnershipCorporate 
accelerator
Corporate 
incubator
Venture builder
Corporate 
venture capital 
Strategic 
partnershipAcquisition
Venture client
Corporate 
venture capital 
Strategic 
partnership19
Open Innovation This study is mainly answering two questions. On average, 
how much time and ongoing cost per opportunity in each 
corporate venturing mechanism are required to integrate 
value in the parent company? Can they be improved?
In short, since CVC is the oldest corporate venturing 
mechanism, the main answers in the literature relate to this 
mechanism. For instance, how long does it take for CVC to 
return capital to its investors per opportunity, once the CVC 
has been created? 19,33 This can depend on other external 
factors, such as the type of goals and the time frame that has 
been established by the corporation. A particular example of 
CVC might have objectives that are strategic, financial or 
hybrid. Additionally, it can take a long- or mid-term view.
There are studies that answer similar questions for the 
venture capital (VC) industry. For instance, there is a study 
citing data from 80 major US companies with strategically 
oriented venture capital program. It found that their reported 
return on investment, for programs that had been in 
operation for five years or more, averaged 14% to 15%.34
With the VC industry as a benchmark, the estimation is that 
VC exits happen in five to seven years after investment in 
start-ups. VCs sell their equity position in the ventures after 2.3 WHAT HAS BEEN SAID, MAINLY ABOUT CVC
2.4 WHAT WE DO NOT KNOW AND WHY THE ANSWER MATTERS
Not only speed but also cost is still a main worry of firms’ 
CIOs. In particular, cost is a special concern of innovation 
units, where quick wins are sometimes demanded with no 
long-term commitment.
Tweeting about the shutdown of Ogilvy Labs in 2016 (Figure 
15), the former director of innovative solutions at Ogilvy Group 
UK wrote: “It’s with regret that Labs has been shut down.” In a 
subsequent interview, she said: “If you’re not attached to 
revenue you’re always in a precarious position.”7,38
Source: Quoted in Omar Oakes and Britanney Kiefer, “Ogilvy Labs 
Shuts Down,” Campaign  (August 9, 2016).Figure 15. Tweet of Nicole YershonAccording to a 2017 article published in Harvard Business 
Review, “When a CEO announces a major initiative to foster 
innovation, mark your calendar. Three years later, many of 
these ambitious ventures will have quietly expired without an 
obituary.” 39
Considering the above, it is important to know the numbers in 
terms of time and cost to manage the risk of corporate 
venturing units properly.
When a CIO is defining a corporate venturing strategy and 
deciding which mechanisms to combine and which to 
prioritize, there are two important questions that she will 
highlight: How long is the process and how much does it cost 
to generate value from an opportunity in each mechanism? To 
find out the answer, the CIO would need to know: (a) the time 
and cost needed to build each mechanism, and (b) the time 
and cost needed to generate value from one opportunity.
Our previous study, has reported the time and cost of building 
each mechanism.1 However, no study has provided the time 
and cost needed to complete the corporate venturing cycle 
for an opportunity through each mechanism. So, in the 
academic literature, this is an unanswered question that is very 
relevant to firms’ CIOs and is attracting increasing attention.eight to 10 years of investment. VCs wait for returns seven to 
10 years after investment.35
Also, in previous studies by some of the authors, we analyzed 
the cost in terms of time and money needed to build each 
corporate venturing mechanism. However, the authors 
either carried out only a qualitative categorization9 or did not 
consider the ongoing cost and speed of the opportunity, 
once the mechanism had been created.1
In the case of corporate accelerators, the annual budget 
required to operate them can range anywhere from $2 million 
to $5 million, including expenses for office space, marketing 
and internal teams. If there are no third-party vendors 
running the program, the number may be lower.30 
It is also important to consider that independent and virtual 
accelerators are more cost-efficient than those that are more 
tightly bound to the parent company, whether positioned 
inside or outside of it a company.36 
Lastly, there are categorizations made by other institutions. 
However, in some cases those did not give empirical data or 
detailed numbers to support their conclusions.37 IESE Business School and BeRepublic   20
How much will it cost (in time and money) to integrate opportuni -
ties’ value into the parent company using each corporate 
venturing mechanism? How can those costs be reduced, while 
increasing the speed? Do the costs differ according to mecha -
nism? Which mechanisms are quicker? And which are the most 
cost-effective? How long should a chief innovation officer wait 
before killing an opportunity?
Executives usually do not have this kind of data because of the 
novelty of the opportunities and the lack of historical data. Based 
on 121 interviews with firms’ chief innovation officers and those in 
related roles in the United States, Europe and Asia (see Appendix 
2), this section covers these questions.
2.5.1 Speed per opportunity by mechanism
Speed is an important factor to consider when deciding which 
corporate venturing mechanisms are more apt for the institution’s 
goals. While a challenge prize may take only around six months to 
complete one opportunity, a venture client program can last more 
than two years. Figure 16 shows the average number of months 
required for one opportunity to go through the whole cycle of one 
corporate venturing mechanism, once it has been built. The time 
spans are divided into the three stages of a corporate venturing 
project (i.e., identification, collaboration, and integration).
The deviations of these metrics are quite different for the reasons 
described in section 2.5.3 such as the level or organizational agility 
of the parent company, brand awareness for attracting 
opportunities, the objectives of the mechanism, the executive 
committee’s urgency to close a deal, any differences in the legal 2.5 THE RESULTS
frameworks governing the start-ups and the parent company, and 
how regulated the sector is. Figure 17 shows the average and the 
coefficient of variation (i.e., low, medium or high) of the number 
of months required.
Not only does the total duration of the corporate venturing cycle 
vary between mechanisms but so too does the duration of the 
identification, collaboration and integration phases. For example, 
the durations of the identification and integration phases are 
almost inverted in hackathons and challenge prizes.  
(See Figure 18.)
2.5.2 Tackling integration, usually the longest stage
A common feature shared by mechanisms is that the integration 
phase is usually the longest. This phase generally takes up at least 
50% of the whole innovation cycle (except in venture builders) 
and can take up to 72% in the case of hackathons and CVC. (See 
Figure 18.)
Source: Prepared by the authors.Figure 16. Months required per stage and mechanism (mean)
Stage 1: Identification10 5 15 20 25 30 0Strategic partnership
Corporate incubator
Corporate venture capital
Acquisition
Sharing resources
Scouting mission
Corporate accelerator
Challenge prize
Venture builder
Hackathon
Venture client
Stage 2: Collaboration Stage 3: Integration21
Open Innovation Figure 17. Months required per stage and mechanism (mean and variation)
Source: Prepared by the authors. The deviation has been measured with the coefficient of variation (defined as the ratio of the standard deviation 
to the mean): low (<35%), medium (≤60%) and high (>60%). The lower the deviation, the more accurate the mean.Stage 1:
Identification
(months)Stage 2: 
Collaboration
(months)Stage 3:
Integration
(months)
Strategic partnership 3.5 11.3 12.8
Corporate incubator 3.5 7.0 16.0
Corporate venture capital 1.9 4.1 16.0
Acquisition 3.3 6.8 9.4
Sharing resources 4.0 2.0 8.3
Scouting mission 2.4 2.9 6.8
Corporate accelerator 2.2 2.3 6.8
Challenge prize 3.5 0.6 6.8
Venture builder 3.0 3.0 4.0
Hackathon 1.3 1.0 5.9
Venture client 0.3 3.2 4.4
Low variation Medium variation High variationIESE Business School and BeRepublic   22
0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
Source: Analysis conducted by the authors. The complete data are shown in Appendix 1.Figure 18. Months required per stage and mechanism (mean as a percentage)
2.5.3 Organizational agility: 
 A competitive advantage
While conducting interviews, the authors realized that 
some companies implementing the same mechanism as 
others required significantly less time to complete the 
innovation cycle. Some companies spent less time on each 
mechanism but still achieved similar results as their slower 
counterparts. The authors found that what gave the 
quicker-acting companies an advantage was the 
implementation of agile principles, among other best 
practices.
In our previous studies, we found that the application of 
agile principles throughout an organization helps to 
increase the speed of implementation while maintaining 
the impact, if those agile principles are implemented 
appropriately. These principles involved characteristics of 
the company such as the delegation of authority; a bias for 
action; the freedom to test new ideas; modular processes; 
aversion to bureaucracy; an ownership mentality; and 
flatter, faster, simpler structures.7
In particular, it was found that those principles can also 
speed up the integration of opportunities from corporate 
venturing units into the parent company.
Some insightful cases of innovation speed are analyzed 
below:
Hackathon:  There are two types of hackathon. The first 
and most common one lasts about a day or two, is easy to 
implement and has a high impact in terms of the media. It Stage 1: Identification Stage 2: Collaboration Stage 3: IntegrationStrategic partnership
Corporate incubator
Corporate venture capital
Acquisition
Sharing resources
Scouting mission
Corporate accelerator
Challenge prize
Venture builder
Hackathon
Venture client
is often used for indirect marketing. The second type lasts 
between four and six months and is carried out in 
collaboration with universities. It is launched during the 
academic year to target students, and usually the 
participants are required to make a final pitch to the 
company. In the second case, companies aim to attract 
young talent who would not otherwise be interested in 
entering so-called traditional sectors. Overall, in both 
cases, the opportunities generated are usually at too early 
stage to be integrated.
Another aspect was that some interviewees, while bearing 
in mind the definition of “value” given in this study (see 
section 2.2.2), sometimes reported spending less than 
one month on integrating the created value into the 
parent company.
For instance, one European company in the energy sector 
launched a hackathon and reported having integrated 
value before the end of the competition. The reason was 
it was able to increase brand awareness in its area 
(innovation ecosystems), making it more attractive to 
start-ups.
In other words, the company was able to increase its 
desirability, to make it more appealing to start-ups to 
collaborate with the company in a short period of time. 
Moreover, the corporation reported increased awareness 
and a cultural change among its employees, while 
becoming one of the top-of-mind players for start-ups 
compared to the competitors in its  industry.
Seventh, there is the size of the deal. The bigger the deal, 23
Open Innovation the longer the time required for an opportunity to go 
through the whole corporate venturing cycle.
Sharing resources:  This process is usually shorter when the 
start-up is in the same continent as the company’s 
headquarters. The process is longer when this is not the 
case, such as when a European company is working with a 
US start-up. This is because two obstacles that hinder agility 
come into the picture: the internal bureaucracy of getting 
approval, and the differences in the countries’ legal 
frameworks. 
So, what should be done? After defining the geographical 
scope of its search for start-ups, the corporation should 
analyze the differences between the headquarters and the 
target geography and prepare internal mechanisms to 
speed up the process.
For instance, a European pharmaceutical company decided 
to build a corporate venturing unit that would focus on 
scouting missions and sharing resources. After deciding on 
the search fields, the scouting team found that most of the 
start-ups that would solve its internal challenge were 
located on the west cost of the United States. However, 
these start-ups’ speeds and legal frameworks differed 
significantly from those of the European company. 
Therefore, the company allocated a legal expert specializing 
in the US market who had a long track record of working 
with start-ups to integrate them at a fast pace into the 
corporate venturing unit. This improved the time span 
required to work with US start-ups.
CVC:  After talking to interviewees, the authors found two 
key factors that allow CVC units to increase its speed during 
the corporate venturing process.
The first factor concerns the identification and collaboration 
stages, enabling the speed and ease of such tasks to be 
improved: international recognition of the company’s brand 
increases the deal flow of opportunities and, at the same 
time, gives the company greater powers of persuasion when 
it comes to signing an agreement.   
The second factor concerns all three stages (identification, 
collaboration and integration) and refers to the urgency of 
closing a deal, as required by the company’s executive 
committee.
Two examples should be taken into account. First, imagine a 
bank that is challenged by a new development in blockchain 
technology, which was acknowledged as one of the top 
priorities in the previous executive committee meeting. The 
CEO may ask the CVC unit to identify a possible start-up 
focused on the problem so the company could invest in it 
and eventually acquire it. On the other hand, another CVC 
unit spots the same opportunity in the market but does not 
consider it to be a high priority of the executive committee. 
In cases like the second example, the whole process of 
identification, collaboration and integration usually takes 
longer than if the problem is given priority.
Venture builder: It was also found that quicker units of venture building usually minimize the interaction with their 
parent firm’s technology department. They look to avoid 
internal conflict over integration processes by developing 
low-risk testing environments.
For instance, one of the analyzed companies was 
struggling to prototype new technologies because it was 
in a sector that must ensure high levels of security. It 
created a parallel low-risk internal environment to allow 
quick prototyping (i.e., a testing server). In fintech is 
usually called sandbox or application program interface 
(API), which enables banks testing new technologies.
This company was able to reduce the time required for a 
POC from 12 to 3 months, increasing the speed and the 
agility of the corporate venturing process.
Partnerships: Although the average time span for the 
whole process of identification, collaboration and 
integration is almost 30 months, the range is quite wide: 
from four to 48 months. (See Appendix 1.) Seven main 
factors affect this variation.
First of all, there is the stage of development of the 
selected opportunity. For instance, building a partnership 
to jointly create a minimal viable product (MVP) from 
scratch is not the same as building a partnership with an 
already established business model that just needs either a 
boost in visibility or an improved distribution channel. The 
earlier in the process a partnership is formed, the longer it 
will take.
Second, it is important to know how mature the 
relationship with the start-up is. If the company and 
start-up have worked together previously, the more they 
know each other’s organization, decision makers and KPIs, 
so the faster the process will be. 
Third, the more regulated the sector (e.g., the chemical 
and pharmaceutical sectors are tightly regulated), the 
longer it will take to build the partnership and execute the 
whole process. The authors found in their sample that, 
when a start-up partnered with a business-to-business 
(B2B) company working in two business areas (such as 
chemicals and technology), the partnership in the first 
business area tackled took up more time than the 
partnership in the second. Usually the main obstacles are 
legal compliance and the related bureaucracy, which may 
include preliminary chemical studies (adding three to five 
months), further due diligence, etc.
A fourth factor is whether the partnership is going to be an 
equity model or codevelopment in the collaboration stage, 
an aspect that echoes some of the previous literature.40
Fifth, there is the flexibility of the company’s business 
model in the integration stage. Depending on whether the 
result of the previous stage is a regulated product or not, 
the product may have to be validated and pass legal 
procedures, which could slow down the process.
A sixth factor is whether the partnership is negotiated in a IESE Business School and BeRepublic   24
country whose legal framework is different from that of 
the headquarters: for example, a Chinese company 
forming a partnership with a US start-up.
2.5.4 Ongoing cost per opportunity per   
mechanism per year
With this report, the authors wanted to equip readers 
with the knowledge needed to identify the best 
corporate venturing mechanism for their goals. However, 
there is a challenge: it is difficult to find a cost metric to 
compare opportunities by mechanism, ensuring that 
apples are being compared with apples and not with 
pears.
The two main challenges are: the FTE cost (work 
outsourced or in the parent company), and the number 
of opportunities with which the corporation wants to 
collaborate (higher or lower).
In the first case, if you outsource 90% of your process, 
your ongoing cost of management will be higher, while 
your internal FTE cost will be lower. If you outsource 5% 
of your process, your ongoing cost of management will 
be lower, while your internal FTE cost will be higher.
In the second case, the cost of collaborating with two 
start-ups is usually lower than with 50 start-ups.
Since our previous studies1 already disclosed the average 
cost of launching each mechanism, this study has 
focused on the cost of an opportunity once the 
mechanism has been created. In short, the authors 
analyzed the annual cost for one opportunity (at any 
development stage: discovery, start-up or scale-up) to 
move through the whole cycle (i.e., identification, 
collaboration and integration) of a corporate venturing 
mechanism. This annual ongoing cost includes 
management and FTE costs.
Firstly, the managerial cost refers to the annual amount 
(in euros) required to identify value, collaborate and 
integrate value from one opportunity into each 
mechanism, once the mechanism has been launched. It 
includes costs such as legal services, marketing, travel, 
databases and facilities (e.g., coworking space, testing 
servers). It does not include the actual investment (e.g., 
the capital principal or investment fee). In the cases of 
mechanisms that have several “editions” during a year 
(e.g., some incubation programs), interviewees provided 
the cost for the whole year, unless there were more than 
three months between each edition.
Secondly, the FTE cost refers to the annual amount (in 
euros) to sustain the mechanism once it has been 
launched in terms of how many full-time equivalent 
employees are required per year to keep the mechanism running.
Figure 19 shows the ongoing costs of an opportunity 
going through the whole corporate venturing process. 
One interesting result was the deviation of the results in 
some mechanisms (e.g., strategic partnership, 
acquisition, CVC, corporate accelerator and sharing 
resources). The interviews showed that there were 
companies integrating value from a similar number of 
opportunities but some were more cost-effective than 
others.
Strategic partnerships were not included in the chart 
because of the high standard deviation. This variation 
exists because of the amount of different forms such 
partnerships can take, bearing in mind that a strategic 
partnership can work to collaborate on opportunities at 
different stages (e.g., opportunity, start-up and scale-up).
What factors increase the chances of reducing the 
internal cost of a corporate venturing mechanism?
2.5.5 Connecting venturing mechanisms  
and business units to reduce structural 
costs
One trigger is the level of the corporate venturing unit’s 
integration into its parent company. When it is highly 
integrated, it can leverage many of the parent company’s 
structural resources, by spotting synergies and 
eliminating redundancies. For example, a corporate 
venturing unit that wanted to launch a marketing 
campaign for a new hackathon might try to engage the 
company’s marketing department. Since the hackathon 
would also make the company’s brand more visible, the 
company’s marketing department would agree to help in 
the endeavor with its own employees, reducing the 
internal costs of the corporate venturing unit’s FTE 
employees.
Another fact affecting FTE costs is that corporate 
venturing units, in order to get business units to support 
a future opportunity integration, often start to share not 
only costs but also employees in joint projects. For 
instance, the authors found that the team of a company’s 
venture builder was composed of members from different 
units who worked together on the production of an initial 
proof of concept. Usually, the departments involved are 
innovation, technology and marketing.
Another helpful way to save on FTE costs is to connect 
several mechanisms. A common example is a 
combination of the scouting mission, the corporate 
accelerator and the CVC. The authors found that, in many 
cases, the scouting mission team provided the corporate 
accelerator and the CVC with opportunities. Finally, 
accelerated start-ups are investment opportunities for 
the CVC. In this case, the FTE cost required for the CVC 
decreases because the CVC leverages the FTE employees 
of the scouting unit.Ongoing cost per opportunity per mechanism per year 
= managerial cost + internal FTE cost25
Open Innovation Source: Prepared by the authors. The complete data are shown in Appendix 1. Strategic partnerships have not been included because of the high 
standard deviation. The euro exchange rate used was from January 2019.Figure 19. Ongoing cost (€) per opportunity per mechanism per year (mean and standard deviation)Companies are increasingly connecting and integrating 
their corporate venturing mechanisms, developing a 
more holistic and unified perspective of new 
opportunities and redundancies. These can be seen as 
internal innovation ecosystems within the corporations.
Another pattern found in the data was the correlation 
with mechanisms that produce more developed 
opportunities (e.g., start-ups or scale-ups) and the 
ongoing cost per opportunity. The only exceptions were 
corporate incubators, which have more ongoing costs 
compared to a corporate accelerator or CVC but usually 
provide opportunities during earlier stages. Additionally, 
as explained in previous research, the cost of building a 
corporate incubator from scratch is quite significative.1
2.5.6 Relationship among speed, 
 cost and the opportunity stage
To understand in greater depth the trade-off between 
cost and speed, it is important to bear in mind the 
--
Notes. The calculation assumed that no external employees were included. However, the more work is outsourced, the higher the managerial cost (i.e., of 
outsourcing) and the lower the number of internal FTE employees. For the FTE cost, the authors used several sources (e.g., Glassdoor) to estimate the salaries of 
innovation positions in Europe. (In the case of the United States and China, the FTE costs are proportionally higher.) The salaries ranged from €50,000 for some 
roles managing a scouting mission or working for a corporate incubator up to €130,000 for those working in CVC units.development stage of the opportunity being worked with 
(i.e., discovery, start-up and scale-up). (See section 2.2.1.) 
For instance, the development stage of a discovery 
found in a scouting mission is different from a scale-up 
to be acquired.
In Figure 20, the three factors are put together: speed, 
cost and maturity of the opportunity. It shows the 
months required for a corporate venturing opportunity 
to go through the whole corporate venturing cycle of 
identification, collaboration and integration (x-axis), 
along with the ongoing cost of that process including 
managerial and FTE costs (y-axis), and the development 
stage of an opportunity (diameter of the circles).
700,000 600,000 500,000 400,000 300,000 200,000 100,000 0Corporate venture capitalAcquisition
Corporate accelerator
Corporate incubator
Venture builder
Sharing resources
Hackathon
Challenge prize
Scouting mission
Venture clientIESE Business School and BeRepublic   26
The interesting insights in Figure 20 are connected with the 
relationship between months and ongoing cost per 
opportunity vs. development stage of the opportunity. 
These are the patterns and the outliers.
Starting with the patterns, the more mature the opportunity 
(either a scale-up or start-up) with which to collaborate, the 
longer the time required to go through the whole corporate 
venturing process and the higher the ongoing costs per 
opportunity, as can be seen in the top-right quadrant (e.g., 
acquisition and CVC) and in the bottom-left quadrant (e.g., 
hackathon, sharing resources, challenge prize and scouting 
mission).
However, there are a few exceptions:
Firstly, the corporate incubator is the mechanism with the 
longest time span but the development stage of the opportunity is only that of a start-up (not a scale-up). 
Therefore, the opportunity is at an earlier stage compared to 
an opportunity from an acquisition or CVC. In other words, it 
provides a less developed opportunity to the parent 
company at a slower speed.
Secondly, the opportunity stage of the corporate 
accelerator and the venture builder is a bit more developed 
compared to that of the corporate incubator and the 
ongoing costs are similar, but these two mechanisms 
require less time for the corporate venturing cycle, meaning 
the process is around two to three times as quick.
Lastly, the speed and cost of the venture client is similar to 
the hackathon, sharing resources or challenge prize. 
However, the opportunity stage of the venture client is more 
developed.Figure 20. Relationship between months and ongoing cost 
per opportunity vs. development stage of the opportunity
Source: Prepared by the authors. The complete data are shown in Appendix 1.Ongoing 
cost per 
opportunity 
per year (€)
0100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000
Acquisition
Corporate venture capitalCorporate 
incubatorCorporate accelerator
Venture builder
Sharing resources
Venture clientChallenge prize
Scouting mission Hackathon
Total months required per opportunity5 10 0 15 20 25
Scouting mission
Sharing resources
Corporate accelerator
Venture builder
Venture clientHackathon
Challenge prize
Corporate venture capital
Corporate incubator
AcquisitionCorporate venturing mechanism (colour) Opportunity stage (diameter)
Discovery
Start-up
Scale-up27
Open Innovation Improving your strategy:
1. Tailor your corporate venturing strategy with numbers: 
Choose the right combination of corporate venturing 
mechanisms, based on data rather than intuition or media 
hype. Since the speed and costs per opportunity per 
mechanism are different, understand first what your company’s 
objectives and expectations are (in terms of goals, capital and 
time horizon) and then analyze the numbers relating to each 
mechanism that fits those expectations. Do not copy and paste 
but tailor your corporate venturing strategy. Now you have a 
benchmark.
2. Plan realistically, ask for the time and budget you need, 
and keep track of the results:  Now that you have the available 
data, estimate more accurately (with a benchmark) the time 
and budget you will need for the opportunities you want to 
integrate. This will help you secure the minimum budget and 
time horizon needed to see results. In particular, if you are 
taking your first steps in corporate venturing and you do not 
have yet historical data, this will really help you. Bear in mind 
that, depending on the mechanism, you will need between 
eight and 28 months to integrate value from one opportunity.
3. Identify where your bottleneck is:  Identification, 
collaboration or integration: Breaking down the corporate 
venturing process into various components will give you some 
clues to identify where your bottlenecks are in terms of speed 
and cost and therefore help you design your scorecard of 
performance indicators. Additionally, with this benchmark, you 
will know whether you are spending too much time or money 
or whether you have to ask your company’s executive 
committee for a bigger budget or a longer time horizon. 
4. Think twice critically about having a corporate incubator: 
While the maturity of a corporate incubator as an opportunity 
is at an earlier stage compared to a corporate accelerator, the 
speed of taking that opportunity through the whole corporate 
venturing cycle is more than twice that of corporate 
incubators, while the costs are very similar. Consider other 
mechanisms that may give you “more with less” such as the 
venture client, which provides more developed opportunities 
at a lower cost and higher speed.
Increasing the speed:
5. Adopt agile principles, especially in the longest 
stage—integration:  Since integration has the longest time 
span of the corporate venturing process, think about how you 
can improve your organizational agility in that process to 
adopt the value you have successfully generated: flatter, faster, 
simpler structures; modular processes; delegated authorities; 
and more. This may give you a competitive advantage.
6. Prevent delays in your corporate venturing mechanism:  
The average time span required by an opportunity to go 
through the whole innovation process may vary for several 
reasons. For instance, if the opportunity with which you want 
to collaborate (i.e., discovery, start-up or scale-up) is outside 
your regulatory framework (e.g., in another continent), involve How can these results help companies’ chief innovation officers do their jobs?
someone with the relevant legal expertise who can speed up 
the process. Secondly, the urgency required by the company’s 
executive committee will speed up your venturing process.
7 . Be the player in your industry with which start-ups most 
want to work: Your brand awareness in the innovation 
ecosystem and the relationship you have forged there in the 
past will help you not only seduce the best start-ups (by 
putting yourself top of mind) but also will speed up your 
processes of identification (i.e., they will come to you) and 
collaboration (i.e., you will close an agreement faster).
Reducing your cost: 
8. Use the “joint three pockets” rule to increase your budget 
and other units’ involvement:  Since innovation units have 
tight budgets (especially at the beginning) and have to 
maximize their ability to integrate value, try to secure the 
involvement (with some budget and a decision maker) of 
business units and of corporate headquarters*. So, get one of 
each pocket. For instance, finance one POC with a start-up 
with a third of the budget from the innovation unit, a third 
from corporate headquarters and a third from a business unit. 
To go further, get a member from each of those three units 
involved in the decision-making process. This will reduce your 
cost for POCs.
9. Leverage the resources of the parent company: If it does 
not slow you down too much, use all the available resources of 
the corporation, such as marketing services, space, and 
expertise. This will not increase your absolute budget but will 
give you the chance to reinvest those costs in something that 
may create more value for the corporation.
10. Connect your internal corporate venturing ecosystem:  If 
your company has been in the corporate venturing arena for 
five to seven years, you may start experiencing having a 
fragmented message about the job of your different corporate 
venturing units. In other words, not showing one unique 
“story” explaining, to internal and external stakeholders, what 
these are doing.
For this purpose, it is important to design a connected 
strategy of corporate venturing among units (with a holistic 
perspective) and to understand how the deal flow of 
opportunities works (e.g., the scout identifies an opportunity 
that connects with the corporate accelerator, which may lead 
to the CVC, followed by an acquisition proposal, and so on).
The other principle for this organizational connectivity is use 
of the MECE** principle, so there should be a person in charge 
of each initiative but no more than one. Therefore, every 
project can run at speed, while accountability is maintained for 
every project. All these principles will help you reduce 
redundancies, enhance synergies and increase corporate 
agility.
--
* In the vernacular, “corporate headquarters” may be referred as “corporate” or 
the “head office.”
** Mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive.2.6 CONSEQUENCES: WHAT NOW?
Corporate 
incubatorIESE Business School and BeRepublic   28
Appendixes
1. Detailed data
Figure 21. Months required per stage and mechanism and the ongoing cost per opportunity (mean and variation)
Source: Prepared by the authors. The deviation has been measured with the coefficient of variation (defined as the ratio of the standard deviation to 
the mean): low (<35%), medium (≤60%) and high (>60%). The lower the deviation, the more accurate the mean.Stage 1:
Identification
(months)Stage 2: 
Collaboration
(months)Stage 3:
Integration
(months)Ongoing cost per 
opportunity per year
(€)
Strategic partnership 3.5 11.3 12.8 NA
Corporate incubator 3.5 7.0 16.0 294,500
Corporate venture capital 1.9 4.1 16.0 331,148
Acquisition 3.3 6.8 9.4 447,363
Sharing resources 4.0 2.0 8.3 152,450
Scouting mission 2.4 2.9 6.8 55,175
Corporate accelerator 2.2 2.3 6.8 310,333
Challenge prize 3.5 0.6 6.8 85,000
Venture builder 3.0 3.0 4.0 255,000
Hackathon 1.3 1.0 5.9 105,762
Venture client 0.3 3.2 4.4 47,000
Low variation Medium variation High variation29
Open Innovation 2. Research methodologyFigure 22. Corporate venturing mechanisms categorized by development, capital and time 
Source: Prats, J., Siota, J., Canonici, J., and Contijoch, X., Open Innovation: Building, Scaling and Consolidating Your Firm’s Corporate Venturing 
Unit. IESE, Opinno  (2018).
This study was carried out to answer the question of how much 
will it cost (in time and money) to integrate opportunities’ value 
into the parent company using each corporate venturing 
mechanism in established firms. To achieve this objective, the 
authors used several sources. Initially, they reviewed the 
literature on the topic. Then, they conducted fieldwork 
consisting of interviews with 121 chief innovation officers and 
executives involved in corporate venturing activities (experts 
located in the United States, Europe and Asia): 63 with a formal 
protocol (167 questions) and 58 with an informal protocol. Then, 
the authors led an exhaustive analysis of corporate venturing 
activities of 26 companies.
An interview protocol was developed, and the interviews
were recorded. Each interview had an introductory phase in 
which the interviewer explained the definitions of possible 
ambiguous words of the questionarie to ensure a common 
understanding. The interviews consisted of both open and 
closed questions. Afterward, the answers were classified and analyzed twice. Later, the authors twice carried out a 
codification of the interviews and the quantitative analysis of the 
answers, using correlation and regression analysis. Then two 
independent experts reviewed the rigor of the process and the 
quality of the results obtained.
The authors acknowledge that, given the complexity of the 
phenomena, a larger sample may increase the understanding of 
this important practice. However, the sample group was 
selected using the practice of looking for representation to 
increase that understanding.
Further research in forthcoming white papers will be welcome to 
provide guidance on additional questions such as what regions 
are more developed in terms of corporate venturing; how to 
align the corporate venturing KPIs of the executive committee, 
the entrepreneur and the CV units’ head; the performance of 
venture capital compared to corporate venture capital; and how 
to measure the strategic impact of corporate venturing.Capital
(required)
Development
(of the external opportunity)Time
(to get results) Long-term Mid-term
High
Low
Discovery Start-up Scale-upVenture builder Venture clientStrategic partnershipCorporate incubatorCorporate venture capital
Corporate acceleratorAcquisition
Scouting team
Hackathon
Challenge prize
Sharing resourcesIESE Business School and BeRepublic   30
3. Mechanisms available for corporate venturing
Scouting mission
A scouting mission is a mission undertaken by professionals 
from an industry in which a company is interested. The 
professionals are tasked with holding meetings with 
start-ups, inventors or university researchers. They look for 
interesting innovations that are aligned with the company’s 
strategy. Companies gain insights and valuable information 
from leading innovation hubs around the world. Start-ups are 
exposed to potential financing opportunities and business 
deals.
Company objective: Gaining insight into leading innovations.
Hackathon
A hackathon is a focused, intense workshop in which 
software developers collaborate, either individually or in 
teams, to find technological solutions to a corporate 
innovation challenge within a restricted time. Start-ups solve 
specific technical problems for companies or produce a 
particular piece of code in a short period of time and, in 
return, they get access to new segments, markets and 
financing opportunities. 
Company objective: Finding technological solutions to a 
corporate challenge.
Sharing resources
Sharing resources is the simplest form of collaboration 
between corporations and start-ups. It allows companies to 
improve corporate branding, attract and keep talent, and 
gain visibility. Meanwhile, start-ups get access to cost-
effective or free corporate resources, increase their visibility 
and are able to network with other similar ventures.
Company objective: Getting closer to the ecosystem to 
understand its composition and needs.
Challenge prize
A challenge prize is an open competition that focuses on a 
specific issue. It gives innovators an incentive to provide new 
solutions based on new opportunities and technological 
trends to foster internal learning. Companies get to adopt 
external opportunities, improve corporate branding and gain 
visibility, while start-ups get access to new segments, 
markets and financing opportunities.
Company objective: Obtaining new solutions based on new 
technological trends.
Corporate accelerator
A corporate accelerator is a program that provides intensive 
short or medium-term support to cohorts of rapid-growth 
start-ups via mentoring, training, physical working space and 
company-specific resources. These resources can include 
money invested in a start-up, normally in exchange for a 
variable share of equity. Through corporate accelerators, 
firms and start-ups get benefits similar to those of a 
corporate incubator.Company objective: Supporting start-ups with a structured 
program.
Corporate venture capital
In the case of corporate venture capital, corporations target 
equity investment at start-ups that are of strategic interest 
beyond a purely financial return. Companies become more 
diversified and get access to products, services and 
technology, while start-ups get access to financial resources, 
know-how and advice from experienced corporations.
Company objective: Fast-tracking access to innovations, 
strengthening internal research, or accessing new 
distribution channels.
Venture builder (or excubator, if outsourced)
Corporations aim to fast-track the growth of start-ups 
through a combination of several tools (e.g., corporate 
incubators, corporate accelerators). In practice, an excubator 
functions as such for a company. While start-ups develop 
tailor-made prototypes to solve a problem for a corporation, 
entrepreneurs gain access to facilities, expertise and 
technical support, including skilled mentorship, which 
increases their chances of getting access to funding. 
Company objective: Getting an MVP outside the regular 
structure.
Corporate incubator
A corporate incubator is a program in which entrepreneurs 
are provided with a set of value-added mentoring services 
(centralized legal or marketing support) and working spaces 
to build viable opportunities and business models ready to 
go to market, in exchange for a share of equity. Corporations 
get a cost-effective and outsourced R&D function, while 
start-ups get access to facilities, expertise and technical 
support.
Company objective: Providing viability to promising 
innovation and its commercialization.
Strategic partnership
A strategic partnership is an alliance between corporations 
and start-ups to enable them to define, develop and pilot 
innovative solutions together. It allows both sides to build a 
relationship and synergies.
Company objective: Defining, developing and piloting 
innovative solutions with an existing company.
Venture client (or client accelerator)
A venture client involves a specific type of strategic 
partnership and a highly integrated tool that companies can 
use to purchase the first unit of a start-up’s product, service 
or technology when the start-up is not yet mature enough to 
become a client. While corporations get access to start-ups 
with a ready MVP, start-ups get revenue and a consolidated 
company as their client.31
Open Innovation 4. Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all those who have helped make 
this study reality. They especially wish to express their sincere 
gratitude to IESE Business School’s Bertrán Foundation Chair of 
Entrepreneurship, IESE’s Entrepreneurship and Innovation Center, 
BeRepublic and John Andrew Carter. Without their effective 
support, the authors would have been unable to complete this 
project. Company objective: Offering a client relationship to 
insource external innovation.
Acquisition
Acquisitions involve the purchase of start-ups by companies 
to access the start-ups’ commercially ready products, 
complementary technology or capabilities that solve 
specific business problems or to enter new markets. The 
buyer benefits from the acquisition of talent, skills and 
knowledge, while the start-up receives monetary rewards 
and a reputational advantage.*
Company objective: Accessing commercially ready 
products, complementary technology or capabilities.
* Note that this mechanism does not include the acquisition of large corporations. In those 
cases, these units usually move the opportunity to another department, such as that in 
charge of mergers and acquisitions.IESE Business School and BeRepublic   32
1. Prats, J., Siota, J., Contijoch, X. & Canonici, T. Open 
Innovation: Building, Scaling and Consolidating Your Firm’s 
Corporate Venturing Unit. IESE,  Opinno  (2018).
2. Chesbrough, H. W. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for 
Creating and Proﬁting from Technology  (Harvard Business 
School Press, Boston, 2003).
3. The agility of a start-up and the strength of a corporation. 
IESE Alumni Magazine (2018).
4. Burke, K. The auto industry will change more in next five 
years than prior 50, says GM’s president. MarketWatch  (2016).
5. The History Of CVC: From Exxon And DuPont To Xerox And 
Microsoft, How Corporates Began Chasing ‘The Future’. CB 
Insights Research  (2017).
6. Brigl, M., Hong, M., Roos, A., Schmieg, F. & Wu, X. Corporate 
Venturing Shifts Gears: How the Largest Companies Apply 
a Broad Set of Tools to Speed Innovation. Boston Consulting 
Group  (2016).
7. Prats, M. J., Siota, J., Gillespie, D. & Singleton, N. 
Organizational agility: Why large corporations struggle to 
adopt the inventions created by their innovation units and 
how to improve it. IESE, Oliver Wyman  (2018).
8. Bolshaw, L. Can corporate venture solve the innovation 
paradox? Ernst & Young Global Limited (2018).
9. Prats, J., Amigó, P., Ametller, X. & Batlle, A. Corporate 
Venturing: Achieving Profitable Growth Through Startups. 
IESE (2017).
10. Chesbrough, H. W. Making Sense of Corporate Venture 
Capital. Harvard Business Review. 80, 133 (2002).
11. Caillard, J.-F. Why is the corporate venture growing so fast? 
What are the keys? Medium.com (2017).
12. Peterson, B. Inside Salesforce Ventures - the investment arm 
behind the $1 billion software ecosystem fueling growth.  
Business Insider (2018).
13. Nijjar, P. Salesforce.com Inc. Seeks to Expand on Past 
Success With Latest $100 Million Venture Fund. The Money 
Fool (2017).
14. Intel Capital, Investing in Global Innovation. Intel Capital  
(2014).
15. Early-Stage Investing: The Qualcomm Ventures Way. Medium.
com (2018).
16. Siota, J., Contijoch, X., Buñuel, M. Á., Santo Domingo, S. & 
Sandoval, F. Presentation of the report Open Innovation at 
IberCaja. (2018).
17. Open Innovation for SMEs (2016). Inspire . [online] Available 
at: http://www.inspire-smes.eu [Accessed 1 Nov. 2018].
18. Preparing FP9: Designing the successor to the Horizon 2020 
research and innovation framework programme. European 
Parliament  (2018).
19. Gompers, P. & Lerner, J. The Determinants of Corporate 
Venture Capital Success Organizational Structure, Incentives, 
and Complementarities. International Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry  18, (2000).
20. GCV data review and 2018 outlook. Global Corporate 
Venturing Analytics  (2018).5. References
21. Lee, S., Park, G. & Kang, J. The double-edged effects of the 
corporate venture capital unit ’s structural autonomy on 
corporate investors’ explorative and exploitative innovation. 
Journal Business Research 88, 141–149 (2018).
22. Ashkenas, R. Manage With a Portfolio Mindset. Harvard 
Business Review (2012).
23. Baghai, M., Coley, S. & White, D. The Alchemy of Growth: 
Practical Insights for Building the Enduring Enterprise (Orion 
Business Publishing, London, 1999).
24. Cabiedes, L. and Siota, J. Entrepreneurs Don’t Need More 
Venture Capitalists But More Customers. European Financial 
Review , July-August, (2016).
25. Siota, J. Linked innovation: Commercializing discoveries at 
research centers . (Palgrave Macmillan, 2018).
26. Glenn, M. Organizational agility: How business can survive 
and thrive in turbulent times. The Economist Intelligence Unit  
(2009).
27. West, J. & Gallagher, S. Challenges of Open Innovation: The 
Paradox of Firm Investment in Open Source Software. R&D 
Management  3, 319–331 (2006).
28. Atkinson, R. Project management: cost time and quality. 
Elsevier  17, 337–342 (1999).
29. De, P., Dunne, E. J., Ghosh, J. B. & Wells, C. E. The discrete 
time-cost tradeoff problem revisited. Journal of Operational 
Research  (1995).
30. Desai, F. Corporate Accelerator Launches Slowing Down. 
Forbes  (2016).
31. Souitaris, V. & Zerbinati, S. How do corporate venture 
capitalists do deals? An exploration of corporate investment 
practices. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal  1, 321–348 
(2014).
32. Hansen, D. J., Shrader, R. & Monllor, J. Defragmenting 
Definitions of Entrepreneurial Opportunity. J. Small Business 
Management  (2011).
33. Park, H. D. & Steensma, H. K. When does corporate venture 
capital add value for new ventures? Strategic Management 
Journal  (2011). 
34. Sykes, H. B. Corporate venture capital: Strategies for success. 
Journal of Business Venturing  (2002).
35. Silviera, R. & Wright, R. The Venture Capital Cycle. Working 
Paper. Available https://goo.gl/efafs7 (2007).
36. Kohler, T. Corporate accelerators: Building bridges between 
corporations and startups. Business Horizons 59, 347–357 
(2016).
37. Menezes, C. Why Corporate Venture Building is the best 
model for disruptive innovation. Medium.com (2018).
38. Oakes, O. & Kiefer, B. Ogilvy Labs shuts down. Campaign  
(2016).
39. Kirsner, S. The Stage Where Most Innovation Projects Fail. 
Harvard Business Review  (2017).
40. Chesbrough, H. & Schwartz, K. Innovating business models 
with co-development partnerships. Research Technology 
Management  (2007).33
Open Innovation Copyright © 2019 IESE Business School and BeRepublic.
All rights reserved. This report may not be reproduced or 
redistributed, in whole or in part, without the written permission of 
IESE Business School or BeRepublic.  
IESE Business School and BeRepublic accept no liability whatsoever 
for the actions of third parties in this respect. The information and 
opinions in this report were prepared by IESE Business School and 
BeRepublic. IESE Business School and BeRepublic have made every 
effort to use reliable, up-to-date and comprehensive information 
and analysis, but all information is provided without any warranty of 
any kind, express or implied. IESE Business School and BeRepublic 
accept no liability for any loss arising from any action taken or not 
taken as a result of information contained in this report or any reports 
or sources of information referred to herein or for any consequential, 
special or similar damages, even if advised of the possibility of such 
damages. This report may not be sold without the written consent of 
IESE Business School and BeRepublic.IESE Business School and BeRepublic   34
www.iese.edu
Barcelona 
Madrid
Munich
New York
São Paulo