 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Evaluating Website Effectiveness  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for evaluating 
your website effectiveness compared  to your top 2 competitors. 
Communicating via your website is a key area to d rive competitive 
advantage; don‟ t miss this opportunity.  
 
 
Read this brief 6 -page report to:  
 
 Understand Website Effectiveness Best Practices  
 
 Evaluate Your Website with a Proven Framework  
 
 Identify Areas of Strength & Weakness  
 
 Compare your Website to the Competition  
 
 Develop a Website Program Action Plan  
 
 Communicate Competitive Advantages Online  
 
 
Read this report to optimize your website program to generate more 
leads, communicate externally, and enhance your brand.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Introduction         3  
 
What Makes a Website Effective?      3  
 
Evaluating your Strengths & Weaknesses     5  
 
Compare Your Website with Competitors     5  
 
Develop a Website Program Action Plan      6  
 
Conclusion          6 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Introduction  
What Makes a Website Effective?    
 
 
 
 
Websites have become the de -facto standard for communicating 
externally to customers, prospects, investors, potential employees, 
partners, and other key stakeholders.  
  
Surprisingly, since the boom of web activity in the dot.com era, many 
organizations ha ve failed to maintain an effective website. As the 
executive responsible for managing website programs, it is your 
responsibility to drive this online channel forward and create a 
competitive advantage in online presence.  
  
Perform a brief analysis of the strengths & weaknesses of your own 
website , and your top 2 competitors, to determine who is leading the 
charge in this area  of marketing. If y ou are being outshined, build the 
business case for a website upgrade, or at least, improve your current 
capabilities and web effectiveness.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
The following section will describe 6 key areas that drive effectiveness, 
to help you understand what makes a solid website. Understand these 
criteria before doing an evaluation.  
   
  
1. Clear Communication     
  
 Users immediately know who you are/what you do  
 The website objective (provide info, support) is clear  
 Target market is clearly defined and catered to  
 There is a simple call -to-action (register for webcast)  
 No irrelevant content or sections ar e present  
 Right amount of info provided. Not too much/too little  
  
  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
2. Brand Consistency & Aesthetic Appeal     
  
 Pages follow consistent layout, color scheme, style  
 Key marketing messages a clearly laid out  
 No spelling mistakes or poor gramm ar  
 Online branding is consistent with offline collateral  
 Website reflects your expertise accurately  
 Visually appealing and  “nice-on-the-eyes”  
 Clean, professional, and follows good design principles  
  
  
3. User -Friendliness & Easy Navigation    
  
 Users can quickly navigate to each section  
 Critical information available within 3 clicks of homepage  
 Forms are automatically populated for return visitors  
 There are clear navigation “paths ” to key sections  
 All links are active. No broken links or display errors  
  
  
4. Search Engine Optimization & Structure    
  
 Website has been submitted & indexed by Google  
 Meta-tags, keywords, page titles are in code  
 Headers are text -based, not graphic -based  
 There is a sitemap that links to all pages directly  
 All pages have incoming/outgoing links  
  
  
5. Content, Forms, & Contact Information    
 
 “Resources” section provides whitepapers & data sheets  
 Webcasts or other value -added content is available  
 Forms capture web leads by gathering contact info  
 Forms are not too cumbersome or ask for too much info  
 All departments have contact information listed  
 Content added regularly to increase visitor return rate  
   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Evaluating your Strengths & Weaknesses  
Compare your Website with Competitors    
6. Transaction Capabilities & Analytics    
  
 New visitors can make purchases without calling you  
 Shopping cart is seamless, easy -to-use, and secure  
 Analytics tell you who is on site, what their viewed  
 Reporting provides web -traffic stats such as page views  
 You can determin e where your visitors came from  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Use Demand Metric‟s Competitive Website Analysis Tool  to quickly 
evaluate your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. This 
exercise will only take about 15 minutes and will provide a benchmark 
to demonstrate future improvements.  
  
To build momentum for a web program initiative, distribute this t ool to 
other stakeholders in your business to obtain their perspective on your 
current level of effectiveness. Once you have gathered the results, hold 
a meeting to discuss findings.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
“Who has the competitive advantage for web effectiveness?”  
  
Using the „Competitor 1‟ and „Competitor 2‟ tabs in the Competitive 
Website Analysis Tool , you  can conduct an apples -to-apples 
comparison of how your website stacks up to the competition.  
  
If achieving budget approval for a website redesign is going to be a 
chore, use the results of this analysis to build a Business Case  for 
improving website effectiveness. Your focus should be on how this 
program will drive a competitive advantage for online communications, 
branding, lead generation, and public relations.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Develop a Website Program Action Plan  
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
 
Based on the results of your competitive web analysis, develop a 
website program action plan to make your recommendations. Provide 
options for the program, including:  
  
 Do Nothing  
 Upgrade Existing Website  
 Conduct Complete Overhaul  
  
Demand Metric has produced a tactical Best Practices Report on 
“redesigning your corporate website ” which has the tools, best 
practices, and actionable advice to kick -start your project. You can also 
generate ideas with the following Research Notes:  
  
 Simplifying Search En gine Optimization   
 Estimating Website Design Costs    
 Free Web Analytics from Google   
 Pull Prospects with Google AdWords    
 Governing your Corporate Website   
 Successful Blogs Improve Customer Satisfaction    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this day and age, websites are the primary communication vehicle for 
mid-sized organizations. Strikingly, most websites do not convey the 
professionalism, expertise, culture, or competitive advantages boasted 
by their organization.  
  
Conduct a very qui ck website effectiveness evaluation to determine if 
you could generate more leads and improve your corporate image by 
updating, upgrading, or re -tooling your current website. Market leaders, 
growing start -ups, and steady producers, all need to communicate 
clearly with customers, prospects, investors, potential employees, and 
other key stakeholders. Take ownership and evaluate your effectiveness.  
 