 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Facilitating Insightful Focus Groups  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for conducting 
insightful focus group sessions.  
 
Read this brief 6 -page report to learn:  
 
 What are Focus Groups?  
 
 Focus Group Use Cases  
 
 Focus Group Best Practices  
 
 Being an Effective F acilitator  
 
 Action Plan    
 
 
Review this report to understand the value of customer insights, and 
how to facilitate successful focus group sessions.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What are Focus Groups?        3  
 
Focus Group Use Cases        3   
 
Focus Group Best Practices       4   
 
Being an Effective Facilitator           5   
 
Action Plan            5   
         
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What are Focus Groups?  
Focus Group Use Cases   
  
 
 
 
 
A focus group is a controlled group interview of a target audience 
demographic. The interview is often led by a facilitator who covers a set 
series of questions or topics. Benefits of focus group sessions include: 
increased customer satisfaction & brand perceptions, and informing 
produ ct development decisions.  
 
Focus groups are a key component to an effective market research 
program. Generating qualitative feedback in this medium can be more 
insightful than standardized surveys.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
There are many reasons why organizations select the focus group 
medium to collaborate with their customers and prospects. Typically, it 
is to listen to “voice -of-the-customer” and guide strategic planning or 
product management decisions.  
 
 
Following are a  few of the key reasons for using focus groups:  
   
 
 Need to collect data, evaluate services, or test new ideas  
 To better understand opinions, beliefs, and attitudes  
 To review and test the assumptions of target audiences  
 Identify gaps between different stakeholder groups  
 To encourage discussion about a particular topic  
 To learn more about a specific topic or business issue  
 To build rapport with a customer base or new market  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Focus Group Best Practices   
 
  
 
 
 
Following are four best practices for establishing focus groups:  
  
1. Plan, Plan, Plan:  
 
 Create a clear schedule and agenda  
 Provide a comfortable setting including refreshments  
 Lay concise ground rules for the meeting  
 Select the right participants for your objectives  
 Record sessions if possible by video camera  
 
2. Actively Manage the Recruiting Process:  
 
 Ensure you have the right people, not just those who are 
willing to participate in a focus group exercise  
 Don’t prej udge participants on physical appearance  
 Membership should be limited to 12 people but should include 
no less than 6 participants  
 Keep special needs in mind for participants with disabilities or 
other requirements for attendance  
 
3. Bring Objectivity and E xpertise to the Session  
 
 Select a experienced facilitator to promote discussion  
 Facilitator must provide objective conclusions based on the 
research conducted, without regard for the client interests. 
Often it is best to hire a third -party market research firm to 
help increase objectivity.  
 
4. Quick Delivery of Report and Diligent Follo w Up  
 
 Make sure conclusions are made in a timely manner and that 
participants are aware of the results.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Being an Effective Facilitator  
Action Plan   
 
 
   
 
 
 Keep your Goals in Mind : at all times throughout the session, 
ensure you are working toward project goals.  
 
 Conduct a Formal Introduction :  introduce each participant of 
the group and do an “ice -breaker” early on.    
 
 Record the Session : ensure participants know the session is 
being recorded to comply with privacy laws.  
 
 Follow the Script :  focus groups can get off -track very quickly; 
stick to your agenda and maintain your focus.  
 
 Be Very Clear :  make sure questions are worded carefull y and 
that words are properly enunciated to ensure clear understanding 
and accurate responses.  
 
 Paraphrase  your Understanding of participant’s answers so they 
can be properly understood and documented. Leave no room for 
misinterpretation, but be careful n ot to make implications for 
participants.  
 
 Promote Equal Participation : among group members to 
ensure you are not conducting a single interview.  
 
 Close the Session Properly : let participants know they will 
receive a report, and thank them for their time.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Define the Purpose, Goals, & Objectives : it is critical that you 
develop a clear purpose statement so you can elicit the best 
information and ask the right questions.  
 
2. Establish a Timeline : planning should be done well in advance 
and the length of the session should be known by all parties 
involved. Develop a very specific agenda.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
 
 
3. Identify Participants : it is important to determine the number 
of participants required to conduct a thorough evaluation. The 
homogeneity/heterogeneity of participants should also be 
evaluated and names & contact information should be secured 
well in advance.  
 
4. Choose the Loca tion: take into account seating and equipment 
requirements. Arrange refreshments. The location should 
convenient and comfortable for participants to encourage active 
participation.  
 
5. Invite Participants : send invitations via email, direct mail, or 
phone appointment, and monitor confirmations.  
 
6. Develop Questions : select 4 or 5 questions that relate to the 
purpose and that will address your major objectives. Questions 
should be open -ended and should move from general to more 
specific. Questions should be tested before being used in a live 
setting.  
 
7. Generate a Script : this will ensure your focus group stays on 
time and remains consistent, especially if you are conducting a 
number of sessions in sequence.  
 
8. Select a Facilitator : a good facilitator will keep the group on 
track, make sure all participants are heard, and will be able to 
deal with outspoken members. Strongly consider a market 
research firm or consultant.  
 
9. Conduct the Focus Group : make sure to f ollow the script and 
timeline. It is also important to be well prepared: recording 
devices, equipment, pens, paper, clock, name tags, etc., should 
be arranged in advance.  
 
10. Summarize Conclusions :  document the key findings from the 
session, including perce ptions of your organization and products, 
or other critical feedback.    
 
11. Write a Report : create a formal report including background, 
purpose, session details, results, and conclusions. Present to 
your Senior Management team.  
 
 
 