© 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Gartner is a registered trademark of Gartner, Inc. or its affil iates. This presentation, including all supporting materials, 
is proprietary to Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates and is for the sole internal use of the intended recipients. Because th is presentation may contain information that is confidential, 
proprietary or otherwise legally protected, it may not be further copied, distributed or publicly displayed without the expre ss written permission of Gartner, Inc. or its affiliates.
GenAI Planning
Workbook
4 steps to implementing 
generative AI inyour enterpriseRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
2 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Generative AI (GenAI) is suddenly on everyone’s 
radar, but some organizations already have extensive experience and success in deploying AI techniques across multiple business units and processes. 
Gartner research shows these mature AI 
organizations represent just 10% of those currently experimenting with AI, but would-be GenAI adopters can learn a lot from them. 
Use this planning workbook to focus 
conversations among business and IT leaders around best practices that help you focus on GenAI initiatives that are both valuable and feasible. To get there, take a strategic approach.Focus GenAI conversations on real business 
problems and achievable use cases
RESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
3 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Actions related to the 4 pillars of GenAI strategy
Establish your vision for GenAI
How GenAI will drive your 
enterprise goals, what benefits you expect and how you will measure success.Remove barriers to capturing value
What organizational barriers 
could hinder your success and what actions are needed to remove those hurdles.
Identify the risks
What regulatory, reputational, 
competency, technology and other risks you may need to assess and mitigate.Prioritize adoption
Which are the best GenAI 
initiatives to pursue, based on their value and their feasibility —
as agreed to by both IT and business leaders.
RESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
4 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Risks
•Regulatory 
•Reputational
•CompetencyVision
•Goals
•Benefits
•Success metricsValue
•Business impact
•Change 
management
•People and skillsAdoption
•Use cases and 
value maps 
•AI decision 
framework
•Decision 
governanceKey components of your AI strategy frameworkRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
5 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Don’t underestimate the need to level-set with 
stakeholders from the outset:
1.Res
tate the corporate vision of your 
enterprise: “……………………………………………” 
2.S
tate how AI will support that vision: 
–e.
g., AI will enable better business value 
in these areas in these ways
–e.
g., We will use AI to achieve fairer 
outcomesFirst, state clearly how GenAI objectives 
link to enterprise goals
Stating AI goals clearly is key 
to encouraging and enabling organizationwide fluency and 
adoption of AI. It will also help you to fund the right use cases —
ones that will deliver clear return on investment and lead to further innovation.AI VISIONRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
6 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Ask why you are pursuing GenAI and what value you expect it to bring based on your major business goals, how you will 
measure success and what use cases could maximize that value (you will verify the value/feasibility of those use cases in the“adoption” phase).
Goal How AI/GenAI Enables That GoalUse Cases to Pursue 
(Illustrative Examples)
Topline revenue growth Business model change inspired or supported by AI creates 
net-new business initiatives.Behavioral analytics, contract life cycle management
Improved customer satisfactionGreater ability to conduct customer behavior analytics increases proximity to the customer.Virtual customer assistants
Reduced costs Task and process automation reduce operational costs. Risk/fraud mitigation, asset performance management
Staff augmentation andincreased productivity Augmented AI and automation increase productivity by shifting people away from managing mundane tasks.Knowledge management and training, content generation, code generation
Improved service availabilityData -driven predictive analytics tools advance digital services. Predictive maintenance, proactive threat managementThen, specify how GenAI will drive business goals
IllustrativeAI VISIONRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
7 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Also, set AI success metrics 
To measure the value of individual use cases, you’ll need success metrics that tie into your overarching business 
goal. Select metrics like those listed here that relate to specific key success factors and provide a timeframe in which you expect to demonstrate value.
Business Goal Appropriate Success Metric Completion
Improved customer satisfaction Customer satisfaction index/Net Promoter Score Date
Topline revenue growth Revenue growth for product lines Date
New business initiatives Number of new business initiatives Date
Task or process automation Reduction in processing time Date
Reduce costs Reduction in CapE x and OpEx Date
Staff augmentation and i ncreased 
productivity Workforce productivity metrics, such as time spent on value- added tasks Date
Improved service availability % of annual availability DateAI VISIONRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
8 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Having identified potential benefits to the business (in the vision stage), surface any strategic concerns that could hinder your 
ability to capture value in the way you have identified it. Also, identify solutions, responsibilities and actions as illustr ated here. Remove organizational barriers to capturing value
Strategic Concern Solution Executive(s) 
ResponsibleWhat the Organization Will Do 
Projects aligned to corporate 
goals are more likely to succeed and mature.Document goals and require a portfolio approach to AI opportunity.CIO •Indicate which corporate goals should be addressed.
•Size portfolio (five or fewer pilots and minimum viable products).
Metrics deliver credibility for project maturity.Select metrics as proxies for financial and risk results or direct such measurements.CFO •Collaborate with your chief data and analytics officer to discuss what will be most measurable and educational for future projects.
Formal structures of accountability bolster AI results.Help complete a RACI (responsible, accountable, consulted and informed) matrix for AI strategy development and execution.Chief data (and analytics) officers, CIO•Draft a RACI matrix for all aspects of AI project and product development.AI VALUERESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
9 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Key Types 
of RisksRisk CategoryExecutive(s)ResponsibleAction Plan
Regulatory
Adhere to 
regulations CIO/CTO andCROUnderstand the continuously evolving regulatory landscape. Enable collaboration between AI practitioners and legal, risk and security members to evaluate use case feasibility and acceptable risks.Create an AI governance office, which serves an independent audit committee to review results.
Reputational Secure and safeCIO/CTO Acknowledge the threats against AI posed by both malicious and benign actors in your organization.Bolster security across enterprise security controls, data integrity and AI model monitoring.Leverage external resources to help secure your AI systems.
Competencies Technical debt CIO/CTO Align AI strategy with cloud strategy and explore cloud as foundation for AI.Create a technology roadmap to modernize data and analytics infrastructures to align with AI goals and timeline.Create a startup accelerator program to reduce technical debt and innovate incrementally.Assess and mitigate risks
Any type of AI comes with a range of risks, including those illustrated here. GenAI carries specific new types of risks, such 
as hallucinations and biased and inaccurate results. Log all such major risks so you can properly assess and mitigate each.AI RISKSRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
10 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Rate the feasibility and value of each project using simple criteria like those shown here, and actually score each so you can rank projects 
against one another. Typically, executives are keen to pursue initiatives where value is high (and risk also tends to be high, i.e., feasibility is 
low) but avoid projects where feasibility is so low that it makes the project impossible. A use case with a seemingly outstanding cont ribution 
to business value and strong feasibility is either a breakthrough, or the market is missing a great opportunity.Prioritize projects that are valuable and feasible
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY FACTORS BUSINESS VALUE FACTORS
ProjectAccess to 
Labeled DataArchitecture and Technology FeasibilityHave Skills/People to ExecuteAligns With Our Mission andValuesSponsor SupportKPIsMeasurableOverall Business Value (Scale of 1 to 10; 10 Being High)Overall Technical Feasibility (Scale of 1 to 10; 10 Being High)Ranking
Name Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No 
Name Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No 
Name Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No 
Name Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No 
Name Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No Yes/Maybe/No AI ADOPTIONRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
11 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Actionable, objective insight
Position your IT organization for success. Explore these additional 
complimentary resources and tools for IT leaders:
Already a client?
Get access to even more resources in your client portal. Log InResource Center
The Top Generative AI 
Questions Answered by Gartner Experts
Access benefits, applications 
and risks of generative AI.
Learn MoreWebinar
Beyond the Hype: The 
Practical Applications & Use Cases of Generative AI
Explore the future of 
generative AI and understand the many use cases.
Watch noweBook
Augmenting Decisions 
With Artificial Intelligence
Decision automation can drive 
competitive advantage. Know when and how to use it.
Download NoweBook
Essential Guide to 
Data Fabric
Find out why data fabric belongs 
in your data management thinking.
Download NowRESTRICTED DISTRIBUTION
12 © 2023 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Connect With Us
Get actionable, objective insight to deliver on your most critical priorities. Our expert guidance and 
tools enable faster, smarter decisions and stronger performance. Contact us to become a client:
U.S.: 855 811 7593International: +44 (0) 3330 607 044
Become a Client
Learn more about Gartner for IT Leaders
gartner.com/en/information -technology
Stay connected to the latest insights