 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Generating Business Strategy Plans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for building a 
comprehensive, business strategy plan. Learn how to benchmark your 
core competencies, implement a strategic decision -making framework, 
and prepare your organization for growth over th e next 12 -24 months.  
 
 
Read this brief 6 -page How -To Guide to:  
 
 
 Prepare for the Planning Process  
 Conduct a Situational Analysis  
 Establish Objectives, Initiatives, Metrics, & Targets  
 GAP Analysis & Program Prioritization  
 Implement a Corporate Governance St ructure  
 Present Business Plan to Key Stakeholders  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Prepare for the Planning Process      3  
 
 
Conduct a Situational Analysis        3 
 
 
Establish Objectives , Measures, Targets, and Initiatives   4 
 
 
GAP Analysis & Program Prioritization       4 
 
 
Implement a Corporate Governance Structure     6 
 
 
Present Business Plan to Key Stakeholders     6 
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Prepare for the Planning Process  
Conduct a Situational Analysis    
 
 
 
1. Build a Strategic Planning Team  - engage a cross -functional 
planning team to represent each department‟s needs. Hold a 
kick-off meeting to set strategic planning goals, schedule 
meeting times, and get organized for the planning process.  
 
2. Introduce the Balanced Scorecard Approach  - review and 
distribute our Executive Summary  “Map Strategy with 
Balanced Scorecard ” to provide a framework to work from.  
 
3. Organize your Business Strate gy Plan  - use our Business 
Strategy Plan template  to pull together all of the analyses, 
assessments, and other materials you have use d to complete 
your business strate gy plan.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
1. Benchmark Core Competencies  - use Demand Metric‟s Core 
Competencies Assessment Tool  to benchmark your corporate 
capabilities and identify areas for improvement.  
 
2. Define Market Segments & Profile Customers  - use our  
Market Segmentation Tool  to define and size key m arket 
segments and develop customer profiles to personify „ideal‟ 
customers. For background information  review  our How To Guide  
“Market Segme ntation, Targeting, & Positioning ”. 
 
3. Perform a Competitive Positioning Analysis  - use our 
Competitive Analysis & Positioning Map  to evaluate your 
comp etitors and assess the market positioning for each of your 
industry‟s key players.   
 
4. Complete an Industry Analysis  - use our STEP Industry 
Analysis Tool  to evalua te the Social, Technological, Economic, 
and Political conditions of your market segments.  
 
5. Summarize the Situational Analysis  - based on your analysi s 
document INTERNAL strengths & weaknesses and EXTERNAL 
opportunities & threats with our SWOT Analysis Tool.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Establish Objectives, Initiatives, Metrics, & Targets  
GAP Analysis & Program Prioritization   
 
 
 
 
1. Determine Business Objectives for Next 12 -36 Months  - 
Use our Business Objectives Matrix  to brainstorm and achieve 
consensus on which objectives are of highest priority.  
 
2. Establish/Update Key Performance Indicators  - use our Key 
Performance Indicators  (KPI) Worksheet to select or revisit 
metrics that are critical for monitoring performance.  
 
3. Build a Balanced Scorecard Strateg y Map  – commence by 
refining your corporate Mission & Vision Statements.  Next, 
develop a Balanced Scorecard Strategy Map  that sets 
objectives, initiatives, metrics, and targets for each of the  
Customer, Financial, Learning & Growth, and Business Process es 
perspectives.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Audit the Current Business Environment by Function – use our  
GAP Analysis Tool  to help you brainstorm ideas for Goals, 
Targets, Timeframes, and Actio n Items for each core business 
function . These GAPS will evolve into programs  & projects for 
each department/functional area of your organization.    
 
Document and resolve GAPS for the following:  
 
   Strategic Planning  
   Business Data  
   Customer Relationship Management  
   Demand Generation  
   Sales Effectiveness  
   Performance Measurement  
   Market Research  
   Organizational Development  
   Human Resources  
   Information Systems  
   Product/Service Development  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
 
 
2. Review  New Investment Opportunities  - gather all 
Business Cases  for new program investments. If you haven‟t 
already, strongly consider making formal business cases a 
requirement for an y recommendation to spend over $10,000 . 
 
3. Prioritize  Current & Proposed Programs and Projects  - 
based on your high-level business objectives; assess  each 
current and proposed program in terms of strategic fit, 
economic impact, and feasibility . Use o ur Business Strategy 
Prioritization Tool  to document each project and evaluate its 
business value.  
 
4. Prepare to Manage Change - For large enterprise level 
programs, you may need to implement a formal change 
management strategy. To refresh on best practices review our 
How To Guide, Enabling Enterprise Change Management . 
To improve your chances for success, use our Change 
Management Readiness Assessment  to ensure you have the 
resources you require for implementing a Change 
Management Plan . 
 
5. Identify Key Success Factors for Execution  – review each 
program and determin e Key Success Factors  (KSF) to 
highlight any key risks. The senior management team is 
responsible for mitigating these risks, evaluating contingency 
plans, and ensur ing that each KSF has adequate resources 
behind it.  For more help in the risk management area, use our 
Risk Analysis Tool , Risk Assessment Tool , and Risk 
Mitigation Checklist.  
 
6. Assign Programs to Depart ment Leaders  - delegate 
responsibility for key programs to the appropriate executives. 
Make it clear that the success or failure of these programs will 
have a direct impact on their performance review . Now may 
be a good time to evaluate Project Management Maturity  to 
determine if the right tools and process are in place to facilitate 
program planning, execution, control, and closure.  
 
7. Build Tactical Program Plans & Schedule Work  - use our 
Management  topic area for help with implementing programs 
and managing the activities of staff . 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Implement a Governance Structure  
Present Business Strategy to Key Stakeholders   
 
 
 
 
1. Establish a Steering Committee  - the role of the steering 
committee is to review investment & business decisions, prioritize 
programs, manage resource allocation, align departmental 
activities, and monitor performance. Read our Executive 
Summary  “Steering Committees Improve Program Success ” 
and develop a Steering Committee Charter . 
 
2. Create a Business Strategy Dashboard - monitor your 
progress on each strategic initiative by tracking key metrics.  Use 
our Business Strategy Metrics Dashboard  to create a 
customized dashboard of your key metrics and provide visibility 
to all steering committee members.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Communicate with Key Stakeholders  - develop a Business 
Strategy Presentation  to communicate the highlights of your 
strategic plan to the key stakeholders in your organization.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 