Graphic Design for Beginners
____________
Fundamental Graphic Design
Principles 
that Underlie Every Design
Project
After reading it you will never look at a graphic design with the
same eyes again.This book was written by Anita Nipane of Digginet.
Design Book for Non-Designers: Guidelines for Small Business Owners, Bloggers, and Marketers
Copyright © 2020 by Anita Nipane.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.
Trademarks
All product or brand names and services identified throughout this book are used in editorial fashion
only and for benefit of such companies with no intention of infringement of the trademark. No such
use, or the use of any trade name, is intended to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this book.
The book cover has been designed using resources from Freepik.com
For information contact:
http://www.digginet.com
First Edition: January 2017Contents
Your Free Gift
Is This Book for You?
CRAP – The Big Four
Contrast
Repetition
Alignment
4 Ways to Align Your Design Elements
Centered alignment
Left Alignment
Right Alignment
Justified alignment
Advanced Text Alignment Techniques
Proximity
What is Composition?
Viѕuаl Bаlаnсе
4 Tуреѕ Of Composition Bаlаnсе
Visual Direction and Flow
Optical Center
White Space
How to Create White Space in Your Design?
Color as Design Element
Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Colors
Hues, Tints, Shades and Tones
Tints or Pastels
Shаdеѕ
Tоnеѕ
Warm Colors and Cool Color
s
Make Your Own Shades, Tints and Tones
Create Your Own Professionally Looking Color Schemes
Complementary Colors
Double Complementary Colors
Triads
Split Complementary Colors
Analogous Colors
Monochromatic Color Scheme
11 Free Online Tools that Will Help You to Create Your Own Color Schemes
How to Choose The Right Colors for Your ProjectCMYK vs RGB
7 Deadly Color Combinations to Avoid
Fonts or Typefaces?
Perfectly Paired Typefaces
4 Typeface Categories
Typographic Contrasts
How Many Typefaces to Use?
Main Principles of Perfecting Your Typefaces
Kerning
Tracking
Leading
10 Resources to Download Free Fonts
Typeface Licenses Explained
How to Install New Typefaces on Your Computer?
What Software and Apps to Use for Creating Your Designs?
Use Free Images - 10 Free Resources
Conclusion
Other Books by the Author
Udemy Online CoursesYour Free Gift
Do you need to create images and simple banners for your webpage, blog,
and social media? 
The good news is – you don't need to hire a designer or buy expensive
software to create visuals for the web. You can do it YOURSELF and with
FREE tools. Thanks to the different resources that are available on the
Internet. There are so many easy and quick solutions out there! Get my book
“
100+ Free Tools to Create Visuals for Web & Social Media
” for FREE
and learn how to:
get royalty free images even for commercial purposes
edit photos and create web banners with free online editors
pick tasteful color combinations for your brand and web banners 
create simple animated gif banners 
take and edit screenshots as well as record tutorial videos from
your screen 
remove the background from any image (no Photoshop or
designer skills needed)
create slideshows, presentations, and infographics
use other tools that will save you time and improve your
efficiency
Is This Book for You?
Do you need to design things, but have no background in graphic design
theory? Are you a starting blogger, small business owner or a zero-budget
marketing specialist who needs to create content for social media,
advertisements, brochures or images for a web page? Do you want to learn
the main graphic design principles to create visuals that effectively
communicate your message?
If you lack a degree in art but need to make social media posts, simple ads,
business cards, flyers, web visuals, brochures or any other visuals, buy this
book and read it. It won’t substitute studying in a design school, but it will
give you a vocabulary of the basic design and composition principles, color
theory, and typography in a quick and practical way. This book ideally serves
as a good starting point, if you want to learn how to produce better-designed
visuals and never again make amateur mistakes. Moreover, after reading it
you will know exactly why your designs look better than they were before.
The idea of this book is not just telling you theoretical principles about using
colors, creating compositional balance and pairing typefaces correctly, but to
show you how you can apply these principles in the real world to improve
your design. You will be educated enough to understand when the design
created really helps to communicate your message and when it doesn’t. 
In order to make this book as practical as possible, you will see illustrations
and examples of every principle that is described as well as 
will learn about
the free online resources
 you can use for creating your new designs.
Recommended especially for non-designers this book will change the way
you look at graphic designs around you
.
Read this book and you will learn how to:
-
          
use the main principles of professionally looking designs
-
          
create a composition and use visual weight, balance, and flow, in
order to emphasize your message,
-
          
recognize the difference between the optical and geographic center
and why the first one is important.
-
          
use the science behind the good looking color schemes
-
          
combine typefaces and use contrast in a sophisticated way,
-
          
use more than 20 FREE resources for creating your own designs.In short, after reading this book you will know how to apply the same design
principles every professional designer knows and uses.CRAP – The Big Four
Apple Co-founder Steve Jobs once said: "Design is not just what it looks like
and feels like. Design is how it works." A common misconception is that
design is only about the way a product, advertisement, web page etc. 
looks. 
In
reality, a purpose of a good design is to make sure that the design 
works and
communicates
. It must help to sell a product or communicate a message.
Have you ever bought a product or a service simply because its packaging or
website 
looked
 nicer than the alternative? Nothing big, just perhaps a
shampoo that has a nicer packaging, or an online course that has more
professionally designed advertisement. When you need to choose between
products with similar prices and similar functions, most probably you will
choose the more aesthetically pleasing option because a common trait of
humans is to perceive beautifully designed things as being better. This is the
power of a good graphic design.
Have you noticed that all designs generally can be divided in those that look
well-designed and in those that don’t? Do you know why? Because the
creators of those designs that look well-designed have used some basic
principles that every professional designer knows, but others – haven't. These
principles are applied to all professionally designed advertisements, banners,
posters, brochures and other illustrative visuals. The acronym of them is
CRAP
: 
contrast, repetition, alignment, and proximity. 
They complement
each other; therefore, usually you will use several of them simultaneously. 
What’s important to know is that if you understand these 4 principles, then
over time you’ll develop a feel for why some designs look good and some -
don’t. It’s like you’ll have some secret super-sense.Contrast
Let’s start with the principle of Contrast, which is one of the most powerful
design concepts, because it attracts attention, creates hierarchy and helps the
viewer to “get” the point of your design quickly.  In simple words – contrast
is used to emphasize information that is important and to attract viewer eye to
start communication. This is why the most important element of your design
should be the most emphasized. The second most important element should
be less emphasized, and so on. This is how you can create the hierarchy and
flow of your design to communicate your marketing message.
Since contrast helps to organize information, users know where to look first,
second, third and last. This helps with scanning the visual or a web page. In
order to create a successful hierarchy of your design elements that serves
their purpose, you need to decide first which phrases and words are the most
important and then emphasize them to create the visual hierarchy by making
the main message bigger, bolder brighter and so on.  For example, the main
message of the banner below is the „big sale”, which has been emphasized
the most.
Contrast does more than just attracts attention. It can be used to establish
boundaries between elements, too. For example, if you contrast the
background color of the main web page content and that of a sidebar, you
show where one ends and the other begins.Similarly, it can work in advertisement, when you, for example, put the main
marketing message on a significantly different background than all the other
information.
You can achieve contrast in many ways:manipulate the space (empty vs. filled)
by usage and placement of elements (isolated or grouped and
bottom or top)
through color choices (dark versus light)
cool colors vs. warm colorsby size (small vs. big)
by creating elements that are visually different from the other
elements used in your design.
by using typographic contrasts that I will explain you in one of the
next chapters.
Keep in mind that contrast only works well if the difference between
elements is APPARENT. If the difference is too small, it may appear to be
more of a mistake than a deliberate decision. Create a big difference, in order
to differentiate two items from each other. You can’t contrast 12px type with
11px type. You see, it looks like a mistake here. You can’t contrast black
with dark brown either. But if you lower the contrast, you can make an
element fade into the background. Therefore, you can use contrast to ‘hide’
certain elements of your designs as well as to give a special meaning to them.
Risks
Too much contrast can disturb the harmony and unity in a design, leading to
chaos and visual noise that causes confusion. Nothing will stand out if every
element contrasts and tries to draw attention to itself. Therefore, unless it’s
your intention, don’t overdo the contrast. Instead decide which few elements
need to stand out and make them look very different from everything else.
Use contrast in moderation.Repetition
In simple words, the principle of repetition means that you repeat the same or
similar design elements throughout the design of your visual. The purpose of
this principle is to tie together separate elements of your design and give a
sense of unity and consistency. While contrast is used to show differences,
the principle of repetition is used to make sure that the design is viewed as a
whole. The repetitive elements of the design may be colors, shapes, textures,
spatial relationships, line thicknesses, types, sizes, graphic concepts, etc.
Look at the example of these cocktail cards. Although different background
colors have been used, both pages still look like taken from one design
project and are cohesive, because all other elements – drawing style,
typefaces, background pattern and text placement repeat themselves.
In the next example, although both cocktails in the cards are drawn by the
same artist and in the same style, the whole image differs and it’s apparent
that they come from 
two different projects. If these two pages were put in the
same brochure, it would look like that one page is coming from another
project and has been put there by a mistake.As you can see, repetition is especially important when it comes to multi-
page design projects, like a brochure, a menu, a book or presentation slides.
Therefore, repeating the same design elements, formatting, colors and style
will create a cohesive set of pages and consistent design.
However, repetition is also very important in a single page design project.
For example, if you have given visually similar characteristics to several
elements, then you communicate that something is similar to these elements.
If two elements on a visual are both put in black rectangular, a viewer most
likely will subconsciously conclude that they are somehow related. For
example, look at this banner that I use on my web page. Typefaces, style, and
colors are repeated in order to create a united feeling and design, but contrast
is used to create accents and draw attention to the main marketing message,
which is “Subscribe” to get free course.Repetition is a key factor in branding and marketing. In order to create your
unique brand design, you need to decide what style, two to four colors, types,
symbols you will use for all your visual communication. This consistency
will help your audience to recognize your brand and company and will evoke
certain feelings and emotions associated with your brand. In order to stay
consistent with your colors, find and save your brand colors using their codes
(HEX, RGB, CMYK). They appear in whatever graphic design software or
tool you use when a color is 
selected on the color palette.In the example above you see three codes (RGB, CMYK, and HEX) of the
same color. In the case, your graphic software or online tool shows only one
of them, for example, HEX code, but you need to know also RGB and
CMYK codes of the same color, use one of the color code convertors that are
available on the Internet, for example, 
Rapidtables
 or 
Hex Colors
.
All your images and advertisements both: online and offline must represent
your branding with certain colors, fonts, backgrounds, icons, image style and
tonality. When you have designed unique visual and textual elements of your
brand, repeat those elements through all the visual materials that you create.
Through consistency, repetition, and uniqueness of your graphics and
materials you will create your brand memorability.  As you can see in the
example below, all marketing materials that represent your brand, like
business cards, letterhead, folder, CD cover and other must have the same
style and elements.Risks
If you aren't consistent with your branding colors, you risk that your logo and
colors will be used incorrectly. In the beginning, a little bit different branding
color may seem harmless, but in the long term, it can disturb your brand
recognition. One more risk is repeating the same element so often that it
becomes annoying or overwhelming.  For example, if you have chosen a
button “Click here” as one of your design elements, don’t use it at every link
you have on your web page.Alignment
In this chapter, I’ll discuss the principle of alignment. Although on one hand,
this concept is very simple and self-evident, on the other hand - if
implemented incorrectly, you can get unprofessional results. This is why I
feel it should be discussed deeper to help you avoid amateurish mistakes.
The main point of the alignment principle is that nothing in your design
should look as if it was placed there randomly because alignment helps unify
all of your elements together into a strong and cohesive structure. If you have
many elements in your design, imagine that every element and in some cases
even details of the element are connected visually with each other via an
invisible line – either horizontally, vertically or diagonally. Every element
should be aligned to another element (top, bottom, left, right, center to page,
vertical center or horizontal center), even if the two objects are physically far
away from each other. This creates a clean, sophisticated and professional
look. Don’t just throw everything on a page like in the example below. No
element has been aligned there.
The purpose of the alignment is to organize elements so that their edges or
centers are on one line or margin. It doesn’t have to be a visible line, most
often it is an invisible line implied by the way your design elements are
placed.Edge alignment
 is used to position elements in a way that their edges are on
one line. Either horizontally, vertically or diagonally.
Center alignment
 is used to line up the design elements with their center
axes either 
horizontally, vertically or diagonally. It doesn’t always mean that
elements should be placed in the horizontal center of the page. Instead, they
can be placed diagonally or side-by-side and still be aligned with their center
axes.4 Ways to Align Your Design Elements
In general, there are four ways you can align elements in your design. Most
probably you have already used them every time you type something on your
computer as most of us. However, let’s discuss them from the perspective of
design.
Centered alignment
One of the easiest types of alignment is centered alignment. Centered text
works best if used for short lines of text and headlines, because longer texts
would be more difficult to read. Usually, centered alignment is a common
choice of beginning graphical designers. The problem is, if you use centered
alignment without creativity, it might look rather boring and won’t create 
a
visual interest.It is advisable to play with texts, shapes, colors and fonts to attract your
audience. As you can see in the example below the word „chef” is
emphasized, because this is a job advertisement with a purpose to get noticed
by potential chefs, which makes the visual more targeted and visually
appealing.Look at the invitation example below. Actually, all you need is imagination
and creativity to create sophisticated and professionally looking centered
designs.You can use centered alignment like 
this, too. Who said it always has to be
horizontal?
Look at this web banner! This centered alignment doesn’t look boring thanks
to the many colorful elements and contrast.
Be creative when using centered alignment and you will get interesting and
eye-catching designs.
Left Alignment
Left Alignment called also Flush Left means that text or graphical elements
are lined up evenly with the left margin, but not with the right margin. Left
alignment is a good choice if you have large paragraphs of text. If you left
align your paragraphs, remember to left align also your headlines.
You can safely use left alignment for large paragraphs of text in left to 
right
languages because it doesn’t reduce readability. This is one of the most often
used ways of alignment.
The strong invisible line of the left alignment connects together all texts in
this business card.
A good practice is to use explicit lines, too. If you have an image or other
elements with explicit outline, align the text along with it as shown in the
example below. Therefore, you will create two explicit lines that will be next
to each other and create a powerful and interesting effect. In this example, the
text is left aligned along the edge of image, which gives it a sophisticated
look.
In the next example, you can see how the same design would look if you had
ignored the rule of the explicit lines and used a centered alignment 
instead of
the left alignment. As you can see that wouldn't look so sophisticated.You can add some creativity and use explicit lines in various ways. Who said
there always should be only one explicit line?
Right Alignment
Right Alignment called also Flush Right means that text is lined up evenly
with the right margin, but not with the left margin. It is often used to give
your design a unique and unconventional look. Right alignment works well
with short texts, but you should avoid using it on large paragraphs since in
the left-to-right languages it decreases readability, but it works well for
business cards, for example.Right alignment often gives more interesting designs than centered alignment
but overusing it may annoy your reader. However, if you use it for a design
of your letterhead, it might look rather stylish.  
Keep in mind that if you need to create your design for right-to-left reading
languages (for example, Arabic, Japanese, Korean etc.), then the rules of right
alignment substitute the rules of left alignment.
Justified alignment
Justified alignment is created by aligning your text evenly along the left and
right margins. This is accomplished by reducing or increasing the spaces
between characters and words in each line so that lines with fewer characters
will be more broadly spaced, while lines with more characters will have less
space between them. This type of alignment, if done correctly, gives more
formal and organized look. Most often it is used in books, newspapers,
magazines and has become popular on the web, as well. Justified alignment
can be especially helpful for working with text in multiple columns because it
helps to keep the columns visually separate from each other. Basically, alignment makes things easier to read and scan visuals faster.
Aligning your elements in a logical way also helps you lead your audience to
read your message in the right sequence, which increases the conversion rate
.
Risks
If you make your elements almost aligned but not precisely, your design will
look less sophisticated. You may think that it is not a big problem, but your
audience will unconsciously notice that and perceive the design as less
professional, which will damage your brand image.
Another common mistake of new designers is trying to center everything on
the page because it’s very safe and comfortable. And it makes everything
look better. However, actually, it might be a boring and dull approach unless
used with creativity as in the examples I showed you. If you don't feel very
creative, the much safer choice is aligning your elements to the left or right
side. You can also put them on the bottom of the page instead of the centre,
for example. Therefore, with careful use of the principles mentioned in this
book, your design will definitely look better and more professional. Until you
get more practice, it’s advisable to use a single strong alignment scheme in
one design, because getting several alignment schemes to work in the same
design is rather difficult and needs a good expertise and designer sense.Advanced Text Alignment Techniques
Three more advanced text alignment options that you can use are text wrap,
asymmetric and concrete.
Text wrap
 is used to wrap texts around illustration, photo or another text (for
example, large initial letter). This text alignment type is often used in reports,
newsletters, books and other text-based designs.
Asymmetric text alignment
 can be used as an interesting design element,
for example, in cases when good readability is not the main prerequisite, like,
invitations and greeting cards. When asymmetric text alignment is used, few
if any, of the text line ends and beginnings align with each other. Therefore, it
should not be used for long texts unless there is a good reason for that. This
alignment type is creative and informal.Concrete text alignment
 is used to arrange text to create a concrete shape.
For example, it can be used to emphasize the object that is described in the
text that creates the shape.
Proximity
Your design always should be easy to scan and perceive. Your audience
should never
 
have to make effort at trying to figure out your advertisement
organization and design priority, like, which text goes with which graphic or
which title comes first and which comes second. The design must be clean
and well organized. The main purpose of proximity is to reduce clutter,
organize information, and give your reader a clear structure to improve
readability. When you are creating your design, be aware of where your eye
goes first, second and third when you step back and look at it. Count the
number of visual elements on the page and the number of times your eye
stops. If your eye stops more than three to five times, consider the grouping
of separate items in units to organize the information and reduce clutter.
In order to achieve that, related elements and information should be grouped
closely together so that they become one visual unit. When you format a
large amount of text in your text editor or any graphical design software, you
know which information should be emphasized. To make the formatting
more effective and your text easier readable, use the principle of proximity by
grouping it. Make bolder and bigger the most important texts like titles and
make small the information that is not so important
.
In a very simple example, it looks like this.The same principle applies to graphic elements. Here you see a bunch of
random squares that really have no proximity to one another. You see each
one of these as a separate element; therefore, your eye has to process each of
them separately.
Now here are the same squares grouped. Some of them are in more proximity
to each other. Although they don't contain any information, you automatically
perceive them as three groups. If you want to create no doubt that two elements belong together, make them
overlap. That is the strongest proximity relationship.
In the real world, it might look like this. There is no doubt that these three
elements have a strong proximity relationship and form a group.
Not like in this example, where all elements are placed randomly.You can use also other design elements to create proximity relationships. For
example, frame your objects or link them with lines or shapes.
If we use a banner as example, then it is advisable that all related information,
like, information about promo offer is placed closely together to form a visual
unit.  In the example below I have followed this principle; therefore, you
have a logical sequence for your eyes to follow.Don’t spread the information over all the area and in each corner like in the
example bellow.
Did your eye stop five times? Most probably, because the elements are not
logically grouped and there are five elements on this banner. I guess you got
confused a little bit because it is difficult to understand the hierarchy of
elements. You see, with the help of the principles described in this book you
can either direct your reader's eyes and help him/her to understand where tobegin and finish reading your message or confuse your reader.
Please see this example of a short article. I have done some basic formatting
there. The text is readable but boring. It doesn't arise any visual interest.
Now I have utilized all of the CRAP principles. The same information has
been grouped into several groups by adding spacing between the main points.
Description of points goes together with the headings, indicating that they are
related.Notice how by simply changing the typeface, you can change the mood and
emotions of the same message. This is how one small change can impact
your whole design and the message and emotions it communicates.Risks
Very often new designers put text and graphic elements randomly all over the
page, filling corners and using a lot of space. It looks like they are afraid to
leave some areas empty, which leads to a scattered and unorganized structure
and information that is difficult to perceive. If elements are placed randomly,
audience unconsciously will assume that they are not closely related. If it is
not your intention, don’t put elements close to the unrelated group.
Otherwise, it can create confusion and you can end up with a clutter. Don’t
be afraid of empty or actually so-called white space, because it is a very
important element of a design. I will tell you how to use white space
effectively in a separate chapter later in this book.What is Composition?
In simple words, composition is when all the separate elements come
together to form a whole piece of art and when all your graphic elements,
colors, fonts and shapes form one cohesive design. A successful composition
means that you have efficiently used and implemented all the CRAP
principles discussed in the previous chapter. Therefore, your design not only
looks good but is also highly functional and effective.
Viѕuаl Bаlаnсе
All elements in every design should create a visual balance. An important
part of this principle is 
visual weight, 
which
 
is a measure of how much any
element in your design аttrасtѕ the еуе of thе viewer, for example, large
objects appear visually heavier than small objects, but bright colors appear
heavier than dark ones. It is a measure of how much something attracts your
eye.
If you arrange all the elements so that no one part is overpowering, visual
balance is achieved. If two objects or object groups on both sides of the
picture weigh the same, then they are balanced. However perfectly balanced
pictures tend to be boring, therefore a certain degree of imbalance can be
useful to create visual tension and movement within a composition and makeit look more interesting
.
4 Tуреѕ Of Composition Bаlаnсе
The composition may be bаlаnсеd or unbalanced. The balanced composition
feels stable аnd аеѕthеtiсаllу рlеаѕing. Whilе ѕоmе оf its еlеmеntѕ might
attract уоur eye more than others, no one area of the соmроѕitiоn drаwѕ your
еуе so much that уоu can’t ѕее thе other areas. On the other hand, in
unbalanced composition individual еlеmеntѕ dоminаtе the whоlе design аnd
some infоrmаtiоn may gо unnоtiсеd.
In ѕоmе situations, unbаlаnсеd composition might bе right for the mеѕѕаgе
уоu’rе trying to соmmuniсаtе but gеnеrаllу you wаnt bаlаnсеd соmроѕitiоnѕ.
Thеrе are four ways tо bаlаnсе a соmроѕitiоn:
1
. 
Sуmmеtriсаl bаlаnсе
 is when equal wеightѕ аrе оn еԛuаl ѕidеѕ оf
a composition, bаlаnсеd аrоund a fulcrum or аxiѕ in thе center.
Thеrе аrе two рrimаrу tуреѕ of symmetry:
Reflection symmetry
 оссurѕ when еvеrуthing on оnе side оf thе
аxiѕ iѕ mirrоrеd оn thе оthеr ѕidе. It’ѕ рrоbаblу thе first thing уоu
think of when уоu hеаr thе word “ѕуmmеtrу.” Thе аxiѕ саn bе in
any dirесtiоn оr оriеntаtiоn, although it’ѕ оftеn vеrtiсаl оr
hоrizоntаl.
A face and a butterfly are common еxаmрlеs of symmetrical balance.In symmetrical designs, design elements are mirrored from side to side
and they often go hand in hand with a centered alignment. The banner
below is a good example.
When thе rеflесtiоn iѕ a реrfесt mirror imаgе, thе symmetry iѕ said tо bе
pure. Usually it won’t bе реrfесt аnd еасh side will have ѕlight variations.
Thiѕ is nеаr ѕуmmеtrу, аnd it’s mоrе common than рurе ѕуmmеtrу. The
ѕуmmеtrу can еvеn оссur оvеr 
multiрlе аxеѕ at thе same timе. Fоr
еxаmрlе, the left аnd right hаlf оf a соmроѕitiоn соuld mirrоr еасh оthеr,whilе thе top and bоttоm also mirror еасh other. Snоwflаkеѕ ѕhоw
rеflесtiоn ѕуmmеtrу оvеr more thаn twо аxеѕ.
Rotational symmetry
 (оr radial symmetry) оссurѕ whеn
еvеrуthing rotates аrоund a соmmоn сеntеr. It саn оссur аt аnу
аnglе or frеԛuеnсу, аѕ lоng as there’s a соmmоn сеntеr. Natural
forms thаt grоw оr mоvе реrреndiсulаr tо the еаrth’ѕ ѕurfасе
dеvеlор rotational symmetry. Pеtаlѕ оf a flоwеr are а good
еxаmрlе. Rоtаtiоn withоut rеflесtiоn can be used to show motion,
ѕрееd оr dуnаmiс асtiоn. Think of thе spinning wheels 
of a
mоving саr. 
 
If you’re looking to create a strong focal point, rotational symmetry is an
effective technique because your eyes are naturally directed to the center.Sуmmеtrу iѕ uѕuаllу seen аѕ bеаutiful аnd harmonized; hоwеvеr, it саn аlѕо
be seen as ѕtаtiс and sometimes rеgаrdеd аѕ bоring. Bесаuѕе hаlf оf thе
соmроѕitiоn mirrоrѕ the оthеr hаlf, therefore аt lеаѕt half of thе соmроѕitiоn
will bе rаthеr рrеdiсtаblе. Aѕуmmеtrу tеndѕ tо bе mоrе intеrеѕting аnd
dуnаmiс. 
2
. 
Aѕуmmеtriсаl bаlаnсе
 rеѕultѕ frоm unеԛuаl viѕuаl weight оn
еасh ѕidе оf the соmроѕitiоn. It is mоrе dуnаmiс аnd intеrеѕting
and еvоkеѕ feelings оf mоdеrniѕm, mоvеmеnt, energy аnd vitаlitу.
Asymmetry creates mоrе complex relationships between еlеmеntѕ,
аnd so it tеndѕ tо bе more intеrеѕting thаn symmetry. Because it’ѕ
mоrе intеrеѕting, asymmetry helps to drаw аttеntiоn.
One of the easiest ways to create an asymmetrical balance is to draw an
invisible line down the middle of your layout and arrange your design
elements unequally 
on either side of the line.In general, there are several principles of asymmetrical balance you should
know:
Large elements seem heavier and attract more attention than small
ones
Dark elements feel heavier and draw more attention than light
onesObjects with texture draw more attention than objects without
texture
Onе viѕuаllу heavy еlеmеnt might be balanced out by many
lightеr еlеmеntѕOne element on a page is more eye-catching than one of many
Bright and warm colors are more eye-catching than neutral or cool
colorsAѕуmmеtrу iѕ rаthеr соmmоn in nаturаl forms: you’re probably right- оr lеft-
hаndеd; trees brаnсhеѕ grоw in different dirесtiоnѕ; сlоudѕ hаvе rаndоm
ѕhареѕ.
Ovеrаll уоu hаvе mоrе frееdоm оf еxрrеѕѕiоn with аѕуmmеtrу than with
symmetry. Muсh in the ѕаmе way that ѕimilаritу and соntrаѕt wоrk together,
you can combine 
symmetry and аѕуmmеtrу to gооd effect. Balance
symmetrical fоrmѕ in аn аѕуmmеtriсаl way, оr bаlаnсе аѕуmmеtriсаl fоrmѕ
ѕуmmеtriсаllу. Cоntrаѕt ѕуmmеtrу аnd аѕуmmеtrу in уоur соmроѕitiоn to
mаkе еlеmеntѕ gеt mоrе аttеntiоn.
In the example below you can see that otherwise very symmetrical
composition has been improved with a horse and asymmetrical shape of the
rectangular, which are the only elements there that don’t repeat themselves. If
you took them away, the design would look rather boring.3. Mоѕаiс оr сrуѕtаllоgrарhiс
 
bаlаnсе
 can be compared with a balanced
сhаоѕ. This type of balance lасk diѕtinсt fосаl points and hierarchy and has
many repeating elements that have the same visual weight. Thanks to the
sophisticatedly repeated shapes, colors, and sizes a feel of visual balance is
created. Please see two examples of сrуѕtаllоgrарhiс bаlаnсе in the images
below.
When you’re designing, try experimenting with different kinds of
compositional balance and CRAP principles. See what works best for your
design, project, and brand. Elements of your composition can be arranged in
such a way that they have one kind of balance or another. To better
understand the compositional principles, educate your eyes and study your
favorite examples of graphic design. Try to recognize how different elements
in the composition are being used to counterbalance others and determine,
when composition is balanced and when it is not. You can even try to
recognize which type of compositional balance is being used in every case.Visual Direction and Flow
Visual direction is 
thе dirесtiоn in whiсh wе unconsciously think аn еlеmеnt
wоuld be moving if it wеrе givеn a chance tо mоvе in the page. It is often
used to lead the viewer’s eye to the specific information or element.
You can lead your viewer’s eye with the help of an illustration or a
photography, too. A common rule is that if an image of a person is used,
make sure the person is looking to the main message of your design. See the
simple example below.American designer Charles Eames have said: „Design is a plan for arranging
elements in such a way as best to accomplish a particular purpose.” With the
help of flow, you can create a visual and verbal sequence in which your
viewer will read and scan your design and marketing message. In order to
create an effective flow, you must purposefully arrange all the visual
elements in a way that controls and leads your viewer’s eye to the direction
you want. It’s advisable to use the principle of flow in every design you
create. For example, in the example below, this principle is successfully used
to lead your potential client eyes from the word „sale” to „up to 30% off”,
which is the main message of this banner. It was done with the simple black
triangle that connects both messages together.Optical Center
Everybody knows what geometrical center is. If we draw two diagonal lines
through the plane (whether it’s picture, a piece of paper or a computer
monitor), the intersection point shows the geometric center of the
composition.
Optical center is the spot that attracts the viewer's eye the most unless other
visual elements draw it elsewhere. Usually 
vertical optical center
 sits
slightly above the geometric center. In advertising, the selection of the optical
center may be useful to draw the attention of the potential buyer to the
specific information. This may be marketing message or an image.
Optical center can be emphasized with:
contrast
size
form
design 
elements
It doesn’t mean that you always must put all your most important information
in the vertical optical center, but you should keep in mind that this is how the
human eye works. It’s a good rule of thumb to make wider margin in thebottom of your page or whatever design project you create and narrower
margin in the top of the page. Therefore, you will naturally place all your
information slightly closer to the optical center. Because if you leave both
margins in the same size it may look like your elements are dropping out of
the page a bit. Look at the example below. The picture here is perfectly
centered and distance of both margins – upper and bottom are exactly the
same size. However, because of the vertical optical center. it looks like the
picture is placed slightly too low.
On the other hand, in the next example, the picture has been placed
considering the vertical optical center and the bottom margin is left a little bit
wider than the top margin. Therefore, the picture looks placed perfectly in the
right place.Additionally, it is important to consider the 
horizontal optical center
 (of
both the object and space) when you want to achieve a centered alignment for
an object that has an irregular form. The object in the example below has
been perfectly centered in the middle of the rectangular. If you measured with
a ruler, the margins on each side of the page would be exactly the same.
However, because of the optical illusion, it looks like it has been placed
slightly more to the left side.
In order to make this object look like it has been placed perfectly in the center
of the page, it must be moved manually a little bit more to the right. Actually,
the margins will not be in the same size anymore, but when viewed, the
object appears balanced.White Space
Each design starts with a white space. In the beginning, it’s undefined white
space, which is what you get when you take a clean page or open a new
document. When you put elements in the undefined white space, active white
space occurs, which is an important part of every design. White space or also
called negative space is always a necessary element in any good design.
Don’t misinterpret, white space is just a term. Actually, 
it can be any color
 –
red, yellow, black or whatever color or background texture you use in your
design. In the example below the white space is actually red. Its main purpose
is to reduce noise and clutter so that focal elements of the design can be
easily recognized and perceived. 
How to Create White Space in Your Design?
1
. 
Don’t be afraid of empty space in your design and don’t fill up
your layout with text and graphic elements. The empty space is
actually functioning as the white space, and you need it for
creating a good-looking design.
2
. 
If you feel like you need to create more white space to increase
contrast around your focal points, consider scaling down all of
your design elements (graphic and type) or just few of them.3
. 
Ask yourself if you really need all these titles, texts, and images in
your design? By deleting the unnecessary elements, you can create
a more focused and professional design. If you are not sure about
the necessity of an element, most probably you don't need it and it
can be deleted.
4
. 
Think outside of the box and look, if you can create some hidden
elements like in the examples below that will give your design a
really sophisticated look.
With the help of the white space, you can mold and define what the positive
space is. See a classical example of optical illusion below. This is how you
can create hidden elements and give additional meaning to the content. Like
in this example, by creating two elements you actually get three elements. 
What do you see? Two faces or a vase?  
And what do you see in the next example – a flower or two dragons?This strategy works great when creating a logo, too. Using white space
creatively you can incorporate multiple meanings in your logo design. Here
are some examples of big organization logos where white space has been
used effectively. For example, in FedEx logo, the white space between letters
"E" and "X" looks like an arrow, which symbolizes speed and moving
forward.
The white space works perfectly for the panda logo of World Wildlife 
Fund
and Pitsburgh Zoo, too.
If you want to understand the psychology of shapes, meaning of colors in
branding and importance of responsive logo design, you can learn about it inmy book “Effective Logo Design: Guidelines for Small Business Owners,
Bloggers, and Marketers”.Color as Design Element
Now we have come to the most colorful chapter of this book. Colors can
energize or cool down. They can lead to action and increase your
conversation rates online of offline if you learn to use them effectively or
they can scare away your potential customers if used incorrectly. Colors are
one of the most powerful design elements. They attract attention, create
associations, and set a mood. Actually, you don’t need to invent a bicycle
because it is already proven which colors work well together and all
professional graphic designers use this knowledge for creating their good-
looking designs. You just need to follow the best practices. Let’s start with
analyzing color wheel and learning the basic terms of color theory and then
we will move to a more interesting part of creating color schemes.Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Colors
As you probably know, you can create any color by mixing the three primary
colors: red, yellow, and blue, which are the only colors you can’t create by
mixing other colors.
If you mix two primary neighbor colors in equal amounts, you get a
secondary color. For example, by mixing yellow and blue, you get green.
If you move forward and mix each of the adjacent colors, you will get tertiary
colors that will fill the empty spaces left in your color wheel.Hues, Tints, Shades and Tones
The six primary and secondary colors that you saw in the previous color
wheels are called hues. These are pure colors that are basis for every other
color variation. When you add white, black or both to your hues, you can get
tints, tones, and shades.
Tints or Pastels
Let’s ѕtаrt with lightеning thе twelve basic hues tо сrеаtе Tints or ѕоmеtimеѕ
саllеd 
Pаѕtеls
. Basically, tints are simply any соlоr with whitе аddеd, which
lightens and desaturates the hue, making it less intense. Tints are calmer,
quieter colors. That mеаnѕ you саn go frоm аn extremely pale, nеаrlу white
tо a bаrеlу tinted almost рurе hue.
A color ѕсhеmе 
using Tints iѕ usually soft, уоuthful and soothing, еѕресiаllу
thе lighter vеrѕiоnѕ. All tintѕ wоrk wеll in fеmininе еnvirоnmеntѕ. Yоu often
see аdvеrtiѕing, mаrkеting аnd websites uѕе раlе аnd hоt раѕtеlѕ if they аrе
targeting wоmеn аѕ a dеmоgrарhiс.Shаdеѕ
Sо nоw thаt уоu knоw how tо lightеn, what’s the easiest wау to make your
соlоrѕ dаrkеr? A Shade is ѕimрlу аnу соlоr with blасk аddеd. Just аѕ with
mаking tints, уоu саn mix any of thе twеlvе рurе colors together. Then
simply аdd any amount оf blасk аnd you have created a ѕhаdе of thе mixture.
Thаt means you саn gо from an extremely dаrk, nеаrlу black tо a bаrеlу
ѕhаdеd рurе hue. Be саrеful nоt tо uѕе tоо much black аѕ it саn gеt a littlе
оvеrроwеring. Thеѕе dаrkѕ wоrk well in a masculine еnvirоnmеnt and are
bеѕt used аѕ dark accents in аrt and mаrkеting grарhiсѕ. Tоnеѕ
Now that you know how to lighten and darken your twelve соlоrѕ hоw do
you tоnе them down? Almost еvеrу color wе ѕее in оur dау-tо-dау wоrld hаѕ
bееn tоnеd either a littlе оr a lоt. Thiѕ makes fоr mоrе арреаling color
соmbinаtiоnѕ. A Tone iѕ created bу аdding bоth White аnd Black which is
grеу. Anу color thаt is “grеуеd down” iѕ соnѕidеrеd a Tоnе. Tones are
somehow mоrе рlеаѕing to thе еуе. They аrе mоrе соmрlеx, subtle аnd
sophisticated.
 
Artiѕtѕ uѕuаllу mix a littlе grеу in еvеrу раint mixture tо adjust the value аnd
intеnѕitу оf their рigmеnt. Tоnеѕ are thе best сhоiсе fоr most intеriоr
dесоrаting bесаuѕе thеу’rе mоrе interesting. They wоrk wеll in аnу Cоlоr
Scheme you might рlаn.Warm Colors and Cool Colors
Dеѕignеrѕ аrе always thrоwing аrоund tеrmѕ likе wаrm colors аnd сооl
colors. But what dо thеу rеаllу mеаn? Gаining аn understanding of thеѕе
terms will hеlр уоu determine what to lооk fоr whеn сhооѕing colors for уоur
brand, advertisement or whatever design.
Wаrm vs. Cool Colors and Hybrids
The color palette is roughly divided into two groups: warm colors on the one
side of the color wheel and cool colors on the other side and they are rather
self-explanatory. Reds, oranges, yellows, and beige or creamy colors are
WARM and thеу tеnd tо mаkе уоu think of sunlight and hеаt. They are hot,
stimulating and soothing to our EMOTIONS. But blues, greens, and grays are
COOL and they tend to make you think of cold, water and winter. This is
rather simple.
However, there are also color hybrids. These are the colors that are formed
when cool and warm colors meet. Hybrids can be warmer or cooler
depending on their mix. For example, green and Purple are the hybrids. If
green has a lot of yellow in it and forms a lime color, then it is warm, but if it
has more blue, then it is cool color (think of Kelly green).  But if you add
blue to purple color, then you get cool blue-violet color, but if you add red,
then you get red violet, which is warm color.Make Your Own Shades, Tints and Tones
In most graphic design software and online tools, you can create your own
colors. If you want to make a shade, just add black. If you need a tint, move
the slider closer to the white color. In order to create a tone, add grey.
In the next chapter, I’ll tell you, how to create different color schemes
(complementary, triads analogous or other) by using different principles.  Be
creative and have fun by combining different shades, pastels, tints and hues
and creating your own color schemes according to the basic rules of color
relationships you will learn. Instead of using pure hues, select one hue, one
shade, and one tint, for example.Create Your Own Professionally Looking Color
Schemes
Now I’ll describe the main principles of good looking color schemes. Below
each scheme you will find a banner that is designed using the color
combination of the scheme described. Therefore, you will be able to see, how
easy is to change the mood and associations of the same banner just by using
different color combinations.
Complementary Colors
The соlоrѕ thаt аrе роѕitiоnеd орроѕitе оnе аnоthеr in the color wheel are
соmрlеmеntаrу соlоrѕ. In spite of the соngеniаl-ѕоunding name givеn tо
thеѕе раirѕ of huеs, they соmе frоm dirесtlу opposing ѕроkеѕ of thе соlоr
whееl and have аbѕоlutеlу nоthing in common.  The term opposite 
colors
would actually be more appropriate for describing them.
The color wheel is organized so that if opposite colors are chosen, then one
color is always cool and the other always warm with the greatest contrast.
When complementary colors are placed next to each other, they make the
other color look more intense and brighter. They work well when you want to
create a contrast or emphasize something in your design. If you place a tiny
accent of a color’s complement next to it, you will create an emphasis. Look
at this bright and colorful web banner created in the complementary color
scheme.
However, be careful with the complementary colors to avoid an effect known
as 
simultaneous contrast, which results in
 each color making the other color
appear more vibrant and dominant. This can be horribly painful for the
viewer’s eye.Double Complementary Colors
Double complementary color scheme is called
 
tetradic because it uses four
colors arranged into two complementary color pairs from either side of
complementary colors on the color wheel. If you use all four colors in equal
amounts, it will be difficult to harmonize them, and the overall impression
may look unbalanced. Therefore, it is advisable to use one dominant color in
your color scheme. Additionally, avoid using pure colors in equal amounts.
This is one of the most complex color schemes that provides a lot of contrast
in color while still blending harmoniously if used correctly. Double
complementary colors make an X in the color wheel.
See the example below of this color scheme. There are exactly four colors in
this design additionally to black and white. The complements orange and
blue have been paired with violet and blue. Triads
A 
triadic
 color scheme is a set of three different colors on a color wheel that
are in equal distance from each other. Rеd, yellow, аnd blue аrе a triadic ѕеt
оf huеѕ. Violet, orange, аnd grееn also fоrm a triad, as dо bluе-viоlеt, red-
orange, аnd уеllоw-grееn and so on.
Nо thrее hues оf thе color whееl can bе ѕрасеd mоrе widеlу—аnd thеrеfоrе
bе mоrе viѕuаllу diverse—than those belonging tо a triаdiс palette. This is
why color triads are often used in color schemes to create both contrast and
balance.Split Complementary Colors
A Split Complementary Color Scheme consists of three hues. This palette is
created by choosing a base color on the one side of the color wheel and then
using the two 
colors
 adjacent to its 
complement
, for example, уеllоw, jоinеd
by red-violet аnd bluе-viоlеt. This provides high contrast that doesn’t create
tension like the complementary scheme. If you are a beginner, this color
scheme can be a good choice to start, because it is difficult to screw up.
Analogous Colors
Cоmbinаtiоnѕ оf three tо fivе adjacent hues оn thе соlоr wheel fоrm
аnаlоgоuѕ ѕеtѕ. All of the colors of this set аrе neighbors аnd nеаr-nеighbоrѕ
оn the соlоr wheel. This is why you should use enough contrast when using
an analogous color scheme. 
A good rule of thumb is to use one color to dominate and a second to support
it, but the third color - as an accent (along with black, grey or white).
Monochromatic Color Scheme
Create a 
Monochromatic Color Scheme
 by taking any of the Hues and
repeating it in various Tints, Shades and Tones. All grayscale images are
created in monochromatic color scheme. But you can do it in colors, too. For
example, choose Green as a basis for your design project and then use it in
tints, shades, and tones, creating as many variations, both obvious and subtle,
as you need for your project. It is very sophisticated approach and usually
creates a calming effect.
In ConclusionEасh hue of the color-wheel-based color schemes can be dаrkеnеd, lightеnеd,
muted, or brightеnеd. Play with lеvеlѕ of saturation within every color
scheme described – soften оr increase their brightness (make tints, shades or
tones) to get the result you want. There are nearly unlimited color scheme
combinations available. Create your own color triads and experiment with the
colors schemes 
you
 can create.
However, to avoid chaos and oversaturation, make one of your colors
dominant in your palette. When you understand and gain the feel of how
these color combinations work together (and which ones you prefer for
yourself), you will have much bigger control over your final design. And
most probably the design will look much more sophisticated and
professional.
And remember that the best color scheme examples can be found in nature.11 Free Online Tools that Will Help You to Create
Your Own Color Schemes
If you still feel like you need some help for choosing right colors for your
corporate style, web page, images and ads, then there are many free online
tools available that can help you. Use these tools to create beautiful and
tasteful color schemes either from your chosen image or following
suggestions of these tools. You can even use already finished color schemes
that are created by professional designers. If you know the basics of color
theory, you can always create beautiful designs and color combinations. All
you need to do is to write down the HEX and RGB codes of the colors you
chose to use them for your own graphic design projects.  Have fun!
1
. 
Color Calculator
:  - a free and convenient tool that helps you
literary calculate your color schemes. Great tool for creating color
schemes using the principles I described before.
2
. 
Coolors
 – get suggestions for beautiful color schemes with a click
of a spacebar.
3
. 
Color Adobe
 - create color schemes from your image or browse
thousands of color combinations.  This tool lets you create and
save various color schemes, each of which consists of a set of five
colors.
4
. 
Color Sphere
 - Google Chrome plugin that helps you to build up a
color scheme from one chosen shade. If you're unsure what color
scheme you should choose, Color Sphere provides a selection of
themes from a drop-down menu. It helps you harmonize colors,
find HEX codes and simulate color-blindness.
5
. 
TinEye Color Extraction
 - a great tool for creating a color scheme
based on your chosen image. You will get a color palette for all
the colors identified in your image, including color codes.
6
. 
Get inspiration from color palettes created by professional
designers. Just find the color scheme you like in the website
Colour Lovers
, copy the codes (hex and RGB) and use it for your
designs.
7
. 
ColorZilla
 - a tool that helps you to get color codes from any point
in your Internet browser and use it in your design projects. Open
any web page, analyze it and inspect a palette of its colors.8
. 
TinEye Multicolr
 - if you need to get free images in a specific
color combination, search 20 million Creative Commons images
from Flickr by color.
9
. 
Color Blindness
 - this tool will help you to assign a certain color
to a main hue. It comprises 1640 different color names. Try it out.
10
. 
Rapid Tables
 and 
Hex Colorrrs
 - tools for
converting color codes from HEX to RGB or CMYK and vice
versa.How to Choose The Right Colors for Your Project
Each color arises particular emotions and associations. Therefore, when you
are choosing colors scheme for your design, consider characteristics of your
target audience (age, sex, social group etc.), because what works well for one
social group won't work for another. For example, pink color may work great
for young girls but won't work at all for a law company.
When creating your brand guidelines or any smaller design project, keep in
mind the psychological explanations of colors as described in the infographic
below; however, don’t forget that different color variations and combinations
give different associations and feelings, so be creative and don’t follow these
general rules blindly. Instead, try to find out what colors and their
combinations work best for your brand and be creative.CMYK vs RG
B
There are two color models that are commonly used in print and digital
design: RGB and CMYK.
What is RGB color used for?
In RGB color model red, green and blue lights are mixed together in different
ways to create any color you may need. This color model usually is used for
creating and displaying images in electronic systems, such as TVs,
computers, and smartphones.  Basically, it means that if you are going to
create a banner or image that will be used only digitally, choose RGB color
model.What is CMYK color used for?
CMYK 
is an abbreviation of
 
cyan, magenta, yellow, and key (black) ink
colors that are used for color printing. The four inks are applied one after the
other on white paper to produce a full-color image. Therefore, to be sure that
your printed colors will match the colors you see on your computer screen,
use CMYK color model.
 
So, to put it simply- RGB is for digital design projects, CMYK is for print. If
you use advanced graphic design software, you can usually choose in which
color mode you want to create your design. Each software provides thispossibility differently, but basically, it looks like this.
7 Deadly Color Combinations to Avoid
Different color combinations work well for different purposes. However not
every color combination is good for advertising. Actually, the most important
thing in every advertisement is a good readability. If your advertisement
message is too difficult to read and perceive, nobody will do that. If nobody
reads it, it goes unnoticed. If it goes unnoticed, you don’t have any results.
No customers, no sales, no money. Just waste of your advertising money.
Keep in mind that nowadays due to the lack of time and abundance of the
information most often people scan texts instead of reading. Therefore, in
order to catch their attention, you need to create easily readable designs and
texts.
I have listed few of the color combinations you should avoid when creating
your advertisements.
1
. 
Green and Yellow
Since yellow and green are too close together, they are difficult to read. There
is a lack of contrast that arises interest. Your ad will simply go unnoticed.
2
. 
Green and Purple
Although it is possible to make interesting and eye-catching designs from
green and purple colors, purple text on a green background may be just too
difficult to read. Mix it up with, white, gray and black or use tints and shades
to reduce brightness.3
. 
Light Colors on a White Background
Yes, they look nice and calming but are too difficult to read. Unless you want
to hide some information from your advertisement readers, don't use a
combination of light colored text on a light background.
4
. 
Neon Colors
Although they look eye-catching, they will tire and irritate your reader's eyes.
5
. 
Colored and Textured Cackground
Don't put text on a bright colored and textured background or it will beunreadable. Turn down the opacity or place your text in a separate box with a
light background to make sure it's readable.
6
. 
Blue and Red
There are many situations when 
blue and red colors work great together, but
not for the texts. Both colors are so strong that they clash terribly.
7
. 
Dark Backgrounds
Unless you have a good reason, avoid putting red, blue or purple text on a
black background, because they are very hard to read.
Moreover, try to avoid putting white text on a black background, too.  As I
mentioned before, readers either read or scan texts. If they scan, they noticeonly most emphasized words. In the case these words rise interest, they start
reading to understand the subject.  Before you decide to use white text on a
dark background consider, if your readers will scan or read the text. 
Usually,
people read paragraph text, but scan headings, titles, and labels. Therefore,
while it may be a good choice to use white text on a dark background for
titles and headings to highlight them and grab readers attention, it's advisable
to not use white text on a dark background for paragraph texts, because that
strains the reader’s eyes.
If you still want to put white paragraph text on a black background, then
rather use light gray color, since that will be easier for your reader's eyes.
However, there are few situations when advertisers deliberately put a white
text on a dark background. For example, if they put some legal information in
their advertisement that they want to go unnoticed. Leasing interest rates, for
example, or additional costs. In this case, some marketers deliberately put
white text on a black background and make the text particularly small to
reduce the readability even more.Fonts or Typefaces?
Most probably you have heard these terms many times, but unless you are a
professional designer you have only a vague idea of what the difference
between them both is. And does the difference exist at all? Actually, yes,
there is a difference. One of the major mistakes, when talking about type, is
mixing up fonts with typefaces and using them as synonymous. If all you
associate fonts with are texts printed in Microsoft Word, it might not feel like
a big deal. However, for those who know the difference, inappropriate usage
of both terms may sound like a mistake.
In simple words, the difference between a font and a typeface is the same as
the difference between songs and an album. If we compare typography with
the music world then typeface is like an album, but fonts are like songs.
Because t
ypeface
 is 
font family 
that make up a design of type, but fonts
embody a particular size and weight of the typeface.  For example, italicized
Arial at 12 points is considered a different font than italicized Arial at 14
points, and bolded Calibri in 18 points is a different font than normal Calibri
in 12 points. In both cases Arial and Calibri are typefaces, but the particular
size and formatting of it are considered a font.Perfectly Paired Typefaces
New and amazing typefaces are invented every single day and the number of
them keeps growing and growing. There are thousands of different typefaces
with new ones being created constantly. It’s easy to get distracted and select
fonts randomly just by assuming that “they look good together.” But are you
sure? Actually, there are some basic guidelines that will show you what to
look for when trying to find typefaces that complement each other.  There are
3 basic principles that you need to know to guide you through this process:
1.
Concord
If you use only one type family without much variety in size, weight, and
style, a design is considered to be concordant. In the example below, I’m
using one typeface, Roboto. Within the Roboto typeface family, there are
several fonts: Regular, Italic, Bold and Bold Italic.
As you can see, the heading is larger and written in Bold Roboto and the
body text is written in Regular Roboto. I have also used Bold Roboto, Bold
Italic Roboto and there is 
some Italic Roboto in brackets. Overall, the design
is very simple and neat. Nothing surprising or extraordinary, but a good
approach, if you want a clean and formal design.
2. ConflictIf you use two typefaces that are similar, conflict occurs, because although
the difference is subtle, it is noticeable, and your reader may wonder if it is a
mistake. It might sound like it’s not a big problem, but it unconsciously
disturbs the reader and gives the impression of unprofessionalism. Therefore,
make sure that the typefaces you are using are different enough from each
other to avoid conflict.
Look at the example below. This time I’ve put the heading in Gill Sans. Both
Gill Sans and Verdana are sans-serif fonts and while they are a little bit
different, they still look too similar. If you look at the first and the last
sentences in the next example, you will notice that the typeface is different.
Even if you haven’t noticed that the heading and these sentences are written
in a different type, most probably, you have a feeling that it looks like there
have been some mistakes in formatting.  Remember that when we are dealing
with typefaces similarities 
conflict.
3. Contrast
To create a contrast, use typefaces of different and contrasting style. This will
help you to create much more attractive and eye-catching designs. The key is
to find typefaces that are different but still have enough in common to look
good together. It must be apparent that the difference has been created for a
reason. You can pair a sans-serif font with a serif font or a fancy font with a
classic font. In my example below, I have used Broadway BT type (in titles)combined with Roboto (in body text). This time it’s apparent that the heading
is written in a different font, which makes the design more attractive and eye-
catching.
To sum it up, concordant typography is good and easy to create, but without a
proper formatting, doesn’t look very interesting. Don’t use conflicting
typefaces because this combination doesn’t look professional and creates a
sense of mistake. If you feel that something is wrong with the combination of
your chosen typefaces, make sure they are not too similar and, therefore,
conflicting with each other. One of the most interesting choices is using
contrasting typefaces because they look attractive and fun. However,
remember that the goal of combining several typefaces is to improve the
communication, not to confuse your audience
.
If you still don’t feel sure that you will be able to find the best pair for your
chosen font, check out these tools.
Tools for Font Pairing
http://fontjoy.com/
 - generate new font pairings. Replace their text
with your book title and tagline. Then choose from different fonts
that are suggested for pairings.
http://www.typeconnection.com
 – this is like a fun dating gamefor typefaces. Choose from one of their suggested types and then
from four different strategies to find the best match for the chosen
typeface. Enjoy the result.
http://typespiration.com
 – check out this webpage to find free
inspirational font combinations with color palettes made by
professional designers.
Or check out 
Font Bundles
 where you can download beautiful typefaces that
are already paired
 according to the best practices. There are both free and
paid fonts available.4 Typeface Categories
To understand how typefaces are categorized and what principles are behind
their pairing, it is vital to have the basic understanding of the main type
groups. They can be broken into 4 very broad categories:
1.
Serif or Roman typefaces
A serif is a small line attached to the end of a stroke in a letter or symbol.
Therefore, typefaces with serifs are called serif typefaces and most often are
used in printed materials: books, newspapers, magazines, and formal
documents. They will help your book convey a feeling of traditions,
respectability and stability.  Serif typefaces are broken into three
subcategories, which are commonly used nowadays: Old Style, Transitional,
and Modern.
Old Style
 typefaces were originally created between the late 15th
and mid-18th centuries and were mimicking the hand lettering of
scribes. They look to be handwritten with a wedge-tipped pen.
The main characteristics of this type are a moderate transition
between the thick and thin strokes of a letterform, a diagonal
stress so that weight stress is at approximately 8:00 and 2:00
o’clock in the thinnest parts of the curved strokes and slanted
serifs. This is a good type group to use on a large 
amount of text
because it makes it easy to read.
Few more Old Style type examples:Transitional typefaces
 were established by English printer and
typographer, John Baskerville in the mid-18th century, because of
the improved printing methods, which allowed much finer
character strokes. Transitional typefaces represent the transition
between Old style and the Modern period, and therefore
incorporate some characteristics of each.  They have a greater
contrast between thick and thin strokes and wider, gracefully
bracketed serifs with flat bases.
Few more Transitional type examples:
Modern, 
also known as Didone typefaces, were developed in thelate 18th and early 19th 
century, 
when even more sophisticated
printing techniques and 
paper were invented. They have thin,
horizontal serifs, a radical difference between the thick and thin
strokes of a letterform, and a perfectly vertical stress. These
typefaces tend to look elegant and really eye-catching, but because
of their structure, are also cold. Most of them are less readable
than old style typefaces. Modern typefaces work well as headlines
but are not good for body text, either on the web or in print.
Because of their prominent thick lines, the thin lines almost
disappear when used for body copy in print, and therefore an
effect called “dazzling” occurs, which significantly reduces
readability.
Few more Modern type examples:
2. Sans serif typefaces
The Sans serif term
 comes from the word “sans,” which in French means
“without,” because these typefaces do not have the small serifs at the end of
their strokes. Simply speaking, these are typefaces without serifs. They often
have minimal variation in stroke 
width, creating the impression of a minimal,simplified design. Most sans serifs are mono-weight, but very few of them
have a slight thick to thin transition. They are contemporary and rather
universal. Often, they are used for body text, on-screen online as well as for
book headlines and printed materials. The well-known 
Arial
, popularized by
Microsoft, is a common Sans serif example.
Few more Sans Serif type examples:
3. Script typefaces
These typefaces imitate handwriting. This category can be broken down into
scripts that connect and scripts that don’t, calligraphic scripts, scripts that
look like they’re hand printed, and so on. Be careful when using scripts –
don’t overdo them and never use them in all caps, because that would look
annoying and disturb readability. Usually, they aren’t used for body text
because they are harder to read than many serif and sans-serif typefaces.
However, they can be successfully used as an interesting accent and fancy
design element.  In general, scripts are used for logos, invitations, displays,
and 
headlines. They inspire feelings of elegance, grace and femininity and
make the texts look more personal.Few more Script type examples:
4. Decorative Typefaces
Decorative typefaces became popular in the 19th century and were used
extensively on posters and advertisements. They are good for conveying
specific emotions and are funny, artistic, and attractive. Decorative typefaces
work great for eye-catching headlines but are not appropriate for body text,
because that would be annoying and unreadable. It’s advisable to use them in
a limited amount.
Few more Decorative type examples:Typographic Contrasts
According to Canadian typographer Carl Dair, there are 7 different ways how
you can contrast types.
1.
     
Size
It’s the most basic and simple way to use contrast. Just use a small type with
a big type. Usually, this way of contrast is used by making headlines much
bigger than the body text.
2.
     
Weight
Use bold type versus light type of the same style to emphasize some part of
the text or create an interesting effect.
3.
     
Form
Basically, contrast by form is used every time you use a capital letter together
with a lower case. Actually, you are using this contrast every time you write a
sentence. You can contrast by form also when use condensed typefaces
together with expanded typefaces.
4.
    
 
Structure
Various typefaces have different letterform and structure. The best way to
contrast them is by using two typefaces from two different categories of type.
For example, you can contrast a san serif type with a modern typeface or a
script. It’s advisable to not use two different typefaces from one category on
the same page to avoid conflict.5.
     
Texture
You can create an effect of texture by using lines with text in large blocks.
Therefore, the text is perceived as a whole. Experiment with different
typefaces and 
letterforms to get the most interesting result.
6.
     
Color
Like you already read in the very first chapter about contrast, you can surely
create contrast with colors, too, for example, cool vs. warm, light vs. dark,
using complementary colors and so on. Just use the same principles you have
already learned in the previous chapter about creating good looking color
schemes. And don’t forget that black-and-white creates the most powerful
contrasts.
7.
     
Direction
Every element of a type and letter has a direction. A line with a text has a
horizontal direction, but a narrow column with a text has a vertical direction.
If you contrast them both, you can get a really sophisticated design. You can
also mix wide blocks of long lines with tall columns of short lines to create
an interesting design.One more way how to use the contrast by direction is to put your text
diagonally. If you want to create a positive and forward energy, place it with
angle up to the right, if you want to create a downward energy, then with an
angle down to the right. Experiment with using both angles on one page to
create eye-catching designs. Just don’t neglect the readability while doing
that.
Usually, we use several types of contrast together. Most often even without
recognizing that. Hopefully, now, when you have learned about these
typographic contrast principles, you will use them consciously and in a moresophisticated way.How Many Typefaces to Use?
You don’t need to use several typefaces to create a great design. A single classic typeface may be all
you need. Simply play with formatting and use contrasts. If you use too many typefaces, you will end
up with a confusing and distracting result. Moreover, it will look unprofessional. In general, when in
doubt, stick with only one classic typeface. 
If you think that one typeface is not enough for your design, don’t use more than 3 typefaces. And only
one of them can be fancy or decorative. The others must be clean and simple.
Remember the three main font pairing principles I explained you previously. The fonts must be
appropriate to your target audience and communicate the emotions and message you want your design
to arise.Main Principles of Perfecting Your Typefaces
Creating perfect typography is important for every design. Don’t ignore this
piece of design process. In this chapter, you will learn about three simple
secrets to make sure your typography always looks perfect. Use them to make
your design look professional and sophisticated.
Kerning
Kerning refers to the process of adjusting the space 
between two characters
:
letter, punctuation, numbers, etc. Usually, it is applied to logos and big titles
with the size higher than 20 points.  Sometimes, a font’s default kerning
doesn’t look well when certain letter combinations are used. In these cases,
you’ll want to manually adjust it so the spacing between all the letters looks
equal. It doesn’t need to be mathematically equal though, but only to create
optical illusion that spacing is equal. It’s because each letter has its own
unique shape (straight-edged and rounded letters) and not always do they
perfectly fit together when put in pairs.
Sometimes, a too wide gap between letters may look like a space between
two words and break your text. Or two letters may be placed so close together
that become unreadable. The usual 
examples are letters “r” and “n”. If they
are too close to each other, they form the letter “m”. Check out these
examples of 
bad kerning usage
.
If it’s hard to recognize where you need to make kerning adjustments, flip
your title upside down to spot the spacing problems. This will help you to
focus on the letterforms and notice which spaces need to be adjusted.  If your software doesn’t provide kerning function, you will need to split your
title into letters or letter groups to adjust the spacing manually. However,
kerning is applied 
only to big titles
. So, don’t waste your time on large
blocks of body text. They don’t need manual kerning because any kerning
problems won’t be visible at small text sizes.
Moreover, kerning should be one of the last steps when creating your design.
Only when the final choice regarding your font and formatting has been
made, move on to kerning to refine and polish your design. In some cases, it
isn’t needed at all.Tracking
Tracking refers to adjusting the spacing equally between 
all the characters
 in
your text. Rather than adjusting only one pair of letters like with
kerning, tracking applies equal spacing to 
all
 the letters in your chosen text at
once. You can adjust spacing in a single word, a sentence, or in whole
paragraphs or pages automatically by using the functionality of your image
editor. If any tracking is necessary, you’ll want to do that before kerning.
Increasing the spacing between letters is an easy technique that helps make
your title look more impressive and epic.
However, you should be careful with tracking, because if overused it can lead
to difficulty in reading.Leading
Leading (pronounced "ledding") is the spacing between lines of your text.
You already use this setting in your text-editing program every time your text
is started in a new row. This is a very simple principle that determines how
text is spaced vertically in lines.
If your title has multiple lines of text, you'll want to make sure there is an
appropriate distance between them to make your title readable. If the space is
too high or too narrow, you will need to reduce it manually. If your image
editor app doesn’t provide this function, you will need to create two or three
separate title lines and then place them in appropriate distance manually.
Whether you're designing a social media post or a Christmas greeting card,
it's worth knowing these basic typography concepts and how to apply them to
your designs. Kerning, Tracking and Leading are important in typography
and should not be ignored. It is the finishing touch on your designs that
makes everything easily readable and professionally looking. Consider these
techniques before completing every design. However, it doesn’t mean that
you always need to apply them. Not always they are necessary.10 Resources to Download Free Fonts
As we already discussed before, choosing a typeface is an important part of
the design process. One of the main goals of the typeface is to communicate
your message and mood and evoke emotions in the reader. The bad news is
that the selection of standard fonts that are available on your computer is
limited. The good news is that you can add new fonts to your computer easily
and free of charge. There is really a wide variety of free fonts available in
different resources. I have listed some of them below. However, there is a ton
of paid fonts, too. So, if you don’t find what you are looking for in free
resources, then look for paid fonts. Simply search for them on Google.
1
. 
Google Fonts
  – search by numerous font categories and choose
exactly what you like.
2
. 
Dafont
 – browse fonts by alphabetical listing, by style, by author
or by popularity.
3
. 
1001 Free Fonts
 – Graffiti, Helloween, Gothic, Fantasy – these are
just a few of fancy fonts categories you can choose from. Check
them out!
4
. 
Font Space
 – a collection of over 31,000 free fonts shared by
designers around the world.
5
. 
Fontsquirrel
 – hand-selected typefaces that are presented in an
easy-to-use format.
6
. 
Urban Fonts
 – nearly 8,000 free fonts to choose from.
7
. 
Font Zone
 – thousands of free fonts to enhance your own
websites, documents, greeting cards, and more. You can browse
popular fonts by themes, name or style.
8
. 
Font Bundles
 – beautiful and stylish fonts that you can get for
free.
9
. 
Behance
 – huge selection of stylish fonts. Pay with a Tweet and
get any of them.
10
. 
Ffonts
 – choose from 14, 000 fonts and use them
as you wish.
If you want to learn about other free tools that you can use for creating
visuals, get this book: “
100+ Free Tools to Create Visuals for Web & Social
Media
”. You can download it for free from my webpage.Typeface Licenses Explained
Similarly like with photos and vector files, you need to make sure you are
allowed to use the typefaces downloaded from the Internet. Including the web
pages I listed before. Typefaces are considered as software and they should
be treated like any other software license. Many free fonts are licensed for
personal use only and do not include a commercial license. It may also
happen that the license prohibits you from using the font in certain
commercial works like in a logo but allow you to use it for other purposes.
So, always check out the license terms before you use the font for your
design.
If you use unlicensed font, it may happen that you will not be able to embed
it in your pdf file, which is necessary to make sure that your fonts will look
the same when the file is opened on other computers. Moreover, it's an
intellectual property violation. There are cases when design agencies have
been sued for using unlicensed fonts.How to Install New Typefaces on Your Computer?
In case you are wondering how to technically add a new font to your
computer, it’s actually very easy. So, don’t be afraid. You don’t need to be a
tech geek or a designer to do that. Just go to any website that I listed before,
choose the font you like and download it. 
Watch this video tutorial
. And
remember to read the license terms of each font to make sure you can use
them for commercial use.What Software and Apps to Use for Creating Your Designs?
There are many software and apps you can use for creating your designs.
Your choice mainly depends on your skills and abilities. If you are skillful in
Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator or Corel Draw, use them. The disadvantage of
these software is that they are rather expensive. If you are not going to use
them professionally, most probably it’s not worth investing in them.
Instead, you can choose from these tools listed below. Most of them are free.
1
. 
GIMP
 
– this free software has rather similar functionality to
Photoshop, which means that it works the best for picture (bitmap)
retouching and editing. If you don’t know how to use it, search for
video tutorials on YouTube.
2
. 
Inkscape
 
– this software has similar functionality to Adobe
Illustrator and CorelDraw. It is used for creating or editing vector
graphics such as illustrations, diagrams, line arts, charts, logos and
others. If you don’t know how to use it, you will need to spend
some time 
learning
 it first.
3
. 
PowerPoint
 – the easiest software to use and won’t cost you a
dime if you already have it on your computer. If you don’t, you
can use its free trial version or 
subscribe
 for all MS Office
products just for $7.99/month. You can use PowerPoint for
creating vector graphics and also for doing simple photo editing. If
you want to learn more about PowerPoint functionality, check out
my tutorials on YouTube
.
4
. 
Canva
 – online app that offers many easily editable templates to
choose from. All you need to do is drag and drop the elements of
your design, change colors and fonts.
5
. 
Pixlr
–free online app that is an alternative to Photoshop and Gimp.
The advantage is you don’t need to install it. Good for photo
editing and working with picture layers.
If you want to learn about other free tools that you can use for creating
visuals, get this book: “
100+ Free Tools to Create Visuals for Web & Social
Media
”. You can download it for free from my webpage.Use Free Images - 
10 Free
 Resources
A single picture can be worth a thousand words. But, where to find free images for your website
design, blog, Facebook or Twitter post, or for a small business ad design without spending a lot of
money for it? Of course, if the budget allows it, you can buy such images on websites like 
istock.com
,
shutterstock.com
 or any other similar sites. If you know how to, you can create images by yourself.
However, quality pictures can also be found online for free – without investing much work into
creating them, and at the same time not infringing any copyrights.
There are many portals on the Internet that offer free quality photos. Some of the authors ask for
attribution, some of them allow using their pictures only for personal use, but there are also plenty of
those who allow using their photos and images for commercial use. Some restrictions may apply;
therefore you should always check the license terms first, but you can mostly use these pictures for
your blog posts, website and social networks, free of charge.
1.
Free Images
 
– More than 388 000 free photos and illustrations.
2. 
Pixabay
 
– More than 310 000 pictures – photos, vectors, and artistic illustrations. You can use every
single one of them, both in digital and printed format, including commercial use. Many of the images
used in this book come from this portal. 
3. 
Snapwire Snaps
 – free photos from 200,177 of the world’s top photographers.
4. 
tookapic 
– high quality free and premium 13,846 stock photos.
5. 
Public Domain Photos
 
– 5 000 free photos and 8000 cliparts which can be used as you wish – even
for commercial purposes.
6.
 
Free Photos Bank
 
– wide variety of different photos – from cables to toys and office supplies.
7. 
Picjumbo
 
– simple navigation and a huge image library. Many beautiful pictures of food and drinks,
which might be very useful for marketing a restaurant or a bar.
8. 
FancyCrave
 – high-resolution food, nature, people, architecture and other photos from professional
photographers.
9. 
FreeJPG
 – great source of technology, people, texture, travel, religion and other images – more than
10 000 images.
10. 
Good Free Photos
 – a gallery of thousands of unique and free public domain stock photos.
Categorized by location for travel photos, species for animal and plant photos, and types of objects for
other photos.
Since I get asked all the time what tools and resources, I use to self-publish my books and create
content for social media, I have published a list of my favorite ones on my blog. 
Check them out here
.Conclusion
Congratulations!  Thank you very much for reading all the way to the end. You’ve made it through the
book and now have a better understanding of how to create great and effective visuals for your website,
social media, advertising, business cards and other projects. Hopefully, you have got some tips and
insights from this book that will stick with you forever. Even it was only one helpful tip it may create a
big difference in your future graphic design projects.
Now I’d like to ask for a „small favour”.  Could you please take a minute and 
leave a review for this
book
? 
Your review is very important because it will help other readers to decide if this book could be
useful for them, too. It doesn’t have to be a long para
graph. Just a line or two would mean a lot to me.
In case you want to be notified when I publish new books, please 
follow me on Amazon
.Other Books by the Author
Free Online Tools Series 
●
      
100+ Free Online Tools to Get Things Done Quicker
●
      
100+ Free Tools to Create Content for Web & Social Media
●
      
200 Free Tools to Save Time on Social Media Managing: Boost Your Social Media Results &
Reduce Your Hours
 
Be Your Own Designer Series 
●
      
How to Create a Logo? Fundamental Principles of Effective Logo Design
●
      
Graphic Design for Beginners: Fundamental Graphic Design Principles that Underlie Every
Design Project
Sell Books on Amazon Series 
5 Secret Strategies of Kindle Publishing: Earn Passive Income with Non-fiction
Books
 
Book Cover Design Formula: Create Book Covers That Captivate Readers
 
Book Launch Formula: 3 Proven Strategies to Launch Your Non-Fiction Book on
Amazon
 
Email Marketing for Authors Made Simple: The 1 Page List Building Plan
 
Workbook: Plan Out Your Non-fiction Book Series
 
300+ Tools & Resources for Self-published and Indie Authors: Write more books in
less time, make data-driven decisions, and save your time and money
Udemy Online Courses
The Ultimate Guide to Creating Your Book Cover Design with PowerPointAbout author
Anita Nipane is a two-times Amazon bestselling author with more than 20,000 readers around the
world. With a Master's in Business Administration and numerous qualifications in Marketing, Anita has
10 years experience as a marketing professional in different industries. In her books, Anita explains
complex content creation and self-publishing tactics in an easy to understand and structured way.