Summary.   IT Management
How to Design an AI Marketing Strategy
by Thomas H. Davenport, Abhijit Guha, and Dhruv Grewal
From the Magazine (July–August 2021)
Giulio Bonasera
In order to realize AI’s giant potential, CMOs need to have a good grasp
of the various kinds of applications available and how they may evolve. This article
guides marketing executives through the current state of AI and presents a
framework that will help them...moreOf all a company’s functions, marketing has perhaps the most to
gain from artificial intelligence. Marketing’s core activities are
understanding customer needs, matching them to products and
services, and persuading people to buy—capabilities that AI can
dramatically enhance. No wonder a 2018 McKinsey analysis of
more than 400 advanced use cases showed that marketing was
the domain where AI would contribute the greatest value.
00:00  /  18:08
Listen to this article
To hear more, download Noa app for iPhone or Android.
Chief marketing officers are increasingly embracing the
technology: An August 2019 survey by the American Marketing
Association revealed that implementation of AI had jumped 27%
in the previous year and a half. And a 2020 Deloitte global survey
of early AI adopters showed that three of the top five AI objectives
were marketing-oriented: enhancing existing products and
services, creating new products and services, and enhancing
relationships with customers.
A I-Pow ered M arketing: Series reprint
buy copies
While AI has made inroads in marketing, we expect it to take on
larger and larger roles across the function in the coming years.
Given the technology’s enormous potential, it’s crucial for CMOs
to understand the types of marketing AI applications available
today and how they may evolve. Drawing on more than a decade
of experience studying data analytics, AI, and marketing and
advising companies across industries about them, we’vedeveloped a framework that can help CMOs classify existing AI
projects and plan the rollout of future ones. But before we
describe the framework, let’s look at the current state of play.
Today’s AI
Many firms now use AI to handle narrow tasks, such as digital ad
placement (also known as “programmatic buying”); assist with
broad tasks, like enhancing the accuracy of predictions (think
sales forecasts); and augment human efforts in structured tasks,
such as customer service. (See the sidebar “Well-Established AI
Applications in Marketing” for a list of some common activities AI
can support.)
W ell-Established A I Applications in M arketing
Chatbots for lead development, customer support, and
cross-selling or upselling Inbound call analysis and
routing, and ...
Firms also employ AI at every stage of the customer journey.
When potential customers are in the “consideration” phase and
researching a product, AI will target ads at them and can help
guide their search. We see this happening at the online furniture
retailer Wayfair, which uses AI to determine which customers are
most likely to be persuadable and, on the basis of their browsing
histories, choose products to show them. And AI-enabled bots
from companies such as Vee24 can help marketers understand
customers’ needs, increase their engagement in a search, nudge
them in a desired direction (say, to a specific web page), and if
needed, connect them to a human sales agent by chat, phone,
video, or even “cobrowsing”—allowing an agent to help the
customer navigate a shared screen.AI can streamline the sales process by using extremely detailed
data on individuals, including real-time geolocation data, to
create highly personalized product or service offers. Later in the
journey, AI assists in upselling and cross-selling and can reduce
the likelihood that customers will abandon their digital shopping
carts. For example, after a customer fills a cart, AI bots can
provide a motivating testimonial to help close the sale—such as
“Great purchase! James from Vermont bought the same mattress.”
Such initiatives can increase conversion rates fivefold or more.
After the sale, AI-enabled service agents from firms like Amelia
(formerly IPsoft) and Interactions are available 24/7 to triage
customers’ requests—and are able to deal with fluctuating
volumes of service requests better than human agents are. They
can handle simple queries about, say, delivery time or scheduling
an appointment and can escalate more-complex issues to a
human agent. In some cases AI assists human reps by analyzing
customers’ tone and suggesting differential responses, coaching
agents about how best to satisfy customers’ needs, or suggesting
intervention by a supervisor.
The Framework
Marketing AI can be categorized according to two dimensions:
intelligence level and whether it’s stand-alone or part of a broader
platform. Some technologies, such as chatbots or
recommendation engines, can fall into any of the categories; it’s
how they’re implemented within a specific application that
determines their classification.
Let’s look at the two types of intelligence first.
Task automation. These applications perform repetitive,
structured tasks that require relatively low levels of intelligence.
They’re designed to follow a set of rules or execute a
predetermined sequence of operations based on a given input,
but they can’t handle complex problems such as nuanced
customer requests. An example would be a system that
automatically sends a welcome email to each new customer.
Simpler chatbots, such as those available through FacebookMessenger and other social media providers, also fall into this
category. They can provide some help to customers during basic
interactions, taking customers down a defined decision tree, but
they can’t discern customers’ intent, offer customized responses,
or learn from interactions over time.
Machine learning. These algorithms are trained using large
quantities of data to make relatively complex predictions and
decisions. Such models can recognize images, decipher text,
segment customers, and anticipate how customers will respond to
various initiatives, such as promotions. Machine learning already
drives programmatic buying in online advertising, e-commerce
recommendation engines, and sales propensity models in
customer relationship management (CRM) systems. It and its
more sophisticated variant, deep learning, are the hottest
technologies in AI and are rapidly becoming powerful tools in
marketing. That said, it’s important to clarify that existing
machine-learning applications still just perform narrow tasks and
need to be trained using voluminous amounts of data.
Now let’s consider stand-alone versus integrated AI.
Stand-alone applications. These are best understood as clearly
demarcated, or isolated, AI programs. They’re separate from the
primary channels through which customers learn about, buy, or
get support for using a company’s offerings, or the channels
employees use to market, sell, or service those offerings. Put
simply, customers or employees have to make a special trip
beyond those channels to use the AI.
Consider the color-discovery app created by Behr, the paint
company. Using IBM Watson’s natural language processing and
Tone Analyzer capabilities (which detect emotions in text), the
application delivers several personalized Behr paint-color
recommendations that are based on the mood consumers desire
for their space. Customers use the app to short-list two or three
colors for the room they intend to paint. The actual sale of paint is
then executed outside the app, although it does allow a
connection to order from Home Depot.Integrated applications. Embedded within existing systems,
these AI applications are often less visible than stand-alone ones
to the customers, marketers, and salespeople who use them. For
example, machine learning that makes split-second decisions
about which digital ads to offer users is built into platforms that
handle the entire process of buying and placing ads. Netflix’s
integrated machine learning has offered customers video
recommendations for more than a decade; its selections simply
appear in the menu of offerings viewers see when they go to the
site. If the recommendation engine were stand-alone, they would
need to go to a dedicated app and request suggestions.
Makers of CRM systems increasingly build machine-learning
capabilities into their products. At Salesforce, the Sales Cloud
Einstein suite has several capabilities, including an AI-based
lead-scoring system that automatically ranks B2B customer leads
by the likelihood of purchase. Vendors like Cogito, which sells AI
that coaches call center salespeople, also integrate their
applications with Salesforce’s CRM system.Combining the two types of intelligence and two types of
structure yields the four quadrants of our framework: stand-alone
machine-learning apps, integrated machine-learning apps, stand-
alone task-automation apps, and integrated task-automation
apps.
Understanding which quadrant applications fall into can help
marketers plan and sequence the introduction of new uses.
A Stepped Approach
We believe that marketers will ultimately see the greatest value by
pursuing integrated machine-learning applications, though
simple rule-based and task-automation systems can enhance
highly structured processes and offer reasonable potential for
commercial returns. Note, however, that nowadays task
automation is increasingly combined with machine learning—to
extract key data from messages, make more-complex decisions,
and personalize communications—a hybrid that straddles
quadrants.
Stand-alone applications continue to have their place where
integration is difficult or impossible, though there are limits to
their benefits. Therefore, we advise marketers to move over time
toward integrating AI within current marketing systems rather
than continue with stand-alone applications. And indeed, many
companies are heading in that overall direction; in the 2020
Deloitte survey, 74% of global AI executives agreed that “AI will be
integrated into all enterprise applications within three years.”
Getting Started
For firms with limited AI experience, a good way to begin is by
building or buying simple rule-based applications. Many firms
pursue a “crawl-walk-run” approach, starting with a stand-alone
non-customer-facing task-automation app, such as one that
guides human service agents who engage with customers.
Once companies acquire basic AI skills and an abundance of
customer and market data, they can start moving from task
automation to machine learning. A good example of the latter is
Stitch Fix’s clothing-selection AI, which helps its stylists curate
offers for customers and is based on their self-reported style
preferences, the items they keep and return, and their feedback.
These models became even more effective when the company
began to ask customers to choose among Style Shuffle photos,
creating a valuable source of new data.New sources of data—such as internal transactions, outside
suppliers, and even potential acquisitions—are something
marketers should look for constantly, since most AI applications,
particularly machine learning, require vast amounts of high-
quality data. Consider the machine-learning-based pricing model
that the charter jet firm XO used to increase its EBITDA by 5%:
The key was to tap external sources for data on the supply of
private jets and on factors that affect demand, such as major
events, the macroeconomy, seasonal activity, and the weather.
The data XO uses is publicly available, but it’s a good idea to also
seek proprietary sources whenever possible, because models
using public data can be copied by competitors.
As companies become more sophisticated in their use of
marketing AI, many fully automate certain types of decisions,
taking humans out of the loop entirely. With repetitive, high-
speed decisions, such as those required for programmatic ad
buying (where digital ads are served up almost instantaneously to
users), this approach is essential. In other domains AI may only
present recommendations to a person faced with a choice—for
example, suggesting a movie to a consumer or a strategy to a
marketing executive. Human decision-making is typically
reserved for the most consequential questions, such as whether to
continue a campaign or to approve an expensive TV ad.
Firms should move to more-automated decisions whenever
possible. We believe this is where the greatest returns from
marketing AI will be found.
Challenges and Risks
Implementing even the simplest AI applications can present
difficulties. Stand-alone task-automation AI, despite its lower
technical sophistication, can still be hard to configure for specific
workflows and requires companies to acquire suitable AI skills.
Bringing any kind of AI into a workflow demands careful
integration of human and machine tasks so that the AI augments
people’s skills and isn’t deployed in ways that create problems.
For instance, while many organizations use rule-based chatbots toautomate customer service, less-capable bots can irritate
customers. It may be better to have such bots assist human agents
or advisers rather than interact with customers.
As companies adopt more-sophisticated and integrated
applications, other considerations arise. Incorporating AI into
third-party platforms, in particular, can be tricky. A case in point
is offered by Procter & Gamble’s Olay Skin Advisor, which uses
deep learning to analyze selfies that customers have taken, assess
their age and skin type, and recommend appropriate products. It
is integrated into an e-commerce and loyalty platform, Olay.com,
and has improved conversion rates, bounce rates, and average
basket sizes in some geographies. However, it has been harder to
integrate it with retail stores and Amazon, third parties that
account for a high percentage of Olay’s sales. The Skin Advisor is
not available on Olay’s extensive store site on Amazon, hampering
the brand’s ability to deliver a seamless, AI-assisted customer
experience there.
Finally, companies must keep customers’ interests top of mind.
The smarter and more integrated AI applications are, the more
worries customers may have about privacy, security, and data
ownership. Customers may be skittish about apps that capture
and share location data without their knowledge or about smart
speakers that may be eavesdropping on them. In general,
consumers have shown a willingness (even eagerness) to swap
some personal data and privacy in exchange for the value that
innovative apps can provide. Concerns about AI applications like
Alexa seem to be dwarfed by appreciation of their benefits. Thus
the key for marketers as they expand the intelligence and reach of
their AI is to ensure that its privacy and security controls are
transparent, that customers have some say over how their data is
collected and used, and that they get fair value from the firm in
exchange. To guarantee those protections and maintain
customers’ trust, CMOs should establish ethics and privacy review
boards—with both marketing and legal experts—to vet AI
projects, particularly those that involve customer data or
algorithms that may be prone to bias, such as credit scoring.. . .
While marketing AI holds enormous promise, we urge CMOs to be
realistic about its current capabilities. Despite the hype, AI can
still accomplish only narrow tasks, not run an entire marketing
function or process. Nevertheless, it’s already offering substantial
benefits to marketers—and in fact is essential in some marketing
activities—and its capabilities are rapidly growing. We believe
that AI will ultimately transform marketing, but it’s a journey that
will take decades. The marketing function and the organizations
that support it, IT in particular, will need to pay long-term
attention to building AI capabilities and addressing any potential
risks. We urge marketers to start developing a strategy today to
take advantage of AI’s current functionality and its likely future.
A version of this article appeared in the July–August 2021 issue of Harvard
Business Review.
Thomas H. Davenport is the President’s
Distinguished Professor of Information
Technology and Management at Babson
College, a visiting scholar at the MIT Initiative
on the Digital Economy, and a senior adviser to
Deloitte’s AI practice. He is a coauthor of All-in
on AI: How Smart Companies Win Big with
Artificial Intelligence (Harvard Business Review
Press, 2023).
Abhijit Guha is an associate professor of
marketing at the Darla Moore School of
Business, University of South Carolina.
Dhruv Grewal holds the Toyota Chair in
Commerce and Electronic Business and is a
AG
DGprofessor of marketing at Babson College. He is
a coauthor of Marketing and Retailing
Management and the author of Retail
Marketing Management: The 5 Es of Retailing.
Recommended For You
Don't Buy the Wrong Marketing Tech
PODCAST
What We Still Need to Learn about AI in Marketing - and Beyond
Why You Aren't Getting More from Your Marketing AI
How Generative AI Could Disrupt Creative Work
