How To Build A Kick-Ass
Advertising Agency
Peter Levitan
Portlandia Press
Portland, OregonHow To Build A Kick-Ass Advertising Agency
Copyright © 2023 by Peter Levitan. All rights reserved.
Published in the United States of America.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
ISBN: 978-0-9883119-8-5
Portlandia Press
Portland, OregonTable of Contents
Chapter 1 What the Hell Is Advertising?
What Are We?
Why Do We Do This?
Chapter 2 The Advertising Agency Business Plan
Start Here
Nine Elements of a One-Page Business Plan
Chapter 3 Agency Positioning Power
It’s An Agency Positioning Jungle
Distinction vs. Sameness
The Expert Agency
eatbigfish: The Challenger Expert
Positioning Options
The Elevator Pitch
Chapter 4 Marketing Starts Here
Nail These Big Three
Chapter 5 Please Be Unignorable
Thank You, john st.
Getting to Unignorable
Chapter 6 Thought Leadership
Thinking Works
Thought Leadership Is Good
Thinking Is Tough WorkThe Unignorable Insight
Building Insights
18 Insight Tools
Chapter 7 You Inc.
Only You Own You
Your Personal Brand and Business
Advertising’s Personal Masters
What about You?
“The Brand Called You”
Six Branding Platforms
Chapter 8 Intellectual Property
Basecamp and Money
IP and Growth
Productizing the Agency
Chapter 9 24/7 Business Development
Stop with the Shoemaker Excuse
Building the Plan
A Deep-Dive Assessment
Chapter 10 The Optimal Agency Website
Always Revising
Generalizations First
The 10-Second Website Rule
Three Optimized Elements
Website Navigation
The Power of Landing Pages
Chapter 11 Inbound or Outbound Marketing?
Oh My. In Out. What to Do?
Inbound Marketing = Attraction
Outbound Marketing = Direct Marketing
Do Both? But...Chapter 12 Account-Based Marketing
Four Mantras
ABM = Direct Marketing = Sales
The Art of Prospecting
Leverage Buyer Intent
ABM Timing and Cadence
Chapter 13 Inbound Marketing
It’s All about Attraction
A Wide-Open Inbound Opportunity
Have A Public Relations Plan
Chapter 14 Marketing Insight Distribution
Deliver The Insights
My Distribution Bottom-Line
Chapter 15 Process Wins
Process Rules Business Development. Full Stop.
Your Agency Is Your Client
Two Management Tools
Chapter 16 Agency Talent Management
It’s the People, Stupid
The Art of Retention
To Remote or Not to Remote?
Workplace Solutions
Three Easy People Management Tactics
Three Ridiculous Insanities
Manage Boss Burnout
Chapter 17 Recruitment
The Art of Recruitment
The Onboarding Dilemma
The Power of CultureDiversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Chapter 18 Community Spirit
The Art of Philanthropy and Your Ad Agency
Chapter 19 Client Management
What Do Clients Want?
What Type of Agency Does the Client Need?
How Much Should a Client Spend?
What More Do Clients Really Need?
Chapter 20 The Savvy Account Manager
Why Clients Split
The Account Manager Role
Account Management Training
Chapter 21 Show Me the Money
Savvy Accounting
Your Agency: A Bottom-Line Model from AMI
Back To How to Price
Cost Management
Chapter 22 The Business Development Budget
A Sad Biz Dev Story
Budgeting for Business Development
Do Not Pitch That Account
Do a Client Assessment
Chapter 23 The Business Development Director
74% Failure Rate Blues
What Can We Do?
Chapter 24 How to Build, Buy, and Sell an AgencyBuild Your New Agency
The Agency Name Game
Brand Name Development
Buy An Agency
Sell Your Agency
Chapter 25 Only One Interview
Going Into Orbit
Chapter 26 A Special Gift for You: Two Instructive Stories
The Worst Advertising Agency Presentation—Ever
A Sad Ad Man “Bye-Bye” Story
Chapter 27 Resources
Best Advertising Creative Brief
Agency Positioning Statements
The Go-No-Go Pitch Quiz
Sample Business Development Director Agreement
The Author
A CodaIntroduction
Peter to AI:
 “Does the marketing world need a new book about how to run a
profitable and happy advertising agency?”
AI:
 “It’s difficult to say whether the world really needs a new book on how
to run an advertising agency. However, if the book offers unique insights,
valuable advice, and practical tips, it will be an invaluable resource for people
in the advertising industry or those interested in starting their own agency.”
Peter to AI:
 “Who should write the comprehensive book on advertising
agency management?”
AI:
 “The best candidate to write a book about how to run and grow an
advertising agency would be someone who has a deep understanding of the
advertising industry, someone who has run an agency and can provide
practical, actionable advice to those looking to start or run their own
successful agency. It would also help if that person was also an advertising
agency client.
According to my assessment, that person is Peter Levitan.”
Peter on Being Kick-Ass.
I settled on the title 
How To Build A Kick-Ass Advertising Agency
 because it
gets to the point.
My 
The Levitan Pitch. Buy This Book. Win More Pitches.
 got to the point
too and delivered actionable advice. So does this book. I have a bias towards
action.
I use the term 
kick-ass
 to describe a person or company that is high-
energy, impressive, people-first, smart, exciting, effective, perceived as an
industry leader and profitable.Being kick-ass is the most efficient path to success.
Peter on Timing.
Publishing a book sets its views and facts 
in perpetuum. Kick-Ass
 includes
expert quotes, relevant third-party research, and industry statistics to support
my thinking and advice. Although our industry’s facts and figures shift daily,
I believe my information is evergreen as it supports a discussion of the
advertising industry’s ongoing issues and opportunities.
Yes, the industry and what we do has shifted in the past few years. An
understatement. That said, what we ultimately do for our clients hasn’t. We
help them grow their awareness, build their brands, and sell stuff.CHAPTER 1
What the Hell Is Advertising?
What Are We?
Do you remember when simply saying that you are an advertising agency
defined your business? You made ads and your mom understood what you
did for a living.
After I decided to name this book 
Kick-Ass
, I had to decide what to call the
advertising industry itself. Today we all make much more than just ads. So,
what will you tell Mom?
Here’s a list of what today’s advertising agencies call themselves—and
things can get confusing, especially given service synergies:
• Advertising agency
• Ad Agency
• Full-service agency
• Integrated 
agency
• Marketing agency
• Digital agency
• UX/UI agency
• Influencer agency
• Storytelling agency
• Media planning and buying agency
• Creative agency
• Branding agency
• Social media agency
• Web design agency• SEM agency
• SEO agency
• PPC agency
• Email agency
• MarTech agency
• TikTok agency
• Direct marketing agency
• eCommerce agency
• Recruitment agency
• CRO agency
• B2B agency
• Challenger brand agency
• Promotion agency
• Out-of-home agency
• Design agency
• Experiential agency
• Strategic consultancy agency
• Performance marketing agency
• AR/VR agency
• Public relations agency
• Strategic consultanc
y
• AI agency
• In-house agency
Yikes. That’s thirty-three options. To help me position and title this book, I
turned to Google Trends to see what marketing agency identifying terms
future client types might search for. I’ll admit I was surprised to see that
“marketing agency” was the clear search-term winner, followed by “digital
agency,” “advertising agency,” and then “ad agency.”
“Marketing agency.” Really? With this information in hand I was hard
pressed to find even a handful of agencies that called themselves a marketing
agency.
Given the search results, why don’t more agencies call themselvesmarketing agencies? Not sexy enough? Too broad?
What about the word agency itself? The descriptor agency seems a bit
outdated, as it refers to the days when agencies acted as media buying agents.
However, the descriptor agency remains in wide use:
BBH Global:
“We are a creative agency obsessed with making your brand more
valuable.”
adam&eveDDB:
“A creative agency dedicated to making work that works.”
The Stable:
“The STABLE is an ecommerce agency that connects brands and
consumers across all channels.”
Billion Dollar Boy:
“Billion Dollar Boy is a global influencer marketing agency that
specializes in integrated, creator-led advertising.”
We Are Social:
“We are a global socially-led creative agency based out of New York City
with unrivaled social media expertise.
”
Elves:
“We are a B Corp certified, integrated creative agency for ambitious
brands.”
Some agencies do get past the word 
agency
:
WPP:
“We are the creative transformation company.”Omnicom:
“Omnicom is a global leader in marketing communications.”
Viral Nation:
“A modern marketing & technology company.”
eatbigfish:
“eatbigfish is a global strategic brand consultancy specializing in
challenger brands and business.”
Koto:
“We are four creative studios across the globe.”
What do industry search consultants call the types of marketing services
companies they search for and advise clients to look at? The consultants
avoid the need for clarification and complexity by just saying 
agency
.
AAR:
“The industry’s leading agency search consultants.”
Roth Ryan Hayes:
“Roth Ryan Hayes is a leader in the field of agency search, selection, and
compensation.
”
Select Resources:
“Premier consultancy in agency search and relationship management.”
R3:
“We help marketers find, pay and keep the best possible agency
relationships – covering Creative, Media, PR, Digital, Social,
Performance, Event, Promotions and CRM.”
Me? I like to keep things simple, as in using the tried-and-true descriptoragency,
 as in: 
How To Build A Kick-Ass Advertising Agency.
Why Do We Do This?
People go into the advertising business for many reasons. Here’s my take on
why we do this. I’ll start with me (this is my book after all).
Before I got into advertising, I owned a professional photography studio in
San Francisco with a client list that included Visa, Mondavi, and 
San
Francisco
 magazine. Nice clients, but I was not having fun. I didn’t want to
shoot for money. Especially in a studio.
On a visit to my New York home, my parents’ apartment building
doorman and I talked about life (very NYC) and my goals. I mentioned that I
thought of going into advertising. He said, “Wow, have I got a guy for you.”
He introduced me to my parents’ neighbor Maxwell “Mac” Dane, a founder
of today’s DDB, née Doyle Dane Bernbach.
I met Mac at his huge Madison Avenue office, and he said, “Hey kid, yup,
advertising is cool.” Even with this positive message, he didn’t offer me a
job.
Around that time, my brother-in-law was a marketing director at Mars, Inc.
He had me visit a super sharp three-piece-suited account guy at the huge
Times Square Ted Bates agency. It was obvious 
he
 was having serious fun.
He said, “Hey kid, go into advertising.” That said, Ted Bates didn’t offer me
a job
.
OK, I’ll spare you the rest of the story, which included some Levitan direct
marketing aimed at agency decision makers. I eventually landed a position as
an assistant account executive at Dancer Fitzgerald Sample, New York’s
largest agency, on the General Mills account. DFS was a 
Mad Men
 agency
that even pitched against Don Draper in the 
Mad Men
 TV show.
I stayed at DFS, which morphed into Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising
Worldwide. Sixteen years at one company.
Back to the why we do this advertising stuff. We all have our reasons.
Here are mine:
1. Working in advertising just happens to be fun. Albert Einstein got it
way right: “Creativity is intelligence having fun.”2. It’s a fast-paced environment.
3. It’s a creative problem-solving business with a diversity of assignments.
New ideas and solutions are developed daily.
4. It combines art and science.
5. Advertising shapes culture. We are immersed in studying culture.
6. Advertising is a people business. It helps people, brands, and companies
tell their stories and, importantly, grow. We get paid to do this.
7. It is both local 
and
 global.
8. It is on the forefront of technology.
9. There are many paths. You could work for an Omnicom agency or as a
digital nomad in Chiang Mai.
Sometimes we move so fast (sometimes too fast) that we forget how much
fun advertising can be. And should be.
Oh, The Money
Making huge bucks is generally not the reason people work in the advertising
business. That said, the advertising world does generate a decent living. The
US Bureau of Labor Statistics’ latest data lists median pay at $133,380. A
decent
 living, but not near the average compensation 
of a Google employee at
$280,000. One more number. Good news, the median pay for lawyers is
$127,990. That’s $5,390 less than advertising.
Another reason people enter the adverting world is that the business of
adverting has a low cost of entry. It doesn’t require a bucket of capital to join,
open, or buy into an agency.
A BFA graduate can just walk in the door at most agencies. Today,
degrees might not even matter. A self-trained Atlanta-based WordPress
specialist can open a website shop with a digital shingle in a couple of hours.
Compare this to the lawyers I mentioned earlier. They spend on average
$60,000 per year for three years of law school to land that entry-level
position.
Do 
you
 need a college degree to make it in advertising? No. From the
savvy people at ADWEAK:BREAKING: Parents Not Sure Why They Spent all That Money on
College Education for Daughter to Be “Storyteller.”
We Are Creative
Advertising people are creative. Full stop.
From the Oxford Dictionary (not from me because I am not creative
enough to define the idea of creativity):
The use of the imagination or original ideas, especially in the
production of an artistic work.
I could argue with the narrow definition of using 
artistic
 work. But, what the
hell. W+K’s Old Spice work is artistic. Dollar Shave Club’s “Our blades are
F***ing Great” was artistic.
We become strategists, media planners, production directors, account
managers, even CFOs because it is a creative endeavor. An endeavor that
requires imagination and original ideas
.
And Let’s Not Forget: Fun Is Good
I’ll go back to my belief that a key reason we’re in advertising is because it is
a seriously fun way to make a living.
However, to make advertising truly fun we must remember that it is still a
business. A well-run business. And that’s why you need a business plan.CHAPTER 2
The Advertising Agency Business
Plan
Start Here
Now that you know the what and why of advertising, it’s time to craft a
business plan for your agency. Your plan will define your objectives and how
you’ll achieve your stated goals.
After dealing with mucho advertising, design, digital, and PR agencies
over my career, I can safely tell you that most agencies do not have a master
business plan. If they once had one, they do not have an updated version. Not
having an updated plan that recognizes industry shifts and new opportunities
is a bad idea that will most likely impede your revenue quest.
My own Portland agency didn’t have a detailed plan. I had a good idea of
what business we were in and what type of accounts we wanted, but we
didn’t have a written plan. I should have, even if just a one-pager that 
was
reviewed and updated every year. Why update? Well, think about the
evolution of the advertising marketplace. Or if you prefer today’s vernacular
—transformation.
“Advertising world transformation?” you ask.
1. The first TV commercial was run by Bulova Watch Company in 1941.
It had 4,000 viewers in New York.
2. The first digital ad was a 1994 banner ad for AT&T on the Hotwired
website. Get this: It had a click-through rate of 44%. The ad asked,
“Have you ever clicked your mouse right here? You will.” We did.
3. The first mobile ad was an SMS text shared by that Finnish company in
2000.4. Google launched AdWords in 2000. Just a bit of transformation.
5. What did the industry look like in December 2019? Generally
optimistic.
6. Only three months later the industry feared Covid would be the norm.
7. How we communicate with each other has experienced a major shift.
Zoom alone has over 350 million daily meeting participants.
8. In October 2021 Facebook went Meta.
9. In 2022 TikTok users averaged 95 minutes per day (over 1.5 hours) on
the platform, and 1.85 minutes per session.
10. 2023? Think AI: DALL·E 2, Jasper, Stable Diffusion, ChatGPT,
anyone? More arriving every day. Need an AI agency to help out here?
Switzerland’s AvantGrade calls itself an “AI first” digital marketing
agency.
11. 2024 and beyond? Scenario planning, anyone?
Why didn’t my agency have an evolving master business plan? I didn’t think
I had the time. Clients came first. Lame on my part. But don’t feel bad for
me. We did make a good living
.
Do 
you
 have a business plan? Having a strategic plan will help you define
your mission, market, services, sales proposition, financial goals, and agency
structure. The plan will help you manage your time and staff and inform your
recruitment and talent management system.
Sounds like a lot of work. But it doesn’t have to be. In fact, keeping the
plan simple is a path worth following.
Nine Elements of a One-Page Business Plan
You do not need a tome-like business plan. Tome? I like this definition of
tome:
 “a book, especially a very heavy, large, or learned book.”
No heavy binders please. Follow the advice of Winston Churchill.
Winston was known for his insistence on having his ministers write one-
page memorandums to get to the point. As he said to his war cabinet, “It is
slothful not to compress your thoughts.”If Churchill could run a war effort from one-pagers, you can get your plan
on one sheet of paper. In this case the adage “Keep it simple, stupid!” applies.
Getting to KISS. Just respond to these prompts with one or two sentences.
1. 
What is your mission?
What is your agency’s service offer?
An example from Goodby Silverstein & Partners: “Our mission is to
create experiences that reach millions and even billions but seem to
speak only to you. We call this effect mass intimacy.”
2. 
What is your vision?
What are your core values?
Again, from GS&P, “We are a creative company that puts people at the
center of everything we do. We work with both clients and consumers
in an atmosphere of honesty and truth, wiping away preconceptions and
learning 
together.”
3. 
Brand positioning
Define your brand. Your specific expertise. Your competitive
advantage. Distill down to a brief elevator pitch that provides distinction
and a strong competitive message. Your agency personality.
Strive to be unignorable. Strive to get past sameness.
4. 
Your services
What services do you provide that will help clients meet their
objectives? How can you create service differentiation? What marketing
benefits do you deliver?
5. 
Marketing
What is the desired outcome or your business development program?
How will you become famous and desired (and rich)? Can you create a
secret sauce?
Define your ideal prospect and customer profile. Be focused. Berealistic. Strategies, marketing channels, and technology will be detailed
in your master business development plan.
6. 
Financial projections
Define your profit margin goals. Plus 20% would be nice. Build out
those pricing strategies. Manage cash flow, agency costs, cash reserves.
Build a P&L and balance sheet.
7. 
Staff requirements
Will you need full-time employees, contractors?
Build staff utilization projections. How will you recruit? How will you
train your people
?
8. 
Office requirements
Will you have a full or part-time office? How will you reduce
uncertainty? How will you manage and inspire remote workers?
9. 
Define success
What are your success metrics? Types of clients? Awareness?
Profitability? Build to sell? Fun tracking? Have a goal line.
Review and Adjust
Your business plan should deliver a clear path to success. And most of the
details should be 
kinda
 set in stone. However, shit happens, and you’ll need
to keep abreast of evolving market forces that might cause you to have to
make midstream adjustments. Market forces? To name a few...
• Recessions. I’ve lived through a few.
• Evolving office and staff scenarios.
• Media shifts à la see ya Facebook, hello Meta. Next? Will Congress
eventually kill TikTok? If gone, who replaces its massive activity?
YouTube Shorts? Instagram Reels?
• Data privacy legislation and its impact on advertising.• The repeal of Section 230.
• Digital disruption? AI copywriters, AI art directors, and virtual reality.
Some market-rocking forces will be impossible to predict: Think 9/11, Covid,
Putin, inflation, Taiwan, Kim Jong-un.
Have a plan but be nimble.CHAPTER 3
Agency Positioning Power
It’s An Agency Positioning Jungle
It’s an advertising, digital, design, branding, experiential, social, influencer,
SEO, SEM, PR, ecommerce agency jungle out there. Imagine a client trying
to find the right-fit agency resource to work with. I’ve been a client that
bought agency services. It isn’t an easy decision.
There are a lot of options. When I do a Google search on “advertising
agency,” I get 17.8 million results. When I search “digital agency,” I get 20.3
million. “Media agency” yields 11.6 million.
Want even more potentially head-spinning numbers? IBISWorld reported
that there are 7,865 businesses in the digital advertising agency industry.
Clutch’s database of advertising agencies lists 9,295 for New York, 2,552 for
the UK, 272 for the United Arab Emirates, 1,095 in London, UK, and, get
this, 105 in London, Ohio. Ohio!
Yikes
.
Regardless of what number you find and how you search, there are a lot of
marketing services options for a client to choose from.
Distinction vs. Sameness
Help your future clients out a bit by creating brand differentiation and
distinctive energy. Get past sameness.
Most agencies (and companies for that matter) have a me-too positioning,
look, and brand messaging (especially the copy they use).• Sameness makes it difficult to stand out and accelerate sales
• Sameness will be ignored
• Sameness does not power agency selection
• Sameness erodes profitability
• Distinction delivers a higher profit margin
• Distinctive agencies get bought
Everything you do should be judged on how much distinction you bring to
the market.
We’re eons into the advertising business and I cannot figure out why so
many advertising agencies cannot create a unique sales proposition— or
worse, don’t seem to care about having one.
The Expert Agency
Al Reis was one of the leading branding gurus. His best-selling books include
The 22 Immutable Laws of Marketing
, 
Positioning: The Battle for Your Mind
,
and 
Focus: The Future of Your Company Depends on It
.
Al has four key rules:
1. 
Get focused.
Build or refocus your company around a singular idea. “When you try
to be everything, you wind up being nothing.
”
2. 
Act like a leader.
“What should a brand leader advertise? Brand leadership, of course.
Leadership is the single most important motivating factor in consumer
behavior.”
3. 
Have a battle cry.
Al’s daughter Laura (yes, branding expertise runs in the family) pushes
the idea of having a slogan. Works for brands, why not agencies? The
slogan of New York’s Mischief is “At No Fixed Address.”
4. 
Create one-word equity.
Here’s a tough one. Can you own a word? Daniel Pink would like you
to own a word. “I was thinking about the business implications of theObama juggernaut the other day when a friend said to me, ‘I can’t think
of the word “hope” any more without thinking of the guy.’”
My take is that clients want expertise and leadership. They want to know
what you can do for them right now. Help them make the decision. Put
yourself in their shoes.
Expert agencies break out from the universe of advertising-agency clutter.
Here is a break out agency.
eatbigfish: The Challenger Expert
eatbigfish and its challenger brand expertise and focus stand out from the
pack.
Simply put, a challenger brand is not the industry leader.
eatbigfish owns the idea of challenger brands. They own the word
challenger.
I like the idea of targeting challenger brands because it defines a target
market for both the agency and clients.
Here is what the eatbigfish website says about their expertise. Note 
the
term 
strategic consultancy
, not 
agency
.
We’re a global strategic consultancy dedicated to challenger
brands.
We’re eatbigfish. And we know challenger brands better than anyone.
Whether you’re a start-up or a global market leader, everyone can be
more challenger.
eatbigfish supports their positioning via on-target thought leadership. This
includes their annual 
The Challengers to Watch
 report and four books,
including 
Eating the Big Fish
 and 
Overthrow II: 10 Strategies from the New
Wave of Challengers
. They also have dozens of branded videos on YouTube.Being defined as the leading challenger-brand agency appears to work.
eatbigfish works with rather large brands, including Google, Charles Schwab,
HSBC, Audi, and KFC. Nice list.
Positioning Options
Brand positioning is the backbone of any marketing communications
agency’s business development program. Your positioning informs your
business and marketing plans and positions you in the mind of clients so they
can more easily decide that they want to talk and eventually work with you.
Agency positionings generally fall into one of these buckets:
• Skill based (branding, experiential, media expert, social media, SEM)
• Industry based (hospitality, health care, beverages)
• Target market based (B2C; B2B)
• Demographic based (Gen-X, Hispanics, seniors
)
• Geographically based (local/regional expert)
• Strategic guru (brand strategy, research, insights)
• Creative genius (elegant problem solvers)
• Full-service (“We can do it all”—the one-stop shop)
• Creative consultancy (the übersmart marketing partner)
I know that the tighter an agency’s positioning (and thus its sales
proposition), the easier it is to attract the attention of a prospective client,
agency search consultants, the press and, someday, a buyer.
The Elevator Pitch
I ask all my advertising agency clients to give me their agency’s elevator
pitch. I ask them to tell me what they do in eight seconds. Why eight
seconds? A study by Microsoft Canada found that the average person has an
attention span of about eight seconds. I ask my clients to deliver their
positioning, sales proposition, and what they do as if we were in an elevatorgoing up three floors.
One of my favorite super-expert positioning stories is about an agency that
once 
owned
 the idea of mobile.
I was at New York’s Advertising Week conference a few years ago. An
agency exec invited me to go to the Soho Club for a drink. When we
approached the bar, we needed to ask a guy to move over one seat so my
drink mate and I could sit together. I asked the middle seat guy if he could
move. As he shifted, I asked him if he was in New York for the conference.
He said yes. I asked him what his agency did. He told me that his London-
based Fetch was the leading mobile specialist.
It took him three seconds to deliver his expert positioning and elevator (or
bar stool) pitch: “Fetch is the leading mobile agency.”
By the way, Fetch Media Limited was purchased by Dentsu Aegis. Experts
get bought. More on this later.CHAPTER 4
Marketing Starts Here
Nail These Big Three
When I build out business development plans for my clients, I always start
with what I call the Big Three—the Big Three Musts.
Before you write your master business development plan, begin to create
detailed inbound and account-based marketing programs. Start here.
If you don’t get these three business development elements right…
fuhgeddaboudit.
My must dos.
Make Sure Your Agency Is Findable
Make sure you are where people are looking for your type of agency. Let’s
say a major health-care client is looking for a health-care 
marketing specialist
just like you. Will they find you in their search? If not, you are invisible.
Invisible does not work well when a potentially hot lead is looking for
your agency’s skills and expertise.
Put your client hat on and ask, “Where and how would I find a company
like mine?”
Start here. Are you everywhere a client might look?
• Are you on the first page of a relevant Google or Bing search? A tough
objective. If you’re not listed there, audit and activate your SEO plan.
Consider testing an ad to get on that first page. Find a message that
breaks through the clutter.
• Are you listed in all related marketing services directories? Clutch?Agency Spotter? Winmo? The Manifest? Clients use these.
• Is you brand optimized on creative source websites like Behance or
Dribble?
• Are you on your regional or national agency club or organization lists?
• Do you optimize your LinkedIn presence? Do you review and manage
all leadership and key employee profiles? Do you regularly post on
LinkedIn?
• Do the major search consultants know you’re alive? They want to know
you—it’s their job. I have a list of all advertising agency search firms on
my blog. It gets serious traffic.
• Do you win awards? Being listed on the right award websites (from
Webby Awards to Adweek’s Best to AAF) is a good thing, a very good
thing. Awards = awareness = third-party blessing = client interest.
• Do you attend and speak at marketing and client-industry conferences?
Write for industry publications to build out your authority?
• Do you have a managed brand that positions you as a category expert?
Does the industry press know you’re a go-to category expert who’s
always ready to give an educated sound bite
?
• If you are a solo resource (or a creative director looking for a side
hustle), are you on Upwork and Behance?
Note that you will never be alone in a search for marketing specialists, so
strive to be unignorable when you get found. Be that valuable expert.
Make this an ongoing question: Are you everywhere a client might look
for an agency like yours?
Goose Referrals
It seems that all agencies say they get most of their new clients from positive
referrals. It is the default. This is especially true in geographic or defined-
category markets where a personal recommendation is common.
This is great. Be proactive about getting referred.
A key to having a robust referral strategy is to make sure that your current
and past clients are aware that you want referrals. Getting referrals from
happy customers is one of best ways B2B companies generate new business.Not a huge surprise. However, what is surprising is how few companies have
a dedicated strategy for growing these valuable referrals.
Referrals lead as a sales generator for a couple of reasons: A referral is a
white-hot lead. If we assume your happy customers are savvy enough to
recommend you to the right potential customer, then you are well on your
way to establishing a valuable conversation and a new business win.
Most marketing services companies do not run highly effective sales
programs, so the most effective new business tool is by default referrals.
Three Wonderful Benefits of Referrals
1. The closing ratio for referrals is high. It has been reported that the
closing ratio of a referral is six times greater than for a potentially
unqualified lead.
2. For the obvious reason that a referred prospect is generally a very
motivated buyer, the referral-generated sales cycle can be as much as
75% shorter
.
3. A referral strategy is cost-effective and will reduce your sales
expenditures. Less expensive is good.
Six Effective “Active” Referral Strategies
I’ve generated referrals from existing clients and customers using the
following set of strategies.
1. Start with an objective. Know what type of clients you want.
2. Determine which of your clients or friends might know the people or
businesses on your prospect list.
3. Be proactive—go ahead and ask for referrals. Some referrals come
because your client or buddy is specifically asked if they know of a
good company in your business category. Some come because your
customers love you so much, they actively “sell” you. Most need to be
stimulated to think about how to help you.
4. Make it easy for people to refer you. Think incentives. Yes, a monetary
offer like an Amazon gift card is kosher. Say “thank you” twice.
5. Make sure a potential referrer knows how to talk about you and your
brilliant expert positioning.6. This is not a one-time shot. Consider reminding your friends about your
offer quarterly. Gently. Can you make this fun? Sure.
Referrals are nice, but one eventually runs out of friends with friends. How
do you deal with this unfortunate fact? Yes, do marketing. Even stimulate
internal marketing to existing clients.
Focus on Client Retention and Growth
The most efficient, stress efficient business development strategy is growth
from current clients. Like for referrals, an agency needs to have a clear client
retention and growth strategy.
• This should not be random. Do not leave it up to untrained 
account
people. Have a conscious retention and growth system.
• Hug your clients. Give them new ideas. Challenge them. Deliver smart
growth proposals. Nicely. A key reason clients walk out the door is that
the agency is not idea driven. Be a relevant thought leader.
• If it is project account, make sure you have a preplanned agency plan on
how to present new ideas and agency services. Not a list but a strategic
approach to how to sell-in relevant services that will excite and create
dialogue. These could be productized services like a branded SEM
program.
The delivery of superior customer service is the rule here. Do not upsell—be
value driven and upserve. Yes, upserve.
From Daniel Pink: “Anytime you’re tempted to upsell someone else, stop
what you’re doing and upserve instead.”
I discuss the idea of upserving in greater detail in Chapter 19, “The Savvy
Account Manager.”CHAPTER 5
Please Be Unignorable
Thank You, john st.
OK, once you’ve settled on a clear and compelling brand position, a unique
sales proposition, ask, how will your message stand out from the pack?
You need to be unignorable.
Building an unignorable agency brand and voice is a critical element in my
agency business development philosophy. Your agency can run down the
business development checklist: inbound marketing—check; outbound
account-based marketing—check; a sweet LinkedIn profile, the cool website,
a YouTube channel—check; lots of wonderful thought leadership—check.
But if all of that is ignorable in a saturated agency-selection environment,
you lose.
I discovered the power word 
unignorable
 when I took a hard look at
Toronto’s agency john st.
john st. built the idea of being unignorable into their agency ethos. From
the john st. website:
Be unignorable.
Our mission is to make our clients’ brands unignorable. We use insight,
analytics, intuition and sweat to do it. But we mostly use sweat.
Unignorable
 is their focus—their expertise. Clients want to be unignorable;
john st. delivers.
Unignorable
 is the agency’s one-word equity. They own it.
Unignorable
 is a distinctive battle cry. I haven’t seen one other agency usethis word.
Want to see john st. in action? Look at the agency’s YouTube channel—
videos that act as john st.’s brand drivers and are unquestionably unignorable.
Their “Catvertising” video has 2.4+ million views. MILLION! “Buyral”
has 1 million views. Does any other agency have this many video views? No.
john st.’s creative director told me that these videos drove incoming
queries from brands like Coke. The Coke question was, “Whoa, who are you
guys?”
john st.’s dedication to being unignorable and creating unignorable work
for clients was a factor in their being acquired by WPP.
Getting to Unignorable
You need to be unignorable to get past being ignored. The world of
marketing services is too large and... most agencies sound alike. Oy... and
look and feel alike
.
Here are eight paths to being unignorable:
1. Make the decision to break out. Like, decide to be refreshingly
different.
2. Use unignorable personality and tone. It’s OK to build an unignorable
personality. Check out Chapter 7, “You Inc.,” which deals with personal
branding and how to craft your standout persona.
3. Understand the intellectual and emotional needs of your market. Grab
them by the mind 
and
 heart.
4. Have a must-read and must-listen-to POV. 
Must-read
 means that you
are offering your market something of undeniable value. My website’s
list of advertising awards consistently delivers mega traffic to my blog.
5. Be known for something. For example, build and brand a quarterly
study that positions you as a leader in your category.
6. Be ubiquitous. Put your thinking on LinkedIn and YouTube and TikTok
and speak at the right conferences. Have a PR plan. Do something that
Campaign
 magazine can’t ignore. They need to fill up those issues.7. Get a face on. Put a face on the agency. OK, not all bosses can be a
handsome David Droga. But many could be but are not out in front of
the agency brand. Remember that clients buy both expertise and
personality. Interpersonal chemistry is often the deciding factor. Why
not start being human on your website?
8. Be funny. Humor works. I used a Cameo impersonator to create “I love
Peter” Trump, Gandhi, and Borat promotional videos for my
consultancy. The Borat video was so well done that I’ve had people ask
me how I got the 
real
 Borat to make the video.
Remember, there are hundreds, if not thousands, of marketing service firms
that a marketing client can choose from. Standing out from the pack is
critical.CHAPTER 6
Thought Leadership
Thinking Works
In 2018 Ford Motor Company left long-term agency WPP for BBDO. A big
move like this was big news, of course. But more interesting to me was
Ford’s hiring of Wieden+Kennedy New York as its “innovation agency.”
Ford was looking to W+K to uncover new approaches, creative
approaches, and to resolve marketplace issues and opportunities.
Being an innovation agency is a valuable business development tool.
Here’s a 2022 
Adweek
 headline: “Ford Picks Wieden+Kennedy as Its Global
Agency Partner for Creative and Brand Strategy.” Apparently four years of
W+K’s dedicated role as Ford’s innovation agency helped it to land the full
account.
Clients large and small want and need marketing advice and brains. Given
the speed of change and transformation, clients need advice about how to
wrestle with our ever-changing marketing universe. 
Today, many clients are
wondering how AI will affect marketing. Help them think through this future.
Thought Leadership Is Good
The marketing term 
thought leadership
 has become a bit of overused jargon.
Well, what marketing term is not a bit overused? I mean, do I really want to
hear the word 
disruption
 again and again?
However, if we step back a bit and ask ourselves if we’d like to be
perceived as an insightful, strategic, and creative thinker—um… a thought
leader—well, I’ll take the words 
thought leader
.Thought leaders deliver actionable
• information
• insights
• strong opinions
• inspiration
• creativity
• innovation
• even peace of mind
Since I started my consultancy, I have produced more than 850 blog posts
and some videos (I’ll admit not quite as sharp as “Catvertising”), have been a
host and a guest on dozens of podcasts, and have spoken at conferences and
produced white papers. I’ve recently launched a LinkedIn newsletter.
I wrote my book on pitching (still selling well) and this book on
advertising agency management. Books generate interest and proof of
expertise.
My thought leadership, which is 100% dedicated to advertising agency
management and business development, works. Specialization works.
The benefits of thought leadership are clear
:
• It demonstrates expertise and authority.
• It delivers compelling, relevant business-building information and
insights. Value!
• It excites.
• It generates peer-to-peer conversations and builds relationships over
time.
• It generates marketing-qualified leads.
• It can be amplified and repurposed for efficiency. One thought can be
modified and spread over a range of distribution platforms.
• Kick-ass thought leadership is unignorable.
Thinking Is Tough WorkThought leadership isn’t easy.
I’m laughing as I write this. You’ll need to start with compelling thoughts,
a degree of leadership, and the right authors.
Ashley Faus, the director of integrated product marketing at Atlassian, lists
four pillars of a successful thought leadership program:
1. Credibility—unquestioned knowledge and authority. Have an opinion.
2. Profile—a big, known company or a title.
3. Being prolific—publishing ongoing long-and short-form content across
multiple channels.
4. Delivering depth—producing new ideas, strategies, methods, and
actional tactics.
To get to the promised land, you’ll need an ongoing content development
production system and a content program calendar.
Consistency is critical. People and algorithms have short memories.
A thought leadership program needs the right people to manage the
program (harder for smaller agencies than larger) and dedication, as in a
strong commitment, from the top
.
One more big piece of advice: I’d start with a thought leadership creative
brief. Define your objectives and audience, their needs, and how you will
deliver that wonderful thinking.
The Unignorable Insight
Your expert positioning will drive thought leadership, and that power word is
authority
. Market-building insights are created and delivered via your
knowledge, experience, and creative approach to problem solving.
Just what is an insight? From the Planning Dirty Academy’s Julian Cole:
“Insight unlocks the way around a problem. It reveals a new path.”
Problem + SolutionNot every client you target will be receptive to your fabulous, intriguing, and
business-building insight. But I have always thought that the client who
responds to my crafted and targeted insights is the client who deserves to
work with me. How’s that for rationalization?
Building Insights
According to Brent Dykes in 
Forbes
,
Insights are generated by analyzing information and drawing
conclusions. Both data and information set the stage for the discovery
of insights that can then influence decisions and drive change.
Brent goes beyond the simple delivery of an insight to what he calls data
storytelling. Storytelling breeds interest and is, yes, unignorable.
Like any marketing campaign, your thought leadership program needs a
plan
.
Six Insight Thought Starters
1. What are your business objectives? What does success look like?
2. Who is your target audience? Business owners, CMOs, marketing staff,
CEOs, even CFOs? How do they consume information?
3. What are their issues? What keeps them up at night? What do they want
from an advertising agency: strategic thinking, new packaging or just
some SEO, please?
4. What strategic or tactical thinking and what specific subjects should you
address? Do the research. What trends could use some of your polished
thinking? Google Alerts is a real-time info tool to help you stay on top
of a trend, category, or brand.
5. Perform the competitive analysis to see what your agency competition
is doing. Look at their thought leadership materials. If it looks like
they’ve found an insight sweet spot, then look at how you can leveragethat information. Can you do it better?
6. What information gaps can you fill? Be strategic.
Idea: Why not brand and productize your thought leadership program? Stand
apart. Make your perspective sound smart.
Stealing Ideas
Need ideas? One of my favorite books is Austin Kleon’s 
Steal Like an Artist.
10 Things Nobody Told You About Being Creative.
The idea here is that there is already great thinking out there and not a lot of
really new ideas. Why not steal from and massage elements from the idea
universe?
Your very own secret sauce is your point of view and hard-to-ignore
opinion. Strong opinions rock.
Are you worried about idea or subject theft? Take it, Picasso: “Art is
theft.” How about David Bowie? “The only art I will ever study is stuff that I
can steal from.” Even more theft from a genius. Take it, Einstein: “
The secret
to creativity is knowing how to hide your sources.”
I’m not suggesting that you steal and simply regurgitate other people’s
thought leadership ideas. But, as I mentioned above, studying your
competition and industry gurus will generate some thought kernels.
18 Insight Tools
New strategic tools that generate insights roll out every month. Tools I use
include:
1. Google Trends. Chances are good that you’re aware of Google Trends.
This a powerful tool to help you know what’s hot and what’s not in
Google’s search universe.
2. Think with Google—a free repository of Google data and research.
3. Google Alerts. Keep up with news related to an individual client or
category.4. Google Keyword Planner. Yes, more Google. From Google: You can
use Keyword Planner to get insights into how keywords might perform.
Google draws on historical search data to make estimates on what you
might get from a set of keywords based on your spending.
5. AnswerThePublic. This is a free visual search listening tool that shows
you what questions and queries your consumers have by getting a free
report of what they’re searching for on Google.
6. Exploding Topics. Yes, just like it sounds—a way to get to the next big
idea. And get ahead of your competitors.
7. Quora—a top 100 website. All answers.
8. LivingFacts—how Americans live today from the PEW Research
Center.
9. Statista—statistics and market research data.
10. vidIQ. Got a YouTube channel? From Backlinko: vidIQ is a SaaS
product designed to help YouTube creators find topic and 
keywords for
their videos.
11. Social Mention. Ever wonder what the world is saying about you or
your company? Here you go.
12. Buzzsumo. Buzzsumo analyzes over 8 billion articles. Enter a keyword
and voila.
13. Sympler. Use their custom qualitative social media research.
14. SurveyMonkey, Typeform, and Qualaroo. Collect your very own
market research data. Clients dig polls, even man-on-the-street
interviews.
15. Ubersuggest. Unlock those effective competitive keywords and search
trends.
16. Add PDF to a Google search query. You’ll often find higher-level
thinking, as in academic, on most subjects.
17. Gartner—insights and reports.
18. Search on a subject, say Instagram, and add the name of a trusted
journal, like 
The New Yorker
 or 
The Economist
 and scan their headlines
for smart insights. Thank you, Julian Cole, for this idea—a fast way to
get to expert opinions.Moving forward, many of us will let the latest AI tool do the analysis and you
will then put your own spin on it.CHAPTER 7
You Inc.
Only You Own You
Back to marketing world clutter. “There are 7,761 Digital Advertising
Agencies businesses in the US as of 2022, an increase of 17.4% from 2021”
(IBISWorld). An increase of 17%. Wow.
Man, it’s hard to break out when so many agencies are selling similar
offers that sound alike.
• We are creative.
• Check out our SEO action plan.
• We’ll build out your influencer network.
• We are a branding agency.
However, the something that your agency and you personally own big time is
YOU.
Every advertising agency search consultant I’ve talked to 
about the agency
selection process points to personality, as in interpersonal chemistry, as being
a major factor in zeroing in on an agency when so many agencies kinda
sound alike.
“I like you” is a powerful decision-making attribute. How will you be
liked? Like your expert positioning, being well liked can be managed.
Your Personal Brand and Business
What is a personal brand? There are many definitions. I went to the website
PersonalBrand.com
 for this definition (why not go to a company smartenough to have bought the URL 
PersonalBrand.com
?):
A personal brand is a widely-recognized and largely-uniform
perception or impression of an individual based on their experience,
expertise, competencies, actions and/or achievements within a
community, industry, or the marketplace at large.
Kind of wordy but you get the idea.
I’m keen on the idea of building and managing a personal brand for agency
leaders and senior managers. Your personal brand is how you present and
control your image to your market—your current and potential clients, your
competition, and your staff (and importantly, these days, your future staff.)
Advertising’s Personal Masters
David Ogilvy
As I discuss in Chapter 23, “How to Build, Buy, and Sell an Agency,” many
agencies are named after their founder. In most of these cases, the founder is
the face of the agency. The founder embodies the mission 
and soul of the
agency.
Ogilvy the agency continues to use the brand essence of its founder David
Ogilvy, who passed away in 1999. On its Careers page, the agency quotes
David and leverages his personal brand to help sell the agency’s soul to
future employees:
As our founder David Ogilvy put it, we seek people who are bigger and
smarter than ourselves. That’s how we create a company of giants.
We’re always looking for modern marketing and brand experts with big
hearts and enormous talent.
How’s that for branding? In 1962, 
Time
 magazine called Ogilvy “the most
sought-after wizard in today’s advertising industry.” Believe me, thisrecognition did not happen by accident. Ogilvy was a brand image master.
The 1985 
Ogilvy on Advertising
 continues to be one of the best-selling
advertising books. Forty years on. Now that’s personal branding, baby.
Mary Wells
Being a special first can drive a personal brand.
Mary Wells was the most famous woman in advertising in the 1960s and
1970s at a time when the business was considered a man’s world. There were
few, if any, Donna Drapers.
Better stated, Mary was one of the most famous 
people
 in adverting full-
stop during those years.
Mary was a copywriter and co-founder of the agency Wells, Rich, Greene.
WRG was universally known for its creativity at a time when building a
brand’s creative story, and taglines, ruled the industry. Mary’s innovative
campaigns included Alka Seltzer (“Plop, Plop, Fizz, Fizz” and “I Can’t
Believe I Ate the Whole Thing”), the Ford Motor Company (“Quality Is Job
One”), BIC (“Flick Your Bic”) and New York City’s iconic (“I Love New
York”). Five of the most effective campaigns 
of those years. Maybe ever.
Need more? Mary took WRG public in 1968, she became the first female
CEO of a company traded on the New York Stock Exchange. She is in
Advertising Hall of Fame.
Hello Gary Vaynerchuck
Gary Vaynerchuck is arguably the most ubiquitous personal brand in today’s
advertising industry. He is the chairman of New York–based communications
company VaynerX and is CEO of VaynerMedia. VaynerMedia is number
five on 
Ad Age
’s 2022 Agency A-List.
No single person in the advertising industry works their personal brand
harder than Gary. His brand reminds me of James Brown’s reputation as
being the hardest-working man in show business.
Gary’s energy is boundless.
His Twitter feed, @garyvee, has 3.1 million followers—and get this, over208,000 tweets. All growing daily. Interestingly, he follows close to 20,000
Twitter accounts, including me. Loving back is a good thing.
His NFT project @veefriends has over 258,000 followers.
Gary’s LinkedIn profile has 5.2 million followers. His YouTube channel
has 3.9 million subs, and he produces eight-ish videos a day. A day.
Gary’s personal brand is brash, intelligent, hyperactive, smart, and so
prescient that it sells his agency every day.
This dude is committed. It helps that he has a branding and content staff
backing him up.
The David Droga Journey
The David Droga brand, and its Droga5 agency, is all about creativity. It’s an
agency that nailed its creative positioning.
Droga leveraged his high-visibility position (and award-winning expertise)
as regional creative director of Saatchi Asia to have it named 
Media
Marketing’s Asia Regional Network of the Year. 
Ad Age
 named the
Singapore office International Agency of the Year. After moving to London,
Saatchi & Saatchi London won Global Agency of the Year at the Cannes
International Advertising Festival.
This was not an accident. Lots of agencies are cool, but Droga just might
be the ultimate heavy lifter of pumping awards for fame and fortune.
This guy is a master at building his own brand to help build Droga5. He
built his agency to a point where it was purchased by Accenture in 2019 for
around $475 million. Accenture bought the agency’s client roster, talent, and,
yes, the brand. Oh, and David.
The Stan Richards Downside
There can be a personal brand downside. Yikes: the Richards Group.
Having an agency associated with its founder can be a negative. From
Adweek,In October, news leaked that in an internal meeting for longtime client
Motel 6, Richards, who at nearly 90 years old remained actively
involved with the company, referred to a campaign idea for the client as
being “too Black” and 
implied that some of Motel 6’s customers were
white supremacists
. (emphasis added)
The agency quickly lost four major accounts: Motel 6, Keurig Dr Pepper,
Salvation Army, and H-E-B.
Stan Richards was 90, for Pete’s sake. Yet his own brand was fully tied to
that of the agency. He 
and
 his agency got cancelled during the height of
cancel culture.
Ann Handley vs. McCann
Can a one-person personal branding machine beat the brand of a mega
advertising agency? An agency born in 1902. Yes.
Ann Handley is a personal branding super force. Interesting stat:
McCann New York has 477 employees and 87,993 LinkedIn followers.
Ann Handley has 458,506 followers.
From Ann’s bio:
Ann Handley is a Wall Street Journal bestselling author who speaks
worldwide about how businesses can escape marketing mediocrity to
ignite tangible results. IBM named her one of the 7 people shaping
modern marketing. Ann is a digital marketing pioneer and the Chief
Content Officer of MarketingProfs, the leading marketing training
company with more than 600,000 subscribers.
How did she make it? Ann has written for Entrepreneur magazine, IBM’s
Think Marketing, Inc. magazine, Mashable, Huffington Post, American
Express, NPR, and the Wall Street Journal.
Her best sellers include 
Everybody Writes: Your Go-To Guide to CreatingRidiculously Good Content
, and co-author of 
Content Rules: How to Create
Killer Blogs, Podcasts, Videos, Ebooks, Webinars (and More) That Engage
Customers and Ignite Your Business
.
If you or your agency needs some help being a writer (and a social media
hero), check her out.
What about You?
Today our personal brand is out there for all to see. We are on LinkedIn, on
our website’s About page, in cute Instagram posts, in our new books.
Whether an agency leader wants to become as famous as David Droga or
not, they most often have no choice. The market might just brand 
them
whether they like it or not. The key is to control it.
There are three core elements to how to build and control a leadership
brand.
1. 
Prioritize your branding.
Define your area of expertise, your persona, and what you want to be
known for. Be authentic and an authority.
Think through your story framework.
Pay close attention to your client and prospect personas and their needs.
Some might want Gary’s chutzpah. Some might find it off-putting.
2. 
Be ubiquitous and consistent.
Optimize your presence. Start with your website. How are you
presented? If you’re a good actor or communicator, why not star in the
agency video? Make sure your LinkedIn profile is well written. And
keep it going because we are in that voracious 360-degree + 24/7
universe.
3. 
Be visible.
If you want fame, have a plan for how and where you will deliver yourpersonal brand story. Your plan will help you select the right media. If
you have a face for radio (as the old joke goes) then do a podcast. If
you’re a good writer, consider writing a book. Good speaker? Then go
after speaking engagements. Do you look and sound impressive? Then
go video.
Team Branding... Too
Everyone in your agency has a personal brand, whether they manage it or not.
Over 700 employees at Droga5 have LinkedIn profiles. Each of their
profiles adds to (or subtracts) from the master Droga5 brand. Many of these
people have 200 or more connections (some way more.) Many are active on
LinkedIn, posting and reposting and liking other people’s posts.
If we do some estimating, it’s quite possible that these 700 Droga5ers have
a LinkedIn reach of over 140,000 connections. That’s 700 Droga5ers times
200 connections. This reach could generate mega views of an agency news
item.
Do these people’s own brand add to the brand value of the total agency?
Do they help or hurt the brand? I suggest that for at least very senior
management, any agency look at how they are presented in social media.
Why not a LinkedIn profile audit?
No, I am not suggesting that you form a social media personal brand police
force. I’m just saying that how your people are presented to the world will
reflect on your agency brand. It is all additive, every day.
I looked at Droga5’s head of business development profile on LinkedIn,
since this position drives outbound communications and is, in many cases,
the first point of contact for a prospective new client.
Pat Rowley gets his brand right. It supports the agency’s creative
positioning. Some copy from his “About” section:
Strategic business leader, highly motivated to help ambitious brands
achieve meaningful growth—through fostering collaborative
partnerships and driving purposeful, effective work.Impressive portfolio and experience over a wide range of categories for
leading global brands in the US, Australia/New Zealand and Asia.
Recognized for over 30 major effectiveness and creative awards at the
shows that matter most (Effies, Cannes, D&AD) as part of
collaborative teams at the world’s top agencies.
This isn’t a random set of attributes. Pat is managing his brand. Brand as
marketing tool. Not a brand-new idea
.
“The Brand Called You”
A bit of early you-branding history. Tom Peters’ 1997 
Fast Company
 article
“The Brand Called You” was the first time the marketing world began to
think about the effectiveness of managing one’s personal brand. Here is the
article’s subhead:
Big companies understand the importance of brands. Today, in the Age
of the Individual, you have to be your own brand. Here’s what it takes
to be the CEO of Me Inc.
I’ll bet that Mr. Vaynerchuck knows he is the CEO of his Me.
Some thoughts on how to get to your very own Me Inc:
1. The first step is to know how you want to be perceived. Hey, it is
branding after all.
2. Build out and sell-in your expertise.
3. Establish your own brand voice.
4. Aim to be unignorable. One path is to be opinionated.
5. Be authentic. Yes, that word again.
6. Build out your personal story. Gary went from selling wine in his dad’s
store, to doing online wine reviews in the early days of YouTube to
being known as a king of social media.
A caveat: This personal branding work can be a component of personal
overwork burnout. Once again, the idea of “Keep it simple, stupid!” shouldbe considered. Gary has a staff to get his Me out there.
That said, get out there.
Six Branding Platforms
1. Personal Video
Australian Tiny Hunter’s video program kicks ass. The agency’s Jodi de
Vries, Jo Gossage, Kiri White and Emma Scott sell-in the agency brand,
culture, and personality. Their short form 
Branding Before Breakfast
averages about two minutes per episode. Thank you, Tiny Hunter, for
respecting my time.
Past titles include “A Brand Competitor Review Framework,” “Slice and
Dice: Maximize and Amplify Your Content,” and “The 90-Day Rule: The
Importance of Brand Storytelling.”
Watch the videos. It doesn’t get more personal than this. Jodi, Jo, Kiri, and
Emma are the agency brand. I like them. I’d want to work with them.
2. Branding by the Book
Should you write a book to help sell your personal and advertising agency
brand? Clearly, considering you’re reading 
my
 book (and considering its
inherent Me-branding objective), my answer is yes. Writing a book delivers
• Credibility—proof that you are an expert (and a creative thinker).
• Visibility—marketing a book helps you and your agency to break out
from the me-too clutter. My The Levitan Pitch book got me speaking
engagements at HubSpot’s Inbound conference (where I discussed how
to write an agency book), and talks at the 4 A’s, and ANA. Plus, lots of
print and podcast interviews.
• Marketing and lead generation—use the book, and importantly excerpts,
to drive blog posts, newsletter sign-ups, and LinkedIn contacts. Go
direct and send the book to your most cherished prospects and
influencers.• PR action—the media (trade press, podcasters, conferences) need
interesting new content. Books rise to the top.
Thirteen steps to get a book written and distributed:
1. Have objectives. What’s the point of all of this work? Fill in the blanks:
I am writing this book because ______. My book’s 
audience is ______.
They will read it because _____.
2. Have an unignorable subject. Meld your insights, advice, and guidance
with a bit of storytelling. A touch of attitude plus humor helps. Ask,
how can I make this book so valuable and unignorable for a select
audience that they must read it?
3. Study the existing market. Where will the book fit in and be
competitive? Do the research.
4. Develop an outline and start writing. Write every day. Be dedicated.
5. Work with an editor. There are two types: a developmental or content
editor (they will work with you on your subject matter) and a copy
editor. No typos please. I hope.
6. Create a power title and descriptive subtitle. How could we resist the
title 
The Four-Hour Work Week
? Or 
How to Win Friends and Influence
People
? Mark Manson’s title 
The Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck
 is
hard to resist.
7. Design a cover that stands out. While you’d love to be in that airport
bookstore, you’ll probably sell most books on Amazon, where your
cover will be seen as a thumbnail graphic.
8. A 
big
 decision: Should you self-publish or find a traditional publisher?
My advice for what is most likely your B2B lead-gen book is to go the
self-published route. Working with traditional book publishers, unless
you are Oprah or Seth or Malcolm, is a pain in the ass, is a very slow
process, and really, do 
you
 really expect to sell a specialized B2B book
at Barnes & Noble or an airport bookstore?
9. Control costs. The cost to design and print is minimal, especially if you
work at an advertising agency. You have designers, copywriters, smart
marketers, and Amazon profile generators in house. Your biggest cost
will be your time.
10. Planning and process. Make the book a priority. Deadlines work. Havea well-tooled editorial and marketing plan and timetable.
11. Pricing. It’s free to publish a print-on-demand book on Amazon 
through
their online Kindle Direct Publishing platform. There are no upfront
costs. Amazon will take a portion of your book’s earnings to print,
leaving you with 60% royalties after the book’s print price. Frankly, so
what. This book won’t be a big money maker. My 
The Levitan Pitch
 has
paid for itself and more via sales and business leads. Consider selling at
a lower price to encourage more sales and therefore more reviews.
12. Manage Amazon. This includes optimizing the descriptive copy for you
and your book, adding a video, selecting the right keywords and
categorization, getting reviewed (ask people early), and pricing the book
to sell. Consider advertising on Amazon (and beyond).
13. Market the heck out of it. Start marketing ahead of publication (like
build your email list). Add book marketing to your company website
and build a standalone landing page. Send the book to prospects, the
press, influencers. Leverage your network. Find new friends via
LinkedIn Navigator. Seek speaking and guest podcasting opportunities.
Repurpose the copy and point back to the book. In 2023, create short
videos.
I believe the key here is to really want to get the book published. Sounds
obvious, right?
3. Podcasting Is Personal
Podcasting is intimate. Podcasts make personal connections. Podcasting is a
virtual story platform. Podcasting builds a fan base.
There are way fewer podcasts than blogs. I could stop with this statement,
but the numbers speak rather loudly: 2.4 million podcasts (DemandSage,
June 2022) versus 600 million blogs (EarthWeb, November 2022).
Podcasting works for agencies. Neil Patel and Eric Sui’s 
Marketing School
podcast has over 70 million downloads. They’ve built their digital 
agencies
by delivering daily short-form advice. Douglas Burdette’s 
The Marketing
Book Podcast
, at over 400 episodes, builds awareness of his Sales Artillery
agency. Drew McLellan’s 
Build A Better Agency
 podcast builds hisconsultancy. I mention him because I have been a guest on the show twice
and it has driven my leads.
Yes, there are some issues to resolve. I know about them, as I launched my
first agency podcast in 2007 and did my limited 
Advertising Stories
 series
during the pandemic.
Podcasting takes time and dedication to get traction.
Priscilla McKinney of Little Bird Marketing is the gold standard for ad
agency podcast marketing. First, she is consistent and has published more
than 300 episodes. Imagine how much energy and time this has taken.
Priscilla built a comprehensive podcast marketing program that includes
self-promotion that supports every high-quality podcast Priscilla does. She
creates a transcript and converts the show into a blog post landing page,
videos, LinkedIn posts, graphical tweets, and outbound emails.
Plus, she does guest stimulation (as in she gets her guests to promote her
show—and deliver backlinks to her website). Priscilla also runs a mutual
admiration society. I’ve been on her show, and she has been on mine.
All this production effort takes staff time. Staff time costs money. Do it
right and it pays off.
Be patient.
I’ve already mentioned the time it takes to create and publish a great
podcast series. Here is one more timing issue: It takes a very long time to
build an audience.
Be prepared to go the distance. And be prepared to not be discouraged.
Buzzsprout has published these download numbers that show just how hard it
is to be popular. Yikes.
New episode facts:
• More than 26 downloads, you’re in the top 50% of podcasts
.
• More than 72 downloads, you’re in the top 25% of podcasts.
• More than 231 downloads, you’re in the top 10% of podcasts.
• More than 539 downloads, you’re in the top 5% of podcasts.
• More than 3,062 downloads, you’re in the top 1% of podcasts.
By the way, and unsurprisingly, most of the top podcasts that will eat up your
potential downloads are produced by pro publishers like NPR, Gimlet,Spotify, The New York Times, and iHeartRadio. In the advertising world,
you’ll compete with shows from Adweek, Campaign, Ad Age, and the Drum.
Think about pet care.
Think hard before you commit to doing a podcast. Podcasting is like
owning a dog. You need to feed it and walk it. A lot.
You will need time plus a quality show plus the right audience goal plus
perseverance.
Podfade is where a show just stops. I’m not talking about a limited series
(not a bad idea—it’s what I did), but a show that just stops dead in its tracks.
Think about the possibility that you might succumb to podfade when you
start to plan your show. Be prepared to market around it.
Set realistic expectations. Maybe just start with a clearly targeted series or
a seasonal format. Why not a ten-part series on summer travel for the
hospitality industry?
I’ve included a sample podcasting Creative Brief in Resources.
4. A More Efficient Idea: Be a Podcast Guest
Being a guest on an established show just might be a savvy alternative to
producing your own podcast. Podcast guesting is like having a speaking gig
at a large industry conference.
Every show out there needs guests.
I have probably been on over 40 shows. The right shows will generate
awareness and positive personal branding—and good news, you don’t have to
do the heavy lifting. You get the show’s audience and their 
marketing
chutzpah.
I tested the services of Tom Schwab’s Interview Valet to get me on the
right shows through strategic appearances. They did the heavy lifting—the
outbound talent marketing—for me. Visit the Interview Valet website for
mucho guesting insights. Tell him I sent you. He is a connector.
5. TikTok... And... UmNeed another personal brand platform? Don’t answer that. Just stay with me.
In addition to driving personal branding à la the Vaynerchuck all-in be-
everywhere universe model, podcasting, and writing books, you could start a
TikTok channel. TikTok is currently a wide open B2B playing field.
Note that I am assuming that Congress hasn’t killed TikTok. If it does,
there will be, should be, a new app to take its place.
Ashley Rutstein, a Denver freelance creative director, did just that. Her
TikTok channel 
Stuff About Advertising
 (@stuffaboutadvertising) has over
45,000 followers. Forty+ K!
Ashley’s TikTok video “A Few of the Agencies Out There ‘Doing It
Right” has 1,325 likes. She mentions a list of agencies and points to
Mischief’s TikTok channel, which includes a video on their winning a
Cannes Lion. Yes, folks, awards and TikTok equal smart personal and
agency branding.
In addition to TikTok we now have YouTube Shorts and Instagram Reels.
Hard to know where this short world is going. Yet regardless of the platform,
short videos are kicking it.
6. Awards Are Personal
Winning advertising awards will elevate your brand. Accepting the award
puts you and your agency in the spotlight
.
Clients include awards in their searches. They need that third-party
imprimatur.
A totally rough look at Google Trends suggests that there are over 15,000
searches on “advertising awards” every year. There are another 15,000-plus
searches for “ad awards.” While I bet that most of these searches are made by
advertising agency people, the number of searches on awards-related
keywords is high.
Put yourself in a marketing client’s shoes. They want to find and select a
new advertising, digital, or design firm. How do they do that?
They ask friends, spend hours searching the internet. Perhaps they were
directly targeted by an agency’s account-based marketing, read an agency’s
thought leadership, or hired an agency search consultant. Regardless, finding
the right agency in the sea of agencies isn’t easy.Many clients look at advertising and design award winners to find an
agency. Third-party recognition is a client aphrodisiac.
The Benefits of Winning
1. Fame is good. The fame equation is simple: Advertising awards drive
global and local industry awareness of an agency. You get something
new and shiny to talk about. If it is a big award, you can put it on your
home page.
2. Your existing clients receive confirmation that they made the right
decision when they hired you. Some might even congratulate you.
3. Your agency staff feels good. Their work is being recognized. They are
working at the right agency.
4. You’ll use the award in your recruitment program.
5. You’ll have a statuette to put in your award-strewn agency reception
area. Assuming you still have an office.
OK. Do it.
Across my global and regional advertising career, my agency groups 
won
big creative awards like the One Show, marketing success awards including a
bunch of Effies, and regional ad awards like the American Advertising
Awards from the AAF.
You could even go for client-industry awards. My Oregon agency won the
best marketing award from the American Bankers Association for work we
did for a regional bank. We beat out the Bank of Americas and JB Morgan
Chases of the universe. We leveraged this award to initiate talks with other
financial clients.
Build an Award Marketing Plan
It’s mind-blowing how many advertising agencies don’t know how to enter
an award show to win.
Too many agencies don’t approach the award process with a plan or
objectives beyond the search for ego fulfillment. This can make the wholeeffort a bit too C R A Z Y. You know that.
The horror! Too many agencies deliver poorly written me-too award
entries. Consider the judges and their mindset. They must read dozens of
award entries. How will you break out of the clutter to nail that award?
Too many entries sound alike: entries that are not creative, entries with
typos, and agencies that do not know how to craft a case study. Worse,
agencies do not seem to understand the award-judge audience and do not
approach entry writing via strategic thinking.
Go out and enter the right award shows. Be strategic. Be unignorable.
I have a list of all advertising awards on my blog. A very well-read post.CHAPTER 8
Intellectual Property
Basecamp and Money
I want you to close your eyes... Well, no, keep them open and just think about
this.
History. Way back in 2004 the agency 37signals had a need for a smart,
easy-to-use project management tool, was not enamored with existing
solutions, and decided to build their own solution for the agency.
Basecamp delivered to-do lists, milestone management, forum-like
messaging, file sharing, and time tracking.
Agency clients and other agencies began using the tool, and within a
month Basecamp had over 100 paying customers. Today over 20 million
people have used Basecamp.
Even more IP. Basecamp itself is moving forward. It launched Hey, an
email service, in June 2020.
Need a smile? 37signals dumped its agency business 
and went full-time
into its SaaS service. Its intellectual property was more valuable that its
service business—and, I bet, after the initial investment, an easier path to
profits. Could you and your agency follow this path?
IP and Growth
This chapter covers two growth areas that I think every agency needs to
consider: owning intellectual property and owning a product.
Be an OwnerA way out of the 
all agencies sound alike
 maze is to develop and own
intellectual property. You might not be able to own the amorphous idea of
creativity, but you can own IP.
From the Oxford Dictionary:
Intellectual property is a work or invention that is the result of
creativity, such as a manuscript or a design, to which one has rights and
for which one may apply for a patent, copyright, trademark, etc.
To get past the legalese, I prefer to call intellectual property intellectual
equity. Equity as in ownership that delivers value.
I know building and delivering intellectual equity might sound like a tough
discovery process.
Go Patel
Neil Patel is a personal branding superstar. His agency, NP Digital, is a
leading digital marketing agency that specializes in SEO, content, social, and
paid media. NP’s client base includes SoFi, Adobe, LinkedIn, Direct TV, and
Ricoh
.
Adweek
 named NP Digital the sixth-fastest growing agency in 2021. The
agency increased its revenues by 585% from 2018 to 2020 by diversifying.
How did NP Digital jump ahead of the digital pack? It’s all about audience
interest, baby. Some numbers based on Neil’s delivery of daily digital
marketing information and advice, and superior personal branding:
• 9 million visits to the Neil Patel blog every month
• Over 1 million YouTube subscribers—over 1 million views per month
• 1 million monthly downloads of Neil’s daily Marketing School podcast.
I listen to it every morning.
But wait. There’s more.
NP Digital builds and buys intellectual equity. They built the SEO SaaS
tool Ubersuggest.
Ubersuggest offers keyword suggestions, content ideas, competitoranalysis and backlink data. It generates over 3 million users per month and is
priced 90% less than competitive tools from Moz, Ahrefs, and SEMrush that
charge $950 to $9,900 a year. Better yet, it does double duty—it drives IP-
driven revenues 
and
 incoming leads to the agency.
I’m not suggesting that you spend the time, energy, and big bucks to build
an Ubersuggest or Basecamp SaaS solution. However, I am suggesting that
you look at what type of intellectual equity you could deliver.
Go White Label
White labeling is when another company does the heavy lifting (idea gen +
programming + design), and you get to brand its service as your own.
Some Resources
AppSumo lists over 30 tech programs that can be white labeled. Programs
include video editing services, project management systems, 
and even social
media tools. One example is Rumble Studio, which can help make your
agency stand out in the world of podcast production:
Rumble Studio is an audio recording solution that lets you conduct
remote interviews and produce content quickly.
Social media tracking tool Awario can be white labeled.
Big boy Ogilvy white labels the client and agency reporting tool Funnel.
But wait, there’s more: Take a page out of the 37signals Basecamp book
and dial it up... Y’all can take the art and science of digital skill sets one
mega step further.
The Colorado advertising agency Huebner Integrated Marketing was such
a nimble developer that it built the company White Label IQ, a sister agency
that creates white-labeled SaaS and PPC services for other agencies. Here’s a
nice message from the White label IQ website:
We understand the cadence and digital skillsets clients demand through
our origins from a marketing agency. As a result, our partnerships withother agencies provide design, Development, SaaS and PPC capacity
with specialized skill sets that make agency life easier and more
profitable.
Your agency has multiple white label paths. If you build it, they will come. If
you white label it from another party, they will come. If you build it, you can
sell it as a SaaS service to another agency.
Productizing the Agency
Productizing your services involves packaging, delivering, and selling your
services as if they were a tangible product.
Two product(ized) ideas
.
The Service Product—Brand Your Secret Sauce
Clients look for a creative agency that has a proven management and
production system that is focused on their needs.
For example, leverage a client pain point and build out your branded
solution.
One certain pain point is a client’s fear that an agency doesn’t listen hard
enough. It might not get to the client’s real needs and goals versus what the
agency wants to deliver. So, prove your listenership skill set with a branded
system.
Example: Create and brand a productized new client onboarding system
with scheduled six-month “How are we doing?” reviews—a system that
demonstrates and sells in how you work to meet client objectives.
Agencies often have systems for initial discovery, research, and ideation.
Consider packaging and branding them.
You could also take a discrete program, create your very own system, and
productize it. Don’t take my word for it. From Jake Jorgovan of Content
Allies, a company that builds branded revenue-generating podcasts:The biggest benefit of a productized service is that you sell the exact
same thing every time. There is no customization, no proposals, and no
back and forth. You have a conversation, evaluate if it is a fit, and then
they either buy or don’t buy.
Make the scope very clear. Define it. Brand it. Price it.
Go Small
A blue-sky example... build XYZ Agency’s Blog-o-Rama. For $9,000 the
client gets a blog post strategy, creative brief, SEO guidance document,
process and calendar doc, and three starter blog posts.
Too small for you
?
This might sound like a small-agency product, but I think larger agencies
could use this idea, or a related idea, as a “Get to know us” program that
offers the client a taste of your magic and customer service that will lead to
more business. Clearly your mileage may vary. However, making an initial
purchase of an agency system easy for a client is a good thing.
In this case, your product acts like a paid amuse-bouche.
Wait, Wait
A productization idea...
The branding company Designjoy offers design as a subscription. A design
product. Billing starts at $4,995/m.
This one-man shop has reported annual recurring revenues of over $1.5
million. From Brett Williams’s LinkedIn profile:
Designjoy a one-person premium design service currently serving 40+
clients with a $1.5M ARR.
On his website:
A design agency with a twist.
Apps, websites, logos & more.From his FAQ: Why wouldn’t I just hire a full-time designer?
Good question! For starters, the annual cost of a full-time senior-level
designer now exceeds $100,000, plus benefits (and good luck finding
one available). Aside from that, you may not always have enough work
to keep them busy at all times, so you’re stuck paying for time you
aren’t able to utilize.
With the monthly plan, you can pause and resume your subscription as
often as you need to ensure you’re only paying your designer when you
have work available for them
.
Brett’s solo Instagram has over 74K Followers. 35K Followers on Twitter.
The mega agency VMLY&R has 57K followers and, get this, 16K
employees.
Now the very serious stuff. From a 2023 Tweet at @designjoy:
Just started tracking my spending habits and budgeting. Designjoy now
costs less than $400/m to run. That’s it. That’s my overhead. And half of that
is a Shutterstock subscription. Agencies are doing it all wrong.
Wait. Wait. There’s more. You can now dive into Brett’s 
Productize
Yourself
 course for $99. Of course, you should sign up for his 
productized
course.
Has your agency ever considered running a series of courses?CHAPTER 9
24/7 Business Development
Stop with the Shoemaker Excuse
It has been reported that most advertising agencies don’t have a
comprehensive business development plan. Yes, this sounds like Chapter 2’s
missing business plan.
A yikes coming... Most of the agencies with a business development plan
do not consistently run the plan they designed.
I hear a lot of excuses from large, medium, and small advertising agencies
about why they aren’t running a long-term, 24/7 business development
program. These agencies often chuckle—a wary chuckle— before
mentioning the infamous cobbler’s shoe excuse.
You know what I’m talking about. The excuse is that the agency is so
focused on its day-to-day clients that it neglects its own business
development—or better expressed, their own sales program. These agencies
act like the way-too-busy shoemaker whose children go barefoot: “Yup, I’m
like really busy making shoes for my customers. Just don’t have the time to
take care of the kids.”
Of course, this is insanity. Some agencies enter a serious failure zone
because one of their large, cash-cow clients leaves and the agency doesn’t
have a prospect pipeline that will deliver the next big account. My mantra is
that we all know clients will walk out the back door and you must have new
ones to come in the front. Keep the pipeline full. A duh? Yes.
Building the PlanThere are a billion experts, websites, blogs, books, white papers, podcasts,
and videos that discuss how to build out a business development plan—a
sales plan. I’m going to hit the most important elements.
Good news: Just like the one-page business plan, business development
plans do not have to be biblical.
The Core Elements of a Power Plan
1. 
Position your agency for growth.
Be an expert. B2B buyers want experts who understand their business,
their category, and their issues and opportunities.
2. 
Act different.
Not all expert positions are truly different. However, do what you do for
your clients and craft and enunciate the positioning, so it stands out. As
Apple once said, “Think different.”
3. 
Set goals.
These can be defined as SMART goals: Specific, Measurable,
Achievable, Relevant, and Time Bound. Have KPI objectives and know
how to assess
.
4. 
Define your target market.
Categories, companies, job titles (à la CMO and CFO), and real people
(get beyond titles). Consider building personas for the people and
groups you need to excite.
5. 
Determine your best marketing channels.
Selection should be based on what inbound and outbound B2B channels
work in your space and what you can get done (“Keep it simple,
stupid!”).
6. 
Be unignorable.Back to thinking different... and looking different too. Once a year I
head to YouTube for the TBWA/Chiat/Day Apple “Here’s to the Crazy
Ones” and the 1984 Macintosh launch commercials. Pure inspiration.
While you are at it, watch Steve Job’s iPhone introduction.
7. 
Be consistent.
Be 24/7, baby. You never know when that next great client will be
searching for you. Use a production calendar.
8. 
Develop a process.
Create and run a well-defined process and system to manage the work.
9. 
Manage agency resources.
Business development is stressful. Manage resources to avoid staff
burnout.
10. 
Systemize client “selection.”
Have a system to determine what requests for information (RFIs),
requests for proposals (RFPs), and pitch invitations you should respond
to—and importantly, should not respond to. 
Given burnout awareness,
I’m seeing many agencies back off from the never-ending pitch cycle.
Use my Go-No-Go Pitch Quiz that’s in the Resources section.
A Deep-Dive Assessment
I always start my client engagements with two tools to help assess an
agency’s goals, strengths, and weaknesses.
My agency business development questionnaire is designed to be a starting
point—a way for me to begin to dig into the agency, its history, objectives,
and so on.
Second, an agency SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats) analysis is designed to ascertain what’s working and what’s not.The Levitan Business Development Questionnaire
This is how I onboard my new agency clients:
I have a few general questions to help us kick off. Your brief (or
detailed) responses will help me to get to know your agency’s
objectives, market position, and strategies so I can begin to formulate a
set of opinions and recommendations to help you grow your agency.
Questions
Do you have a master agency business plan? If so, when was the last
time you revised it?
Do you have an active business development plan?
If you do, what is and isn’t working
?
Who at your company is most responsible for business development? Is
business development currently an agency-wide effort?
What is your agency’s core brand positioning or sales proposition? Do
you have a focused elevator pitch?
Is your current brand position competitive—do you think it stands out
from the pack?
What have been the key reasons clients have hired you?
Do you specialize today or want to in the future (in, e.g., a business
category, media, technology)?
Do you have a geographic concentration—local, regional, national, or
global?Do you have any unique, standout intellectual properties or marketing
solutions?
Can you describe what a cherished high-value client looks like?
What are the top five new clients you would like to add to your roster?
Note: Clients you think would choose you. Why would they do this?
Do you currently have a strong client-lead pipeline?
How have you been getting your best new client leads?
What percentage of new leads are the result of referrals or word of
mouth
?
Do you participate I head-to-head pitch presentations or are clients just
asking for proposals?
Do you have a standardized RFI or RFP format?
What do you view as your biggest business issues (your positioning,
missing skill sets, business development, geography, staff, etc.)?
What other factors inhibit growth? Competitive agencies, new business
models, client inertia, macroeconomic issues, etc.?
What agencies are your direct competitors?
Are there any agencies or marketing companies in general that impress
you? Why?
Agency resources: If I suggest a thought leadership program (social
media, cases, research, white papers, videos, etc.) do you have theinternal resources or partners that can help get the work done?
What’s your end game? You don’t need to have one today. However,
some agency owners or leaders have a desire to build a sellable agency.
Knowing this helps to focus on a value-building path.
A SWOT Analysis
I also ask my clients to do a SWOT analysis. An agency SWOT analysis
provides a top-level perspective on an agency’s opportunities and issues.
Strengths and weaknesses represent current conditions; threats and
opportunities represent the future.
Consider having multiple people do a SWOT on their own. Is the
leadership team on the same page? You might be surprised at the often-
disparate results.CHAPTER 10
The Optimal Agency Website
Always Revising
Ta da! Here’s to yet another new agency website.
Virtually every advertising agency I talk with is considering revising or
rebuilding their website. Some even days after launching a new one since it
took the agency seven months to build the latest site and it’s now looking
stale to your designers. You know what I’m talking about.
This recurring need for new comes with the marketing services landscape.
We are on the frontlines of both design and evolving technology. We design
stuff for a living so our designy UI and UX stuff better look and sound good.
We want to believe our website is so compelling and informative and
convincing that visitors will stay awhile and learn all about us. And make
one-on-one contact.
Not 
so fast.
The sales guru Daniel Pink reminds us that we’ve moved from 
caveat
emptor
, the Latin maxim that means “let the buyer beware,” to 
caveat
venditor
, meaning “let the seller beware.” This is because a client will most
likely examine your agency and its sales proposition before you ever know
they looked at you. In fact, you may never know they stopped by in the first
place—or how long they stayed.
Generalizations First
Gartner’s corporate executive board reported that B2B buyers are 57% of the
way to a buying decision before they’re willing to talk to a sales rep. 
Caveatvenditor.
An agency website is, at first, a B2B sales tool. It should strive to entice a
visitor to let you know that they visited. It is a mega wasted effort if they like
the look and feel of your website but are not enticed to make contact.
Website Musts
Be clear about who you are and what you offer. Get to the point.
Build the website to meet visitor needs, not to make your strategy and
creative teams feel good.
Use clear navigation.
Have some personality. People buy people. Friendly is good.
It is OK to want to be cool but strive to initiate contact. Make a visitor an
offer they can’t refuse.
The 10-Second Website Rule
The bottom line: Prospective clients give an agency website mere seconds to
introduce the agency and learn about what it can do for them
.
People, all people, exhibit some form of attention deficit disorder. We
know this as marketers. To gain several minutes of user attention, you must
clearly communicate your value proposition within 10 seconds.
Ten seconds. How did I get to this number?
I used the research of the UX/UI expert Jacob Nielsen as reported by the
NN/g Nielsen Norman Group. According to Nielsen, 10 seconds is what you
get.
It’s clear that the first 10 seconds of the page visit are critical for users’
decision to stay or leave. The probability of leaving is very high during
these first few seconds because users are extremely skeptical, having
suffered countless poorly designed web pages in the past.
If the web page survives this first—extremely harsh—10-second
judgment, users will look around a bit. However, they’re still highlylikely to leave during the subsequent 20 seconds of their visit. Only
after people have stayed on a page for about 30 seconds does the curve
become relatively flat.
A quick question: Did you use any of this 10-second fast-in and fast-out
thinking to build your agency’s website?
OK, don’t come after me. If your website was designed by a design-first
creative director without a solid sales-oriented creative brief that recognized
what I’ll call WDD, website deficit disorder, then, um, some seriously high
home page bounce rates will happen.
Three Optimized Elements
Once hooked, a prospective client will look hard at the agency website for a
clear understanding of what you can do for them via your sales proposition
(the sales pitch), clients you have worked for (proof), past work and cases
(proof), awards (third-party support), agency thought 
leadership, and,
importantly in a world of agency sameness, agency personality. And these
days, for an increasing number of clients, your agency culture.
Stating the obvious... your website is a critical sales tool. You know this.
However, my years of building websites (my first was for Microsoft in 1998)
and deconstructing hundreds of agency websites demonstrates that many are
not following Nielsen’s 10-second rule.
Here are my three rules for having an attention-grabbing website.
1. KISS: Keep it simple, stupid!
You have that 10-second window to capture the attention and interest of a
visitor to begin to sell them. I am a fan of simple, fast-read design.
Simple (and fast) is good.
Once upon a time, M&C Saatchi told prospects what they will get from the
agency as soon as the visitor hit the home page.
In large type the agency delivered their very direct sales pitch. Their USP:BRUTAL SIMPLICITY OF THOUGHT.
It is easier to complicate than simplify.
Simple ideas enter the brain quicker and stay there longer. Brutal
simplicity of thought is therefore a painful necessity.
Maurice called the delivery of this simplicity message one-word equity. At
that time, the agency sold the idea of simplicity—can you imagine them
having a complex design to express this thought?
This direct statement of keeping it simple works in today’s overstimulated
website deficit disorder world. “Hope” helped define the Obama brand.
A look at even more simple. This time it’s simple served up with humor.
NYC Walrus agency’s website stars a talking walrus (how’s that for
branding?). You input a question and the walrus delivers an answer.
In case you think it’s all left up to the talking walrus, the home page also
includes a drop-down menu of the usual navigation (Home, Work, Info,
News). They also point to the agency’s Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and
Medium pages.
While Walrus might seem to break my Rule 2 (see below), they deliver on
their advertising philosophy and distinctive message—humor works—which
seems to attract their nice client list and sweet awards.
Even more simple.
The digital and experiential agency Puppy Love opens with their giving a
visitor the opportunity to choose a voice (cowboy, ASMR, or Aunt Ruthie)
and a background color that delivers the agency’s sale proposition. The voice
and color thing is both simple and different. I chose a cowboy and lavender
and got this message in cowboy speak:
WE BUILD DIGITAL AND PHYSICAL EXPERIENCES FOR
BRANDS WHO WANT TO BE DIFFERENT.
Why the interactive voice and color action? Well, it does deliver on and
supports the “being different experience” message and, hey, why not be
interactive to grab the attention of that WDD (website deficit disorder)
visitor? It also quickly ups the interactive time spent on the home page.2. Salesmanship rocks.
The agency website must sell. It is its reason for being. You have those
measly 10 seconds to say something that grabs and then drives the visitor to
your sales pitch.
Look at your competition and ask if they deliver an action-oriented, sales-
oriented message. Probably not. Too many agencies fear “selling.”
M&C Saatchi quickly sold the idea of simplicity. Walrus quickly sells the
idea that advertising can be fun. Both work because M&C Saatchi is a
recognized brand and Walrus’s talking walrus is hard to ignore and 
delivers
the message that these guys are funny—and goes further to sell.
On the day I’m writing this book, Walrus has an offer on their front page.
They’re asking advertisers if they have their Super Bowl spot. If Walrus’s
spot isn’t ranked in the top five, the client doesn’t have to pay for production.
This offer got the attention of Ad Age. I am sure the agency will always sell-
in their being “different.” Simple “different.” Fun “different.”
Go direct marketing.
Portland’s The Good is an ecommerce conversion rate specialist. Its site is
designed to sell via The Good’s very focused pitch that immediately nails a
big client pain point:
98% of your website visitors won’t buy from you today.
We improve your conversion rate turning more visitors into buyers.
The Good’s website puts a client pain point front and center (poor
conversion). It’s followed by “We can help…” (a “call us” message) and
clear navigation to action.
The home page also includes proof, as in conversion and revenue increases
for clients, including Xerox at 86.7%, Easton at 240%, and Swiss Gear at
132%. Plus, and I really dig this approach, they have a one-minute video that
tells their data-backed science story to deliver a sales pitch.
They also offer two agency principle books. More proof that they are a
CRO expert and thought leader.
The agency’s results and cases are also direct and clear. Each case funnelsto a contact form.
3. Personality, please.
Every website has a distinct personality. Walrus is smart fun. The Good is a
conversion specialist that walks its talk.
Too many agency websites just provide lists. Our mission, our services,
our work, our clients, our people, our locations. Too often these factoids are
delivered without any personality. Your personality just might be your
differentiator.
More thoughts on personality to come. But first, someone please steal this
stand-up comedy idea...
Once upon a time I thought that it would be “different” to have my
agency’s website open with a video of a stand-up comedian riffing on the
advertising industry and our wonderful agency. “Take my agency… please.”
(By the way, that line riffs on the comedian Henny Youngman’s “Take my
wife… please.” Under 45? Check him out on YouTube.)
Why would I consider using a comedian to introduce the agency? I am a
believer in the power of humor to arrest attention. Plus, this angle gives the
agency a personality in a generally personality-free zone. And I guarantee a
comedian will keep a visitor on the home page for longer than 10 seconds.
Yeah, I have an opinion. However, I’m not alone. From the 
Harvard
Business Review
:
The workplace needs laughter. According to research from institutions
as serious as Wharton, MIT, and London Business School, every
chuckle or guffaw brings with it a host of business benefits. Laughter
relieves stress and boredom, boosts engagement and well-being, and
spurs not only creativity and collaboration but also analytic precision
and productivity.
Go ahead and take this humor-first idea… please.
A unique example of leading with humor is the creative and production
studio ADWEAK. The agency drives interest—for example, its 100,000Twitter followers—via its unique look at agency and client life.
• BREAKING: Agency Just Listing Anything They Can Think of on
Capabilities Slide for New Business Pitch
• BREAKING: Agency Staffers Still Have No Idea what Recently 
Hired
“Thought Leader” Actually Does
• BREAKING: Client Plans to Wait Until After She Receives Holiday
Gift from Agency Before Announcing Review
• BREAKING: VLMY&R Considers Adding Another Couple Letters to
Name
The ADWEAK website has few words but delivers this compelling key
message:
We’re good, we’re smart, we’re fast and we’re not A-holes.
Try some humor if you’ve got it in you, please.
Website Navigation
If you have only 10 seconds to grab interest for your sales pitch, better do it
fast. Challenge yourself by asking, Why should a prospect pay attention? Or
worse, Why wouldn’t they just click away?
The Home Page
There is no one size fits all. However, your home page must do a couple of
things right.
Branding
Your primary objective is to deliver a branded sales proposition. The sales
pitch doesn’t have to be hardcore—just not normcore.Do a competitive check of your competition to make sure that you look
and sound different. I’d like to think this does happen. But a perusal of 10
kinda-look-alike agency websites will indicate that this is not standard
practice
.
Nudge a Bit
Activate the power of 
nudge
.
The world of behavioral economics includes the concept of creating a
nudge. This idea comes from the book 
Nudge: The Final Edition
, written by
Nobel Prize–winning Richard Thaler and Cass A. Sunstein.
They postulate that
A choice architect has the responsibility for organizing the context in
which people make decisions.
A nudge, as we will use the term, is any aspect of the choice
architecture that alters people’s behavior in a predictable way without
forbidding any options or significantly changing their economic
incentives.
Bottom line: You are a communicator whose clients pay to generate an
action. What action do 
you
 want 
your
 website visitor to take, and how will
you nudge them along?
Navigation Elements
Most agencies have similar navigation elements. Here is my quick take on
how to deliver clout in each of the most used website sections.
OK. But. Your agency might not need all these elements. One way to
assess this decision is if you think that you have a seriously hot shit and to the
point sales proposition or irresistible offer that would make the visitor that
come-on that they can’t refuse. Another is that you subscribe to the less-is-
more school of communications.
Adweak Studio’s website is an example of brevity. They sell their own
brand of creative via a home page with a humorous sizzle reel and a 113
word About page. That’s all folks. Of course, it helps that their 100K Twitterfollower account delivers an average of over 3 million Twitter impressions a
month.
On to more
.
About. And About Us
There are many routes to delivering the About message. These include your
mission, agency story, and services.
Here’s how three of Ad Age’s Small Agency winners describe themselves.
Movers+Shakers delivers a clear sales proposition (as in what’s in it for
clients):
CONNECTING BRANDS TO CULTURE.
Movers+Shakers is a disruptive creative agency on a mission to spread
joy. By connecting brands to culture, we drive brand love.
Our clients rely on us to push them into tomorrow, creating cultural
relevance across mainstream and emerging social platforms.
Fitzco delivers the agency’s internal culture message:
We’re an independent and integrated team that thrives in the trenches
together. When you see how our media, strategy, and creative work
effortlessly and quickly together, you’ll understand that we’re united in
a simple principle. The collaboration, the work, the results, our people,
our culture—it all matters to us.
Our agency’s mission is pretty simple: to care deeply, learn
continuously and push creatively to deliver business solutions that have
a real-world impact.
Alto starts out really good. I like the home page message as it defines the
clients they want:A creative company for courageous brands
.
Inside Alto gets a bit too me-too:
We are a creative company that is structured to make industry-changing
work and partner exactly in the way our clients require: Centered
around a lean core of highly experienced players, our team is scaled to
fit the needs of each client and project.
Isn’t this every agency?
Your agency’s About page is a significant chance to make sure that
visiting future clients will like you. It’s an opportunity to shine.
Act different.
Our People
People buy people. In many business development pitches, the decision
comes down to which agency people the decision-maker team likes more.
Given the similarities between agencies, especially pitch finalists that have
similar expertise stories, the people factor matters. Simpatico is a good thing.
This people thing applies to agency websites. How you show your people
matters. It matters to prospective clients but also, and importantly, to your
current 
and
 future staff. Future employees want to work with people who
look and sound cool, smart, caring and experienced.
Some Our People musts to think through:
1. Decide how many and which people to show. If it’s a small agency, you
could show everyone. Does this make you look too small? These days
small is good. Large agencies must prune the list. Just management? Is
this too hierarchical?
2. Determine your look. Do the portraits have similar attributes? Are they
high quality? Similar lighting and background? I like it when agencies
have a look that makes everyone appear like they work at the same
place. Of course, this goal gets strained due to remote work. Try on
some Photoshop
.
3. Should you consider using video vs. static photos? More video
haranguing coming later.4. How much description to add is a big decision. Just a title? Roles,
experience, achievements?
5. Should you link to people’s social media profiles? Linking to a
LinkedIn profile would allow a visitor to dig in deeper. However, you’d
better trust your people to keep their profiles up to date and
professional.
6. How can you humanize your staff? You could just have a photograph
and a name. Or you could inject some personality.
These agencies Our People pages are worth a look:
Digital Marmalade’s Meet the Team page uses some interactivity. Play
with the images.
Zulu Alpha Kilo, not surprising, uses humor on its Crew page. Watch the
video. Please. And, yes, what a unique idea—video to introduce agency
human beings.
Creative Theory combines photos with animation, unique copy (“Ashlee
Green is an agitator of potential” rather than just her business title—“Sr.
Account Manager”), and each bio includes the employee’s email. A nice
personal touch.
The humorous Wexley School for Girls (a now long-lost agency) used
photos of models—not the real folks. Who doesn’t want to work with
attractive people? The Wexley list was not ignorable and helped to drive
home their unique attitude.
Our Work
Of course, the Our Work section is all about “show me the money.” Clients
want to see standout creative work, ideas, and strategies (often media
strategies) that sell.
The Our Work section tells the visitor the clients you’ve worked with and
the breadth of your communications skills. And, of course, that you are a
creative thinker that delivers a high degree of power thinking and 
action.
On to the multiclient sizzle reel. Sizzle reels work some of the time. In my
take, most are kinda run-on video sentences with little explanation or reason
to pay attention. I think the reel could work harder if you lead the viewer
through the work. Consider adding some text to both inform and excite. Toomany sizzle reels deliver visual headaches that leave way too much
understanding to the viewer. Adweak Studio’s sizzle is actually about their
delivery of sizzle.
Our Cases
Cases sell. Sell big time.
State the objective, then the work (or thinking), and then offer some
results. Keep it simple and fast. Be strategic in your approach.
LONDON Advertising once upon a time went beyond just showing case
histories to having a unique branded way—an ownable way—to frame their
cases via the ownable term “straight-line thinking.” From objective to
delivery to success. In all cases, the agency supported their main message:
They create one single marketing idea that can work around the world.
Here’s an example of straight-line thinking for the Mandarin Oriental
Hotel Group client.
The case leads with a print ad: a portrait of the actor Morgan Freeman and
the line “He’s a fan.”
Product: Fantastic hotels.
Strategy: The rich and famous choose to stay there.
One Brilliant Idea: “He’s a fan.”
The Outcome: Group has grown 500% since campaign launch.
I don’t need paragraphs of case copy to understand the direct communication
of this explicit approach.
Why not use your agency’s very own business development case study?
Did you employ a brilliant strategy for your own sales? Show how you used
out-of-the-box inbound marketing. Podcasting. LinkedIn, Short 
videos,
landing pages. Walk your talk. Preen a bit. It is also a way for you to sell in
the idea of a different marketing approach. If you do it for you, you can do it
for the client.
Our Services
Sure, talk about your services. Just consider that long lists of services that
range from strategy to digital prowess to TV commercial production to
influencer marketing to experiential to PR to UX mastery are not particularlyconvincing.
I’ll use the analogy of the 10-page New Jersey diner menu. In this case the
menu from New Jersey’s Mark Twain Diner. How can this one-location diner
make omelets, BBQ pulled-pork nachos, fried calamari, Philly cheese steak
sandwiches, baked Greek spinach pie, pierogis, Maryland crab cake salad,
avocado toast, quesadillas, bistec encebollado, coconut-crusted chicken salad,
Cuban paninis, Jack Daniel’s smokehouse full rack of ribs, and of course
grilled cheese? In one kitchen. OK, I will stop. You get the idea.
I know why some of you want long lists of services. But there has to be a
better way to present your integrated skills than with a run-on and run-on
diner-menu approach.
Can you condense your list into a singular client-benefit story or wrap it
into a branded service product? Give your list a reason for being. Relate the
list back to your master brand.
Testimonials
I love third-party proof. Testimonials deliver proof. These can be copy or
video based (entertaining and brief videos, please.)
Be different. What if you had a short video channel just for testimonials?
One ad agency had their current clients telling website visitors that they
would never leave their agency despite getting sales pitches from competitive
agencies every week. It was an interesting way to sell-in the value of the
agency. An agency that was irresistible
.
Our Clients
Clients like to see a 
list
. Who have you worked with? Are you desirable?
Client history is proof. Client lists are delivered via names, logos and the
work itself.
That said, what should make up your list? Keep in mind that the future
client might go beyond the logos to ask for details.
Do you just show the work the agency did? Do you include past clients?
Like, you did a one-off project for AT&T in 2018. How far back do you think
you could go?
Do you include the mention of clients your staff might have worked on at
other agencies? Here are two examples as food for thought.My Oregon agency specialized in health-care clients. Of course, we listed
the agency’s very own current and past health-care clients. But what about
my own multiyear health-care client history that preceded my Oregon tenure?
I had worked with Johnson & Johnson around the world. Did I include J&J in
our client history? You bet. Hey, any new client would have gotten my
experience, so why not state it?
Your agency is made up of people who have past business experience.
Why not say that your ECD worked on Hilton? On the other hand, do you list
Honda if your only touch was that your junior copywriter had once done
some Honda CRV banner ads at Hakuhodo? Um, no.
Brains. Blogs, Podcasts, Etc.
Industry research studies indicate that clients want strategic thinking based on
an agency’s experience and foresight.
I like stating the obvious. So be a showoff.
I’m going to call this website section “brains”. This is where you show
your brainiac thinking. Agencies call this section different names:
• Blog
• Strategic Insights
• Thought Leadership
• Ideas
• Opinion
s
• Journal
Whatever you call this section. It needs to meet at least these three objectives:
1. The agency must sound smart and have a unique and competitive
perspective. I see way too many me-too blog posts that will get lost in
the wind. In most cases, Google doesn’t care what you’ve written if it
mirrors the agency down the block.
2. The agency must deliver insights that immediately relate to its
prospect’s information needs and, yup, those pesky pain points. This is
the opportunity to look like the leader that will propel the client
forward.
3. The agency needs to leverage the art and science of search engineoptimization when choosing what to write about. Write for your
audience, but don’t forget about what Google cherishes.
Brains is where an agency can go big. I’ve included ideas in Chapter 6,
“Thought Leadership.”
A plus: The agency’s brains section demonstrates that the agency can do
social media marketing for itself. A savvy client will notice that you get SEM
and SEO from reading your headlines and action-oriented thinking.
Be very efficient. Once you have that blog post or podcast interview or
white paper, amplify it across other platforms.
Our Culture
Clients, employees, and, importantly, prospective employees are now looking
hard at agency culture. Agency values, beliefs, and your mission matter.
From Havas Canada’s “People and Culture” page:
Diversity and inclusion. We believe great businesses are built on great
cultures. We are taking tangible steps to create a genuinely 
inclusive
culture within our Villages. That means providing opportunity for all of
our people to succeed.
Dallas’s Hawkeye says:
People are at the heart of everything we do. Ours is a culture without
ego. But full of ambition—a place that celebrates diversity, empowers
creativity, and accelerates careers.
One could say these are just words. But, today, words like these need to be
said—and backed up. People can sniff out BS.
Speaking of getting past BS and pablum, go look at Mojo Supermarket’s
2022 World Cup series “The Slavery Cup” on Agency Spy. Mojo put their
agency culture on the street via projections on FIFA and UN office buildings.
Go Fact SheetMost websites are information rich. So much so that most of us can’t
remember all of what we read, watched, and loved. Understatement: The
website visit can be ephemeral, as in a fleeting memory.
Help your prospects remember you by giving them facts and info to
download and hold in their hands. It can be a one-sheet PDF that can easily
be shared within a client organization.
Deliver all the information in one place that an attention deficit marketing
director needs.
Please Ask for Contact
Driving contact is where the rubber meets the road. A tour of agency
websites shows a wide range of contact pages. Most are too weak. Some
(most) just provide an email contact. Some contact pages go for it by
providing reasons to make contact. These contact pages are much more
assertive than just having a passive contact email form.
I am a strong believer that the contact section should be warm and
welcoming. Businesslike but friendly. Contact should be an invitation and a
metaphorical fist bump.
Bland does not work for me. I need some online hospitality. This is a place
to show some personality. Even humor. Even empathy. Try to get past the
passive voice. Ask for the order. Gently. Not too Glengarry Glenn Ross.
Instead of bland text, why not deliver a 20-second video on why we should
talk?
Given people’s general inertia, go ahead and tell the visitor to make
contact. Consider how to give them a good reason to act. Maybe make an
offer to capture attention and a reaction. This isn’t a brand-new idea—SaaS
companies do this all the time because it works.
Here is what I say on my Contact page:
Three reasons to contact me.
1. I deliver the most creative approach to advertising agency
positioning and lead generation.
2. I am the most experienced agency business development coach. Read
the “My Story” page. I stole the idea from Austin Kleon.
3. My goal is to make your advertising agency unignorable.Unignorable drives awareness and action. Think of the alternative.
I deliver an offer...
Take me up on my free Corleone Godfather offer.
This is an offer you can’t—or rather, shouldn’t—refuse.
Let’s talk for thirty minutes—just 0.50 on the timesheet—to discuss
your agency’s issues and opportunities and how I will help you build a
more powerful advertising agency business development plan
.
Does my Godfather offer work? Yes.
Does my Gandhi testimonial video at the bottom of the page help? Yes.
Chicago’s Orbit Media website development firm goes a bit further than
most agencies. They address the fact that the client might just be ready for
them. They have this interactive dialogue-building offer on the Contact page:
Have a project but not quite ready to contact us? See if Orbit is a fit for
you.
Last point. Do not ask for too much information. You do not need the
prospect’s date of birth.
Video, Please
Too few agencies include brand-building video on their website. If they do,
there’s a high degree of chance that it will be a sizzle reel.
I prefer a video that helps deliver the agency’s USP. The digital agency
HawkSEM opens with an animated video that clearly states the agency’s
mantra and client benefits—in 10 seconds:
We could start by talking and bragging about award this and featuring
that, but who cares? We believe in results. At the end of the day
delivering measurable marketing results, predictable revenue, and highROI is what matters.
Another approach is to put a real human in the video. Why not have an
agency leader deliver the message, and while they’re at it, also deliver some
agency soul? You can make a compelling video introduction. You are
creative.
Videos engage, are more memorable, and are better at brand recall than
text and... increase buying intent.
Still with me? MarketingProfs reports that “the average user spends 88%
more time on a website with video than a website without one.” How can one
ignore this 88% finding?
The Power of Landing Pages
Landing pages, short form micro-websites that hammer a single point and
encourage a visitor to act now, should be considered if you target specific
client categories and want to hype a singular agency expertise.
Example one: I worked with a media planning and buying agency that
created a separate micro site for their white label planning services for third-
party agencies. They did not want to confuse their marketing clients by
having them see the two services aimed at two different audiences.
Example two: Another agency wanted to point to their financial prowess
but did not want to confuse their more universal UX/UI design clients. They
hyped their financial services on a landing page promoted via direct to
category ABM marketing.
Landing pages, due to their simplicity and direct relationship to an inbound
or outbound sales message and often offer, can dramatically increase
conversion rates. Many leading SaaS companies use landing pages to drive
interest and immediate action. They make their visitor a fast, concise offer
they can’t refuse.
Check out landing page best practices at Unbounce and HubSpot.CHAPTER 11
Inbound or Outbound Marketing?
Oh My. In. Out. What to Do?
When I was asked to run business development at Saatchi & Saatchi, I called
up Jonathan Bond of New York’s very successful Kirshenbaum & Bond
(now KBS) and asked him what business development strategies worked best
for his successful agency. He said they were not exactly sure what were the
hardest-working tactics, so they did everything. Admittedly this was back
before data took over the universe to tell us exactly what works. Um, wow,
that is wishful thinking.
I mention this conversation because even today with reams of conversion
data, there isn’t a one-size-fits-all approach to building the perfect business
development program. Advertising, PR, ecommerce, SEM, email, strategic,
branding, experiential (I’ll save you from my going on and on) agencies and
their unique expertise and prospective clients are way too different for a one-
size-fits-all 
program.
This gets me to the often-asked agency question: What is more efficient
and effective, inbound or outbound marketing?
Let’s start with definitions.
Inbound Marketing = Attraction
From HubSpot:
Inbound marketing is a business methodology that attracts customers by
creating valuable content and experiences tailored to them.From Marketo:
Inbound marketing is the process of helping potential customers find
your company.
From me:
Inbound marketing is an always-on content-based strategy that
responds to demonstrated buyer intent.
My first foray into inbound marketing was in the mid-1990s when I was CEO
of the award-winning New Jersey Online, a very early online newspaper with
more traffic than the online New York Times. One of our most potent traffic
drivers was our online forum section (a community bulletin board). Our
forum’s communities offered discussion zones for New York and New
Jersey’s eight professional sports teams and state-wide youth sports.
When kids and parents discussed their Saturday games, other parents and
kids chimed in. The forums were a very compelling, very attractive 24/7
community magnet. Forums delivered inbound attraction. Forums were the
early edge of our world of social media
.
Today’s inbound marketing activity, the art and science of getting the right
people to find your company, spans SEO, PPC, must-read content, new social
media, and audio and video broadcast platforms. Unfortunately, driving
inbound interest via the Google business model is getting harder and harder.
It’s getting Harder
Once upon a time it was a Google search world that thrived on SEO. Today a
client looking for an agency might, stress might, use Google. Even using
Google search, it is freaking difficult to get on page one or even three.
These days prospects could be searching for you on Instagram, LinkedIn,
YouTube, TikTok, Dribble, Behance, on award websites, and use word of
mouth care of your active referral program.
Plus, AI search will become (is) a serious search platform.Outbound Marketing = Direct Marketing
I had a good laugh a few years ago care of one of my adverting agency
clients. The agency’s Dubai-based CEO had spent much of his career at
Microsoft, and his marketing lingo included the first time I had ever heard the
term account-based marketing. I asked for a definition. He described direct
marketing and its century-old strategy and tactics. I laughed.
Account-based marketing (ABM) is outbound direct marketing.
Two Expert Definitions
From Marketo:
Account-based marketing—or key account marketing—
uses the
combined expertise of the marketing and sales teams to target select
groups of accounts that require tailored marketing.
From Gartner:
Account-based marketing (ABM) is a go-to-market strategy targeting
certain accounts with a synchronized, continuous set of marketing and
sales activities. ABM activities engage those accounts and individuals
through all stages of the buying journey.
Key descriptors being key account marketing; select groups of
accounts; synchronized, continuous set of activities.
While some marketing gurus prefer SEM-generated inbound to outbound, I
prefer a combination. Because doing both can be highly efficient if you
combine and repurpose your efforts.
Do Both? But...I think that in today’s cluttered business development information universe
outbound, as in ABM, works harder than inbound. Harder? ABM provides
the platform and systems that leverage your expert positioning to go after the
specific clients and categories that deserve your brains.
Today’s inbound effectiveness is constrained by the massive amount of
content of all types and the fact that managing SEO itself has gotten more
difficult. An example of content overload: I just counted that I have 25
advertising-and marketing-oriented podcasts listed in my podcast app.
Twenty-five!
A Google search on “healthcare SEO agency” yields 3,510 results with
seven ads and eight listings on Google’s first page. What are your odds for
getting a free listing on this page?
However, inbound still needs to be in your marketing mix. You just 
need
to be more strategic and meld and execute the art and science of content
marketing. So, no, you are not getting an inbound pass. With smart workload
planning you can do it all—well, the smart stuff.CHAPTER 12
Account-Based Marketing
Four Mantras
In this section, I cover a range of ABM tactics. As mentioned earlier, there is
overlap between outbound and inbound marketing. All content can be sliced
and diced and delivered to meet tactical objectives.
There are four mantras of ABM:
1. Directly meet the current and future information needs of your market.
Do the required market research to find those hot buttons. I like future
think because we are all looking over the horizon for how to deal with
the disruption that is for sure coming next.
2. Market to a well-researched and well-designed prospect list. Building
the right list is critical. It allows your impressive thought leadership to
be delivered directly to your key prospects through persona
development, personalization, and optimized reach and 
frequency.
3. Have agency methodology to help edit and build out the thought
leadership program. Consider using the ICE scoring model, which can
assign numerical values to ideas. Prioritize them via an assessment of
impact, confidence, and ease.
4. Keep it simple, stupid! There is no way that you can do everything.
Have an agency system and process to deliver your efficient plan. Do
not build a complex ABM plan that you will not run.
Good news: Being an expert or specialist with a managed thought leadership
program will make your ABM program much more efficient while waiting
for inbound efforts to mature.
ABM = Direct Marketing = SalesAccount-based marketing is a broad subject. Here are some topline thoughts
and actions. Your mileage may vary.
But, but, here is where your mileage is irrelevant. According to the 2023
RSW/US New Year Outlook Report where it questioned the clients that you
want:
How do you most often learn about new agencies?
A significant number (44%) stated that they learn about agencies via
direct agency outreach.
I’d say 44% is a rather directional response.
Every B2B marketer interested in doing account-based marketing should
ask seven key questions:
1. How do I leverage ABM’s direct marketing prowess to tell my story
and deliver my sales proposition
?
2. What are my future clients’ pain points? How can I address them to
look like a high-value problem solver and leader? How can I
personalize my messaging?
3. What tone of voice should I use? What is the balance between and
professional and personal? Between rational and emotional marketing?
Using humor to stand out works.
4. How can your outbound marketing be unignorable? Consider that the
alternative is being ignored.
5. How do I go direct? What text, audio, and video channels should I use?
Are there any market gaps I can fill? Testing and data analysis are
critical.
6. How do I develop and manage the cadence of my touches?
7. What is the best timing? There is a lot of research on the best day and
hour timing for each outbound platform. Some advice is contradictory.
You’ll need to test for yourself. One of my marketing timing issues is
that I’ve had clients on six continents. The perfect 4PM in California is
5:30AM in Delhi.The Art of Prospecting
There is no ABM without building an individual, company, or industry
category prospect list for your direct marketing program.
Using a dating metaphor: Prospecting is the difference between a 1950s
ingénue anxiously waiting for the phone to ring with a call from Mr. Right
and today’s assertive daters who get out of the house to meet people (or
actively use Bumble or Hinge).
The first step in outbound marketing is conducting a client prospect
assessment that leads to list building. The process of building a list of your
agency’s most cherished future clients will focus your efforts.
Create your ideal customer profile (ICP). Who is in your business
development B2B sweet spot?
Go one to one: Target primary decision makers with a valuable
personalized message. For example, the vice president and global brand
leader at Ritz-Carlton should want to read your qualitative study of how
competitive hotel brands are using social and paid media. This same study
can be sent to individuals across Ritz-Carlton’s marketing group.
Go one to many: Do you want a large master list for generalized
outbound? Your ABM opportunity here is to deliver category knowledge and
insights that would be of value across an industry. For example, all CMOs
and marketing teams at large hospitality companies might be interested in
your quarterly travel poll, person-on-the-street interviews, and impossible-to-
resist newsletter.
Selection criteria includes the following:
1. Establish your sales goals and review the scope of your total
addressable market (TAM).
2. Research master categories and industries that you have expert street
cred in. Examine subcategories. Zero in. For example, if you are a
hospitality expert, a narrow focus might prioritize resorts or spas.
3. Create buyer personas. Key in on the demographics: occupation, job
titles, experience and stage of life, interests, pain points and fears,
challenges, education, and geography. Isolate emotional needs.
4. Locate prospects with marketing budgets. Target clients currently at
other agencies—they spend on advertising programs.5. Go more horizontal than just the marketing department. Today, CFOs,
COOs, and procurement execs should be included on your list. A CFO
would be interested in data about social ROI.
6. Locate clients that clearly need help. Find those challenger brands.
7. Think about every person and company that you (and your staff) have
interacted with in the past. Stay in touch with past clients who have
moved on to another job.
8. Use Google Alerts to keep abreast of people, industry, or individual
company news. Like where that CMO just landed
.
9. Use services like ZoomInfo, LinkedIn Sales Navigator, Winmo, and the
Ratti Report to find that brand new CMO.
Create a rating system to select the best client opportunities based on your
business objectives and history. Be realistic, but why not go for it?
Keep all eyes and ears open for opportunities—everyone at the agency,
your “partners,” should understand the agency’s objectives and be visualizing
opportunities.
Building the list takes time.
Be efficient and find the right person to build the list. You can do this in-
house or outsource to a local intern or a Fiverr assistant.
Use your CRM to keep the list up to date.
Leverage Buyer Intent
I love the idea of acting on buyer intent.
From Gartner:
What is intent data, and how is it collected? Intent data is a dataset of
prospects’ behavioral information that indicates what they are
interested in and what they are likely to do or buy next. Buyer intent
data is collected by analyzing prospects’ actions expressing their needs.
A nuts-and-bolts indication of buyer intent could come from contentconsumption tracking: whitepaper downloads, email newsletter subscribers,
and LinkedIn views of your posts, to name a few. Go beyond you to look at
the market’s reaction to and participation in your competitor’s social media.
ZoomInfo can add a direct look at buyer intent via their company and
executive tracking. Tracking includes knowing which prospects are actively
researching relevant topics on third-party websites
.
I view this as being a big WOW worth testing.
ABM Timing & Cadence
A big question I get is, what timing and cadence should be used for outbound
messaging to prospects? How many touches do I use, and when?
My Bottom-Line Take on ABM Outreach
Remember that you are sending messages (email or LinkedIn or mail) to
strangers. Strangers who, in most cases, don’t know you and don’t want to
hear from you—until they do.
Always keep clutter in mind. The average person receives 100 emails a
day. Be succinct. Be relevant. Be personable.
Do not send out lame emails. I am not even going to go into this issue.
You know what I’m talking about because you get these every day.
One of your brilliant emails probably won’t move the buyer needle.
Patience is an ABM virtue. Keep at it. Pleasant persistence wrapped in
intelligent must-read information will eventually yield a new contact. Too
many agencies send out a limited series and because there wasn’t enough
action, they can the program too soon.
A smart client who needs you will pay attention to a brilliant business-
driving thought leadership insight that provides a clear way for them to
advance their business. However, it may take a few varied touches to get the
prospect to say let’s talk.
A less than ideal prospect will ignore you even if they need you. Maybe
they are too focused on losing their job or are in a bad marriage. These guysmight never pay attention. And might not have enough gray matter for your
agency.
Back to patience. Many prospects do eventually circle back. I get this
incoming message often: “I have been reading your stuff for a couple of 
years
and I am ready to talk.”
“I am ready to talk” means you are on the prospect’s timetable, not yours.
If you fade always and aren’t there when they’re ready, then your efforts have
failed.
Timing and a Sample Contact Plan
There is no perfect contact plan. Test alternative approaches.
Consider a 90-day base plan that includes five plus super insight-oriented
touches. Do not overwhelm. But nail the objective of creating awareness that
you exist and would be a strategic and creative thinking partner. Ongoing
research studies and polls can provide strategic message frequency.
Clients are people. Good news: You’ve built those client personas to
understand the company and the person. Visualize what the prospect looks
like, how they feel, and what they need—and how they might consume
information.
Perform the pain point research required to determine the best relevant
information for each type of prospect and category. Use the tools that tell you
what works for your competition and just make what they do better. Be
opiniated. Ubersuggest is a sweet competitive research tool.
Use your existing market knowledge and stay tuned in: Google Alerts and
Trends will let know what issues and opportunities are trending. Is there a
perfect content distribution plan? No. But get going, and once you start to roll
out your ABM program you will see patterns that can be tossed or repeated.
Here’s a starter contact scenario for LinkedIn and email. Consider this a
thought starter. Everyone will have their own business objectives, outreach
style and voice.
Cadence Management
One of my clients uses the following email and LinkedIn Navigator
introduction system to get early-stage meetings with high-quality 
prospects.To demonstrate their outreach cadence, let’s use the idea that the agency is
looking for new contacts and relationships in the hospitality category and that
it has built a set of valuable insights.
Email 1: Personalize. Add a relevant and timely discovery from your
research. For example, “I saw that you opened a new hotel in Cancun. We
have experience in the Yucatan and do SEM work for Marriot. Here is a brief
case history. Can we set up an appointment to talk about how we delivered
positive ROI?” The push for a meeting might be early overkill or not. You
decide.
Email 2: Four days later: add “Even more hospitality marketing… I’d like
to show you how I helped Mexico Tourism with its marketing.” Delivering
value offsets friction.
Email 3, seven days later: Add even more value… Offer a brilliant
hospitality industry insight to add undeniable value. Have an opinion on why
Hyatt is prioritizing luxe while Hilton is adding family vacation options.
It helps if you send something unignorable. For example, research related
to a category competition review usually gets attention. My agency did a
deep quantitative study of major health-care brands to compare how each
used social media. Reading the comparative data was irresistible. This
program won us business.
Why not invite the prospect to a high-value webinar? Gotta be high value.
In 2013 it could be about AI and hotel selection. In 2024 and beyond... find
the latest head scratcher.
Email 4: “Megan, I recognize that our experience might not be a priority
right now. However, we’d like to continue to share our expert strategies in
the future. I’ll stay in touch as we roll out hospitality marketing insights.”
Important: Keep at it with class. Periodically send more insights or
research. It could take months and even years to get the Marketing Qualified
Lead (MQL) hand to raise. It’s called sales pressure. Gentle pressure. OK.
Not pressure but think of it as sending unignorable thinking to the right target
market on a scheduled roll-out basis
.
Manage via a content calendar. Really, what do you have to lose unless the
prospect screams, “ENOUGH!”
To get past the same old, mix it up. Think about mixing up digital
platforms, even getting past digital itself. As I’ve mentioned, use paper. Use
creative insight packaging.Think about adding in a follow-up after hours voice mail to the prospect—
to their company system. Why not make sure that the busy prospect knows
that you sent that valuable research?
Wait a few weeks and repeat. Use your CRM tool to keep track of contact
outreach. Patience, please. Do not go to sleep.CHAPTER 13
Inbound Marketing
It’s All about Attraction
Inbound marketing is an attraction strategy based on irresistible content
marketing that helps clients find you.
Irresistible = unignorable.
Your inbound program should actively attract 24/7 traffic to your brilliant
thinking and offers. The goal is to effectively convert this traffic to leads and
meetings.
In Chapter 4 I said that you need to be where clients are actively looking
for you. If that Hilton Hotel CMO is searching for hospitality marketing
news, be there. If they have a specific marketing need that you can address,
get it into a searchable blog, Tweet or podcast.
The downside... inbound marketing can become way complex and very
time consuming. And it has become less effective over the years. Just wait for
the barrage of AI generated blog posts. Yet it still works if 
you go for being
unignorable.
There is a valuable secondary benefit to doing inbound marketing. It’s
important to note that clients are looking for agencies that have a deep
understanding of how to do inbound social and content marketing. Your
inbound marketing program will serve as proof of your expertise. Walking
the inbound or SEM talk is a good thing.
Be attractive
Be totally focused on knowing what the market wants and needs. A positive
tactic to increase inbound traffic is to learn from your competitors. Whatworks for them?
Use tools like Ubersuggest and Similarweb to see what competitive
agencies are writing about and do it better.
Get that intern to study what competitive LinkedIn post get liked and
shared.
Read the trade press to see what issues they are pushing. Use Google
Trends and Alerts. Have an intern do a review of what a trade publication like
Ad Age
 is writing about.
Inbound Tactics
Yes, create that valuable agency blog, newsletter, video, and podcast. Better
yet, be a guest.
Make sure you’ve researched the competitive landscape—that is, analyze
keywords that drive action, find the information gaps you can address with
your expertise and opinions, and concentrate on key industry and CMO
issues.
We know smart inbound marketing works—if you work it hard. However,
there is additional efficiency to be had. Yes, back to sandwiching ABM and
inbound. Your white paper industry study, your interviews, your podcasts can
all be sliced and diced and amplified across all the inbound platforms
.
Repurposing and amplification options should be embraced.
A Wide-Open Inbound Opportunity
Own a Business Category
Why are industry and category information hubs “owned” only by
associations, conferences, and related news websites? Why can’t your agency
be the category information leader?
Here’s an underused inbound content idea: Own your business category’s
detailed information website, microsite, Instagram (and thus the category).
Use the underused (in the advertising world) listicle, a list-based formatthat is based on a specific theme.
Want accounts in the hospitality category? Then go out and become its
most trusted expert resource.
Build that go-to industry directory. Become positioned as a leader who is a
category resource. This acts as a nice 24/7 viewership magnet that positions
you as a leader. Optimize the heck out of it.
What might your directory be if you want to own the hospitality category?
A hard to resist title: “The Hospitality Industry Navigator.”
What are the ingredients?
1. List hospitality news websites. All information in one place.
2. Isolate one major story each week. Remember the 2023 holiday season
Southwest Airlines meltdown? You could have written about a
marketing plan that would save the airline’s reputation.
3. List essential business and marketing white papers. Use a PDF search
on Google to find big thinkers.
4. List industry events. Global and regional.
5. List industry awards. Let the winner know that they are on the micro
site
.
6. Review industry websites.
7. Review new industry marketing programs (Marriot will want to read
about Hilton).
8. Highlight primary and secondary industry research.
9. Collate important academic papers.
10. List industry podcasts.
11. Do profiles of industry leaders (including your prospects). Hmm, that
should generate some agency awareness.
12. List who is moving to another company. Run those Google Alerts.
Owning the category will help you be positioned as the knowledgeable expert
and as a helpful and caring brand.
Drive continuous traffic. Keep the microsite up to date with fresh info.
There is something new every month that a brand might find interesting.
Make it an active destination that proves your industry experience,
expertise, and digital chops. I have one on my blog and it gets shared. Visit“The Big Advertising Agency Resource List.”
Add a newsletter.
Have A Public Relations Plan
Few inbound platforms deliver the positive awareness of having your agency
mentioned in a 
Campaign
 Magazine or 
Ad Age
 article, or in the case of
driving hospitality industry awareness, a magazine like 
Hotel Business
.
So how does an agency or agency leader get into the right publication with
the right brand-building copy? To find out, I asked Doug Zanger, a former
editor of 
Adweek
, director of brand and purpose communications at the
Martin Agency, and now a consultant for agencies on how to get wonderful
trade press attention. Look him up. He is now counseling agencies on their
PR planning
.
Understand that the publications that you want to be in need you too. This
is a symbiotic relationship. Editors and their journalists must fill up their
pages every day. They need the right copy to keep the attention of their
readers. They need you.
An Editor’s PR Advice
You are not alone in seeking press attention. 
Adweek
 editor Doug Zanger
received dozens of incoming agency pitches every week.
He told me that most were ineffective and offered little value. Too many
were one-offs and not a strategic relationship-building effort. Too haphazard.
Doug’s advice?
1. Have a one-on-one direct marketing plan to drive your brand awareness
at the publications the same way you contact future agency clients. Do
the research, find a journalist’s hot buttons, deliver value and a hard-to-
ignore POV. Go slow to build the relationship.
2. Use Muck Rack to build out a list of relevant publications and
journalists—like Jamison Fleming, 
Adweek
’s managing editor— andagencies and marketing. Study his beat, perspective, personal history,
and past articles. What could you say or send that might turn him on?
Have clear objectives for what you want. Be an authoritative and
credible voice on industry trends or breaking news. Doug once
interviewed me for an article about the Richards Group’s flameout
because he knew I was a business development expert.
Get your fabulous new Marriot campaign in the mags. Get new hires
or major promotions in the publications. Are you under 40? Then try to
get on the under 40 list. Hmm, why is it always under 40?
If you want one of those nice awards, you must have a plan 
to get the
attention of the publication’s judges. I asked Doug why I keep seeing
the same agencies repeated year to year. He said that it often came down
to agency branding and that leading agencies know how to get the
attention of the right journalists. If you’re out of sight, you’re out of
mind.
You should study what the award judges are looking for. Importantly,
this goes beyond the awards, as the following list is an indication of
what the publication views as ongoing leadership subjects. This is what
Adweek says about how it selects winners:
To select Adweek’s winners, a diverse jury of editors and writers
from across the newsroom gathered to debate two to four finalists in
each category. Our discussions focused on a number of factors,
including:
How much did the agency grow its revenue? Where did that growth
come from? What clients did the agency win or lose?
Did the agency bring in top talent to bolster the shop?
Is the agency taking real steps to retain talent, including nurturing
and promoting diverse talent? Is the agency helping build pipelines
for underrepresented groups that the whole industry will benefit
from?
With sustainability growing ever important, is the agency supportingsustainable growth and helping clients with strategy to become more
eco-conscious?
Is this agency a role model for how other agencies should operate?
And most importantly, we look at the creative work. Does 
it get us
excited about advertising? Does it deliver results? Is it well-crafted
with strong strategical insights?
A Bit More PR Advice
The PR firm NATA offers this simple path to quickly get the attention of the
busy (as in inundated) press by keeping the messaging straight and to the
point. A few words can deliver a big message via being on point and clutter-
free. NATA’s advice:
If you run a company or have a job, you almost certainly have to write
emails every day. Telling your story should be just as easy as your
regular discussions with clients or suppliers.
We’ve developed a point-by-point technique at NATA PR that helps us
get straight to the point when we’re talking to journalists or influencers.
The purpose of this technique is to make information easy to read and
maximize the chances of a journalist talking about you.
Practice this technique using these simple questions. Answer them and
then remove the questions before sending your email:
What:
• Brand Z is launching a new vitamin C serum.
Why:
• The vitamin C doesn’t become oxidized and retains all its properties that
help reduce skin pigmentation.
• It’s a completely new patent from company Z and they are the only onesin the world that have it.
When:
• It’ll be launched on X
.
Where:
• On Z’s website and in reputable pharmacies.
Contact:
• Please don’t hesitate to get in touch if you have any questions.
Create or Appear on Podcasts
Podcasts have legs. Smart podcasters promote their episodes via audio and
transcribed text on their website and across other platforms. The sweet
benefit of podcasts is that you can entice your guests to promote their
interview across their own universe to deliver uber amplification and back
links.
Remember the goal of being a podcast guest. Guesting = borrowed
audience.
And, as mentioned earlier, some podcasts take advertising.
Publish Short Videos
Short videos get found and shared. LinkedIn prefers video to text. There are
far fewer videos than blog posts. Google wants to highlight your videos.
Databox reports that 74% of respondents said that videos are more Go to
industry events to get your face out there.
Running a PR plan isn’t a freebie. However, being mentioned in the trade
press is invaluable.CHAPTER 14
Marketing Insight Distribution
You’ve got it all together. Your agency’s business objectives, positioning,
experience, defined target market and lots of brilliant, impossible to ignore
thinking. Here’s how to get your thought leadership, innovative perspectives,
insights (or whatever you want to call it) in front of the right people.
I need to mention a couple of primary distribution objectives first.
Reach. You want your messaging to reach the right decision makers (and
their teams). Building a prospecting system is critical.
Frequency. You need to craft an effective approach to how to build the
message frequency of your outreach touches. There is no one-size-fits-all
cadence/sequencing system. YMMV. Test and keep on testing. The frequent
delivery of smartness will grow your pipeline.
Uniqueness. You want to look and sound different than your competitors.
Be 
unignorable.
Think 360-marketing. The term 360-degree marketing was coined around
2000. It recognizes that no single message or platform is enough to make a
meaningful dent in an over saturated B2B marketing environment.
Deliver The Insights
1. Your website is your information centerstage. You know that. Why are
agency people so obsessed with their websites? Here are some rather
compelling numbers to support our obsession.
Google and Millward Brown Digital reported that 89% of B2B
researchers use the internet during their research process and on average
conduct 12 searches before engaging with a brand or company. Assupport, a study by Demand Gen Report found that 77% of B2B buyers
said they used a company’s website to research a purchase decision.
Marketing agency websites deliver their thinking via text and video
blogs, white papers, webinars, podcasts, and that irresistible study.
2. Landing pages allow the agency to pinpoint a target audience to deliver
a discreet message and offer that the visitor can’t refuse. This is where
you can show off your expertise in a particular category.
3. Email newsletters deliver continuous engagement. Build your list via
website offers and gentle outreach. I’ve employed contractors in the
Philippines to help compile mailing lists. Yes, I know about opt in
.
Keep your newsletter brief. My agency’s newsletter was called 
One
Idea
. One big idea a month. One idea is perfect for low-attention-span
CMOs.
An option: Publish a LinkedIn newsletter. Your connections and
followers will be invited to subscribe, and LinkedIn will alert your
network whenever you publish new editions.
Another cooler option: You could send out the newsletter as a quarterly
zine. Paper is unexpected and works hard.
4. LinkedIn. Post frequently on LinkedIn’s personal and company pages
(LinkedIn loves video). Put your thinking in LinkedIn groups (I am a
member of the Digital Marketing group, which has 2 million members).
Use LinkedIn Navigator to make direct connections.
Interreact with your prospect’s posts. They will notice that you are
smart and pay attention – to them. Be cool, not stalkerish.5. The other guys. Since every agency and one-person shop and their
future client types are different, it is worth testing marketing on the
other guys. Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and short-form video
platforms are all viable options.
6. B2B advertising. Whoa! Advertising works. These days, given
competitive SEM and thought leadership pressure, pay to play has
become essential. I know, I know. I know that you know that
advertising works. You are an agency after all. However, too many
agencies don’t even think of advertising their services.
The agency LONDON Advertising advertises 
LONDON Advertising.
Go figure. From a Sky News story:
An advertising agency launching a new advertising campaign is nothing
new, but it is when the campaign is for rather unusual clients
themselves. LONDON Advertising has launched adverts on billboards
and TV that include voiceovers from Liam Neeson and Helen Mirren.
From Paul Bainsfair, director general, IPA (UK):
When the London advertising campaign broke, I had to smile to myself
because here was an example of an advertising agency doing what most
advertising agencies should be telling their clients to do.
Remember to build press love. Sky News even interviewed me for an
article about LONDON’s advertising program:
When you’re an agency that uses advertising, believe me, for some
crazy reason you are unignorable.
There are multiple advertising options: PPC on Google and, who knows,
maybe include Bing. Test advertising on LinkedIn, Twitter, in client
category publications, and ad world directory advertising (e.g., Clutch
and Agency Spotter).Go micro targeting. Why not have agency ads at the top of results for
any relevant client company or CEO, COO, or CFO director search? It
might be a bit hard for the CMO of Hilton to not notice the ad from you
on his very own result page. It would help if he was a narcissist. Many
CMOs are.
7. Remarket. Since advertising agency outreach generally needs 
more than
one touch to nudge conversions, leverage the efficiency of remarketing
or retargeting. A rather efficient, low-cost tactic to drive frequency.
8. Podcast advertising. Have you considered running agency business
development ads on targeted podcasts? Podcast advertising is booming
because it works. It’s more difficult to move away from a podcast ad
than to click past a 
banner
 ad.
9. Leverage other people’s audience. Why work to build audience when
you can borrow it? Guest blog. Guest podcast. Speak at that special
conference.
Start with going guest across some podcasts. Do the legwork to find the
best targeted podcasts. Search on Google Podcasts. Consider using a
third-party podcast talent agency like Interview Valet to run your
podcast selection and outreach.
Build a list of relevant marketing influencers. Reach out. Pay for play.
10. Artificial Intelligence marketing. AI driven search might be the best
search option going forward. How will we optimize for AI? Too early to
tell.
11. Go video. Australia’s Tiny Hunter agency has over 200 marketing and
advertising insight videos on YouTube. The agency tells me that the
videos help them close deals with the right new clients—clients who
spend time listening to Tiny Hunter’s advice. The agency’s founders are
more interested in closing client relationships than racking up hugeindiscriminate view 
numbers.
12. Publish your book. Books are proof of expertise. My advice: self-
publish. There is no need to use a time-consuming traditional publisher
if you want to write and distribute that B2B book. My first agency
advice book has netted me well over $100,000 in sales and new
business.
13. Meet real people at conferences. Go where your next client hangs out.
Give that insight talk and make friends. Hand out your book or at least a
zine.
14. Direct marketing. I’m thinking old fashioned here. Why not send out
#10 envelopes with intriguing insights? Or, as I’ve mentioned more than
once, a well-designed zine.
15. Use the telephone. Warmly.
If there is a sales term that really freaks advertising people out it’s 
cold
calling.
Cold calling = yuck. And it should. A marketing decision maker does not
want a cold call.
But, but, let’s think of making that call another way—a process I’d much
rather refer to as warm calling.
I say 
warm calling
 because the warm call would be a follow-up to you
sending something valuable (like that mind-blowing man-on-the-street
interview video) to a prospect. Or make that call after you know that the
prospect demonstrated intent because they opened an email and viewed your
newsletter, reacted to a blog post, or viewed your LinkedIn profile.
Some agency folks are afraid of making a smart call—even a warm call.
Here’s a warmup: Try calling at off hours (to the office phone of course)
and leave a brief voice mail message about your new study. Consider this a
light warm touch. More frequency for your messaging
.My Distribution Bottom-Line = Grow Wantedness
I wake up thinking that the client I want... the one that wants to work with me
will pay attention to my insights if I get it in front of them. The clients I want,
want me to get me in front of them.CHAPTER 15
Process Wins
Process Rules Business Development. Full Stop.
Understatement: Running a business development program requires tender
loving care. Without dedicated oversight, chaos rules.
Establish a system.
1. Define 12-month business objectives, goals, and potential obstacles.
2. Establish key performance indicators (KPIs).
3. Write mission and vision statements.
4. Build an expert, stand-out agency positioning.
5. Identify key prospects and build a list management system.
6. Review branding elements, including website.
7. Determine your marketing channel roadmap. 
Research and develop a
kick-ass thought leadership content plan.
8. Develop thought leadership content.
9. Agree on inbound marketing and ABM strategies and distribution
tactics.
10. Think about how to have your presence be 24/7.
11. Establish clear responsibilities.
12. Make sure that agency staff recognizes the critical nature of the business
development program. This comes from the top.
13. Manage the calendar.
14. Manage your CRM system.
15. Track success metrics. Track website analytics.
16. Have a system to judge what leads are valuable; what RFPs to respond
to and what pitches are worth your time and effort. Since there are somany moving parts to making the all-important GO decision, I
developed a quick handy-dandy quiz that you and your senior team can
take to help you to decide if you really want to spend the time and
money to pitch this account. The quiz will even start to help you think
through what you will need to say and do to win the business. The quiz
is in Resources.
Efficiency is key. Establishing agency systems and processes is imperative in
building and running efficient agency business development programs.
Today, it is especially important to manage the workload and reduce the
potential of staff burnout.
Internal business development–related communications must be carefully
managed. Agency staff who touch the business development process should
understand the value of business development, the fact that lead generation is
critical, and that you have a business development management system that is
baked into agency culture. Ensure that everyone knows how valuable their
contribution is.
Keep biz dev burnout in mind. Back-to-back RFP responses, etc. are not
good for morale
.
Your Agency Is Your Client
This is a must. Treat business development as if it were a client. Get past that
shoemaker’s too busy BS.
Give your program job numbers and personnel assignments. And
deadlines.
If you back-burner business development, you will back-burner growth.
Two Management Tools
CRMHave a customer relationship management (CRM) system to manage your
agency’s relationships and interactions.
CRM provides a range of benefits:
• A CRM system provides an ongoing business development database and
system that can be shared across agency functions.
• It provides management with a global view of prospecting and lead
nurturing activities.
• It is a repository for existing leads and lead management. Lead follow-up
and lead nurturing will be closely managed.
• It will help you understand prospect triggers. You should know how
clients first landed on your website and requested an FRI or RFP, and
what specific marketing platform made them make contact.
The real key to reaping the benefits of a CRM tool is using it. Especially true
when you never know when your current business development leader will
leave your agency, with lots of historical info in their head.
CRM can be a pain in the ass to run and manage. A complex system, think
Salesforce, can be overkill for a small agency.
That said, even a weekly updated spreadsheet works better than having 
no
CRM system. Or worse, a CRM system that you’re paying for and not using
(if so, don’t feel bad—most companies that have paid lots for a Salesforce
type tool don’t use most of its functions).
Consider CRM training across agency functions. Do not have the business
development director be the only staff member who knows how to use the
CRM system.
Use a Business Development Calendar
The biggest new business program fail is that marketers are not consistent.
Start and stop programs don’t work.
Calendars are critical to staying on track. As important is that you use it to
hold biz dev–related staff, including the business development director,
accountable.
List the actions, including who is responsible for getting businessdevelopment jobs done and out. Clear responsibilities, assignments, and
deadlines are required. You do this for client jobs, so do them for your
agency to stay on course.
Use the calendar to ensure consistency. Now that you have a prospect list,
it’s important that you keep your messaging front and center on a scheduled
basis. You never know when a target prospect will have a new project for you
or will wake up in the middle of the night worrying about their marketing.
iPad usage at 3 AM is growing.
Social media content development itself demands a calendar. The calendar
demands that you have a content development strategy and plan. Don’t be in
the position where you ask, “Yikes, what should I post this week?” Do some
batch thinking and production to reduce workload.
There are over automated 25 content calendar tools to make this effort
easy. LOL. Well, easier. I’ve written hundreds of blog posts and newsletters.
I use a notebook.CHAPTER 16
Agency Talent Management
It’s the People, Stupid
“It’s the economy, stupid” was a phrase, a mantra, coined by James Carville
in 1992 when he was advising Bill Clinton in his successful run for the White
House. It forced the campaign to focus on a key message: it’s the economy.
Agencies need to focus on talent management. It’s the people, stupid.
Today we are dealing with remote workers, limited days in the office, and
an evolving understanding of what working even means.
I stress 
evolving
. Some talent-related terms that were not in daily use pre-
pandemic:
• Remote working is now universal
• Virtual office
• WF
H
• Hybrid work
• Burnout
• Quit quitting
• Quittageon (quitting can become contagious)
• The great resignation
• Resenteeism
• Proximity bias
• Triple-peak syndrome
These terms are just the icing on the workplace cake. Agency management
must juggle corporate needs, employee needs, and even client needs as they
are also living in the new wildly evolving world of work.The Art of Retention
Retaining your best people, managing in-house and remote workers, and
navigating shifting workplace issues ain’t easy. Think about generational
differences: how people communicate, what they value in a job, what life-
stage they are in.
There is a generation gap. Gen X has different values than Gen Z. I see
a few ways to span the gap.
1. Drive intergenerational dialogue and teamwork. Consider break-out
group discussions. Get any negatives out on the table. Yes, this can be
painful. Group bitch sessions should be avoided. Maybe having one-on-
one discussions is a smarter approach. Brevity rules here.
2. Understand how different generations use communications technology.
I once had an account executive that only used email to communicate
with clients. I suggested that the telephone was a touch more immediate.
Today Gen Z appears to prefer Slack to email.
3. Communicate and share agency values and culture
.
4. Emphasize interpersonal respect.
5. Develop and consciously manage a mentorship system.
6. Run training programs. Keep them brief.
To Remote or Not to Remote?
“Our assets walk out of the door each evening; we have to make sure that
they come back the next morning” said Infosys chairman emeritus Narayana
Murthy.
Does this sound familiar? Of course. This is what happens at every
advertising agency every day. Your assets are your people.
OK, let’s get this obvious fact over with: how we work has changed. Big
time.
After 2020 the move to working from home, or Costa Rica, many agency
employees simply do not want to return to the office full-time. Ever.In fact, when we say 
remote
 work, as in working from home, we could just
as easily be saying that returning to an office location is itself remote work
after a year or two of working from home and not commuting.
A May 2022 survey of 1,000 US adults found that 39% would consider
quitting their jobs if employers are not open to some form of remote work.
That number ticks up to 49% for millennials and Gen Z.
I know of a Dallas agency that had senior staff leave to start a new agency
simply because their current agency mandated that they return to the office
five days a week.
As a result of this tumult, agencies are reviewing how to manage where
and when their employees will work—and how they will collaborate. Go
back to the office full-time? Part-time? Never? Pick one:
1. Never return to the office. Close the office. Pocket the rent money. The
international agency R/GA just did this.
2. Run a hybrid two-office-days-a-week model.
3. Three days a week. Four days a week
?
4. Work at the office 60% of the time. Employees get to pick their own
timing. Um, a bad idea.
Your agency, either through leader mandate or, better, leadership and
employee dialogue, needs a plan. You will need to be flexible and open to
even more change because who knows what’s coming down the road.
The plan will recognize your geography and its effect on commuting and
personal needs like childcare (parents need some flexibility). Every office
and geographic location differ. Add in long-distance remote staff and things
get rather complicated. Therefore, review your agency’s office plan every
few months.
But, but. Note that whipsaw office planning can be very debilitating. Make
some decisions that will help staff know where and how they will live their
life.
Uncertainty sucks.
Burnout Ain’t GoodThe idea of advertising agency people burnout is not a new thing. A study in
1956 by Life Extension Examiners of New York compared the health of
executives in manufacturing, banking, and advertising.
The ad people showed up worst in 10 of 18 categories, including high
blood pressure, organic heart and prostate problems, and abnormal
blood counts.
From 1949 to 1959, at a time when life expectancy for White males
was 67.1 years, the average age at death in 
Advertising Age
’s obituaries
was 59.9. “It’s a killing business,” concluded Lou Wasey, 71 years old
in 1956. “Most of the men who have been along with me in business—
they’re all dead, and they were younger than I.
”
Wait a second… I need to repeat this alarming fact: From 1949 to 1959, at a
time when life expectancy for White males was 67.1 years, the average age at
death in 
Advertising Age
’s obituaries was 59.9.
Somehow, I made it past 59.9. Good thing I sold my agency when I did.
Advertising is simply a demanding service business that has gotten much
more demanding from a time perspective with the proliferation of needy 24/7
digital programs. The 1949 to 1989 adman had to plan only for TV, radio,
print, and out of home. And where the best martinis lived.
Burnout Defined
According to the Mayo Clinic,
Job burnout is a special type of work-related stress—a state of physical
or emotional exhaustion that also involves a sense of reduced
accomplishment and loss of personal identity.
It is imperative that agency management understands and knows how to see
burnout symptoms before it is too late. Job burnout is endemic in the
advertising industry. I’d even say endemic in most service industries.
What Leads to Burnout?Christina Maslach, a psychology professor at UC Berkeley and the foremost
burnout researcher in the United States, names six elements of workplace
burnout that management should be conscious of:
• Workload, or being overworked
• Lack of control, or feeling like one lacks resources, decision-making
power, and autonomy
• Lack of recognition and reward, or feeling like the reward doesn’t match
the effort
• Lack of community
• Unfairnes
s
• Lack of meaning and misalignment of values
• Today’s new workplace requires management consciousness and
communication.
Possibly Some Good News (And Not)
Speaking of management work stress consciousness, it’s worth the time to
see what’s happening on a macro basis. Within the marketing universe, your
agency’s mileage may (will) vary. There is no single agency type, structure,
or size. There isn’t even a one-size-fits-all time-utilization factor across
industries.
I’m betting that it’s good news to see that some employees are using their
commute times for recreation and family time instead of loading on more
work.
OK. Nice thinking. However, Microsoft may have found another work-
related issue.
The Loooonger Day = Triple Peak Syndrome
Triple peak
 is yet another new term related to remote work. What’s triple
peak?
Microsoft found that its employees had peak work periods before and just
after lunch. The pandemic and work from home changed that. Microsoft
found that its people added another work peak between 6 and 8 PM:Newer data suggests the trend is here to stay. Traditionally, knowledge
workers had two productivity peaks in their workday: before lunch and
after lunch. But when the pandemic sent so many people into work-
from-home mode, a third peak emerged for some in the hours before
bedtime. Microsoft researchers have begun referring to this
phenomenon as a “triple peak day.”
Flexibility is good. Expanding work hours are not.
Today’s new workplace requires enhanced management consciousness 
and
internal communications.
We’re so Lonely
Allow me to state the obvious: While working remotely has its advantages, it
can also be way lonely.
Lonely in the sense that people are working in isolation and aren’t hanging
out with and directly interacting with workmates, collaborating, and,
importantly, living agency culture. Lack of shared culture, shared goals, and
just plain having a next-door office coworker to occasionally complain with
breeds stress. The missing in-person interaction experience is particularly
hard on younger employees, who miss the comradery.
A few years ago, I was toying with an agency model that had a core in-
house team (creative, media, digital, production, account management) and
dedicated freelancers or contractors. At that time, it was kinda a new
approach—an approach that targeted the idea of being lean and agile to
manage down costs while maintain quality.
As part of the planning process, I interviewed some of our freelancers. One
of the most interesting observations was what I call the Christmas Party gap.
A freelancer told me that the hardest part of freelancing was the alone factor.
He said that he really missed going to the agency Christmas party.
For him, lonely meant not Christmas partying. Advertising people like
people. Advertising people like fun. On many days, being alone ain’t fun.
Think about how to foster deeper communication across time zones or
around the block.The Collaboration Problem
A core advertising agency mantra is our belief in the collaborative nature of
creating kick-ass advertising solutions. We think the best thinking and work
comes from people working together. People-to-people communication
sparks magic ideas.
Y’all remember sitting around that conference room table. Or over a coffee
in the kitchen. Or hanging at a local agency bar trading big ideas.
David Gross of Anchor Worldwide stated the interpersonal collaboration
need clearly:
Creative development and production require face-to-face
collaboration. It’s hard to have a brainstorm on a Zoom call.
Is the Zoom problem real? Yes. But learning to interact personally on a Zoom
call is also a management challenge that needs to be resolved.
I live in Mexico, and my consultancy has agency clients on five continents.
I’ve also worked across time zones from a range of foreign cities. While I
like to be face-to-face, I don’t think working at a distance reduced the
efficacy of our collaborative working experience. I’ve learned how to manage
distanced relationships. I also find it can often be easier to do the meeting
telephonically to reduce Zoom’s visual and tech distractions.
But I’m not creating big advertising solutions where a close interpersonal
collaborative environment has historically driven success. Art directors and
copywriter teams used to sit together in one office. In London their desks
faced each other. What is today’s equivalent?
Play the people game. Learn how to make those distanced meetings work.
Workplace Solutions
I’m not convinced that the old-fashioned nine-to-five in-office experience
itself was that efficient—or sustainable. Many smart agencies recognized this
and offered more flexibility way before the pandemic.My New York agency had a four-day work week in the summer. Our work
did not suffer
.
Good managers pay attention to people’s personal needs and watch for
symptoms of being overworked.
Absentee culture begets lost social connection
• A SHRM study of CEOs and HR officers pointed to maintaining culture as
the top remote-work challenge. Stating the obvious, remote work impedes
the development of shared agency culture and personal connections. Some
solutions to consider:
• Have quarterly meetings to review and discuss company values. Be
intentional.
• Experiment with social solutions. Find times to have casual conversations
or other forms of social engagements. Not so easy as time zones need to
be managed. Not so easy if your developers are in Estonia and your
copywriters are in Buenos Aires.
• Think about perks. Help to cover at-home tech needs, including laptops,
high-speed connectivity, mic, and lighting to improve the quality of Zoom
meetings.
• Add new mental wellness benefits. Virtual cocktail hours, anyone?
• Be proactive. Recognize early signs of stress. Reach out to discuss and
meet the challenges.
Three Easy People Management Tactics
Schedule frequent performance reviews
To maintain staff motivation and to provide proof that the company cares,
consider increasing the frequency of staff reviews. Why not initiate one-on-
one dialogue every six months
?Management by Walking Around (MBWA)
Way back in the 1970s, Tom Peters introduced the idea of management by
walking around—a type of people management that involves managers
taking random, unplanned walks around the office to improve morale, human
contact, and unplanned collaboration. Having the boss sit in their corner
office all day was deemed a poor management tactic. This is still an issue. In
fact, now it’s a mega issue to be resolved when we are miles from each other.
One remote MBWA idea is to have managers create open office meeting
times. It’s a simple way for people to informally connect and discuss issues
and opportunities.
Management via Training
Running agency training programs can deliver a smarter and happier staff.
It’s proof that you care about your people, their career advancement and your
search for excellence:
74% (of employees) are ready to learn new skills or re-train to remain
employable in the future. (PwC, 
Workforce of the Future 2030
 report).
Consider running concise small-group Zoom-based training sessions (20 to
30 minutes), virtual team-building workshops (why not hire a facilitator?),
and the virtual cocktail hour (everybody is their own bartender). Make
learning fun. Bring in a mixologist to invent an agency cocktail.
Speaking of cocktails... Y’all might need that new cocktail to help get
through some office-life insanities
.
Three Ridiculous Insanities
Email and Slack InsanityHow many emails do you get a day? Slack and messenger notifications? Too
many. Too many interruptions lead to distraction and lower productivity. And
stress.
A Cure
Email is an example of daily insanity. I’m talking about interminable,
unnecessary all day and all-night emails. What seems to be an emergency
must-act-now email from a colleague on Sunday morning just might not be
that urgent.
The agency email system and always-on culture need to be tamed.
Management must design internal communication and communication
etiquette and rules.
Periodically discuss the magnificent benefit of reducing CC and BCC lists
—less is more. Lower expectations for immediate response (unless you get a
client request). Have agency correspondence rules. This might be a bit more
difficult as people use the CC thing to prove that they are paying attention
from their apartment kitchen.
Reduce reply all. Everyone does not need to be in on every Slack dialogue
to be concise.
Turn off notifications—especially mobile.
Get past multitasking. Sure, multitaskers like to parade their multi-ness.
BS. Don’t take my word for it. Neuropsychologist Cynthia Kubu says,
“When we think we’re multitasking, most often we aren’t really doing two
things at once. But instead, we’re doing individual actions in rapid
succession, or task-switching.”
Meeting Insanity
How many unnecessary, poorly managed meetings do you sit it? Add 
in
staring at a screen with thumbnail-size talking heads and you can start to feel
the burn coming on.
Poorly managed advertising, design, and PR agency meetings waste time,
kill creativity, and cost money.A Cure
My Northwest Airlines client’s marketing department had a serious meeting
problem. Most of my clients seemed to be in nonstop meetings from 8 AM to
6 PM. I couldn’t figure out when they had time to think, let alone get their
jobs done.
This fact wasn’t lost on the airline’s CEO, who hired a management
consultant to help create an efficient and effective meeting culture. A culture
with stated rules to increase meeting effectives and reduce the length of
meetings.
Here are the eight rules I picked up at Northwest:
1. Before booking a meeting room or Zoom window, ask if a face-to-face
meeting is even necessary.
2. Designate a meeting leader to run the meeting and manage the process.
3. Have clear objectives and an agenda.
4. Invite only the people who need to be in the meeting. This isn’t a
numbers game. Well, it is if you calculate the cost of meetings.
5. Show up on time. Keeping colleagues waiting is rude and costly.
6. Have a timetable. Make sure anyone needed in the meeting knows of
the start and stop times.
7. End the meeting when you’ve covered the objectives. No rambling.
8. State any follow-up items, timing, and individual responsibilities. If a
meeting needs some memory, send out a brief meeting summary ASAP.
And here it comes: Now a few words from Elon Musk. Of course.
1. “No big meetings.” Think about the cost of filling up a room. Five
agency people in a one-hour meeting at a billable rate of $200 per hour
costs you $1,000. Ten of those meetings a week will cost you $10,000,
or one a week will cost you $52,000 per year.
2. “No frequent meetings.”
3. “Leave a meeting if you are not contributing.” I love this one. Just get
up and go do some real work.
Sage advice all around.
I suggest that agencies develop internal meeting rules. Everyone will begrateful. Burnout will be reduced.
Go further: Share your meeting rules with clients—demonstrate that your
agency is well managed. Show them that you care about their time.
Client Insanity
We all want more clients, ever more happy clients who want to work with us
forever.
To get to this holy grail, we must take the time to fully understand the
client’s mindset, goals, and even emotional needs.
Today’s marketers live on the 24/7 social marketing hamster wheel. CMOs
are on that fast-paced wheel and on a job tenure rollercoaster. The leadership
advisory firm Spencer Stuart reported that the average tenure for CMOs is 40
months. Only 3.3 years. The lowest level in more than a decade.
Clients want to show success fast. This results in your people running fast.
Probably too fast. You need three Instagram reels a day? You got it. Five
Instagram posts this week. Yup, you got it. A review of the Google Ads plan?
Yup. A weekly analysis of all related KPI stats? That really big creative idea?
Coming right up. And on and on.
Managing the client mindset (real and perceived need) requires real-time
consciousness of their objectives and stresses, and an agency 
system that
recognizes that agency-to-client communication is critical.
Take time to review best-of-class client management. Discuss how to
listen—and look like you’re listening. This is called active listening. Be
proactive in periodically discussing your client management systems.
Get past just being order takers. See Chapter 18, Client Management for
more.
Manage Boss Burnout
Lots and lots of press and studies exists about how to manage employee
burnout. But what about boss burnout?
Bosses, from mega-agencies to one-person companies must contend withchanging economic landscapes, 24/7 workloads, the world of projects, client
retention, constant pitching, the delivery of excellent agency work, managing
the P'L, and fostering staff and partnership happiness. Yikes, that is a lot to
juggle that breeds sleepless nights.
It’s never good for any size agency to have a stressed-out boss. I’ve lived it
as both an employee and a boss. But don’t take my word for it. The 
Harvard
Business Review
 is on the case.
It’s stunning how quickly your stressed-out boss can turn you into a
stressed-out team member. This is partly because of the contagious
nature of emotions.
Boss stress and resulting burnout is an agency-wide issue. An issue that must
be recognized and managed. The boss must pay attention to signals of
overstress for their sake and the sake of total agency good vibrations and
agency culture.
Before I get into my advice for how to manage boss burnout, I offer some
large agency insights from Michael Farmer. Michael is a consultant to agency
holding companies, a leading expert in managing agency scope of work and
is the author of 
Madison Avenue Manslaughter
, easily one of the best
advertising book titles ever. Here is my question and Michael’s 
no holds
barred answers.
PL: Michael, what are you seeing at the top of the agency pyramid?
Michael:
 Senior agency executives burnout from the constant losing and
winning of new business. A constant cycle of pitching.
They focus on the short-term – the need to make quarterly numbers. It
affects their personal compensation.
They have no ideas about how to change things:
• They compete on price with all other agencies.
• Procurement has all the power.
• Holding companies win business at low prices – and they have to
participate.• Their agencies are vendors, rather than partners with their clients.
• They’ve seen much of their talent liquidated in annual downsizings.
They’re left with junior resources.
If they knew how to turn things around, they would (they say) – but I don’t
believe them. I have yet to meet a single agency that kept track of its scopes
of work and knew what work was being done on each client.
Without knowing the nature of the work, how can they expect to be
partners who make a difference in client performance?
WOW! Yikes!
OK, what about you? Manage 
your
 boss role.
• Get back to reviewing your agency’s business model. How and where do
you fit into today’s advertising universe? Make necessary adjustments.
Make sure that your agency’s service offer meets the needs of the market.
• Do not respond to every RFP and pitch request. Use my go-no-go
questionnaire in the resources section.
• Take a hard look at current responsibilities and transfer or share ownership
where appropriate
.
• Connect more personally with your team members. Understand their needs
and issues. No, don’t have yak sessions where everyone dumps on the
boss. However, frank, managed conversations will help to get everyone on
the same page to work out any issues. Asking, “How’m I doin’?”, worked
big time for New York’s ex-mayor Ed Koch who asked this question of
citizens on his daily walks. A very MBWA guy.
• Take time off. Go work out. Even bosses need that work–life balance.
Bottom line: happy bosses lead to a happier agency and more fun for
everyone. And longer careers.CHAPTER 17
Recruitment
The Art of Recruitment
The advertising industry is experiencing some brain drain. A range of factors
has made a career in adverting not look as groovy as Don Draper’s Madison
Avenue three-martini lunches.
According to WordStream’s 
State of the Agency
 report,
Hiring is a top-three challenge, and 15% of digital marketing agencies
feel that hiring and training new employees is the biggest challenge
they will face this year.
Factors leading to advertising’s very own brain-drain include:
1. Lower profits. The loss of the golden 15% media commission structure
back in the early 1990s put a clamp on agency profits and perks. Selling
project man hours versus agency value does 
not help foster good vibes
either.
2. The 24/7 digital workload. Jay Chiat’s 
wonderful
 line, “If you can’t be
bothered to work on Saturday, don’t bother to come in on Sunday.”
Ain’t cute today. If it ever was.
3. Salary and WFH issues. These days it can look like an agency person
can make more bucks as a freelancer. My website designer lives in
Portugal. I’m using a video editor in Minneapolis. Some ad biz people
jumped ship to the client side. Some experienced agency people would
prefer to run a bagel bakery (true) or a brewery.
4. It has taken too long for the industry to help women, minorities, and the
LGBTQ+ community to see a clear career path.5. The pandemic shifted much of the talent job search control to the
prospective employee.
6. Every agency is now competing for talent with agencies around the
world. If 
I
 can work from anywhere, I can work for 
any
 advertising
agency anywhere. This makes it important to develop and consciously
manage mentorship.
A Well Managed Recruitment Plan
You cannot wait till you need that new employee to create a recruitment plan.
Review your agency brand and culture messaging. Assess how you look
and sound. Would 
you
 want to work for you?
Does your website sell your workplace culture?
Be smart (and creative) about how you describe job openings.
Have clear, as in not vague, job descriptions. Look at competitive agency
copy. How can you stand out? Ask yourself, would 
you
 want to work for
you?
Leverage the hell out of LinkedIn as a recruitment tool. One of my clients
goes directly to people at other companies who have the required skill sets.
This agency has a recruitment enticement script that lays out 
all the benefits
of working at their company. Direct outreach has been the agency’s single
best-performing recruitment tool.
Think ahead. It is possible to start to meet future employees even before
you may need them. Make friends. Be a networker. Always be recruiting. A
new term = ABR.
Ensure that all your employees know about the jobs that need to be filled.
People know people who know people. Provide staff members (and friends of
the agency) with a clear understanding of what you’re looking for and how to
sell-in the agency if they’re a primary early contact.
Recognize that you’re dealing with generational differences. Reflect
individual needs when discussing your employer brand story. Build the right
benefits talking points. Younger employees are looking for different things
than baby boomers.
I mentioned generational differences earlier. PwC’s 
NextGen Survey
 foundthat
Millennials would select flexible working, work-life balance, and the
chance for overseas assignments above financial rewards. Generation
Xers are raising families and are understandably the biggest users of
flexible working (81%), compared to millennials (56%).
Sell-in the idea that you have a high-value training system to help employees
learn and grow. Be able to say, “When you join agency XYZ, we will help
you grow.”
Shorten the time used for the interview process. That wonderful employee
might find their next job halfway through your agency’s five-person
interview process. Ah hmm... if you invite your people into the interview
process, train your staff on how to interview. Get the word out on what to ask
and even how to sell the agency. I’ve hired dozens and was never trained in
how best to interview
.
The Onboarding Dilemma
Efficient onboarding works for both the new employee and the agency. Have
a clear approach to how to onboard workers—especially remote workers.
I have a smart, experienced business development director client who was
recently let go from her remote agency business development job. A key
reason for termination was that she never had the chance to fully integrate
into the company and its culture and have opportunities to form a bond with
agency management. According to the SHRM Foundation, the four Cs of
traditional onboarding are clarification, compliance, connection, and culture.
Building personal connections and sharing culture, particularly
important to agency morale, are rather difficult to manage on a laptop.
Jamie Kohn, research director for the HR practice at consulting firm
Gartner gets to the point:
Employees today are experiencing a crisis of connection, and HR
leaders report that the biggest challenge with expanding remote work ismaintaining the organization’s culture.
Traditionally, new hires connected to organizational culture organically
by living it in their day-to-day, in-person interactions. For many people
working remotely, changing companies can feel like swapping out one
laptop for another.
Starting my career in a 1,000-person office in New York’s iconic Chrysler
Building with our own cafeteria, gym, and many local bars and coffee shops
built relationships and solidified agency culture. Hard to do today when the
copywriter is in Denver and the art director is in Miami
.
Onboarding Solutions
Be proactive and aware. Develop a preboarding system that starts the
onboarding process ahead of the first day on the job. This is an opportunity to
prove your interest in the new employee, introduce them to future colleagues,
and begin to cement cultural nuances. The payback can be significant.
Amazon’s HR department has pointed out that preboarding increases the
retention of first-year employees. Pre-boarding saves money.
Design the onboarding system to get ahead of new employee expectations.
Note the rather compelling research responses from F
ailure to Attach: The
Crisis for Pandemic Hires
 by Perceptyx. See how many respondents said yes
to this critical onboarding-related statement: “I had a clear understanding of
what to expect on my first day as an employee”:
Pre-pandemic = 74.9%
During pandemic = 60.7%
Fifteen percentage points is a huge difference. A potentially huge failure.
Really, how hard is it to manage expectations? Food for thought...
• Hold personal onboarding sessions for new employees. Include one or
more current employees.• Develop an onboarding kit—agency status and history information and
some swag if you’ve got it.
• Prepare an organization chart. Where will the new hire fit in?
• Foster dialogue. Nurture and plan ongoing one-on-one conversations
between new and existing employees since people are not accidently
meeting each other in agency public spaces.
How well are you dealing with the new HR world? What is your plan?
Play the long game
.
The Power of Culture
Defining agency culture has become a serious make-or-break recruitment
tool. What are your agency’s values? Does it have a purpose beyond just
making bucks? How does it manage the work–life balance equation? Is it
community minded? Are you charitable? Do you have diversity inclusion
initiatives?
What Is Corporate Culture?
Corporate culture is the set of values, beliefs, behaviors, and attitudes that
characterize a company and its employees. It’s what makes a company
unique and is reflected in everything from the way employees interact with
each other to the company’s core values and mission statement.
A strong corporate culture can be the difference between a company that
can attract and retain top talent and one that can’t. This is especially true in
the case of Gen X and millennials, who place a high value on finding a job
with a company that shares their values.
Three reasons why creating a human-oriented culture and vision will
deliver success.
1. It attracts top talent. As noted before, corporate culture can be the
deciding factor for candidates who are trying to choose between two
similar job offers. If Company A’s corporate culture appeals to thecandidate more than that of Company B, then the candidate is more
likely to accept a job offer from Company A. Here’s a positive,
employee-friendly vision statement from LinkedIn:
We welcome and seek constructive feedback so we can learn and grow.
This is our company, and we operate together against our single vision:
to create economic opportunity for every member of the global
workforce
.
2. It promotes employee retention. Once you’ve attracted top talent, you
want to keep them around. A strong corporate culture can help with
employee retention by fostering loyalty and commitment among
employees. Employees who feel like they belong to a supportive
community are less likely to look for new opportunities elsewhere.
3. A positive culture grips the attention of clients. Clients are humans too.
Yes, have that humanity-based culture and vision. Be like Patagonia or Ben
& Jerry’s.
Need Proof? Some Research
A study by Glassdoor found that 60% of job seekers would not apply for a
job with a company if they didn’t like the look of its website, and another
study found that 78% of employers believe that a prospective employee’s
cultural fit is more important than their skill set.
What does this mean? It means that if your company doesn’t have a well-
defined corporate culture, you’re going to have a hard time attracting the best
and the brightest. Make sure your culture-speak is represented in actions.
Walk that talk.
Seven Culture Thought Starters
Here are some ideas and thought starters to get your advertising agency
culture in gear. Riff on these. Discuss the value of each idea. Get internal
feedback, read about what works at leading companies, and study yourcompetitors. Defining your culture is not the best area in which to be
dictatorial.
1. Write those compelling mission and vision statements to foster
alignment.
Boise’s Oliver Russell, a B Corporation agency nails it: “Oliver Russell
is a branding agency that elevates the impact of companies 
striving to
do good for people and our planet.” They walk the talk. More. Oliver
Russell’s Inspiration Alley project is a collection of large-scale murals
depicting social justice heroes—Malala Yousafzai, Maya Moore, Colin
Kaepernick, and Dolores Huerta. They visualize their vision. Also take
a look at the book: 
Rise Up: How To Build a Socially Conscious
Business
 from Oliver Russell’s leader Russ Stoddard.
2. Diversity as mission is a key element of the W+K vision: “Our
founders, Dan Wieden and David Kennedy, were clear on our mission
from the start, “To create a place where people could come and live up
their full potential. Where they could do the best work of their career
because that place relished freedom, diversity, and unpredictability.’”
3. Tame the long-distance issue. Create scheduled 30-minute meet-and-
greet opportunities for new employees. Have department leaders talk
about their objectives.
4. Have a platform (in person or digital) that allows employees to share
ideas, personal info, and dreams with each other. This can get old so use
some of that creative thing to make it valuable and fun.
5. Have offsite team-building meetings. In many cases, this will cost less
than keeping all that expensive office space. I live in San Miguel de
Allende, Mexico, and according to Conde Nast Traveler it is the
friendliest city in the world. Come on down. I’ll show you around.
6. Develop a paid employee volunteer program to address community
issues. Poll your employees for their opinions about this year’s agency
charitable work. Walk the talk by being inclusive.
7. Invest in your culture via training and development programs. It will be
a triple win. This works for the employee, you the boss, and your
clients. Why not invite them to your series of thirty-minute training
sessions
.I talk to my ad agency clients about building an advertising agency brand that
is unignorable. A brand that stands out from the pack. Culture is a key
component. Make your culture unignorable and hard to resist.
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Agencies have gotten past the age of male domination. Statista reported in
2019 that women represent 59.7% of employees at independent agencies.
Even more: 51% of CMOs in 
Ad Age
’s 2021 top 100 advertisers were
women.
There are compelling reasons that driving a more diverse work force needs
to be a serious goal of agencies.
Agency staffing should strive to reflect real-world demographics. Period.
Should we expect that a White 23-year-old content developer can get in the
head of a 46-year-old Latino parent? A few can. But not most.
Diverse agencies make more money. According to MarketingHire,
McKinsey found companies in the top quartile for gender diversity on
executive teams were 21 percent more likely to outperform on
profitability and 27 percent more likely to have superior value creation.
Meanwhile, companies in the top quartile for ethnic/cultural diversity
on executive teams were 33 percent more likely to have industry-
leading profitability.
If this financial outperformance information doesn’t start to nudge you to
having an active diversity recruitment program, I’m not sure what would
.
Larger Agencies Get It
R/GA has Cultural Collectives groups to help diverse employees connect. If I
were looking at an agency that cares about my personal needs and has a way
to connect me to my “group,” I’d think that R/GA was walking the talk.R/GA’s individual Cultural Collectives include women, Black, Asian,
Arabic, Hispanic, and LGBTQ+ groups.
You don’t have to be large to make diversity an agency goal. New York’s
Orchard, at under 50 employees, is another agency that puts it on the table:
When we founded Orchard in 2019, we made it central to our mission
to actively address the issues of gender and racial inequality. We made
the following concrete commitments:
Our majority equity shareholder and highest paid employee is and
always will be female.
All female employees at orchard are paid equal to or more than their
male peers.
We would increase the size of our BIPOC talent pool available to the
entire industry in pursuit of which we voluntarily train at-risk BIPOC
youth for careers in the communication and media arts.
Does this Orchard statement resonate? The impact of this initiative was
acknowledged by Facebook’s chief creative officer and VP of global business
marketing during Facebook at Cannes Lions Live 2021:
You can only stand up and talk about things if you’re actually doing
something about them. An agency we love that has been doing this
since 2019 is Orchard. Their story is really inspiring..
.
Orchard’s commitment to their internship program is crucial to
ensuring a diverse future in the marketing industry.
Right on, Orchard.
My bottom line here is that the advertising industry must be very active in
creating a diverse workforce. Just mouthing the words doesn’t cut it.Actively Recruit the Next Generation
Like Orchard, get out into the community and sell, yes sell, the idea that
working in adverting is a smart career choice. Start them thinking early.
My conversations with Black and Hispanic agency owners confirm that the
ad industry must work with youth precollege to begin their journey into
advertising.
Wil Shelton, CEO of LA’s Will Power Integrated Marketing, told me that an
issue within the Black community is that advertising is not even a recognized
career path. Kids who want to be Stephen Curry or YoungBoy are not
thinking of Adolescent’s Ramaa Mosle, Mischief’s Greg Hahn or RG/A’s
Robert Greenberg. Get out in the market earlier, meet teens and talk up the
benefits of an advertising career. Make a difference. The payback will come.
Once again, walk the talk. It takes only a couple of hours to go to an inner-
city school to pitch marketing and advertising as a profession. Excite the next
gen. Bring you team along. Bring clients.
If you need a bit of inspiration and an advertising version of Kevin Durant,
head over to my 
Advertising Stories
 podcast interview with L.A.’s Wil
Shelton on how his Wil Power Integrated Marketing agency is a super power
in the black community
.
DE&I Is Good Business
Don’t take my word for it. According to McKinsey’s 
Diversity Wins
 report,
Our 2019 analysis finds that companies in the top quartile for gender
diversity on executive teams were 25 percent more likely to have
above-average profitability than companies in the fourth quartile—up
from 21 percent in 2017 and 15 percent in 2014.
Clients pay attention to an agency’s DE&I awareness and structure.
This is particularly evident in the growing number of RFPs that are aimed
at women-or minority-owned agencies.Inclusion Includes the Ageism Issue
Diversity goes beyond racial, ethnic, and LGBTQ+ diversity. Ageism,
another business and cultural issue, is a global business challenge.
From 
Wikipedia
:
Ageism, also spelled agism, is discrimination against individuals or
groups on the basis of their age. This may be casual or systemic.
Ageism is particularly endemic in the advertising industry. In 2021 only 8%
of WPP’s workforce was over 50, and rival Dentsu’s 50-plus total skewed
lower at 6.9%. Note that 34% of the US population is over 50. Simply insane.
Given the size and purchasing power of the 50-plus group, it’s amazing
how poorly this demographic is properly represented in advertising
campaigns. From AARP on the effect of ageism on the advertising product
itself
:
That helps explain why those age 50 and over who do most of the
consumer spending represent only 15 percent of adults in online media
images and are seven times more likely than younger adults to be
portrayed negatively.
I see two reasons for our age of ageism.
First, there appears to be a belief that younger people are simply better at
creating truly wonderful marketing, advertising, and new tech solutions in the
digital age.
What does Marc Zuckerberg think? “Young people are just smarter.”
Think it’s just Silicon Valley speak? Nope. Just ask WPP:
We have a very broad range of skills and if you look at our people—the
average age of someone who works at WPP is less than 30—they don’t
hark back to the 1980s, luckily.
This lame statement was care of WPP’s CEO Mark Read. Read is around 55.Guess it’s OK for management to be “old.”
The second reason for agency ageism is related to the cost of older
employees. Employees over 50 simply cost more. Higher costs are not a good
thing in a profit-stressed industry like advertising.
In addition to having a higher salary requirement than a twentysomething,
older employees have higher employment-related costs. Older employees’
benefits like the health plan and longer vacations simply cost more. Growing
annual health-care costs was a major reason I decided to sell my advertising
agency.
Yes, costs play a huge role. However, advertising is an industry that has
decided that youth is a requirement in the digital age. Agencies like natives.
Somehow marketing experience delivers less value. Bob Hoffman knows.
If you think that ageism in advertising is solely a byproduct of agencies
having to cut costs, you’re wrong. Most agencies 
wouldn’t hire a 55-
year-old copywriter if she came free and gift-wrapped.
I’ll end with an interesting stat: US boomers hold $71 trillion in assets. To
put this into perspective, one-seventh of the world’s assets are controlled by
76 million US boomers.
Does this remarkable stat suggest that agencies will hire more 50-plus
employees to help their clients understand, reach, and sell to the older, richer
crowd? No.
So, what is really the reason for ageism in advertising? My takeaway is
that people over 50 are smart but are just too expensive for a low-margin
industry like advertising. Agree?CHAPTER 18
Community Spirit
Community spirit, as in delivering beneficial philanthropy to local or national
organizations, is an active expression of the agency’s culture and vision talk.
While much corporate giving is centered on monetary donations and
sponsorships, advertising agencies of all types are uniquely positioned to
provide valuable marketing assistance to not-for-profit entities.
My agency worked closely with Make-A-Wish Oregon. We provided free
marketing services and gave cash donations, and I sat on the board.
Everybody won: Make-A-Wish, critically ill kids, their parents, the broader
community, and our team, who felt good about working at an agency that
delivered on our community-oriented vision.
The Art of Philanthropy and Your Ad Agency
Many, but not enough, advertising agencies have one or more nonprofit
clients. It can be a wonderfully symbiotic relationship.
This important charitable work also provides benefits for the agency’s
recruitment and new business programs. If done correctly, the nonprofit
relationship is strategic. One agency that gets it is Portland’s Grady Britton.
You can read about their multi-year program in my HubSpot article “An
Agency That Does Good.”
I’ve felt so strongly about the symbiotic aspect of charitable work that I’ve
always recommended a strategic philanthropic approach or plan to my
clients. Below is how I’ve represented this concept. If you agree with me,
please pass this on to your clients. At a time of reduced corporate spending,
it’s important that agencies play a more assertive role in selling the benefits
of strategic philanthropy, internally and externally.Strategic Philanthropy Is Good Business
During recessions, many agencies lower their annual investment in
philanthropic donations. Because of this, I believe this is precisely the time to
consider why, how, and where you donate based on adopting the principles
and benefits of strategic philanthropy. But what is that?
Strategic philanthropy, also known as cause marketing, is a business
strategy whereby a company clearly aligns its mission and business goals
with those of a nonprofit organization to create a strategically tailored and
mutually beneficial partnership. A well-designed program balances the
positive impact on the community with a clear understanding of the positive
impact a giving program will have for the company, its brand, customers,
and, importantly, employee recruitment and retention.
Strategic philanthropy isn’t about disguising self-serving activities under a
veil of good intentions or adopting a cause simply to sell more products. It is
about sincerely showing your clients, customers, and employees that you
really care about your community and important causes. It’s about having
your organization receive measurable benefits that will make you want to
donate even more next year. This is a win-win marketing program for your
company, your employees, nonprofit 
partners, and even agency clients.
Why Participate with Nonprofits?
Effective strategic alliances will enhance your brand equity and image,
increase stakeholder and employee loyalty, and lead to increased revenue and
sales for the parties involved.
It’s not difficult to leverage your charitable activities to enhance your
corporate image. Here are six thoughts to get you started.
1. Think small.
Consider working with local charities that can demonstrate in-market
impact from your donations.
2. Create alignment.
Consider aligning your services, and areas of expertise with an
organization that complements your company’s mission and business.3. Lead by being a positive example.
Set up a charitable program with clear community benefits to
demonstrate to your employees and clients that your company doesn’t
exist simply to make money.
4. Involve your employees.
Build a program that gives your employees a sense of ownership and a
direct, visible connection to the good you are doing. Working with local
charities will allow your employees to participate on a personal level.
Think cultural enhancement.
5. Spread the word.
Most nonprofits have limited funds for advertising and public relations.
Leverage your giving to promote your charitable programs and to help
create awareness for your nonprofit partners. Pitch positive community-
interest stories to the local 
press, have a charitable giving section on
your website, and let your clients know what you’re doing. Don’t be
shy.
6. Think bottom line.
If you and other businesses see a tangible benefit from giving, you and
they will give more. This may be the most compelling point of all.
Facts to Support the Concept of Strategic Philanthropy
According to the Cone Cause Evolution Study, a national survey on the
attitudes of Americans about corporate giving, there are many benefits to be
accrued from strategic philanthropy:
88% of Americans say it is acceptable for companies to involve a cause
or issue in their marketing. This record number represents a 33%
increase since Cone began measuring in 1993 (66%).
85% of consumers have a more positive image of a product or company
when it supports a cause they care about.90% of consumers want companies to tell them the ways they are
supporting causes. Put another way: More than 278 million people in
the U.S. want to know what a company is doing to benefit a cause.
Giving is a good thing. Making giving sound like a good thing is really a
good mission. Telling the world that you live your positive corporate vision is
an all-around good thing for your agency.
Giving is especially a good thing if you pitch the art of strategic
philanthropy to your clients. Everyone wins.CHAPTER 19
Client Management
What Do Clients Want?
Your next client probably has multiple needs, even if they think all they need
is an Instagram influencer program or seriously good video storytelling.
It’s often difficult for a client to clearly state business objectives.
Objectives range from increasing sales and revenues; growing brand
awareness; building loyalty; new product development; geo expansion to
more Xandr please. Just to name a few. I’ve seen an inability to express clear
objectives across client seniority. I once had a senior Nike client who didn’t
have clearly stated sales goals. I know, kinda crazy.
Instead of asking for those numbers, I asked my client friend how she
made her bonus. Interesting revelations in that discussion, including finding
out where the agency could act to help make her a Nike star.
Let’s look at some industry research to help us get into CMOs’ heads
.
The UK firm SCOPEN interviewed 81 senior marketing professionals,
including 57 chief marketing officers, and 56 agency professionals. The
overwhelming majority of respondents (72.8%) were the ultimate spending
decision makers. The research showed that creativity is the number one
criterion used in agency selection.
However, SCOPEN also reported,
It’s interesting to see how (clients) are talking more about innovation
related with business transformation, and digital transformation, which
is a different territory from creativity, much more difficult, of course, to
find agencies in that space.I’ll parse this out. Here is SCOPEN’s list of large client needs.
1. Creativity
2. Innovative ideas (how W+K got that first piece of Ford)
3. Digital capabilities
4. Strategic planning
5. Marketplace insights
6. Competitor insights
7. Brand knowledge
8. Trend awareness and predictions
9. Media planning
10. Social media prowess
11. Integrated services
12. Good value
That’s a long list. Not all clients need all of that. To simplify, I believe that
most clients are looking for advertising experts. Be the expert who delivers
smart, efficient programs plus measurable results. High ROI results
.
What Type of Agency Does the Client Need?
Once the client determines their marketing objectives, or thinks they have,
they’ll think through the type of agency they want to work with. Here’s my
short list of agency types and how you might position your agency based on
pitch-oriented typecasting:
Regional leader
No one knows your local or regional market better than you. Your market-
driven local reputation drives your new business success. There are agencies
that are asked to every regional or local pitch simply because they have been
around forever, know their markets, and thrive on referrals.
Creative heroYour work stands out, gets discussed, has won awards, and, most
importantly, has a history of building brands and market share. Clients want
creative agencies (it’s an essential part of what we offer), but creativity is in
the eye of the beholder and can be difficult to demonstrate— especially when
pitching less experienced clients.
Full-service provider
Our industry has gone back and forth on the value of the full-service agency.
I sense that we’re currently experiencing a shift toward smaller full-service
agencies that can deliver an integrated approach. There are so many moving
parts to marketing today that some clients are becoming overwhelmed and
need a single strategic partner that can help build and manage an integrated
plan. Agency selection research backs up the need for integrated solutions.
Strategist
You’ve developed a reputation for your strategic insights and guidance.
You’ve solved tough client problems in the past and have the cases to 
prove
it. You offer innovation and live to beat down disruption. You see into the
future.
Specialist
You’ve positioned your agency as an expert. You could be a mobile, SEM,
social media, content, experiential, PR, or digital expert. The list of
specialization opportunities keeps growing. Pay attention to what’s hot,
what’s next.
Category market expert
You know the client’s industry or product category better than any other
agency. You’ve supported this fact with extensive client category history and
your leading thought-leadership program.
Target market expert
No agency knows the client’s target market, demographics, and consumers
better than you.Big
When I was at Saatchi & Saatchi, we led every pitch with a global map
showing all the Saatchi offices. I called it our dot map. We had dots
everywhere. Big multinational clients want integrated global services and an
agency that can run campaigns across borders. These clients need (or think
they need) big networks and lots of dots.
Big is usually a good thing. The downside of big is that mid-size clients
can feel like they could get lost inside a huge global agency.
I once solved the too-big client issue by not selling in the huge Saatchi
brand. We sold in a bespoke agency setup made up of three agency
principles. The agency, Keeshan Jeary and Levitan, offered personalized
services plus all the value inherent in the world’s largest agency. Big became
small and personalized
.
Then Again, Small Works
Small Agencies Can Win Large Accounts
A recent interview in 
Ad Age
’s 
Ad Lib
 podcast reveals the insight that even
large clients are now attracted to smaller agencies. I’d imagine that this might
not be a big surprise to you. Smaller agencies that deliver specialized services
have been on client radar for a few years.
Nike hired my small agency to work on Nike’s Major League Baseball and
college sports marketing programs because of our sports marketing expertise.
Not our global reach.
So… What do the big clients want to see from smaller agencies, and is
your agency set up to deliver it?
Client Advice for Small Agencies
Maureen Morrison’s 
Ad Age
 article “How a Small Agency Can Land a Big
Client Like Mondelez” sheds some light on this universal question. The
article is an interview with Mondelez International’s agency scout Deb
Giampoli. Deb shares her tips on the dos and don’ts of how to get her
attention:
Do have a story to tell.“Make sure your shop has a compelling story about who you are and
what you do. If you want to punch above your weight, have more than a
capabilities deck to show.”
Do know how to articulate your strategy and talk about your work.
“The bar is just as high for small agencies as it is for big ones,” Ms.
Giampoli said. “Great work is every agency’s best calling card,” she
added.
Do make yourself visible.
“Approach marketing executives through mutual connections,
conferences or writing white papers on interesting topics. If 
you’re
really good at what you do, I will find you… When you do get found,
have a great story to tell about who you are and what you do.”
Don’t cold call potential clients without doing your homework.
Ms. Giampoli said she won’t work with an agency that hasn’t
researched her role and what she values in agencies. If you are going to
cold call, she said, the only chance you have is if you’ve done your
homework.
Don’t expect a meeting to lead to an immediate assignment.
“I don’t believe in love at first sight. I might meet you and like you a
lot, but that doesn’t mean that something’s going to happen quickly.”
Don’t be a general agency with a mediocre offering.
Ms. Giampoli said, “It’s far better to be a shop with a smaller, more
specialized offering than a jack-of-all-trades without anything
compelling.”
She closed the interview with, “I get emails from small agencies all the time
apologizing for being small… Don’t apologize for being small.”
The NBA’s Muggsy Bogues was 5’3”. He never apologized. Small and
smart can be a beautiful thing. Einstein was 5’7”. Elliot Page is 5’1”.How Much Should a Client Spend?
When I was a punk account executive on the General Mills new products
account, my client’s marketing director called me up and asked me how
much GMI should spend to launch a new pasta brand. I was like a deer in
headlights. No one at the agency had ever prepped me on how to 
set an
advertising budget. I had no clue. I told my client I’d have to get back to
them.
For most brands establishing an advertising budget is one of their most
difficult decisions. Painful. Even with all those wonderful tracking metrics, I
still think that John Wannamaker kinda got it right. You probably know
where I’m going:
Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the trouble is I don’t
know which half.
Of course, the “I don’t know which half ” message will be denied by quant
jocks. But you get the idea and need to keep this client stress-building pain
point in mind when talking budgets.
When I eventually ran my own agency, I tried to create a set of budget
benchmarks to help with the “how much” question and to try to get past
having to super-customize each job. Did we succeed? Well, as a full-service
agency, mostly no. Super specialists, à la SEO or influencer agencies, should
have an easier time creating benchmark pricing.
So how much should clients spend? Here’s my food for thought options.
Rule 1
Clients should spend 5% to 10% of revenues on marketing.
To support this spending ratio for this book, I studied the research of three
advertising budget experts. Here is some support for the percentage approach.
MarketingWeek
’s Mark Ritson quotes economist Dr. Grace Kite:
A “good rule of thumb” is to spend between 5% and 10% of your
revenues on advertising. That proportion will usually enable you toachieve competitive excess share of voice and ensure the maximum
return on investment
.
Rule 2
Aim for a share-of-voice advantage.
Bottom line... spend more than your competition. Makes sense, yes? Need
support? Les Binet (group head of effectiveness, adam&eveDDB) and Peter
Field reported in an IPA article that “historically, share of voice has driven
share of market.”
A laugh. An advertising agency tradition is to advise clients keep spending
on marketing during a recession. Does this advice get taken? Maybe half the
time.
Rule 3
The CPG-based 60/40 rule suggests that brands use 60% of their budget for
brand building and 40% for activation.
Is this a solid, always go-to ratio? Of course not. But we need to start
somewhere. Here are two perspectives:
1. Activation provokes an immediate response and sale. CMOs and CFOs
like this. This is today’s holy grail.
2. Brand building builds long-term sales and revenues. CMOs like this.
But in difficult economic times, CMOs need to drive immediate
activity.
Need support for long-term brand building versus activation?
According to CEO Brian Chesky, 90% of Airbnb traffic happens
directly, not through search. Instead, its ad spend has been used on
brand campaigns that inform consumers about various services Airbnb
offers. (eMarketer)How about the brands that are well established in your head? Did you need to
see a Patagonia ad to get you to buy that down vest
?
Rule 4
Estimate the job via a tight work estimate and tack on your profit margin.
Simply put, cost + markup = price. Work with the client to establish a
detailed scope of work (SOW).
Easy? Nope. Some words from Michael Farmer the author of the
appropriately named 
Madison Avenue Manslaughter
. Here is a tidbit from an
interview I did for my “Advertising Stories” podcast.
I’ve worked with, Ogilvy, Gray, VMLY&R, BBDO, you name it. I’ve
worked with them all. I don’t know of a single holding company
agency that has yet developed a methodology for measuring the amount
of work they do so that they can better negotiate fees and resources
with our clients.
Those are the big boys. And they have a hard time estimating.
If you’re just starting out, you might need to lower your price to get a few
new clients in the door. Make sure to make this pricing flexibility a short-
term business-building proposition. Consider having that set-price
productized service offer to get things rolling.
Hours vs. Value
I discuss financials in detail in Chapter 20, “Show Me the Money.” However,
one of the more difficult agency-to-client discussions is often about the
relationship between the hours required to deliver a specific job and the
ultimate marketplace value of the deliverable.
The value model aligns agency work with measurable client goals. This
should increase client satisfaction. But establishing value is subjective and
can be hard to track.
What is the real value of super brand driving advertising? What could anagency charge for sales-building brilliance? What could agencies have
charged for
:
• OREO’s Super Bowl blackout tweet “Power out? No problem. You can
still dunk in the dark.”
• The Capital One strapline “What’s in your wallet?”
• Apple’s Mac launch TV commercial “1984”
• Budweiser’s “Whassup” or Guinness’s “Guinness is good for you.”
• The Always campaign: #LikeAGirl
• Tubi’s 2023 Super Bowl screen-takeover commercial from Mischief
In this case, we are going well beyond the specific hours it took the agency to
come up with the big idea.
This is about the true market-building value of work itself.
A sharp agency team can go from an observation to an insight to a brilliant
advertising idea in a day. Should the agency charge for the eight hours (let’s
say four people at the blended rate of $350 per hour = $11,000) or the true
value of the big idea?
Budweiser reported that supermarket sales were up 7.9% for the first four
weeks of the DDB Chicago Whassup campaign versus the year-ago period,
according to Information Resources Inc.
Maybe Bud gave DDB Chicago a bonus. Or a nice tip. But probably not.
At least the agency won a Grand Clio. What was Bud’s ultimate gift? DDB
was fired in 2011.
The idea of how to attribute high value to a big creative idea has been
long-term agency-to-client discussion. I’ve never yet seen an industry-wide
solution.
What More Do Clients Really Need?
An agency can deliver all or some of the master list of client wants. However,
if these deliverables are not supported by superior agency service and
conscious relationship building ethos, clients will split.It’s the service, stupid.
I was trained in account management skills when I started out at 
New
York’s Dancer Fitzgerald Sample. DFS had clients like P&G, HP, Nabisco,
Toyota, and Sara Lee, and it understood that client touch was a critical
element in maintaining ongoing relationships and setting the agency up for
even more new projects from these clients.
In my first year I attended weekly management training sessions. I’ve used
this training as I advanced at major agencies, as a company CEO, as an
agency owner, and even today as a consultant. Understanding the art of
people-to-people skills and communications management has propelled my
career and client successes.
Sadly, most of today’s ad agencies do not provide any training for their
account managers or client touchers. Money is simply too tight. CEOs and
COOs are too busy. Not taking the time to train your account managers is
nuts.
Please, no crying. Below are some of the account management skills that
are must haves and can be taught. Easily.CHAPTER 20
The Savvy Account Manager
The best, as in long-term client relationships, are driven by excellent service.
Yes, the clients want strategic thinking, superior creative, breakthrough
media planning, and efficient execution. But if the agency is not delivering
superior service, the client will eventually split.
I was the client of agencies for seven years. No question that the work
came first. But the relationship could easily have been eroded via poor
service.
Why Clients Split
If a major cause of agency dismissal in a longer-term relationship is
perceived poor service, then all agencies need to address this potential issue
fast. It’s imperative that agency management ask their client “How are we
doing?” on a scheduled basis. Make asking this service question an element
of your overall service 
offer.
I also recommend a more detailed annual assessment. That said, one fast
path to understanding client love (or lack thereof) is to use Net Promoter
Score (NPS) research. An NPS survey measures the likelihood that a client
would recommend your agency to others. The client rates the agency on a
scale of 1 to 10.
The Account Manager Role
Since most agencies have account managers who handle day-to-day client
communications, agencies need to do a better job of training these frontlineemployees. This training can also be used for any client-touch person. Even
self-taught one-person shops.
Is training necessary in a busy agency environment? Um, yes. Need an
unfortunate 13% kick in the ass? Here’s a 
wow!
 as reported in the 2022 
What
Clients Think
 report from the UK’s Up in the Light.
Only 13% of clients stated that their agency “regularly exceeds their
expectations.”
Thirteen percent. I’m sure you are saying not 
my
 agency. How do you know
this? Have you asked lately?
The Kick-Ass Account Manager
To get a handle on how well agencies describe the account manager role, I
looked at account manager job postings from two established agencies.
Here’s a quick look at how two agencies talk about the account manager role
in their Career website sections.
WPP Sydney senior account manager position:
Key Responsibilities: Build an open, honest, and trusting relationship
with the client, the account management team, 
creative department, and
all other agency partners.
1. Actively contribute to the agency’s culture.
2. Work with the Senior AD on leading the brand and BTL strategy
and how it connects to creative.
3. Create the best possible opportunities for creative development, by
supporting teams in creative development and understanding how it
delivers to business challenges.
4. Work alongside a village team with like-minded colleagues,
ensuring that teamwork and collaboration are front and center of
that process.
5. Be involved in team development and support your team
environment through collaboration and inclusivity.Goodby Silverstein & Partners senior account director position:
For us a great Senior Account Director does the following things really
well:
1. Clearly defines the client’s business problem and gets people in the
Agency excited to work on it.
2. Provides their own point-of-view that is considerate of both the
Client’s and Agency’s viewpoints, but not necessarily beholden to
either one of them.
3. Serves the needs of the individuals on their team and on the
account.
4. Constantly set (and if necessary, change) the conditions on the
account to allow people to do their best work.
Wow
 is all I can say after reading these job descriptions. Account
management is a complex role that requires the ability to dig into the client’s
objectives; savvy communications skills; being up to date on new
technologies, strategic, and marketing insights; reflects agency culture; and
understands how to motivate agency teams
.
Agencies often hope that account managers somehow learn how to deliver
these services via osmosis. Not good enough.
Account Management Training
Why not have an account management training program? Training your staff
in account management skills delivers a range of benefits. An account
management program doesn’t have to be complex, time consuming, or
expensive.
In addition to ensuring that agency employees know how to deliver
superior service, gauge client satisfaction, and are up to date on industry
trends, training (upskilling) has additional benefits directly related to agency-
wide employee satisfaction.
1. Training drives higher employee morale2. It fosters company loyalty and instills corporate culture
3. It increases staff retention
4. It is a positive recruitment tool
Here is a radical idea. You could even invite clients to your training program.
Show them how important the delivery of service is to your company. Ask
for their input.
Here’s my 12-point advice for agency leadership on how to build (and
motivate) an exceptional account manager.
Training can be done in brief bite-sized sessions.
1. Define what a spectacular client relationship looks like. Have stated
relationship objectives.
2. Make continuous learning a part of agency culture. Curate a set of tools
and resources, including articles, group Zoom education meetings, and
YouTube videos—even relevant YouTube quickies—that will help train
your account managers on how 
to manage clients.
An ongoing training program will make sure that account managers
are up to speed on the latest advertising trends and are a step or two
ahead of the clients. This program will also foster interdepartmental
communication.
3. Account managers need to know the details of their account’s P&L.
Train the manager on how to help manage their costs and profit margin.
Get way ahead of any profit problems before they fester. The account
manager, not the busy CFO, is on the front line.
4. Create a system for scope-of-work management. A scope-of-work
agreement defines the work the agency is going to do for the client and
the time it will spend on the work. It includes a definition of
deliverables, the timeline, agency and client responsibilities, and
reports. The account manager should work closely with the project
management team to ensure that the job is on time and meets client
expectations and to help avoid scope creep.
Managing evil scope creep, and related (often difficult) client
communications, is not easy. It requires both real-time agency systems
and the art of client handling. I was brought up being called an accountexecutive. I was a bit surprised to find out that UK agencies called their
account executives account handlers—a rather direct way to define the
job. Train your account people in the art of client handling. Gentle
handling.
5. Help account executives understand that listening closely to the client’s
objectives, as in really listening, is critically important in building a
trusted relationship.
Go further and train the team on what is called active listening, which
is defined by the Center for Creative Leadership as follows:
Active listening requires you to listen attentively to a speaker,
understand what they’re saying, respond and reflect on what’s 
being
said, and retain the information for later. This keeps both listener and
speaker actively engaged in the conversation.
A key attribute of Active Listening is leaning in. Body language works
to help make clients think you’re listening. Leaning in even works on
telephone or Zoom calls. Have a Zoom or Google Meet best practices
POV.
6. Make sure account managers know how to anticipate client needs and
issues. Think developing a client-radar mindset.
Shep Hykin, a customer service expert, calls this anticipatory
customer service. A brilliant example comes from the ’70s and ’80s TV
show M*A*S*H.
One of the characters, Corporal Walter “Radar” O’Reilly, played by
Gary Burghoff, set a standard for customer service. He worked for
Colonel Potter, who ran the unit. It was always a good laugh when
Colonel Potter barked out a request for a file and Radar was walking
into his office with the file before the Colonel even finished his request.
It was as if he could read minds, or as his nickname indicates, as if he
had radar.
Understanding the client, like really well, will help your account people
to be able to be a step ahead of client needs. There is nothing aspowerful as being able to answer a question before it is asked.
Building the art of curiosity is important. The goal is to anticipate
client needs and let the client know that y’all are ahead of the curve.
7. Account managers need to take the time to learn about the agency’s
successes, history and culture, branding, and best client case histories.
Manger 1 might not know the details of a successful program delivered
last year by Manger 2. Have a system for sharing experiences across
accounts
.
8. Clients need and want strategic guidance. Have a schedule for sending
them the agency’s thought leadership materials and relevant information
about their programs, competitors, and industries. You want to look and
act like a valuable strategic leader.
Consider providing account managers with a templated approach to
thought leadership distribution. Offer a micro-training program to cover
the basics of thought leadership development and distribution options.
9. Teach presentation skills: Giving a persuasive presentation comes
naturally to some but not all. Presentation skills can be taught. Start
inside the agency. These skills are particularly important these days as
we are doing more virtual presentations.
Have an agency approach to how to run and manage an online
presentation. This includes branding, backgrounds, lighting, and sound.
Buy your remote staff the right equipment.
Prospective clients often ask that the people who will be working on
their account be in the initial pitch meeting. Don’t wait until the day
before a pitch to teach your pitch crew stellar presentations skills.
In fact, why not take everyone in the agency through a couple of
recent pitches?
10. Management skills, as in knowing how to manage in-house
communications and how to share client objectives and strategies, can
be taught. Being conscious of how to start and control agency jobs and
to be efficient is a must-have skill.
How to delegate, coach, support, and direct across the agency are not
necessarily native skills. A bit of training will help.
Support agency and client communications with a set of shell
documents, including your project scope proposals, creative brief,contact reports, and best practices on how to use communication tools
like email and Slack.
11. Account managers have a personal brand. Look at how your key 
players
look to the outside world. I know savvy clients look at everyone’s
LinkedIn page. Even Facebook and Instagram pages. No, I’m not asking
you to be a personal brand policeman. Just help your folks understand
that the agency brand includes the power of their very own brand.
My takeaway here is that agency leadership should not leave client
relationships to chance and that even a fast-paced training program could
reduce client turnover and, better yet, increase client love.
This program could be run beyond account management as many people in
the agency occasionally touch the clients. Manage those touches.CHAPTER 21
Show Me the Money
Savvy Accounting
I mentioned at the start of this book that my Oregon agency didn’t have a set-
in-stone business plan. We should have. But nope. What we did have was a
solid approach to tracking our financials.
Our agency financials were tracked by our CFO, and she was supported by
scheduled reviews with our accountant.
We had monthly internal profit analysis reports that were designed to
quickly provide a look at agency profitability and productivity. Our profit
analysis report included the following:
1. 
Gross margin analysis
The objective was to increase account by account efficiency and to
locate any red flags before they caught on fire.
2. 
Overhead analysis
We continually reviewed overhead line items including rent, 
staff costs,
insurance (corporate and health), and technology costs.
3. 
Free cash flow analysis
As an agency owner, our quarterly free cash flow calculation either
made me sleep like a baby or become an insomniac. We calculated our
free cash flow by subtracting capital expenditures from net cash.
4. 
Labor costs assessment
We had a goal of allocating approximately 50% of revenue to salaries
and benefits.
5. 
Staff utilization
The staff accurately tracked their time, and these reports allowed us to
create utilization rates that compared billable hours to total hoursworked. Our utilization rate helped us calculate hourly rates. This
information also helped us to determine future hiring needs and any
potential skill set and service mix deficits.
6. 
Account receivables
My CFO was a genius in tracking and managing accounts receivable.
The genius part came in as a focused approach to invoicing and
examination of any overdue payments. Her job included working with
me on all proposals and client billing agreements. The genius also came
in as she established close working relationships with our clients’
accounting departments to ensure that we were paid on time.
Your Agency: A Bottom-Line Model From AMI
Getting back to “Keep it simple, stupid!”
I am a big fan of Drew McClellan’s AMI (Agency Management Institute).
Drew advises his agency clients to observe what he calls the 55-25-20 rule.
Spend 55% of your AGI (adjusted gross income, or 
gross billings minus
cost of goods) on salaries and benefits and 25% on overhead and drive 20%
to the bottom line.
Back To How to Price
“My company needs a 12-month marketing program for our DTC Amazon
store. I’d like a proposal please.”
“I need to rebrand my international pet food brand.”
We all like to hear these lovely words. What marketing services provider
wouldn’t? The prospective client’s question means that your agency
optimized its business development program, got the attention of a
prospective client, killed the RFP, had a sales meeting where you sounded
smart and experienced, and now the client is interested in getting a solid
proposal.
The next step is to price out the services they need, or think they need.
How do you get to that magic number? You are now about to estimate the jobvia determining the value of your expertise plus staff time plus overhead plus
experience plus your profit margin goal. Getting there can be rather
complicated.
1. Does the client have clear business objectives and KPIs? Have you
discussed their rationale? Be their Sherpa, not just an order taker.
2. Is the client an experienced marketer? Have they done a program like
this before?
3. Does the client have a stated budget? How did they arrive at that? Will
they provide you with what they have spent in the past?
4. Do you have predetermined pricing models so that every job does not
have to priced à la carte?
Just for laughs I searched on Google for “advertising agency pricing models”
and it delivered 613 million results (on another day it was 719 
million), so
you ad folks (and clients of course) appear to be working hard on establishing
agency pricing models.
I’m about to state the obvious. Getting your pricing scenario and system
right will result in higher profits, less agency stress, and even a happier client.
You want to get paid fairly and reduce client relationship tension points and
get past any future surprises.
First a bit of history.
The word 
agency
 comes from the time when agencies acted as sales agents
for newspapers. If the agency brought business to the newspaper, the
newspaper paid them a 15% commission. This evolved to the agencies
providing creative and media services. The good old days.
My client Johnson & Johnson had a $75 million media budget. The agency
charged the 15% fee that delivered $11.25 million to the agency. We also
charged 16.5% for production. Believe me, our margins were high.
The 15% fee started to shrink in the 1990s when clients figured out that
they could reduce this percentage and still receive the required service. Or so
they thought. Agencies had little choice but to go along. Those good old days
disappeared.
Today, agency pricing is all over the map.5 Pricing Models
There are five main pricing models. I’m sure that some creative CFOs have
other thoughts.
1. 
Hourly rates
You charge a client for staff time by the hour. Generally, an agency
charges using a single blended rate. The blended rate is calculated by taking
the average hourly rate of all employees that will work on the job and then
multiplying by the number of hours it will take to complete the project.
In this case it is critical that you use some form of time sheets which 
will
never be totally accurate. Yet, having them is a must.
What do agencies charge? I’ll include this example as background.
According to Credo’s 2022 digital marketing industry pricing survey, on
average, US-based digital marketing firms charge from $148 per hour for
SEO and $152 per hour for PPC work. This is lower than the $200 per hour
average that my average ad agency client charges.
The pros are that you get paid for the hours you work. The downside is
that the client usually needs a fixed cost and the hourly rate can cause friction
when the job is affected by scope creep and when a client questions each
billable item.
2. 
Fixed rate
Clients like fixed project rates. The agency calculates the rate by
estimating the numbers of hours it will take to complete the project,
multiplying that by the agency’s hourly blended rate, and then adding in the
agency’s margin goal.
A way to manage the fixed rate is to have one or more agency benchmark
rates to see if estimates fall inside of the range of average ad agency rates.
The benchmark rate is calculated by looking at average industry rates based
on region, size of the company, and a few other data points, including agency
pricing history.
The pros are that this should be an easy discussion. However, the agency
must manage scope creep, which can become a serious agency profitably
issue.3. 
Performance or value pricing
That value thing, again. In this case, you get paid for delivering
performance value based on measurable results. This can be hard to calculate
if the agency is providing multiple services.
Back to the predigital era. While we wanted to get paid for success, the
array of marketing factors limited the ability to point to any one agency
deliverable’s effectiveness. I recall conversations with clients about
performance pricing where performance was also affected by the creative
messaging, media spend, product distribution, product promotions, and the
efficacy of the product or service itself. Mucho factors that could make or
break a clear path to understanding what drove performance.
Some good news. In the digital world an agency can establish digital
conversion metrics and the value of each conversion.
A pro is that the value proposition helps the client and agency be aligned
behind a definition of success. Most of the time.
4. 
Retainer
A retainer is an agreement between the agency and client that sets a rate
and timetable for a project or ongoing program. Goals are defined in an
onboarding session and the work is scoped out. The agency works closely
with the client to determine what work will need to be completed and the
timetable, and then agree on a monthly number of hours to meet the
objectives.
Both parties benefit from pricing clarity and a predetermined payment
system.
Considerations
It can be difficult to agree to a retainer with a new client you’ve never
worked with. Can they stay the course?
Some clients will find it difficult to commit to a retainer if they don’t have
a way to judge the work or success.
It can be difficult to fire a bad actor client when in a retainer partnership.
That said, agencies sure like knowing what revenues, and profits, can be
preplanned.5. 
Consulting
Consulting is the delivery of strategic advice designed to reach, engage,
and convert customers.
Consulting includes client and industry market research, competitive
analysis, and marketing and advertising recommendations that can lead 
to a
long-term relationship.
Many agencies would like to have the pricing power of a McKinsey
Digital. You can set this up over time. Get known as a strategist and make
this a standalone offer. Start with your brilliant though leadership.
Cost Management
“Only the paranoid survive.” This rather important message was delivered by
Intel founder Andy Grove’s 1999 mega bestseller of the same name.
As we all know, shit happens. Be prepared. Always be paranoid (ABP), a
close cousin of always be closing (ABC).
We can’t really plan on clients staying forever or maintaining their spend,
we can’t predict macroeconomic events or what’s on the minds of Putin and
Xi, and we can’t control our award-winning creative director going to start
their own agency with our largest client.
External shit will happen. The only element of your agency business that
you have 
total
 control of is your cost of doing business.
Understand your cash runway. We’re seeing many well-funded, yet low-
revenue Silicon Valley startups run out of cash. Your agency is not immune.
If you think you’re on a serious path toward doom, just close your doors or
begin to plan on how to merge or sell.
Reinvent your business plan (maybe your business itself). Never let a good
crisis go to waste. Look at your existing business plan. Consider tossing it.
What plan, and advertising agency structure, makes sense today and for the
future?
Think about what a client would buy from you in a recessionary
environment, not what you want to sell.
Back to paranoia and the need for being nimble. “If you don’t like change,
you’re going to like irrelevance even less.” A bit of guidance from US Armygeneral Eric Shinseki.
Dial up that scenario planning. Think through three or four business
scenarios. What would you do if a quarter or half of your clients reduce 
their
marketing? What growing industry categories or new media should you begin
to specialize in? Get into future think. Why not offer scenario planning to
your clients? Include a market review, some future think, and
recommendations. I bet McKinsey Digital does this.
A hard truth: Since staff costs account for at least 50% of your cost
structure, you need to examine staff performance—often. Be realistic.
Fire underutilized or poorly performing employees quickly. Harsh? You
bet. Occasionally I waited too long. If you know you must let some staff go,
do it quickly. You want to reduce any internal stress if you can. Don’t leave
employees guessing or wondering why that low-energy person (today’s quiet
quitter) is still around.CHAPTER 22
The Business Development Budget
A Sad Biz Dev Story
The cost and effectiveness of agency business development can make or
break an agency. Let me give you a real-world worst-case example.
A Pacific Northwest agency was one of a set of digital agencies trying to
land a major account. The client’s pitch team wanted to see each agency’s
strategic approach. To win, the Northwest agency built a comprehensive plan
that included custom market research and leased MarTech technology. The
pitch dragged on forever and the agency was racking up staff and hard costs.
Good news: The agency won the account.
Bad news: The pitch became so expensive that the agency almost went out
of business 
after
 winning the account. The agency’s costs included the cost of
the initial RFP response and a four-month pitch that included spec work. Add
in the agency’s work for this new client plus the 
client’s 90-day payment
schedule. The cost of the RFP response, managing and crafting the pitch
itself (mega labor hours), and the actual work, once won, had the agency
essentially working for free for more than six months.
Could the agency have managed down this insane scenario? Not sure.
Every pitch and client engagement is by nature unique. That said, the agency
could have had a better handle on what was coming when they initially
interviewed the client. However, I’m not sure that the client was forthcoming
or really knew what they needed in the first place. Unfortunately, many
clients are not skilled at running a pitch.
The takeaway is that agencies shouldn’t pitch everything. Period. Spend
the time to understand the client’s needs, motivations, and past agency
history and know why you should be the winner and what the search and
pitch details are—including payment terms (yes, often hard to gauge). But ifanything doesn’t feel right or professional, then bail.
Always keep in mind the cost of pitching and that, at best, an agency will
win only 30% of the time.
Budgeting for Business Development
Determining the balance between the cost of business development and its
effect on agency profitability is not easy. Having an established business
development plan and annual budget is essential to managing down business
development costs and driving up the win rate.
Business development costs include:
• Agency management costs. As an agency CEO I allocated 50% of my time
to business development. I view 50% as a goal for most agency CEOs or
COOs. It helped that I viewed biz dev as fun.
• Internal staff costs. This includes anyone who touches the business
development plan plus the salary and commission plan of a business
development manager.
• Annual marketing costs. These include thought leadership development
and any expenditures related to ABM, SEM, agency advertising, and other
marketing systems or platforms. Your business development plan should
include cost estimates.
• Out of pocket costs. Think freelancers, developers, and software
purchases.
• Onerous payment terms. Payment terms have evolved into insanity and
even bullying. The 2022 Keurig Dr Pepper PR agency search included the
marketer’s request for 360-day payment terms, meaning the winning firm
would not get its full payment for nearly a year. Try telling your dry
cleaner that you will pay your bill in 360 days.
Do Not Pitch That Account
My book 
The Levitan Pitch. Buy This Book. Win More Pitches
 spends a fair
amount of time discussing the bottom-line pain and people burnout issuesrelated to the cost of pitching—especially pitching too often. A big problem
is an agency not having tight selection criteria for the type of accounts the
agency should pitch.
It’s difficult for an agency to say no to a desirable client looking for a new
agency. It’s way less difficult if an agency has a specialization, an expertise.
Expertise will help you know what accounts to go after and, importantly,
which accounts should hire you. Think of having that expertise that helps you
say no, this account is not in my wheelhouse.
Here’s my topline take on larger-account pitch management. With full-on
pitches costing thousands in bucks and time, agencies should have a go-or-
no-go system to assess the potential of every pitch.
Reggie Jackson, an ex–New York Yankee, is a baseball hall of famer. He
got in with a .261 batting average. That’s only 3 hits for every 10 times at bat.
In agency think, this would mean that the agency would be Hall of Fame
material if they won 3 out of every 10 pitches.
Let’s do some larger agency math using the 1:3 ratio.
Based on my personal experience, conversations with 
agency CEOs, and a
review of existing data, on average, small to medium agencies respond to 10
RFPs and participate in six pitches per year. Your mileage may vary, but let’s
go with this.
My estimated cost per a larger agency RFP is $15,000 based on 150 hours
of work at a direct labor cost of $100 per hour. At 10 RFPs per year, that’s a
participation cost of $150,000 per year.
A conservative estimate of an average finalist pitch—which includes
external and internal meetings, pitch management, strategic planning, writing,
creative work, pitch design (as in leave-behinds and supporting digital
programs), the pitch itself, travel and expenses, and post-presentation follow-
up costs—is approximately $35,000. If an agency does six pitches per year,
that’s $210,000.
Obviously, given the size range between multinational networks and small
shops these numbers seem fair for the average agency, and they help frame
the issue.
Using my scenario, the total annual cost for RFPs and pitching comes to
$360,000. This number doesn’t include the day-to-day costs of business
development. If you add in management, creative, analog and digital
marketing, and business development director time, an agency could easilytop out at over $500,000 in labor and outsourced business development costs
per year. I am ball-parking here just to get to a reference number.
A total of $500,000 means that you better have a solid business
development plan and budget and sound who-should-we-pitch criteria.
Smaller agencies and one-person shops have to recognize that the time to
pitch takes away for getting the actual client work done. This cost can be
huge.
The Resources section includes a go–no go, to-pitch-or-not-to-pitch
assessment tool
.
Do a Client Assessment
Here’s another angle to help you decide which accounts to pitch. As an
agency owner, I always cherished four client attributes. Frankly, if I could get
just two of these, I’d be happy. Our agency-of-record client Nike delivered all
four.
1. Fame. Famous clients look great on your client roster, act as poster
children for prospective clients that need third-party reassurance that
you deliver results, and help you woo more talented employees. Having
famous clients will make your parents proud.
2. Creative love. You are in the creative services industry because you are
creative and want clients who respect creativity. Creativity to me
extends beyond just the creative idea into creative media, strategic
thinking, market insights, and technology. That said, the bottom line for
most agencies is that we want to make great advertising programs, and
to get there, you need clients who want that too.
3. Cash. Fame is nice. Clio Awards are nice. But cash rules. After all, you
are in business. In this case, money means having clients that deliver
agency profits. No profits means no staff, no creative, no brilliant social
media strategies, no awards to win—and no agency.
4. Niceness. Early in my career, I was given the advice that I should only
work with clients who align with my agency’s values and share mutual
respect. To take it a step further, work with nice people who you like. If
I appear to have gone all gooey, I listened, and it was great advice. Lifeis too short to work with assholes.
Nice is a good thing in a business where having fun is a key benefit.CHAPTER 23
The Business Development Director
74% Failure Rate Blues
Ah, the agency business development director. Agencies like to call this
position’s responsibility business development rather than sales because…
well, because business development can sound less salesy to our sensitive
agency ears. But it is sales after all.
Whatever you call it, I’m not sure there’s a more difficult job inside an
agency than that of business development director.
The tenure of a new business director is now two years or less. In a survey
conducted by RSW/US, only 26% of new business directors were considered
successful. Turn that around. That’s a 74% failure rate
.
What Can We Do?
First, let’s all agree that even the best business development director cannot
sell an advertising agency that doesn’t have clear marketing goals, a
reasonable sales budget, a distinctive and competitive positioning (please!),
services that at least look undeniably effective to the outside world, IP, and
committed and active agency management.
Everyone at the agency must understand that even your favorite clients
will eventually walk out the back door and must be replaced via an active
24/7 business development plan—in other words, fill the pipeline. Therefore,
business development programs must be treated with the same respect and
attention to detail that the agency delivers to its clients.
Make sure you have a strong competitive message and story. Always askthe question, If you were a client, would you hire you? If not, figure out why.
Fast.
To get the job done, run business development with the same attention and
systems that you deliver to clients.
Four Issues That Help Business Development Directors Fail
1. Little management patience. All too often the business development
director isn’t given the time to build out the plan and tactics before all
those new expected clients start to roll in. If the average tenure of a
business development director is around two years, it means a lot of
these folks are being hired (and let go) way too soon in the sales cycle
to make a sales dent. Worse, agency management doesn’t understand
the sales process itself. Maybe the boss should take a bit of sales
training.
2. A stranger in a strange land. Today’s wonderful business development
director often comes from outside the agency and might have to live
with the impersonal business constraints of working 
from home.
Distance is not a good thing. Business development managers need to
really understand the deep workings of the agency. How you do this
long distance requires the care and attention of agency management.
What happens when the new business development director has little
chance to integrate into the distributed agency and experience its
culture? This is a serious issue. It is incumbent on agency management
to integrate this important new hire into the organization. Have an
onboarding plan before they arrive. It starts with intelligent onboarding
and must include an alignment between the business development
director and clearly stated agency sales objectives.
3. Compensation. Another reason business development directors fail is
that the agency does not have a sound, sales-oriented compensation plan
that reflects the objectives of the master business development program.
Incentives baked into the compensation plan must be designed to
meet agency objectives. Sounds reasonable. But most agencies don’t
have sales experience and don’t know how to write a strategic
incentive-based comp plan. Elements should include:• A decent, livable base salary
• A bonus when the business development manager delivers a meeting
with a key prospect that is on your must-meet ABM list. Virtually
every agency leader tells me that they can close the deal once they
have a one-on-one conversation with that prospective client. Reward
that business development director for getting you in that room
• Payout of an incentive-inducing percentage of the first year’s revenues
(not profits, because an agency’s profit ratio is not the responsibility
of the business development director).
4. Focus. Do not have the director manage any new accounts. This would
be a major distraction. A big-time 
understatement.
5. Business development is an agencywide responsibility that needs to be
supported across agency functions. No new clients, no raises.
A 4A’s report cited that 90% of agency staff say they must figure things out
on their own due to the lack of training. I recommend that all business
development activists—anyone who plays a role in agency marketing—are
offered some form of basic sales training.
I put a sample business development director contract in the Resources
section.CHAPTER 24
How to Build, Buy, and Sell an
Agency
According to US Census data, the US advertising and public relations
industry reached an aggregated revenue of roughly $154 billion in 2021. It
was $81 billion in 2011.
There is money in them darn advertising hills. To get at it, you could start
from scratch, buy an existing agency, or sell out for massive bucks.
Build Your New Agency
New advertising and digital agencies are started every day. IBISWorld
reports that there are now 87,712 agencies. There were 60,000 in 2012. US
annualized advertising agency growth is +4.8%. Why?
1. New marketing platforms need new agencies. There were no TikTok or
influencer agencies a few years ago. A range of AI 
specialists is
coming.
2. The major consultancies are playing at advertising and have launched
their own well-funded creative agencies. Accenture Interactive bought
Droga5.
3. Older evolving platforms like SEO need new blood and ideas.
4. Hot teams leave their current agency, often with a client, to become
their own boss.
5. A 25-year-old just might just go digital nomad and break out of the
corporate world of an Omnicom. Go nomad in Chiang Mai. Sounds
good to me.6. Starting that new agency from your local coffee shop carries a rather
low cost of entry.
I’ve covered the major tools you’ll need to run a successful agency. Here’s a
quick recap.
1. Write that business plan. Know how and from who you’ll you make
bucks.
2. Define your brand positioning and expertise.
3. Build that thought leadership plan.
4. Determine staffing requirements, including full-time employees,
freelancers, and how to manage a distributed workforce. Hire slowly.
5. Set your pricing models and systemized processes.
6. Understand your cost structure. From IBIS: The highest costs for
business in the advertising agencies industry in the US as a percentage
of revenue are Wages (31.1%), Purchases (7.6%), and Rent & Utilities
(6.6%).
7. Build out a business development plan and tools including a sales-
oriented website. Make being unignorable an objective. Manage
workload by employing the art of “Keep it simple, stupid!”
8. Do the legal and financial work to understand and plan your financial
goals and guidelines
.
That’s the tough stuff. Time consuming. But you want to hit the ground
running. Deal with the detail upfront.
Now for some fun. Every advertising agency I’ve ever met has gone
through the agony and ecstasy of naming their company.
The Agency Name Game
Other than the positioning gyrations all agencies must go through, what
services to concentrate on, the design and redesign of their website, and so
on, how they name themselves is one of their most important branding
decisions.I worked for three advertising agencies. Two were founder named
agencies: Dancer Fitzgerald Sample (New York’s largest agency; remember
“Where’s the beef?”) and Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising Worldwide. The
third was my very own Portland agency with its current usage name Citrus.
Do advertising names matter? Wow, this is a tough one to answer. As
you’ll see from the different naming conventions listed below, how one
chooses a name is a journey.
Once again, some thoughts from Al Reis’s 
The 22 Immutable Laws of
Marketing
. Al on one of the great advertising taglines and names:
“With a name like Smucker’s, it has to be good.” Most companies,
especially family companies, would never make fun of their own name.
Yet the Smucker family did, which is one reason why Smucker’s is the
No. 1 brand of jams and jellies. If your name is bad, you have two
choices: change the name or make fun of it.
Smucker’s hard-to-ignore name helped it become a leader in the preserves
market. Can you name any other brands in the preserves market? More names
you ask. Just for the hell of it, here are some of the names from 
Ad Age
’s
2022 Small Agency 
Awards:
• Mojo Supermarket
• Movers+Shakers
• Fred & Fared
• Quality Meats
• Preacher
• Alto
• Opinionated
• NVE Experiential
• Media Matters
• Zulu Alpha Kilo
Do any of these agency names instill immediate confidence? A must-call
reaction? Stand out from the crowd? Communicate a benefit? Man, toughquestions to answer. However, these are all better than the insanely
unmemorable VML&R. This name deserves a WTF!
My current favorite is Movers+Shakers. This brand name has energy and
kind of meets the client pain point of finding a way to live through an era of
disruption.
The drill is that names do matter. Spend the time to think through the
naming process.
Five Types of Brand Names
1. 
Neologisms
A neologism, or new word, is just what you would expect it to be: a word that
is created.
Pros: New inventive products can make the new name synonymous with
their product (Xerox, Kleenex, Microsoft, eTrade). They are distinctive and
are globally friendly. There are no legal or copyright issues. Neologisms are
an easy domain name get.
Cons: Neologisms have no meaning and initially take more marketing
energy to become recognized.
Agency example: Smak calls itself the “impact agency.
”
2. 
Current usage words
Words that already have meaning. Brands with current usage names include
Oracle, Sprint, Apple, Tide, and Fidelity.
Pros: Current usage names telegraph brand values (Apple is friendly), tap
the name’s inherent attributes (Sprint is fast), can quickly trigger positive
imagery (Tide is fresh and clean), and communicate service messages with
less marketing spending (Uber).
Cons: Marketers must make sure that current usage names accurately
reflect the brand’s image and do not raise a negative or confusing response.
There may be trademark and domain hurdles.
Agency example: Opinionated. They say, “Opinionated people make
opinionated work, and given the dumpster-fire state of media these days,
that’s the only kind of work that gets noticed.”3. 
Hybrids
Hybrids combine current usage names. You might be typing on a ThinkPad
laptop. Or brushed your teeth with Aquafresh. I just played games on my
PlayStation.
Pros: Hybrids are like current usage names in that they quickly
communicate a brand message. In addition, the combination can build on the
power of the two-word combination. Finally, hybrids reduce the issues
associated with copyrighting the name.
Cons: The cons are like those of current usage names. The two words
could cause a bit of confusion.
Agency example: Media.Monks is a sweet name for a media agency. I
want the expertise, concentration, and dedication of a monk.
4. 
Acronyms
Acronyms are letter combinations that generally reflect a multiple word
name. In many cases, the Acronym has taken the place of the original name
(IBM was once called International Business Machines).
Pros: Acronyms can be distinctive and have few legal issues.
Cons: Acronyms require marketing to make them memorable. 
They have
little inherent meaning, and since they essentially say nothing about the
brand, they add little value to the customer branding experience. They can
also be hard to remember.
An easy agency target that I must mention again: Who the heck came up
with the ridiculous and impossible to remember agency name VMLY&R?
5. 
Founder names
Founder-based names abound across many service and product categories.
Ford, Chase, Jensen, and Schwab all are names of company founders.
Pros: Using the founder’s name adds direct personal credibility. It helps if
the founder has built, or is willing to build, an authoritative personal brand.
Cons: In most cases using a founder name requires marketing to seed the
name. It helps if the founder has a strong personal brand. Think
Vaynerchuck.
Agency examples: Allison+Partners is, guess what, named after Scott
Allison. Can you name the team that runs the brand and design firm Antonio& Paris?
The Naming Process
Yes, there is a strategic process to naming. Selecting a name should be an
important element of your brand-new advertising agency’s marketing plan. A
new name also works for agencies that need a facelift and repositioning.
I bought Oregon’s Ralston Group (a founder name), and then moved to
Ralston360 when we added social media to our mix, and then to Citrus when
we bought the design firm Citrus. A better name all around.
Things to Consider
You cannot begin to name your brand without establishing clear brand
positioning and business objectives, which in the case of ad agencies
sometimes just means sounding cool. Little Hands of Stone is arguably kinda
cool and is certainly distinctive. And the strange name makes me wonder just
who these guys are. HawkSEM is an expert SEM agency.
Craft your agency’s story and personality. Are your smart, friendly,
quirky, sincere, a quant jock, strategic, or just give good lunch? Before I sold
my Citrus agency, I thought of renaming it PORTLAND to leverage the
city’s creative reputation. I mentioned London’s agency LONDON
Advertising. Both London and Portland are well known for their creativity.
Hello, AUSTIN.
Do a competitive review. OK, this is a duh. A competitive review should
examine your competitors’ brand positionings and brand names. Depending
on who you talk to, there are like 4,000 agencies in the USA. Sounding like
the competition won’t help you stand out.
A Name Story
Here’s a little competitive-name happy-ending story for you. I sold Citrus the
agency in 2014. A couple of weeks after the deal closed, a sale where the
name Citrus was dissolved by the new owner, I was sitting in my room in
LA’s the Standard Hotel and checked my voice mail. An unknown lawyersaid I must call him immediately about a VERY serious company issue. He
was being rather aggressive. So, I gave him a call.
No polite chit chat, the tough a–hole lawyer dives into a threatening
diatribe about how I must get rid of the name Citrus because his agency
client, another Citrus, wants us gone. If I don’t do as he says, he will sue the
shit out of me.
While the dude is doing his nasty lawyer thing, I’m thinking this
conversation should be fun. So, I play along and let the guy rant and rave and
tell me that I must change the name of my 10-year-old agency like tomorrow.
I’m acting a bit nervous, but I’m telling him I can’t do much. He’s asking
why I can’t do much. After a few minutes of playful obfuscation, I say, “OK,
you win. I’ll change the name.” And I hang up. I never mentioned that my
own Citrus agency was no longer 
alive.
I use this story to tell you to do a research dive before you launch.
Brand Name Development
Once you have your positioning and a deep understanding of your
competition, it’s time to review the types of names that will work hard for
you.
1. Are these neologisms, current usage words, hybrids, acronyms, or
founder names?
2. Are there application factors that must be explored? Think about how
the name works in business development marketing, pronunciation,
spelling issues, and new geo markets, even global applications. Future
think is important.
3. Do a trademark review. A trademark review should be conducted early
rather than later. Don’t fall in love with an agency name you can’t own
(unless you have Apple-sized cojones).
4. The domain name. Ah, the URL. Ever spend hours on GoDaddy
searching for usable URLs? No matter your name, be prepared to wind
up with a hybrid or abbreviated URL or a unique top-level domain like
.agency, .io, or .media. Today, a URL is not as important as it used to
be.5. Be Google friendly. Common usage agency names like Walrus, Basic,
Naked, North, Steak, and Farm, even if you can get them, do not make
for easy Google searches. And they might be gone on Twitter, Pinterest,
Instagram, TikTok, and on and on.
6. Do research. Names can be tested via qualitative (ask your client friends
for their opinions) or quantitative techniques, including online surveys
on LinkedIn. Research? Really? It sounds a bit pedantic, right? It didn’t
to Paul Malmstrom of the compelling agency Mother
.
“The name ‘Mother’ basically came out of a focus group in the general
public,” co-founder Paul Malmstrom told AdFreak. “Sixteen different
tests were done around a randomly generated set of words, and all
groups (except one) settled for ‘Mother’ as a top contender. The tests
showed ‘Mother’ had pretty positive associations, ranging from
‘Nurturing,’ ‘Familiar’ to ‘Don’t eat with your mouth open.’ To the
founders this seemed to be great values to base the agency on. Words
not rated as high were, for example, ‘Wallet,’ ‘Meager’ and ‘Clogs,’ but
a close runner-up was (inexplicably) the word ‘Wienerschnitzel.’”
I like the letter 
A
. Way back in 2000 I founded the intelligent bot company
ActiveBuddy. Check out our startup launch video on my YouTube channel.
The name came from our entry into the instant messaging category with a
service that let people use natural language to talk to computers. The name
made sense—remember how active your IM buddy list was? Did we do
massive research funded by our VCs? No, my cofounder’s wife came up with
the name over dinner.
That said, I witnessed a great extra benefit of the name ActiveBuddy when
I attended internet industry conference and trade shows and realized we were
always at the top of the attendee, exhibitor, or speaker list. Our name started
with an A. While this realization was a duh moment, it made me fully
understand the power of the name AAA Plumbing within the context of
directories and how important it is to pay attention to every possible issue and
opportunity.
Do I take my own advice? When I launched my advertising agency
consultancy I went with a founder’s name: Peter Levitan & Co. I thought of
using SEO and Google-friendly keywords like combinations of advertising,
agency, ad, business development, new business, positioning, sales, pitching,presentations… but I figured why not grow my own founder brand, my
personal brand. Plus, my mommy and daddy 
named me.
Buy An Agency
Existing advertising, digital, PR agencies, digital agencies get bought. It’s the
fastest way to grow (in size and revenues) and to acquire new marketable
skills, an expanded client list, fresh talent, a new geography, and revenues.
I lived through the era of major agency acquisitions. Holding companies
bought up stand-alone agencies to add geographic reach and new skill sets.
Today, management consultancies acquire creative agencies to be able to
deliver more fully integrated services.
Today, experts get bought faster. Brainlabs bought the influencer agency
Fanbytes in 2022. Fanbytes, launched only five years earlier, works with
blue-chip clients including Samsung, Nike, Ubisoft, Mattel, Estée Lauder,
and H&M. It has data set of over 3 million influencers. Fanbytes is an expert.
According to Market Research Future’s latest report, the influencer market is
expected to expand at a compound annual growth rate of 8.2% to reach $2.85
billion by 2025.
OK, this purchase is a no-brainer for Brainlabs. They got a leading
influencer marketer, a set of new clients, and super smart people.
Need another expert agency purchase no-brainer? Acquisition-oriented
Accenture bought The Stable. Why? The acquisition immediately led
Accenture into the into the ecommerce space, omnichannel retail, direct-to-
consumer (DTC) commerce and big-name clients.
My point? You’ll get bought if you own something special. Yes, a duh.
Sell Your Agency
Marketing agencies get sold for various reasons. A critical element in
creating a positive sales process for the sale of your agency is to know (really
know) why you want to sell. Does this sound simplistic? Believe me, it isn’t
.
Allow me to briefly discuss the objectives and a bit of the history of mythree agency buy-and-sell deals.
I’m including some personal background, as sales are personal.
Deal 1: 2002
This agency purchase deal had multiple objectives. I wanted to leverage my
deep advertising and digital skills and buy a successful creative advertising
agency and move out of the New York area to much greener, mellower
pastures. The deal I was looking for would need to meet both business and
personal needs.
I bought the Bend, Oregon, advertising agency Ralston Group. It helped
that a large ski mountain was 20 minutes up the road.
Deal 2: 2006
This deal had one objective: agency growth.
My Ralston360 partner and I had been looking for over a year to buy a
complementary West Coast agency in Portland, Seattle, or San Francisco. We
knew we needed a foothold in a larger West Coast market to accelerate
growth.
We had come up short until we found Citrus, a small Portland design firm
that had an exceptionally strong relationship with Nike. We made a three-
year earnout deal with the two owners and picked up two Nike agency-of-
record account responsibilities: Major League Baseball and college sports.
Oh, we also took the name Citrus.
We got Nike, sports marketing expertise, two smart people, decent
revenues, an office in Portland, and a new name. That was a good business
deal.
Deal 3: 2011
This deal had two objectives: It was time for me to move on, and I wanted to
keep my agency intact for the benefit of my staff and clients.
By the ninth year of owning and running Citrus, I was starting to burnout I
had put in my sixteen years at Saatchi & Saatchi 
Advertising Worldwide’s
New York and London offices, I had been CEO of two internet startups, and I
had grown Citrus and its national client base, including Nike, Dr. Martens,
the Montana Lottery, Blue Cross, Providence Health (80,000 employees infive states), large regional banks, Idaho Power, Harrah’s, and the UN.
I also had other life plans. By that time my wife and I had lived in Oregon
for 14 years and my kids had gone off to college, I had money in the bank,
was building a solid nomad-based advertising agency consultation business
and had multiple countries on my must-travel-to list.
My business partner and I sold Citrus to another Portland advertising
agency. This was a local deal that made sense on many levels.
Reasons to Sell
Owners have a variety of reasons they want to sell their advertising agency.
Selling is both a business and personal decision. It’s important that the seller
really knows why they want to sell and how to get it done at the right price
and when.
Here are some key reasons for wanting to sell:
• General industry reasons. The marketing communications industry is
always in a state of flux: recession fears, hybrid work systems, new media
solutions. You just might be tired of managing constant transformation.
• Agency business reasons. My favorite reason to sell: You are undeniably
unignorable
. So well-known at being an expert that it’s time to cash in. I
need to stress the expert part. Experts sell faster and at a higher valuation.
• A dream reason. Someone has made you a offer you can’t refuse.
• A merger. You’re thinking strategically. You want your smaller agency to
hook up with a larger agency to help grow the business and to provide
major-league experienced guidance. Also, maybe you can offload some of
that management time
.
Here is a merge-versus-buy quote from Sir Martin Sorrell of S4 Capital that
ran in 
Media Post
. Remember, that Sorrell built WPP on the back of M&A in
the network growth days.
“Part of Sorrell’s disruption strategy, he said, was to find merger
candidates as opposed to acquisition candidates. ‘If you want to sell,
we’re not interested,’ he said. ‘If you want to buy in’ and have a‘missionary zeal’ for the business, that’s what S4 is looking for.
Nothing like some skin in the game to keep someone waking up in the
morning ‘with their heart in their mouth’ and focused on success, he
added.”
• Tired reasons. You are simply tired after years of running and growing an
agency. Especially true for over-50-year-old owners. Plus, you have built
undeniable value (I hope).
• One more big reason. You have other things you’d like to do. That was a
key reason I sold my agency, plus I did not what to reinvent the agency
model—yet again.
These are some of the reasons you might want to sell. Regardless of the key
business reason, I suggest that you take a deep breath and really understand
your
 motivations. Selling an advertising agency at any time can be (will
probably be) a long-term journey—a stressful journey.
Understanding your rationale will help you polish your agency and craft
the right deal and will dramatically help you to find and entice the right
buyer.
How to Sell High
Start here: Visualize your future buyer and their needs. You do this in your
business development work. Do that here. Why not create a buyer 
persona?
I knew that my buyer was probably another west coast agency that would
love to have my client list.
It’s time to ask a tough question. Please answer this honestly: “Would you
buy your agency?”
If the answer is “Yes, I’d buy me,” make sure you dig into your rationale
and polish your shiny bits. Plus, you better make sure that you’re not being
delusional.
Would you buy your agency? Yes? Really? You sure?
Does this sound harsh? Believe me, I’ve seen agency owners think their
agency is perfect and desirable only to hear cricket chirps in the marketplace.If the answer is “No, I would not buy me” and you still want to sell at
some point, then you need to pull out those business and marketing plans and
take the time to rebuild your agency with a target buyer and their wants in
your sights.
A positive note: As you build a better agency for a future sale, you’re also
building a better agency for today that will attract more new clients. A total
win-win even if you don’t sell right away.
To get to a new, more beautiful agency, you may need to make some big
adjustments.
1. Business model reinvention. How you made money in 2019 might not
work in 2025.
2. Find that compelling new or improved positioning. Be unignorable.
3. Add, adjust, or kill current services.
4. Consider brand extensions. Why not add subspecialties that can be
discreetly marketed?
5. Manage your client mix. Do not have a client that accounts for more
than 30% of billings. Get rid of low-margin clients.
6. Hike up your pricing. Get past having any vestige of being a low-cost
supplier.
7. Cut your costs sooner rather than later. Reduce liabilities and debt
.
8. Have a sound accounting system. Polish the P&L, balance sheet, and
EBITA.
9. See if you can make long-term deals with current clients to keep them
happy.
10. Adjust your processes. Efficiency is God. Remember that you can brand
your agency processes. Intellectual equity is a good thing.
11. Market the hell out of your agency. Fame is a good thing. Having a
solid business development program is a mega plus.
12. Be good looking. The San Diego agency Basic’s high-test website,
strong positioning, client base (Patagonia, KFC, Google Store), and
leadership branding look really good. FYI, Basic was bought by Debt—
a large European digital marketing agency based in Amsterdam.
Big point: Build your sales pipeline. Nothing builds interest and a highervaluation more than being able to say we are in discussions with Ferrari and
FritoLay.
The Valuation Game
Show me the money. Why not start with the prize. That said, I’m not going
into great financial depth here. I’m not an accountant. Or a business broker,
which is a sales option, though I’m not a fan of these folks for an agency sale.
Agencies are specialized beings.
Agency valuation techniques should be discussed with an M&A specialist
or an accountant. I can help you add lots of value to your agency, but I’m not
a financial genius. Know what you’re good at. If isn’t numbers, get an expert.
Earlier rather than later.
Valuation Options
• Asset-based valuation. Because your assets are agency brains, I don’t
believe this calculation makes much sense. This method 
calculates a
business’s equity value as being the fair market value of a company’s
assets less the fair market value of its liabilities. If you have IP, remember
Basecamp—good!
• The multiple. Some gurus use six times EBIDA as a starting point. OK,
this initially sounds good. But in real life, this multiple has ranged all over
the place. Experts get higher valuations—an integrated agency in Boise
not. You need a number, right? My research suggests that you can sell the
“average” agency for a three-times multiple.
• If you can, study industry sales comps. It’s difficult to impossible to find
out about private sales to use as comps. But you can explore reported sales
made to public companies such as WPP, the Interpublic Group, Publicis,
Omnicom, and consultancies. You can also explore information and news
from Adweek, Ad Age, the Drum, the 4A’s, and the Association of
National Advertisers.
Good luck.Define Your Agency’s Buyer and Their Mind-Set
Do a pros-and-cons buy-or-sell review. Take both sides of the equation. Be
brutally honest.
Run an agency SWOT analysis. Consider having multiple people do this to
reduce bias and wishful thinking. I have all my advertising agency
consultancy clients complete a SWOT analysis before we build business
development plans.
Build out scenario planning. What if we do this? What if that?
Write a creative brief to help you develop your sales pitch. You do this for
your clients. You are your own client when in agency-sale mode.
I previsualized the sales process as I wrote my Citrus agency sale creative
brief. What would I have to do to make the deal happen? What would the
buyer need to hear and see? What objections would I need to overcome?
What icing could I create to make the agency taste better
?
I based my rational understanding of who my target buyer would be on a
detailed assessment of our real value and who it would appeal to. It was a
delusion-free zone.
Here are the pros and cons we developed.
10 Citrus Pros:
1. We had a well-crafted regional reputation. Reputation is a good thing. A
quote from Bob Hoffman, at that time “The Ad Contrarian,” in my book
on pitching:
By the way, the best new business program is a good reputation. Duh!
2. Our name-brand client list was regional and national.
3. No single client accounted for more than 20% of agency billings.
4. We priced our agency services correctly. We did not position ourselves
as a low-cost agency.
5. We had an active business development program and industry-leading
thought leadership. For example, we launched an agency podcast in
2006 (yes, 2006) and ran the blog Recession Freakout in the 2007–2009downturn. We were forward thinking.
6. We had transferable creative and strategic prowess. The agency that
bought us was not as creative.
7. We had a strong balance sheet and P&L. We had a brilliant CFO.
8. We did not have any deal-breaking liabilities or long-term office leases
in Bend or Portland.
9. Importantly, I was not critical to the sale. I had been placing myself in
the position of not being essential to the management of any account
during the preceding two years. I would be an ego-free element of any
deal.
10. A plus: The buyer could subtract my salary, bonus and BMW lease
from our costs to immediately increase 
profits.
4 Citrus Cons
There weren’t many, as I had been crafting the agency for a sale for over a
year.
1. One serious limiting factor was that we were not really an expert
agency. We were just an excellent integrated marketing agency. This
reduced the pool of potential buyers. Dentsu didn’t want a 30-person
full-service outpost in Oregon.
2. Portland was already stuffed with creative and savvy tech agencies.
3. A potential con and a plus: I wanted the staff to move to the new agency
with their accounts. This was important to me. It was a tough objective,
but we met it.
4. Our clients could have revolted and split when they found out about the
sale. They didn’t because we managed the process and kept key people
in place. The deal was managed so the clients understood that all their
strategic, creative, and account management benefits remained solid. I
wanted the clients to go along with the deal. They did. This was another
key reason the buyer needed to keep my staff onboard.
Was I a con in any way? Nope, no con. I wasn’t moving with the business
and would not be missed. At that point, who cared? But as part of the deal, I
was required to stick around for three months.
While sitting and not doing much, I decided that the acquiring agencyneeded a new, robust business development plan. I accidentally discovered
my consultation business. It was to be one of dozens of advertising, digital,
design, PR agency plans I have written since I sold.
A Seller Option: Employee Stock Ownership Plan
Consider selling to your employees via an employee stock ownership plan
(ESOP). An ESOP is essentially a qualified retirement plan that invests in the
company
.
I considered an ESOP a few times during my tenure. However, it just
looked a bit too complicated for me, and a few casual conversations with
employees didn’t make me feel optimistic that the type of a deal was right for
them.
But exploring an ESOP has its advantages. Here’s a list from John
Brown’s 
Forbes
 article “Sell to an ESOP: The Most Undervalued Exit Path”:
You may attain financial security through a partial or complete sale of
your ownership interest and can stay in effective control until you are
paid in full.
A sale to an ESOP can be designed to accommodate your desired
departure date whether that date is in a year or several years in the
future.
You can leave your businesses gradually.
Owners can remain as president or CEO even after selling all
ownership to the ESOP Trust.
There are several tax advantages to the ESOP exit path.
If you have the time to think this through, which means you’re not trying to
run out your front door tomorrow, you might want to explore an ESOP option
with your accountant or exit planner.
Would the idea of selling to my employees have made me feel good? Yes.
Did I think I could pull it off? No.
The Earnout OptionAre you willing to take an earnout? To be clear, here is a definition of an
earnout from 
Investopedia
:
An earnout is a contractual provision stating that the seller of a business
is to obtain additional compensation in the future if the business
achieves certain financial goals, which are 
usually stated as a
percentage of gross sales or earnings.
Earnout or no earnout is an important decision an owner needs to make.
A standard example is some cash up front and quarterly payments based
on an adjusted gross income calculation. Most deals go in this direction—it’s
a contingency plan for the buyer.
FYI: This is what I did in the Citrus sale. I took some cash up front and a
three-year earnout based on the adjusted gross income of the accounts we
included in the sale. It worked.
Remember, I had set the buying agency up for success: the right crew,
solid accounts, strong profit margins, good reputation, and a positive status
quo. That said, the new agency lost some of our business in the third year.
But the bottom-line was that I was happy by then, still got some quarterly
income, and had moved on.
By the time some of the adjusted gross income was declining, I had a
profitable advertising agency consulting business and had built a house in the
best small city in Mexico and traveled a few months every year since I had
became an early digital nomad. My plan worked.
Manage Your Timing
Advertising, digital, PR, and so forth agency sales take time—often a long
time. A sale can easily take six months–plus if you talk with multiple dance
partners. And all too often a promising deal falls apart during those months of
talking.
Here’s what I would do in respect to timing:
1. Build out your sales plan. This is your agency’s internal plan to createvalue and a sales scenario.
2. Create an agency “For Sale” calendar to get the job done. This includes
all milestones from the initial decision to sell, to designing and
marketing the deal you want, to the closing.
3. Hone your business development plan. Look like and act like a 
winner.
Grow your sales pipeline.
4. Build out enhanced branding to make you look sharp.
5. Create new and improved assets. Got IP? Build it. License it.
6. Dial up branding for you and your key players.
7. Add in the time for lawyers, accountants, M&A guidance, and
document creation.
Assume that this sales process from the day you say, “Go—let’s find a
buyer” to a closed deal can easily take months. In many cases, your patience
will deliver more moolah.
Negotiation Or Not
Every sale requires negotiation skills and planning, but 
negotiation
 is a word
that too often strikes fear into agency executives. Agency execs and owners
are not good negotiators—they have little to no negotiation training and
limited experience.
Don’t take my word for it. My 
The Levitan Pitch
 book includes an
interview with Gerry Preece, a 22-year P&G agency services procurement
veteran and consultant with Roth Ryan Hayes, a leader in the field of agency
search. An unfortunate quote to internalize:
In 95% of the cases, agencies are babes being led to slaughter. Terrible.
Naive. Wishful. They get creamed. They are up against professional
negotiators, and they often put their unskilled (in negotiations), nicest,
most accommodating people against Procurement. It’s generally a
blood bath.
Hearing that 95% of P&G agencies are like “babes being led to slaughter” is
a painful point to digest. Note that in P&G’s case, we’re talking about someserious big-time network agencies that don’t know how to negotiate.
It’s baffling to me that I never took a course in negotiation. Why I didn’t
try to learn how to negotiate is crazy given the agency 
industry’s need to
wrestle every percentage point of margin out of our deals. The only thing that
makes me feel better about this deficiency is that I’m clearly not alone.
When To Tell Your Clients
Clients don’t like change. Frankly, most will view an agency sale, or merger,
as good for the agency and its owners but will question whether it’s good for
them.
It’s therefore critical to know how and when you’re going to tell your
clients you’re selling the agency. There’s a balancing act here: You can’t
spring it on them at the last minute, but you can’t bring them on board too
early.
My rule: Wait until your sale negotiations are finalized. Just imagine the
worst case: You tell the client that you’re selling and then the deal falls
through. This would not make you look like a genius and could make that
client a bit skittish.
Notify your key clients first. Communicate specifics that relate to
individual clients, as not all clients will react the same way. Be prepared with
answers to the following questions:
1. Who is the new owner? Know what they bring to the party.
2. What is the structure of the new agency? How will it affect the client’s
account? Could balls be dropped in the transition?
3. What benefits will accrue to the client from the sale? To keep the client
happy about the sale, make sure you can tell them why the sale would
be good and, importantly, friction-free for them. Put yourself in the
client’s mindset.
4. What changes to staff and service, if any, might the client experience
due to the sale?
5. How involved will the selling agency’s management be going forward
?When I told Nike we were selling Citrus, I could tell them that their agency
account and creative and production teams would all be moving to the new
agency. Furthermore, I could assure Nike that the larger combined agency
would provide better service and even fresher thinking. Our big boy Nike
said, “Sure thing. Why not?”
Again, every sale and client will be different. But don’t tell any client
about the sale before you must and before you get your positive good-vibe
ducks in a row.CHAPTER 25
Only One Interview
Going Into Orbit
My book 
The Levitan Pitch
 includes multiple interviews with industry
leaders including the all-important agency search consultant universe*. I
decided that this book needs only one interview.
*Yes, I continue to pitch that book.
I recently read Andy Crestodina’s book 
Content Chemistry: The Illustrated
Handbook for Content Marketing
. It’s a mind-blowing, very detailed, fully
illustrated overview of the world of content marketing. Buy it.
Andy is the cofounder and chief marketing officer of Chicago’s 50-person
Orbit Media Studios, an expert website development agency.
I gave Andy a shout and we discussed the following, which, not
surprisingly, reinforces some of the points I make in this book. In this case,
unbelievably brilliant minds think alike
.
The interview has been edited for clarity and brevity.
PL: There are so many advertising, digital, and content development
agencies. How do you use your book to stand out?
Andy: A way to differentiate is by being the most helpful, informative,
generous brand. When I started publishing blog posts 15 years ago, I quickly
figured out that the lifespan of a blog post is short, that the value you’re
putting out in the world is not very durable, and that I could get greater value
from this work I was putting in if I was more strategic about it and applied
more forethought.
So early on, I put out this hypothesis: If you think ahead and write anoutline of everything you know on a topic and then blog into those topics,
write articles about each of those subtopics, then you will end up with having
not just a list of topics and a bunch of articles, but you’ll have a table of
contents and a half-written book.
It’s partly differentiation. It’s partly a sales tool because we send it to
prospects, and it makes us look and feel different. So strategically, it’s a good
strategy because it’s efficient, and it solves a problem, and it supports the
bottom of the funnel. It supports sales. That’s basically it.
PL: I agree that books create differentiation. What other advantages do
you get from the printed word?
Andy: In the digital world there’s a Back button in front of the reader. A
book delivers more of a captive audience. If you can hook them and get them
into a printed book, they’re reserving more of their time and attention for you
than in other formats. There are no notifications, there’s no distractions. This
book doesn’t do anything else. And the fact that it’s so visual means that we
stopped making an electronic version of it. It’s print only. So, I’m really
looking for that quality time with the 
reader, for the chance at better attention
and intimacy.
PL: How does the book work into your overall marketing program?
Andy: The book supports sales goals. And prospects are the ultimate target
audience. They’re the most important target audience. But it also supports
marketing goals. It leads to lots of speaking engagements, it leads to
conversations like this one, it leads to interviews on podcasts, and it creates a
lot of exposure. Books are a differentiated format. Anyone can write a blog
post, hit publish, and it goes live. But there’s only a smaller percentage of
those of us that are willing to take the time, like you’re doing, invest all of
that research and writing into something bigger.
PL: How do you promote the book?
Andy: The book is sent directly to prospects after meetings. So that’s thenumber one way it gets promoted. The book also is promoted on our website
and has been a popular textbook at universities.
The book is in my introduction when I give presentations. We do at least
one or two webinars a week. This morning I was interviewed for a podcast. I
was asked, “How can people find you?” I say orbit 
media.com
, and I’ve put
all my best into one book called Content Chemistry. You can find it
anywhere. It ends up in my introductions, in my interviews, amplified
through all of my normal activity.
So, what you just heard was, there’s not a specific marketing strategy to
promote the book, but we get more value out of all of our visibility because
the book is included in everything we do.
PL: What are your thoughts about being a guest on other people’s shows
—podcasts, for example—versus doing your own?
Andy: Anybody can have a podcast. I’ve done that as a data-driven marketer.
It’s a black hole. There’s so little data and feedback you get on 
podcasts.
There aren’t good reports for it. It’s just an act of faith. Even if you’re very,
very efficient with the production, it’s frustrating to know what it’s doing for
you.
You rely on anecdotes. Oh, I heard you on that thing. So, my podcast
strategy is to be part of other people’s shows.
My blog post strategy is very similar. Early-stage content marketers, two-
thirds of their content should be on other people’s websites. Write for
everybody. Write all over the place. I will never stop guest blogging. It’s
been part of my strategy for 10 years.
PL: Thanks. I’m currently stealing lots of ideas from the book.CHAPTER 26
A Special Gift for You: Two
Instructive Stories
Here’s a real-life pitch lesson from my days at Saatchi & Saatchi London. It’s
a painful story that I hope will help guide you to win more new account
pitches. This story is the most read chapter in my 
The Levitan Pitch. Buy This
Book. Win More Pitches
.
The Worst Advertising Agency Presentation —
Ever
I won my first pitch in 1984. I was an account executive at Dancer Fitzgerald
Sample, which at the time was New York’s largest 
Mad Men
– era advertising
agency (Saatchi & Saatchi bought DFS in 1987). The pitch was for Western
Union’s $15 million EasyLink Service. EasyLink was the first commercial
email service and launched the same year as the IBM PC—the times were
changing fast. We won the pitch, and I learned how a well-oiled pitch worked
from a new business team that 
won nine out of ten pitches that year.
After I began working on the business, I asked Western Union’s senior
client why we won. She stated three reasons:
1. We took the time to do the research to understand this brand-new
market. We arrived with the insight we needed to lead with the benefit
of what we called instant mail and not the geeky packet-switching story
of electronic mail.
2. She was dazzled by our pitch presentation technology. We used a large
bank of slide projectors (this was 1984) to deliver our presentation
across a huge screen. Remember, the client was a technologist, and ourpresentation tools were perfectly mated to her background.
3. She liked us. The people factor matters.
After that first pitch, my batting average was a sweet 1,000.
Not all of my pitches went that smoothly, and over the years I’ve learned
from my winners 
and
 losers.
Here’s the story about the worst, most painful and potentially career-
ending advertising agency pitch I’ve ever been involved in. Let me warn you
that it is a sad—but 
instructive
—story. You’ll learn about hopes and dreams,
pitch management, ego management, client psychology, and baby seals.
Saatchi & Saatchi and Adidas
In 1992 Saatchi & Saatchi moved me from New York to London to run
business development and the Johnson & Johnson and Sara Lee accounts
across Europe and the Middle East. The agency set me up with a sweet expat
package that included staff, a nice travel and expenses budget, and a house in
Notting Hill. To say this was a cool move and a big job would be an
understatement.
Shortly after I arrived, my London friends moved me into what had 
been
Maurice Saatchi’s old totally white office before he and Charles headed
across town to the more palatial international HQ building. To say that sitting
at Maurice’s old desk was cool would be yet another understatement.
One day I was in my office with Maurice and Jeremy Sinclair (Saatchi’s
global executive creative director), and while discussing the agency’s new
business program, Maurice turned to Jeremy and said, “Boy, we made a lot of
bad decisions in 
this
 office.”
As it turned out, I was about to witness them making more bad decisions.
A few weeks after that meeting, Maurice told me we were going to pitch
the global Adidas account. Huge brand, global business, cool category, big
budget, powerful competition, and a potentially great creative platform.
Everything an agency could wish for.
At that time, Nike was on its world domination streak, and Adidas had to
step up its marketing. Nike wanted to kick Adidas’s butt by taking marketshare from Adidas’s global football business. Adidas was getting nervous.
And there’s nothing like pitching a highly motivated client that knows it has
to step up its marketing.
But wait, wait—there’s more… and it was personal. If we won the
account, I would open and manage my very own sports marketing agency to
run the Adidas account because Saatchi had an existing sporting goods client
conflict in the network.
A couple of days later, Maurice and the reclusive Charles Saatchi and I
met with Robert Louis Dreyfus, Adidas’s new CEO and majority owner, to
discuss the pitch. Get this: Robert was a close friend of the agency. He had
been the CEO of Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising Worldwide. He was one of
us.
One more good thing: Robert asked me to fly from London to Portland,
Oregon, to meet with Rob Strasser and Peter Moore, who just started running
Adidas America. Rob and Peter were sports industry superstars who helped
Phil Knight build Nike and were instrumental in the signing of Michael
Jordan. Rob and Peter told me that they 
wanted Saatchi to help lead Adidas
marketing into the ’90s. Adidas needed some Saatchi stardust.
Let’s stop for a second and parse this out.
I am working with Maurice and Charles Saatchi—the most famous
advertising men in the world.
They asked me to run a huge pitch for the global Adidas account. Adidas’s
CEO is a close friend of the agency, and the management of Adidas America
wants us.
If we won the business, I’d build and run my very own Saatchi sports
agency. I was already beginning to visualize a reception area adorned with
signed World Cup balls. OK, I was getting ahead of myself.
But wait, there’s even more good news: During an early meeting, Robert
leans over to me and says, “Peter, you’ve won this business as long as you
don’t fuck up the pitch.”
I was thinking, the world’s best agency doesn’t fuck up. I don’t fuck up.
The Pitch
I am now about to tell you how we did, in fact, fuck up, and more importantlyfor you, what I learned.
I think it’s important to point out that this was my first big pitch as Saatchi
& Saatchi London’s business development director. I’m happy to say that
I’ve gotten much better at pitching.
Because Adidas would be such a huge win for the agency, the Saatchi
brothers wanted to participate directly in the pitch. A rarity at that stage of
their careers.
Because Adidas had so much potential, they wanted me to use the creative
talents of Jeremy Sinclair (the agency’s global ECD) and Paul Arden, another
London creative all-star.
I was now working with Charles, Jeremy, and Paul—three of London’s
most famous creatives.
Looking good right
?
Nope… we started to make a whole set of brand-new mistakes right there
in Maurice’s old office.
Stay with me, there’s a lot of learning here.
Mistake 1
While we all said it was my pitch to run, I had a room full of owners and
enormous creative egos (English creative egos are huge) that were difficult to
control and were rather opinionated.
Lesson
Every pitch needs to establish one leader and manager. Period.
Mistake 2
My mega-ego creative team was the wrong team for Adidas. They didn’t
know sports; they didn’t want to study the market. And these middle-aged
guys did not understand the motivations of the younger sports-shoe
consumer. Especially how Nike was killing it.
Paul even called Nike “Nīk.” However, despite his mispronunciation, he
did have a big idea that was in fact very big.
The idea was that sport is akin to 
God
. Sport is a key ingredient in our
humanity: It brings out the best in us and it brings the world together. Think
of the 2022 Argentina vs. France World Cup game. Through this big idea,Adidas would own the power and humanity of sports itself.
Yes, that’s a big idea. Unfortunately…
The Ego Team decided we needed a video for the pitch to deliver the big
idea to Adidas. Paul went out on his own, wrote the script, and produced the
video. On his own.
To illustrate this big idea, the video included metaphoric images of man’s
inhumanity to man contrasted with the glory of sports. OK, I got it.
Unfortunately, the imagery went a bit over the top to include individual
metaphors like baby seals being beaten on the ice contrasted with the beauty
of high jumps. Bloody bloody 
baby seals!
Cue cringes.
To make matters worse, the video didn’t have a budget. You try telling
Charles Saatchi how much of his money he could spend on his pitch. The
video wound up costing over £30,000.
Lessons
Build the right team for the pitch. In this case the team was primarily based
on seniority, not perfect fit. (Note that I also had a savvy account planner and
well-oiled pitch team working on the pitch.)
Don’t lose control of the process.
Establish a budget going in. Stick with it.
Don’t give the creative team too much rope.
By the way, just in case you’re thinking I was completely out of my mind,
I had asked some of Saatchi London’s other award-winning creative teams to
come up with alternative ideas that we presented alongside the bloody seals
video. Due to the egos of the Ego Team, I had to do this side hustle on the
QT.
Mistake 3
I couldn’t get these guys to rehearse. I rarely got them in the same room at
the same time.
Worse, a couple of days before the pitch, Jeremy began to realize that the
baby seal video was going to be difficult to present (a rather large
understatement) and told me that I was going to present all the creative work.Lessons
Assign roles based on expertise not seniority.
Stick to a plan.
Rehearse and rehearse. A lot.
Mistake 4
We knew the CEO Robert Louis Dreyfus well. But we didn’t know the
Adidas marketing team. They were not part of the decision to seek a new
agency. This pitch was CEO driven.
In fact, we weren’t even aware that the Adidas marketing group had
already started on a new Adidas campaign approach with London’s Leagas
Delaney.
Lessons
Know what clients will be in the room and understand their motivations. I
should have realized that the Adidas marketing team didn’t want to be in the
pitch. We could have managed this. But we were so enamored of our
relationship with the CEO and access to internal Adidas information that we
didn’t bother to start relationships with the marketing team before the
meeting.
We certainly should have known that beating baby seals to death would
alienate virtually everyone in the room. Well, my team knew, but we had lost
control of that element of the pitch to the agency’s Ego Team by then.
Mistake 5
This is a mistake wrapped up in what’s usually a good start. Maurice opened
the meeting with a story. Sir Maurice is like the Steve Jobs of agency
pitching story telling—with the added benefit of an English accent.
We all know that starting with a relevant attention-getting story is a good
thing. However, since we didn’t rehearse, we didn’t know that Maurice was
even going to lead with his story, and we weren’t at all prepared to follow
along.
The story turned out to be an involved dream sequence about how ancient
Egypt, Pharaohs, and Adidas were alike. During the story, even I was spacing
out on visions of the Sphinx and pyramids.In addition to spacing out, I didn’t know that Maurice was going to hand
the meeting over to me immediately after he talked about my being in his
Egyptian dream. I’m sitting there listening to my 
very own dream, and then I
hear, “Take it, Peter.”
Lesson
Please rehearse.
Conclusions
Here are all the lessons:
1. Every pitch needs a leader and manager.
2. Never lose control of the process, which should include a timetable and
a pitch budget.
3. Make sure that every idea presented is based on an insightful strategy
that is developed from a deep understanding of the market and brand.
We had done market research, but it didn’t directly support the sport as
God creative concept.
4. Know which clients will be in the room, their backgrounds, and their
motivations. Understanding buyer business and emotional motivations
are keys to closing the sale.
5. Assign agency roles based on expertise—not seniority or “hey, it’s my
turn to pitch.” Only your best presenters should ever pitch.
6. Don’t give the creative team too much rope.
7. Rehearse.
8. Consider starting with a story. The 
right
 story.
9. Don’t show images of bloodied baby seals.
How Did It all Work Out?
As you might suspect, we did not win the Adidas account, and I didn’t get my
very own Saatchi & Saatchi sports agency with a reception area wall of
World Cup soccer balls.This pitch, a pitch we should have won, quickly became a famous agency
fuck-up story. Fortunately, everyone knew I wasn’t solely responsible
.
On the positive side, I did learn some powerful lessons and went on to win
more pitches in London and New York and have this great story to tell.
Retribution? Yes.
Adidas has never ever been lauded for its advertising. I’m sure that the
best creative agency in the world would have helped.
Nike did in fact kick Adidas’s global football ass.
We got a good laugh when shortly after the pitch Adidas’s marketing team
stole Saatchi’s brilliant tagline “Nothing is impossible” and humorously
reissued it as “Impossible is nothing.”
Years after the Adidas debacle my Portland agency Citrus won agency-of-
record business from Nike. I finally had my very own sports agency with
Nike as a lead client.
A Sad Ad Man “Bye-Bye” Story
This is a personal story about my Nike client. I can’t help myself from
sharing it.
It is instructive in the sense that it should remind us that the client is the
client. They are, at the end of the day, the boss. Not every great idea will get
past their boss filter.
How to accept and manage a 
no thanks
. Especially when you know that it
should be a gleeful yes, is an acquired marketing agency skill better learned
early.
A Client’s Shortsightedness Helped Me Sell My Advertising
Agency
Here’s how Nike blew my mind and reinforced my desire to sell my
advertising agency. At the time, we were a Nike advertising agency with
recurring annual revenues from our Major League Baseball and 
college
sports accounts.I often talk to agency owners about their plans (hopes, that is) for selling
their advertising agency sooner or later. Some are young and are being smart
about how to begin to create value for a future sale and some are simply
ready to move on – ASAP. Chapter 23 discusses the why and how of selling
in detail.
There were many reasons for my heading to the exit. I wanted to move on
from running an agency (I had been in advertising and marketing since the
1980’s); I was burnt out by the effects of the recession on our profit margin; I
didn’t want to hear about the next increase in my employee health plan; I did
not like watching advertising becoming viewed as a ‘commodity’; there were
simply too many agencies chasing too few clients; I had some pretty good
ideas for creating the “agency of the future” but didn’t have the energy to
make that happen and, finally, I got way tired of poor client decision-making.
Nike Blew My Mind
One of my agency’s’ more intelligent B2B clients was Digimarc, a
technology firm that essentially 
owned
 the early QR code market (even the
technology behind SoundHound) and, more importantly, digital
watermarking, a technology that could turn a graphic or logo into an active
QR code. Aim your phone at a QR imprinted logo (a real logo, not a bar
code) and it would launch a mobile marketing event. Digimarc called it “The
barcode of everything.”
One day I brought home a Nike running shoe box and thought that Nike
should use the Digimarc technology to activate the Swoosh from being a
static graphic to being a very active mobile event launcher. The program was
simple, inexpensive and global. Over time, Nike would alert its buyers that
there was information and promotional value in aiming their phone at the
Swoosh logo. I’m talking millions of boxes that could be brought to life, to
tell stories, build the brand and, sell more Nike products
.
Just think what Nike could do with the box and related videos: a video
message from LeBron, new product intros, deliver promotions, and on and
on. I’m like thinking that every one of the millions of currently “DUMB”
Nike boxes would all of a sudden become a “SMART” marketing tool.
I asked our direct Nike clients if they’d make an introduction to the seniormarketing team to show them how easily and inexpensively (I stress easy and
low cost) they could invent a whole new way to add significant value to their
packaging. Note, Nike sells hundreds of millions of shoes a year that come in
boxes that go directly into people’s homes.
I’m thinking… A No-Brainer Idea. Right?
We had the meeting, showed the from dumb box to smart box presentation
and instead of pats on our agency backs… we got blank stares. Blank stares!
I’m sitting there thinking that this is a major high value / low-cost no-brainer
and these guys did not get it. Did not get that for virtually no cost, they could
turn their packaging into a significant brand-owned mobile media event. A
media and marketing tool that was perfectly targeted to excite Nike’s core
market which are, of course, major mobile users.
Frankly, this was close to my last agency-life-straw.
It broke my resolve.
I’ll try to be kind here. I guess the Nike marketers were busy. But I did
have a sense that I was delivering pearls before swine. Am I being harsh?
Maybe. That said, I couldn’t believe that one of the smartest marketing
organizations in the world preferred to send DUMB vs. SMART packaging
into millions of homes.
An Update
Look, we have all proposed ideas that clients have not bought. Even brilliant
no-brainers. Nike’s not buying this idea was 
shameful.
Years later, the Nike AE that I made the pitch with on that fateful
afternoon now works directly for the Nike exec that didn’t buy the idea. The
exec still remembers my look of total disbelief when they said no thanks.
Of course, today, given the universal use of QR codes, I’d like to think of
how far Nike would have been ahead of this graphical mobile marketing
curve.CHAPTER 27
Resources
Four Resources for You
1. Best Advertising Creative Brief
2. Advertising Agency Positioning Statements
3. The Go-No-Go Pitch Quiz
4. Sample Business Development Director Agreement
The Best Advertising Agency Creative Brief
I was trained to use Creative Briefs to build out advertising programs. I’ve
used them for creative work, business development 
programs and content
plans. I used a Creative Brief to help sell my agency. A smart Creative Brief
outlines a program’s strategic objectives; the target audience and their current
thinking; reviews the deliverables; success metrics and the tone of the work.
It focuses the mind. Occasionally, I added the question of how the work
could be unignorable.
To provide some guidance, I offer an imaginary Creative Brief for a
podcast program from the Giant Gorilla agency aimed at the hospitality
market. This Creative Brief is designed to make the agency a category
thought leader.
A Sample Podcast Creative BriefCREATIVE BRIEF:
Giant Gorilla Agency Product/Service:
The Marketing Journey Podcast
January _1_202?
Background
London’s Giant Gorilla agency specializes in hospitality industry marketing.
It has been successful in building a large client base across a range of
industry subcategories. Giant Gorilla is known for its strategic approach, data
expertise, high ROI programs, and for its business insights and social media
channels.
It is time to move this energy into podcasting.
What is the objective of the project?
Create and produce a daily, brief, unignorable podcast for the hospitality
industry. Use the podcast to drive agency awareness and lead gen.
Each show will run for 5 minutes and will includes a brief agency
promotion. An example of this style of podcast is The Marketing School
podcast from Neil Patel and Eric Siu, it is an example of a quick-take daily
listen
.
Who are we talking to?
Listenership will include marketing leadership and press in the food and
beverage, lodging and recreation industries.
What do they currently think?
The hospitality industry took a major hit in 2020. Current trends point to
growing domestic and international travel. The cash cow of business travel is
not expected to reach the highs of 2019 any time soon.
The industry is ripe for the consumption of marketing information related
to category growth.
What do we want them to think and what action do we want them to
take?
We want the industry to view Giant Gorilla as the leading advertising andmarketing communications agency in the hospitality industry. The essence of
hospitality has changed, and Giant Gorilla is uniquely positioned to be a
leading voice in industry marketing.
What is the message that will move this target audience to action?
Giant Gorilla’s The Marketing Journey hospitality podcast delivers business-
building information, insights, and brief leadership interviews... every day.
“Give us five minutes every morning and we will help you accelerate your
growth.”
Program Elements: The Show
The five-minute 
The Marketing Journey Show
 will be published every
weekday at 8 AM EST.
Giant Gorilla’s COO Nancy Greene and Creative Director Jill Davis will
host The Marketing Journey. Nancy will use her past broadcast experience to
lead the discussions. Friendly, intelligent banter will rule.
From time to time, the show will bring in Giant Gorilla’s leading thinkers
(like CTO Sandy Goddof on TikTok and travel), current clients 
and guests
from the industry.
For production efficiency we will gang record five shows every Tuesday
afternoon unless there is late-breaking industry news.
The production team is TBD.
What are the support points?
Timely topics will include news about the business of hospitality: industry
trends; what’s hot in marketing; the move into new business models; and a
range of discussions on the constant evolution of hospitality marketing, with
a concentration on digital marketing.
Smart thinking + show personality + great guests = traction & agency
brand building.
We have already booked interviews with the CMO of InterContinental
Hotels; Shake Shack owner Danny Meyer, a very successful Airbnb host, and
the CTO of 
Hotels.com
.
Shows will be supported on the Giant Gorilla website with show notes andlinks and across social media channels. Guest will be encouraged to promote
their episode.
Shows will be used in agency ABM marketing.
What is the brand’s character?
The 
Marketing Journey
 is super smart, knowledgeable, and curious – all with
a touch of humor.
What is mandatory?
Each show will be broadcast on all of the major podcast platforms and will be
supported by individual show marketing.
Each show will promote Giant Gorilla’s hospitality industry expertise. See
The Marketing Journey marketing plan for detailed information
.
Agency Positioning Statements
I have been hammering the idea that advertising agencies, large, small, single
entity must have a brand positioning that stands out for so long that I had to
go to ChatGPT for a third-party definition:
A brand positioning statement is a brief statement that communicates
the unique value and identity of a brand. It is typically a sentence or
two that captures the essence of what the brand stands for and what sets
it apart from its competitors.
OK agencies. Stand out. Be unignorable. Agencies know this. But most
agencies are not standing out.
To demonstrate agency sameness (or to be kinder, variety), I’ve compiled
a list from the world of agency descriptions. Before I show the list, it is
important to know (I know you know this, but it is always worth keeping it
top of mind) ... the competition for creating differentiation is happening daily
whether you are a global, regional, local agency or a single entity. The
competition for mind-space is fierce. Just imagine being a client trying to
make sense of all these words and statements.I am not trying to tell y’all not to use one of these. Just make sure that the
way you express your positioning is designed to make you stand out.
Remember that you will need to condense any of these into that 3 floor
elevator pitch.
We Are Creative
1. Our work breaks through clutter
2. We are storytellers
3. We design and grow brands
4. We 
really
 are creative – we mean it! Ask to see our Clios, Lions,
D&AD’s, Webby Awards and Agency of the Year accolade
s
We Are Strategic
1. We eat disruption for breakfast
2. We create innovative brand strategies
3. We are a marketing R&D lab with a special sauce
4. We understand the future
5. Our strategy director rocks
6. We deliver and manage customer relationships
7. Our media research drives effective and efficient buys
We’ve Got Attitude
1. We are nice people
2. We disrupt
3. We are way cool
4. We are ambitious
5. We are client collaborators
6. We are big agency people who built a smaller, more nimble alternative
7. We are nimble8. We are funny
9. Our agency vision and culture statements are right on
10. We are not dirt bags
We Are Experts
1. We know 
your
 industry
2. We take challenger brands to #1
3. We’ve decoded digital advertising
4. We concentrate on B-to-B advertising
5. We are programmatic media experts
6. We get video marketing
7. We are retail + shopper + CRO expert
s
8. We are demographic experts
9. We create passionate brand relationships
10. Take one of our courses
We Deliver Results
1. We make brands unignorable
2. We crunch big data for breakfast
3. We are all about conversion optimization and ROI
4. Did we say ROI?
5. We deliver engagement
6. We are analytical geniuses
We Deliver Reassurance
1. Our founder wrote, “Whassup?”
2. Our CEO ran marketing at Apple
3. We’ve designed 157 websites4. We eat marketing transition for breakfast
We Get Around
1. Think Global
2. Think Global. Act Local.
3. We own your town, state, or region
And you? How do you talk about you?
Wait a minute. So, Peter, how have your agencies
positioned themselves?
Dancer Fitzgerald Sample, my 1,000-person NYC Mad Men agency 
used the
line; “
Ambitious Advertising.
” This defined our power-built advertising
campaigns and goal of landing the clients that were ambitious. Defining the
clients you want isn’t a bad approach. Our clients included Toyota, P&G,
General Mills, Nabisco and HP.
Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising Worldwide was all about our size (the
world’s largest) and very British attitude. We used the statement “
Nothing is
Impossible.
” It got us British Airways, Gillette, and Schweppes.
My Pacific Northwest agency Citrus told clients that we created
advertising that “
Moved consumers to action.
” 
Move
 was our key deliverable.
Our favorite clients were Nike, Dr Martens, Harrah’s, and the Montana
Lottery.
The Go-No-Go Pitch Quiz
I’ve pitched for new business from Fortune 100 companies to start-ups to
individuals. In all cases, the pitching, i.e., the act of selling and closing a deal
isn’t easy. It takes work, time, moolah, and will most likely reduce your
concentration on the needs of existing clients. Having a plan and a system todecide who to pitch and, as important, not to pitch is a good thing. A very
good thing. Here is an approach that can be modified for any type of large or
small agency.
You’ve been asked to respond to an RFP or, potentially better (keyword =
potentially), be a finalist in a new business pitch. Great. Now, should you go
for it? Should you spend your agency’s precious time, staff resources and
cash? This is your last chance to make this critical decision.
Since there are so many moving parts to making the all-important ‘Go’
decision, I developed a quick handy-dandy quiz that you and your senior
team can take to help you to decide if you really want to spend the time and
money to pitch this account. The quiz will even start to help you think
through what you will need to say and do to win the business.
The quiz isolates a set of decision-making criteria and employs easy 
math
to calculate your interest in actually pitching the account. You can, of course,
add or subtract criteria. The point is to use some gray matter and time to
make the right call.
You do not have to pitch every account that comes knocking. In fact,
don’t.
A note about your people: Since this is a strategic decision, and you really
don’t want to show your staff that you are taking a quiz to make the decision,
I wouldn’t put this in front of the agency or the pitch team. It’s just for
management. OK, maybe you could share it after the fact to show that you do
think through the Go decision-making process.
Each question has three answers ranked from 0 to 3. There is also a bonus
question related to incumbency. If your total score is over 10 then you have
no choice but to go for it. A 4 to 9 score is where you will have to use your
gut and personal experience to make the decision. 3 or less and I’d think hard
about ditching the pitch and instead take everyone in the agency out for a
beer.
Note: All client, pitch and agency motivations are different. You might
want to modify this list depending on your own situation.
The Quiz
1. 
Do you know the decision maker?0 – You’ve never talked to them.
1 – The client came to you through a personal referral.
2 – You are on a first name basis with the client. Maybe you’ve worked
together in the past.
2. 
Do you have any history with the company?
0 – Never crossed paths.
1 – You worked with someone at the client who can vouch for the quality of
your agency.
2 – You worked directly with the client or one of their brands in the past
.
3. 
How professional is the client’s agency selection process? Answer
either the client or the agency search consultant questions only. (A or
B, not both.)
A. 
Is the person running the pitch experienced?
0 – They have never ever run a pitch before.
1 – They are acting professionally.
2 – They have run pitches before and even sound like they are using the 4A’s
and ANA pitch guidelines.
B. 
Is the client is using a search consultant?
0 – You don’t know the consultant.
1 – You have pitched the consultant in the past but lost.
2 – You have won business from the consultant.
4. 
Is the client in a category that your agency has targeted?
0 – No.
1 – Yes.
2 – Yes, and we have a dedicated business development effort to add clients
in this specific category.
5. 
Do you have direct category experience?0 – You have none. Um, what’s a Widget?
1 – You have worked with a similar company or brand in the client’s
category.
2 – You are perceived as being a leading expert in the category. This is
probably due to prior client experience and recognized thought
leadership.
6. 
Do you know the client’s budget and / or how they plan to compensate
the agency?
0 – You have no clue, and the client isn’t forthcoming.
1 – The budget seems low, but you are willing to gamble
.
2 – We’re in the money!
7. 
Is the client looking for a “hot” award winning creative agency?
0 – You are creative but are not known for this.
1 – Recent campaigns have gotten you some industry attention.
2 – You have shelves full of Clios and were recently named to the Adweek
Agency of the Year Something list.
8. 
Do you pitch well?
0 – Pitching hasn’t been an agency strength.
1 – You have won a third of your pitches.
2 – You are so good at pitching that you have to pinch yourself.
9. 
How strong is your agency competition?
0 – They really kick ass, have a very high pitch batting average, and you
should be worried.
1 – They are very similar to you.
2 – They look weak.
Ladies and gentlemen, your score is _____.
As a reminder: If your score is over 10 then you have no choice but to go
for it. 4 to 9 is where you will have to use your gut to make the decision. Lessthan 3? It’s Miller Time down at your local.
A Bonus Question: Are you the incumbent?
Just to complicate matters, are you the incumbent agency? If so, you need to
think through why your beloved client has put the account up for grabs. Here
is my simple litmus test.
1. You have no clue why the client has put the account up for review.
Um, without knowing why I’d back way off. It has been reported that
only 10% of incumbents keep their account.
2. You are the incumbent, and this is one of those pre-scheduled
procurement-driven reviews. You know that the client loves you. I’d go
for it.
If the client has passed your Go-No-Go Quiz then it’s time to get to work.
Good luck!
Sample Business Development Director Agreement
I am including this sample business development employment agreement as a
guide to how to compensate and motivate an agency business development
director. Given the high failure rate of this position, we all could use any
guidance we can get.
I arrived at this agreement having been a mega agency biz dev director in
London and New York; played a key sales role in my Internet-based
companies, where a veteran newspaper sales director clued me into how to
build an effective comp program and biz dev management experience at my
own agency.
The Agreement
Re: Employment with ABC Agency, Inc.
Dear Meagan,
This letter is our formal offer of employment to you and confirms the termsof your employment with Agency, with a starting date of XXX. Should you
accept this offer you will serve as a full-time employee in the position of
Director of Business Development. Your responsibilities will include, but not
be limited to, developing new clients for the agency according to pre-defined
client criteria, gathering information about prospects that fit client criteria and
preparing research reports to be used in attracting prospects to the agency. In
addition, you will make outbound sales calls, appointments for agency
meetings and stay in 
touch with prospects via regular correspondence and
mailings.
You will play a key role in managing the agency’s response to proposal
requests, participating in presentations and if business is successfully won,
assure a smooth transition through introduction of the account team for them
to take over of the new account. Please refer to the accompanying job
description for a more complete review of the responsibilities.
You will receive a monthly salary of $X,000, beginning on your first day
on the job, payable on the 15th and last day of each month. You understand
that this position carries an exempt status and therefore you will not receive
overtime compensation for services performed under this employment
arrangement.
In addition to receiving a monthly salary, you will be eligible to increase
your income through commissions earned based on obtaining new business
for Agency. The program will work as follows:
You must be instrumental in the pursuit and attainment of new clients for
Agency based on prospect lists developed with Agency senior management
and approved by Agency shareholders. If you are successful in obtaining a
meeting with an approved prospect, you will receive a meeting bonus in the
pay period following the meeting. Meeting bonus will be $500 less taxes.
If Agency is successful in retaining the client, you will receive a
commission based on the client’s cumulative earnings. The commission rate
will be 5% of AGI (Adjusted Gross Income defined as gross billings
collected less direct costs related to those billings) generated on each client
acquired. The client must be current with payments and be in good standing
in order for commission eligibility. The commission will be paid 45 days
after the end of the calendar quarter and will continue for the shorter of up to
2 years from date of first billing or until the business affiliation between
Agency and you ceases to exist.Because business development is such a priority at Agency, we want to
reward active employees for their assistance in business development. As
such, we want to be clear in identifying what “instrumental” versus
“
assistance” means in developing new business. Please see the attached
Exhibit A, as a part of this offer letter, and which has been made available to
certain existing Agency employees with contacts that may be in a position to
bring new business to Agency.
At all times your employment with Agency is “at will”. “At will” is
defined as allowing either you as the employee or Agency as the employer to
terminate your employment at any time, for any reason permitted by law,
with or without cause and with or without notice.
You will be eligible for health, vision, life, disability and dental insurance
the first of the month following your 30-day employment anniversary. With a
start date of XXX, 202X, this coverage would be effective XXX, 202X. As
an employee your insurance coverage is paid for by Agency. Any dependents
you wish to cover under our group policy will be at your expense.
Please review the Employee Handbook accompanying this letter.
Company policy requires that you read this handbook and acknowledge your
understanding of Agency policies by signing the acknowledgment that
accompanies the Handbook. A copy of the acknowledgment also
accompanies this letter. Please return this signed acknowledgment to my
attention at your earliest convenience.
All designs, logos, copy, production records, estimates and other material,
whether written, printed, or drawn, whether or not subject to copyrighting,
made or devised by you or by you with others, will remain the sole and
exclusive property of Agency. Upon termination of your employment with
Agency for any reason, you shall immediately return to Agency any and all
documents and materials containing confidential and proprietary information.
Should your employment with Agency terminate for any reason
whatsoever, you agree and understand that for a period of one year from the
date of termination you will not solicit or influence any clients, or otherwise
divert or attempt to divert, directly or indirectly, any client from Agency that
Agency did business with at the time of such termination or had solicited or
did business with during the twelve-month 
period ending on the date of
termination.
Also, for one year following such termination, you will not attempt torecruit or hire, directly or indirectly, whether it be as an employee, consultant,
agent or representative, on a part-time or full-time basis, anyone who is an
employee or independent contractor of Agency now or was an employee or
independent contractor of Agency during your association with Agency.
You acknowledge that the restrictions contained in this letter, in view of
the nature of the activities in which Agency is engaged, are reasonable and
necessary in order to protect the legitimate interests of Agency and that, in
addition to all other remedies available to Agency, the Company shall be
entitled to injunctive or other appropriate relief. You further acknowledge
that Agency has introduced you to its sources of referral, its customer lists, its
processes, databases, fee schedules, etc.
If the provisions in the foregoing two paragraphs are found to be overly
broad or restrictive, then they will be construed in the broadest manner
consistent with applicable law.
If you are in agreement with this offer, please sign and date two copies of
this letter where indicated below. As this is being sent via email, return both
copies for final signature by Agency, upon which we will return a fully
executed copy to you.
We look forward to having you rejoin us as an Agency employee and to a
mutually beneficial association.
Very truly yours,
Peter Levitan, CEOThe Author
I like stealing smart ideas. I stole this author format from Derek Sievers who
was the mastermind behind CD Baby. I discussed the value of idea theft
earlier in the book. If you are going to steal ideas from someone, Derek is a
good start. Look him up.
Me In Twenty-Four Seconds
I’ve been a commercial photographer; an agency owner; an EVP, GM and
global business development director at the world’s largest agency. I founded
two successful early-stage Internet companies. Active Buddy, which
presaged Siri and AI, was bought by Microsoft.
I run a global consultancy dedicated to helping advertising agencies make
more money.
A New York native, I now live in San Miguel de Allende, 
Mexico.
You can too. Ask me how.
Me In 2 Minutes
My San Francisco based Levitan & Feinstein Photography worked for San
Francisco Magazine, Robert Mondavi Winery, Sonus, and Visa.
I joined New York’s largest Mad Men agency Dancer Fitzgerald Sample
Advertising in 1980. DFS had golden clients that included P&G, Nabisco,
General Mills, Hanes, Wrangler, Toyota and HP. One of my clients invented
commercial email. True.
The UK’s Saatchi & Saatchi bought DFS in 1986 while I was running theMinneapolis office. Going UK, I started to buy English suits. I won multiple
Effie Awards for early-stage content marketing. This was content before we
called it content. I called it information as a service.
I moved to Saatchi’s London office in the 1990s as European Director,
business development director, and managed Johnson & Johnson and other
accounts across Europe. I bought more English suits.
I discovered early-stage digital marketing when I returned to New York in
1995. After AOL’s President Ted Leonsis told to me to “get the fuck out of
advertising” (his exact words) l left the agency to invent the online news
industry for the third largest newspaper group. The Newspaper Association of
America named me its New Media Pioneer.
In 2000, I launched the startup ActiveBuddy and raised $30 million. We
led the world of natural language bots. Our SmarterChild bot had over a
billion Instant Messenger conversations across AOL, MSFT, and Yahoo.
Microsoft bought the technology in 2006.
I moved to Oregon in 2002 and bought the ad agency Citrus. Our clients
included Nike College and MLB AOR programs, multiple banks, healthcare
accounts including the five-state Providence, hospitality accounts including
Harrah’s Casinos, the Montana Lottery, and Legalzoom.
I sold Citrus in 2014. I’ve bought and sold three agencies. I know the art of
buying and selling agencies
.
I have spoken at the 4A’s, the ANA, Newspaper Association of America,
Radio Advertising Bureau, international and regional advertising orgs, and
recently at marketing universities across India.
My 
The Levitan Pitch. Buy This Book. Win More Pitches.
 has guided many
agencies in how to run business development. It is an example of how book
marketing drives personal brand awareness and business.
What I am Doing Today
I counsel and coach advertising, digital, design, and PR agency leaders across
the globe on how to build, manage, and sell kick-ass profitable advertising
agencies.
I have over 850 blog posts on business development. This is my fifth book.A Coda
I’ve covered a lot of territory in this book. All said, if you want to build a
kick-ass and way happy advertising agency you need to keep that new client
pipeline flowing.
To know how to efficiently get to that wonderful place where you get
hired, I asked Lisa Colantuono, President, AAR Partners (the industry’s
leading agency search consultants) about how clients make the final decision
to hire an agency. I believe her response works for any type of client and
agency from one person to 1,000. Take it Lisa:
PL: “How does a prospective client make that final agency selection?
Lisa: It’s a loaded question and of course, there are many variables involved.
One point to keep in mind is that the selection is not based solely on the final
presentation but rather the entire process and the progression from beginning
to end
.
Another critical factor is “translation” meaning the agency needs to
translate their plans into actionable ideas that make sense and helps the client
understand the output.
Of course, “chemistry” or as I prefer, “cultural compatibility” is key.
But after two decades of managing reviews, one client wrapped up making
that final agency selection into the simple three Cs: confidence, competence,
and cheeriness! You can’t have confidence without the competence but be
sure to show your assuredness and do it with a smile… In the end, people
want to work with people they trust and like.”
Now, a Big Request
If you enjoyed this book, please leave me a review on Amazon. I will loveyou forever.
Ciao
.