October 2023Transformation and People & Organizational Performance Practices
How to gain and sustain 
a competitive edge 
through transformation 
Our latest research confirms that a comprehensive approach to  
transformation, which enables mindset and behavior changes  
at scale, is crucial to success—including when it comes to  
outperforming peers.The modern organization  is facing a confluence 
of disruptions that have raised the bar for how 
companies manage change and transform 
themselves. The results of our newest McKinsey 
Global Survey on transformations continue to 
confirm just how much value is at stake, and  
how much can be lost, at every phase of such 
change efforts.
So what really works when it comes to today’s 
transformations? We know that successful 
transformations involve a wide range of actions that 
reflect the will, skill, rigor, and scope1 of the effort. 
But after surveying transformation participants 
across the globe, we identified seven actions in 
particular that are most likely to increase the odds 
of a transformation’s success—by both achieving 
and sustaining performance improvements2 and 
helping organizations establish a lasting competitive 
advantage (see sidebar “About the methodology”).3  
The seven actions we identified—including role 
modeling, moving quickly, and striving for holistic 
impact—point to a clear transformation approach 
for managing change successfully in an ever-
changing world.The value at stake and the 
foundations for success
Consistent with our previous research, we find that 
companies are losing potential value across all four 
phases of a transformation4—most notably during 
the execution of transformation initiatives (Exhibit 1).
1 For the purposes of this article, we discuss will and scope separately to distinguish between leaders’ and employees’ commitment  to the  
 transformation’s aspiration, which is reflected in will, and the breadth  of that aspiration, which is reflected in scope.
2 Includes respondents who say their organizations’ transformations of the past five years have been very or completely successful at improving  
 the organization’s performance (for example, profitability, return on capital, market value, lead-time reduction) and at sustaining those  
 improvements into the present day.
3 Includes respondents who say their organizations’ performance has been better or much better than competitors’ since the  
 transformation began.
4 For more, see “Losing from day one: Why even successful transformations fall short,” McKinsey, December 7, 2021.About the methodology
Our online survey was conducted from April 11 
to April 25, 2023, with 472 respondents who had 
been a part of at least one transformation effort 
in the past five years. Only respondents whose 
transformation initiatives had been at least partly 
implemented answered the full survey, including 
questions on the transformation’s success. Our 
sample included respondents who held various 
roles in the transformation, from senior leaders and 
sponsors to contributors and owners of specific 
initiatives. To adjust for differences in response 
rates, the data are weighted by the contribution of 
each respondent’s office location to global GDP to 
develop insights that are as representative as  
possible of a global business audience. In this 
article, we report on the results for the actions that 
had the largest effects on the outcome metrics.  
Exhibit 1
McKinsey & CompanyWeb 2022
MeetingTransformationChallengeSurvey
Exhibit 1 of 6
19 37 25 20Distribution of lost /f_inancial bene/f_it, by transformation phase,1 %
Note: Figures do not sum to 100%, because of rounding.
1We de/f_ined “/f_inancial bene/f_it” as the potential increase in EBITDA that the transformation could have achieved. Respondents who answered “don’t know/not 
applicable” are not included in the analysis. 
Source: McKinsey Global Survey on transformation, Apr 11–25, 2023 (n = 472)Respondents report that value is lost across all phases of a transformation, 
especially during execution.
After execution Execution Planning Goal setting
2
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation To understand how companies can realize or reclaim 
this value, we asked participants about a range 
of actions that are used to support a successful 
transformation effort, including those that are associated with the “influence model,” McKinsey’s 
long-standing theory of behavior change within  
an organization.5 (See sidebar “The influence  
model, explained.”)
 In McKinsey’s research  and experience, 
the most effective change efforts follow 
the four elements outlined by the “influ -
ence model,” an essential tool for changing 
people’s mindsets and behaviors.1 In the 
transformation context, we recommend 
pursuing these four elements to ensure the 
changes are comprehensive and systemic. 
1. Engage on and communicate a 
bold aspiration . A truly successful 
transformation sets a high bar 
for the organization. To back 
bold aspirations, leaders can do 
three things. First, they can foster 
understanding and conviction among 
employees across the organization 
through change stories and 
communications dedicated solely to 
the transformation. When employees 
understand the reasoning behind 
the changes they’re asked to make, 
they’re more likely to act in support 
of these changes. Second, they 
can emphasize speed. When the 
transformation moves quickly yet 
thoughtfully and includes input from 
employees, people are more likely to 
recognize why the effort is important and different from past ones. And 
finally, they can strive for holistic 
impact: when a transformation aims 
to improve a range of outcomes, 
not just financial ones, employees 
are more likely to link the overall 
aspiration to their own work and what 
matters most to them.
2. Mobilize a leadership network 
to role model the change. When 
company leaders demonstrate the 
behavior changes that they are 
asking others to make as part of the 
transformation, employees are more 
likely to follow suit. And remember, 
leaders come from everywhere   
in the organization, not only from  
the C-suite.
3. Enable better, faster execution 
through reinforcing mechanisms. 
When an organization establishes 
structures, systems, and processes 
that align with the goals of the 
transformation, employees are 
more likely to feel supported and 
rewarded for adopting new mindsets The influence model, explained
and behaviors. Among the essential 
mechanisms to bolster these 
changes are incentives, operating-
model changes (for example, the 
streamlining of decision rights 
and “boxes and lines”), process 
changes, systems and technologies, 
governance, performance 
management, and corporate norms 
about how work gets done.
4. Ensure the adoption of new skills 
at scale.  When employees have the 
skills to act in a new way, they are 
more inclined to make the desired 
changes to their mindsets and day-
to-day behaviors. Such skills relate 
to everything from execution and 
leadership to functional or technical 
expertise. And across skill types, 
employees are better equipped to 
support the transformation changes 
under way when they are offered a 
range of targeted opportunities to 
apply the skills they learn in their 
day-to-day work.5 Tessa Basford and Bill Schaninger, “The four building blocks of change,” McKinsey Quarterly , April 11, 2016.
1 Tessa Basford and Bill Schaninger, “The four building blocks of change,” McKinsey Quarterly , April 11, 2016.
3
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation Respondents’ answers suggest that four broad 
elements underlie transformation success:
 —Will: an ambitious, shared aspiration to reach the 
organization’s full potential
 —Skill: the capabilities and tools of the 
organization as a whole (for example, gathering 
market intelligence and using that to inform 
product design), as well as those of the 
individuals who make up the organization 
(for example, focusing on the right priorities, 
communicating clearly, and running meetings 
effectively)
 —Rigor: the performance infrastructure of the 
transformation effort (for example, incentive 
structures) that enables the disciplined 
execution of individual initiatives and the 
sustainability of the effort’s overall impact
 —Scope: the range of outcomes that the 
transformation aims to improve, such as 
EBITDA, working capital and cash, customer 
experience, employee health and safety, or 
greenhouse-gas emissionsThe survey results, and our experience, affirm 
that a comprehensive approach to transformation 
is best. Nearly all respondents (96 percent) 
from transformations that implemented all four 
elements say their efforts improved and sustained 
organizational performance, compared with  
13 percent of respondents from transformations 
that implemented just one.6 Furthermore,  
despite the difficulty of outperforming peers in a 
continually evolving competitive landscape—and 
the inherent challenge of large-scale change 
efforts—respondents whose transformations 
implemented all four elements report a much  
higher rate of outperforming peers than those 
whose transformations implemented just one.  
They are more than twice as likely to say so:  
39 percent, compared with 16 percent. Yet the 
results suggest that few organizations are taking 
this comprehensive approach, with only 6 percent 
of respondents reporting transformations that 
implemented all four elements.7 
In our research, we also identified seven actions 
that underlie the four broader elements of will, 
skill, rigor, and scope. Since respondents reporting 
many of these actions are nearly twice as likely as 
their peers to see successful outcomes (Exhibit 2), 
we took a closer look at each one—with a focus on 
how the seven actions can help companies create a 
sustained, competitive advantage. 
6 To determine which respondents reported that their transformation implemented one of the four elements, we analyzed their responses to  
 questions about the specific actions that underpin will, skill, rigor, and scope. For some actions, respondents’ transformations are categorized  
 as doing that action if they say their organizations implemented a related action effectively or very effectively. For others, respondents’  
 transformations are categorized as doing that action based on their identification of, for example, the types of skills the organization made  
 efforts to build (for “skill”) or the length of time it took to see meaningful improvements in the outcomes the transformation aimed to improve  
 (for “rigor”).
7 It’s possible that few respondents say their transformations have implemented every element, because missing one makes it harder to  
 implement the other three. For example, transformations may encounter barriers to execution (rigor) if their employees aren’t committed to the  
 reasons for the transformation (will). Only 21 percent of respondents report that their transformations implemented the actions that reflect  
 skill, and 21 percent say the same for rigor (compared with 76 and 70 percent, respectively, for will and scope).
4
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation Will: The organization’s commitment 
to the aspiration 
To influence the organization’s will to undertake 
the transformation, we identified two actions that 
are related to transformation success: fostering 
understanding and conviction, and role modeling.
Fostering understanding and conviction.  The 
survey results indicate just how critical it is that 
employees understand why they’re being asked to 
change. Respondents who say their transformations 
fostered understanding and conviction are 3.2 
times more likely than those without this action 
to report outperformance versus peers after the 
transformation began.To start, companies should explain why the 
transformation is necessary in the first place. 
According to the survey, respondents whose 
transformations explained the rationale are 3.1 times 
more likely than others to report outperformance 
(Exhibit 3). Also critical is clarifying its implications 
for employees across the organization, identifying 
important stakeholders who can build conviction 
internally, and ensuring that leaders use a 
consistent change story to align the organization 
around the transformation’s goals.Exhibit 2Web 2022
MeetingTransformationChallengeSurvey
Exhibit 2 of 6
McKinsey & Company0 25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100
4.7× 3.2×
1.7× 1.6×
2.2× 1.5×
1.4× 4.0×
1.7× 1.2×
4.3× 1.6×
1.7× 1.9×Success rate of transformation, % of respondents
1Respondents who say their organizations’ transformations have been very or completely successful at both improving their organizations' performance (eg, its 
pro/f_itability, return on capital, market value, or lead-time reduction) and sustaining those improvements into the present day.
2Respondents who say their organizations’ performance has been better or much better than competitors’ since before their transformations began.
Source: McKinsey Global Survey on transformation, Apr 11–25, 2023 (n = 472)When respondents say their transformations involved each of seven key 
actions, they also report a higher rate of success.
Respondents reporting improved and
sustained organizational performance1Respondents reporting
outperformance vs peers2Element Action
Will
Skill
Rigor
Scope Striving
for holistic 
impactEmbedding 
reinforcement 
mechanismsMoving
quickly to
realize impactApplying skillsBuilding skillsRole modelingFostering
understanding 
and convictionPresence of action Absence of action
Multiplier
5
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation Role modeling.  Leaders need to walk the walk 
with respect to the desired mindset and behavior 
shifts they’re asking others to make during the 
transformation. Respondents reporting that leaders 
role modeled changes are 1.6 times more likely to 
report outperforming their peers.
To do this, leaders can start by communicating 
changing expectations and norms clearly and 
consistently and providing employees with 
opportunities to learn more from leaders about the 
transformation. They can also identify “influencers” 
(that is, influential people whom other employees 
look to for advice, input, or ideas) and involve 
them in the transformation as owners of important initiatives or milestones, since role modeling 
happens—and matters—across all levels of  
the organization.
For example, one industrial company in a dire 
financial situation took several steps to ensure 
that all employees were committed to the 
transformation’s aspiration. The CEO personally 
shared powerful and honest stories about why 
the transformation was necessary at all levels of 
the organization, so employees understood as 
well. He also role modeled new behaviors that 
employees were expected to demonstrate. For 
example, he showed he was taking the change 
effort seriously by running core meetings when Exhibit 3Web 2022
MeetingTransformationChallengeSurvey
Exhibit 3 of 6
McKinsey & Company1442
3.1×
2041
2.1×Success rate (outperformance vs peers),1 % of respondents
1Respondents who say their organizations’ performance has been better or much better than competitors’ since before their transformations began.
2These questions were used to determine whether the transformation fostered understanding and conviction. We determined that the speci/f_ic actions above were  
“present” in the transformation if respondents said their organizations implemented the action and that the action was eﬀective or very eﬀective at sustaining changes .
Source: McKinsey Global Survey on transformation, Apr 11–25, 2023 (n = 472)Respondents whose transformations foster understanding and conviction are 
more likely to report outperforming peers.
Presence
of actionAbsence
of action
Leaders in the organization 
helped employees understand
how the transformation would
help the organization move in 
the right direction2Leaders in the organization 
helped employees understand
why the transformation
was necessary in the
/f_irst place2
6
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation the chief transformation officer couldn’t attend 
and by leading courageous conversations about 
the transformation in forums that were open to a 
wide audience. He also held himself personally 
accountable when his team made any missteps: 
apologizing to the organization, providing the 
rationale for what happened, and committing to 
doing better next time. This commitment cascaded 
throughout the organization, with nearly 50 percent 
of the workforce involved in individual initiatives 
in some form by the transformation’s second year. 
Through the transformation, the organization 
saw substantial shifts in mindsets and behaviors. 
The company also realized massive performance 
improvements, including to its share price, which 
increased by more than ten times during the 
transformation.     
Skill: The capabilities the organization  
needs to succeed
To ensure that the organization has the capabilities 
needed to support the transformation, respondents’ 
answers point to two actions: building skills and 
applying skills. 
Building skills. Once the organization has fostered 
commitment to the changes, it can initiate efforts 
to build the necessary skills for transformation 
success, including technical, execution, 
interpersonal, and leadership skills—which other 
McKinsey research suggests are foundational 
for the future of work.8 Respondents stating their 
transformations included efforts to build all of these key employee skills are 1.5 times more likely to 
report outperforming peers.
To do this, companies can formally evaluate 
employees’ skills to identify gaps and initiate 
efforts to develop capabilities that are directly 
linked to value creation. Our past research on 
transformations confirms the importance of 
linking business and talent priorities—namely, 
by identifying high performers and giving them 
ownership of high-value initiatives.9 
Applying skills. Throughout the transformation, 
employees need regular opportunities to apply the 
skills they are learning. When they do, respondents 
are four times more likely to report that the 
organization outperformed peers.
Companies can create these opportunities by 
providing resources to support employees’ behavior 
changes during the transformation. In the survey, 
respondents who say their organizations provided 
resources for applying new skills through tools,  
such as dashboards and project plans, are 3.8  
times more likely to report outperforming peers  
(Exhibit 4). Companies can also establish a weekly 
meeting cadence for employees at all levels to 
share their progress on applying new behaviors 
and monitor the implementation of transformation 
initiatives, to ensure that people have enough 
opportunities to demonstrate the skills they  
are building.
8 For more, see Marco Dondi, Julia Klier, Frédéric Panier, and Jörg Schubert, “Defining the skills citizens will need in the future world of work,”  
 McKinsey, June 25, 2021.
9 “Losing from day one: Why even successful transformations fall short,” McKinsey, December 7, 2021.
7
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation A global equipment manufacturer and services 
provider was particularly effective at ensuring that 
the organization had the full complement of skills for 
the transformation to succeed. To create sustained 
behavior changes, the organization engaged more 
than 50,000 employees in more than 100 countries 
and in nearly a dozen languages in formal capability-
building programs. These programs covered a 
range of foundational skills, from providing tactical 
project management support to project owners to 
advising senior leaders on how to motivate their 
teams through a mix of in-person, virtual, and digital 
delivery formats. The organization also developed 
programs to enhance employees’ core business 
skills and expertise in topics across operations, 
sales, strategy, and finance. By shifting behaviors 
through skill building, it improved execution skills across levels, from senior leadership to the front 
line, with more than 95 percent of participants 
recommending a broader deployment of these 
programs. According to executives, the organization 
now has a shared language and set of common 
tools, which are accessible by all employees, for 
sustaining the behavior changes made in the 
transformation. “Common language, common 
behaviors, uncommon impact” was a familiar  
refrain about its capability-building programs.
Rigor: The organization’s discipline 
in executing rapid change 
The survey results suggest that the successful 
execution of the transformation involves two 
actions: moving quickly to realize impact and 
embedding reinforcement mechanisms.Exhibit 4Web 2022
MeetingTransformationChallengeSurvey
Exhibit 4 of 6
McKinsey & Company3.8×46
121.9×42
22Success rate (outperformance vs peers),1 % of respondents
1Respondents who say their organizations’ performance has been better or much better than competitors’ since before their transformations began.
2These questions were used to determine whether the transformation enabled employees to apply new skills. We determined that the speci/f_ic actions above were 
“present” in the transformation if respondents said their organizations implemented the action and that the action was eﬀective or very eﬀective at sustaining changes .
Source: McKinsey Global Survey on transformation, Apr 11–25, 2023 (n = 472)Respondents whose transformations provided tools and opportunities for 
employees to apply new skills are more likely to report outperforming peers.
Managers in the organization 
provided opportunities for
employees to apply what
they learned from the
transformation in their daily work2The organization provided tools 
(eg, dashboards, project plans)
to support employees in making 
behavior changes that were part 
of the transformation2Presence
of actionAbsence
of action
8
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation Moving quickly to realize impact. Time is of 
the essence when organizations are making 
improvements on the outcomes the transformation 
aims to address.10 As we’ve seen in earlier research, 
much of the value a transformation ultimately 
creates is typically achieved in its first few months.11  
Respondents reporting that the transformation realized impact in less than six months are 1.2 times 
more likely to say their organizations outperformed 
peers. What’s more, we also observed that  
57 percent of respondents whose transformations 
realized impact in less than six months reported 
improving and sustaining organizational 
performance (Exhibit 5).
Exhibit 5Web 2022
MeetingTransformationChallengeSurvey
Exhibit 5 of 6
McKinsey & Company363757Success rate (improved and sustained organizational performance), 
by length of time to see meaningful improvements,1 % of respondents
1Respondents who say their organizations’ transformations have been very or completely successful at both improving their organizations' performance (eg, its 
pro/f_itability, return on capital, market value, or lead-time reduction) and sustaining those improvements into the present day.
Source: McKinsey Global Survey on transformation, Apr 11–25, 2023 (n = 472)Respondents who saw meaningful improvements quickly are more likely to 
report improved and sustained organizational performance.
More than
12 months6–12 
monthsLess than 
6 months10 The survey asked respondents about five types of outcomes that their organizations’ transformations aimed to address: financial, operational,  
   or both; customer; employee; social, environmental, or both; and capability building.
11  Kevin Laczkowski, Tao Tan, and Matthias Winter, “The numbers behind successful transformations,” McKinsey Quarterly , October 17, 2019.
9
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation To speed things up, leaders will want to identify and 
execute quick wins (for example, on pricing and 
improved spending management) within the first six 
months and create a road map of iterative sprints for 
more complex transformation initiatives.
Embedding reinforcement mechanisms.  Also 
critical to rigor is the implementation of new policies 
and procedures that reflect and reinforce the 
transformation’s formal changes. Respondents 
who report the use of reinforcement mechanisms 
are 1.6 times more likely to say their companies 
outperformed peers.  To do this, companies can start by including 
transformation-related objectives in annual 
performance reviews, holding project leaders 
accountable, and tying employees’ financial 
incentives directly to transformation outcomes. 
Survey respondents reporting that their 
organizations aligned employee incentives with the 
transformation’s goals are 2.6 times more likely to 
report outperforming peers (Exhibit 6).
Exhibit 6Web 2022
MeetingTransformationChallengeSurvey-Ex1to6-mp
Exhibit 6 of 6
McKinsey & Company1.5×29
192.6×47
181.8×54
29Success rate (outperformance vs peers),1 % of respondents
1Respondents who say their organizations’ performance has been better or much better than competitors’ since before their transformations began.
2These questions were used to determine whether the transformation embedded reinforcement mechanisms. We determined that the speci/f_ic actions above were 
“present” in the transformation if respondents said their organizations implemented the action and that the action was eﬀective or very eﬀective at sustaining changes .
Source: McKinsey Global Survey on transformation, Apr 11–25, 2023 (n = 472)Respondents whose transformations reinforce the changes being made through 
a range of formal mechanisms are more likely to report outperforming peers.
Presence
of actionAbsence
of action
The organization
incorporated expectations
for new behaviors
into annual
performance reviews2The organization
aligned employee
incentives with
the goals of the
transformation2Leaders in the
organization held
employees accountable
for contributing to the 
transformation2
10
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation A power company executed change rigorously by 
incorporating transformation targets in its planning 
processes, including budgeting, and in the metrics 
used to evaluate executive performance. The 
organization also moved fast, implementing more 
than 700 initiatives to realize over $150 million 
within the first few months of implementation. By 
the transformation’s third year, the organization 
was incorporating transformation targets into 
annual reviews, holding employees accountable, 
for instance, by linking individuals’ goals to their 
contributions to transformation targets. Through the 
transformation, the organization saw a 60 percent 
increase in its stock price over a three-year period. 
More than five years into the effort, the company 
has sustained the changes that it made. 
Scope: The breadth of the aspiration 
Finally, our results suggest that transformations 
with a broader scope tend to outperform peers. 
More specifically, these transformations aim to 
improve the organization’s performance in more 
than one of the following dimensions that we 
tested in the survey—financial, operational, or both; 
customer; employee; social, environmental, or both; 
and capability building—which we define as striving 
for holistic impact. Respondents reporting that the 
transformation had a holistic aspiration are 1.9  
times more likely to say their companies 
outperformed peers. 
To do this, companies should set bold aspirations 
that aim to improve performance across a wide 
range of outcomes. Earlier research has found  
that much of a transformation’s value is generated by these types of growth initiatives, which shows 
that addressing both the bottom and top lines  
helps the organization reach its full potential 
through transformation.12  
An energy company is pursuing an enterprise-
wide transformation that’s broad in scope by 
equally prioritizing change in three dimensions 
of the organization: its health (or organizational 
effectiveness), operational performance, and financial 
performance. The company is emphasizing each of 
these goals equally, based on an organization-wide 
mindset that is focused on sustaining long-term 
performance, rather than short-term gains alone. The 
bold aspiration also provides employees a shared, 
meaningful goal to compel them to modify their 
behaviors in pursuit of sustained gains, rather than 
focusing exclusively on short-term cost reductions.  
To meet and exceed the ever-rising bar for 
organizational change, companies should consider 
how transformations can set them up for a true 
competitive advantage—in addition to achieving 
successful outcomes for the change effort itself. 
The results of our survey suggest that the seven 
actions noted above, rooted in the science of 
behavior change, can help accomplish both 
objectives. Through these actions, leaders can 
ensure that their organizations have in place four 
essential elements for transformation success—will, 
skill, rigor, and scope—that could give them a better 
chance at outpacing the competition in a time of 
constant disruption and change.
Designed by McKinsey Global Publishing  
Copyright © 2023 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.The contributors to the development and analysis of this survey include Rajesh Krishnan , a partner in McKinsey’s New York 
office; Nicolette Rainone , a data science specialist in the Columbus office; Zachary Silverman , a partner in the Atlanta office; 
and Dominic Skerritt , a partner in the New York office. 
They wish to thank Tejas Channagiri, Mitzi Cohen, Miren Elía, Ben Fletcher, Jon Garcia, Arne Gast, Louisa Greco, Stephan 
Görner, Julie Heaser, Kourosh Houshmand, Jacquie Hudson, Randy Lim, David Mendelsohn, Nehaarika Mulukutla, Hanna 
Oliveto, John Parsons, David Pralong, Jennifer Simmons, Fábio Stul, and Joachim Talloen for their contributions to this work.12 Kevin Laczkowski, Tao Tan, and Matthias Winter, “The numbers behind successful transformations,” McKinsey Quarterly , October 17, 2019.
Scan • Download • Personalize
Find more content like this on the 
McKinsey Insights App
11
How to gain and sustain a competitive edge through transformation 