1
How	Brands	Streamline	Their	Agency	Partnerships
©2019	eMarketer	Inc.	All	rights	reserved.
How	Brands	Streamline
Their	Agency	Partnerships
ARTICLE
JUNE	20,	2019
Amy	He
Shrinking	media	budgets,	aggressive	growth	goals	and	ever-complex
marketing	needs	are	causing	a	shift	in	the	brand-agency	relationship.
In	their	bid	for	self-preservation,	brands	are	streamlining	spending	and
in-housing	capabilities.
Brands’	concerns	with	agency	partners	range	from	the	need	for	better
design	and	creative	(33%	of	respondents),	different	pricing	models
(30%)	to	more	flexible	working	models	(25%),	according	to	a	study
conducted	by	the	Society	of	Digital	Agencies	and	Forrester	Research.
The	study	further	surveyed	client-side	marketers	about	why	they2
How	Brands	Streamline	Their	Agency	Partnerships
©2019	eMarketer	Inc.	All	rights	reserved.
terminate	their	agency	partners.	A	third	of	respondents	(33%)	said	they
terminated	over	pricing,	19%	said	it	was	over	new	management	at	the
brand’s	organization	and	16%	cited	cost	overrun.
Marketing	strategies	require	increasingly	complex	tech	and	data,	as
well	as	sophisticated	expertise	that	can	come	from	external	partners—
partners	that	tend	to	stay	ahead	of	the	curve	with	best	practices	and
new	innovations.	But	brands	want	to	be	more	self-sufficient	and
increase	their	internal	capabilities	to	control	first-party	data	and	have	a
direct	relationship	with	their	customer,	so	the	brand-agency
relationship	has	started	to	evolve.
“Agency	relationships	can	be	a	black	box	for	brands,”	said	eMarketer
principal	analyst	Jillian	Ryan.	“Transparency	and	control	were	major
concerns	for	brands	looking	to	streamline	the	agency	relationship.	For
many	the	end	goal	is	more	ownership	over	their	customer	data	and	the
ability	to	self-sustain.”
When	brands	begin	streamlining	their	partnerships	with	agencies,	they
start	a	discovery	process	that	will	help	them	assess	what	marketing
and	advertising	goals	they	want	to	reach,	what	internal	capabilities
they	already	have,	what	areas	still	require	agency	partners	and	where
gaps	and	overlaps	exist.
This	assessment	process,	ironically,	involves	another	type	of	external
partner—like	a	management	consulting	firm—that	helps	brands
distribute	skill	sets,	source	new	talent	or	even	find	an	agency	partner
to	manage	this	work.
Once	brands	complete	their	assessment	process,	they	use	flexible
engagement	models	to	do	their	work:	they	either	bring	their	work	in-
house	or	consider	a	hybrid	engagement	model.
In-housing	refers	to	taking	work	that	was	previously	outsourced	to	an
agency	internally	so	that	a	specific	internal	team,	group,	or	single
employee	manages	the	work.	
Executives	at	Verizon,	Chobani,	and
Trunk	all	noted	in	interviews	with	eMarketer
	
that	in-housing	enabled
better	access	to	major	decision-makers	and	allowed	for	increased
flexibility	and	speed	on	projects.
Brands	that	don’t	want	to	completely	part	from	their	agency	can
partially	in-house	operations	while	still	leaning	on	external	agency3
How	Brands	Streamline	Their	Agency	Partnerships
©2019	eMarketer	Inc.	All	rights	reserved.
counterparts.	In	fact,	most	in-house	agencies	(85%)	still	outsource
functions	to	external	providers,	according	to	2018	research	from	the
In-House	Agency	Forum,	so	agencies	don’t	need	to	necessarily	view	it
as	a	threat	to	their	existence.
Additionally,	for	in-housing	to	work,	agency	partners	need	to	support
brands	in	their	effort	and	offer	coaching	to	aid	brands	on	their	journey.
“Brands	implementing	a	flexible	engagement	model	have	more
purview	over	their	marketing	and	advertising	capabilities,”	said	Ryan.
“This	approach	also	leaves	room	for	agencies.	They	have	an	expertise
in	many	of	the	specialties	that	brands	are	looking	to	manage	internally
and	should	offer	support,	training	and	guidance	to	brands	to	stay
relevant	and	necessary.”
To	get	further	analysis	on	how	the	brand-agency	relationship	is
changing,	read	our	latest	report.
Report
	
by	
Jillian	Ryan
	
Jun	13,	2019
The	Brand-Agency	Relationship
