 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Implementing Effective Marketing Dashboards  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
Measuring marketing performance has become a top priority for  almost 
every organization, yet most do  not have a  comprehensive system in 
place.  
 
Marketing Dashboards provide a high -level snapshot of the  most critical 
metrics that relate to business performance.  
 
Benefits of implementing a Marketing Dashboard include:  
 
 Ability to Measure Marketing Effectiv eness/ROI  
 Improved Visibility for Senior Management  
 Better Allocation of Resources  
 
 
This report will define Marketing Dashboards, highlight their  benefits, 
and provide high -level Best Practices for establishing  an integrated 
performance measurement system . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Introduction         3 
 
What are Marketing Dashboards?      4 
 
Benefits of Marketing Dashboards      4 
 
Implementation Best Practices       5 
 
Conclusion          12 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Introduction    
 
 
 
 
Over the past 10 years there has been a distinctive shift in Marketing 
activities; budgets are only being allocated to investments that can 
produce measurable returns, such as sales support and lead generation. 
In a time of Sarbanes -Oxley compliance, repeatable controls, processes, 
and policy & procedures, have been implemented to ensure 
accountability.  
 
This cultural shift is spreading into Marketing as senior executives have 
witnessed increased efficiency & effectiv eness by standardizing, 
measuring, and benchmarking, key metrics in functions like Finance, 
I/T, Sales, and Operations.  
  
Structured processes and analytics are new for most Marketing 
departments, so it is no wonder that in a recent CMO Council  Survey, 
Marketing Performance Measurement was  highlighted as a significant 
priority by over 90% of the companies. Strikingly, less than 14% of 
these companies reported having any type of comprehensive system to 
measur e Marketing. Those who did have systems in place significantly 
outperformed their competitors in revenue growth, market share, and 
profitability.  
  
Clearly, it is essential that Marketing professionals learn the Marketing 
Performance Measurement discipline  if they are to survive. No longer is 
it acceptable to provide gut -feel estimates of the impact of marketing 
programs. Results must be measured.  
   
A simple approach to measuring performance is implementing a 
“Marketing Dashboard .” This report will define Marketing Dashboards, 
highlight their benefits, and provide high -level Best Practices for 
implementing an integrated performance measurement system. Before 
implementing any MPM solution, be sure to read our summary, “ Get 
Ready to Measure Marketing Performance ” and complete the 
Dashboard Readiness Assessm ent. If you are already measuring 
your marketing perform ance, use our Marketing Measurement  
Maturity Assessment  to benchmark your strengths & weaknesses and 
to identify areas for  improvement .    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Benefits of Marketing Dashboards  What are Marketing Dashboards?   
 
   
 
 
Marketing Dashboards are comprised of the most vital diagnostic and 
predictive marketing metrics, structured so that executives can quickly 
identify trends in performance.  
  
Typically, Marketing Dashboards have 3 -5 key metrics in each of the 
following categories:  
  
 Customer  
 Product  
 Brand  
 Channels  
 Efficiency  
 Organizational Development  
 Environment (macro -economic)  
  
Once the key metrics have been established to highlight performance for 
that aspect of marketing, data can be sorted by: geography, business 
unit, markets, or any other relevant perspective.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
There are numerous reasons why you should consider improving your 
performance measurement system for marketing.  
  
Some of the key benefits are:  
  
 Development of a Performance -Driven Culture  
 Increased Visibility for Senior Executives & Board  
 Ability to Demonstrate Effectiveness & ROI  
 Justification of Marketing Budget & Spending  
 Improved Sales & Demand Gene ration  
 Better Allocation of Department Resources  
 Financial Risk Mitigation of Future Investments  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Implementation Best Practices   
 
   
 
 
Following are the 7 key stages of implementing a Marketing Dashboard:  
  
1. Discuss Project with Steering Committee  
2. Assemble a Project Team & Complete Project Plan  
3. Review Data Sources & Identify Gaps  
4. Select Critical Performance Metrics  
5. Build a Framework for Measuring Results  
6. Develop a Brand Scorecard  
7. Select a Marketing Dashboard Solution  
  
Next, we will examine these stages and provide practical advice to help 
you with each step of the implementation.  
 
 
1.  Discuss Project with Steering Committee    
  
Marketing Dashboards are not for every organization. If your senior 
leadership does not buy -in to the concept, your project will never get off 
the ground. Achieving cross -functional alignment on the role of 
marketing in your organization is a key success f actor for a successful 
implementation of a performance measurement system. Use our 
Dashboard Readiness Assessment  to determine how prepared your 
organization i s for a Marketing Performance Measurement or 
Dashboarding initiative.  
  
Influence the key stakeholders in your organization by communicating 
the benefits of your business case, from their perspective. If it is a VP 
Sales, speak in terms of increased Sales Support , Lead Generation , 
and better Customer Relationship Management . For a CFO, focus on 
the ability to track financial returns from Marketing investments, and 
better allocation of resources & budgets. Us e Demand Metric’s 
Stakeholder Analysis Matrix  to identify key stakeholders and 
evaluate their interest, power, support level, and buy -in. 
  
Once you have achieved  approval to implement a Marketing 
performance measurement program, and obtained a solid commitment 
from your peers to help you with the process, you are ready to assemble 
your project team.  
  
   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
2.  Assemble a Project Team & Complete Project Plan   
  
First, determine the goals & objectives of your project plan . Ensure you 
have alignment with the general business strategy, and create high -level 
goals that will resonate with your sponsors at the executive level.  
  
As measuring performance and developing a Marketing Dashboard is an 
integrated exercise, build a cross -functional team including leaders from 
the Sales, Information Technology, Finance, and Customer Service 
departments. You will require insights from each of these areas if you 
are serious about keeping a pulse on your department and its 
effectiveness. Distribute a project p lan, which includes the following: 
goal & objectives, scope of work, deliverables, costs & scheduling, and 
acceptance criteria.  
  
Having a detailed roadmap of your project will ensure that you stay on 
track, gain momentum as you achieve milestones, and man age 
expectations accordingly. Many performance measurement initiatives 
have failed as a result of improper planning up -front. To minimize risk, 
be sure you invest the time to document what you are trying to 
accomplish.  
  
  
3. Review Data Sources & Identify Gaps   
  
Every organization contains huge volumes of information that can be 
converted into insightful, decision -making data, if properly extracted. 
Information can come in many forms: staff industry knowledge, 
operational transaction data, and sto red information on shared drives, or 
filing cabinets.  
  
Following are a few areas to check first:  
  
 Historical Transaction Data  - every company should have a 
record of past results. Examine the impact your previous 
Marketing efforts had on the business. Ge t a grip on future by 
analyzing the results of your past.  
 Marketing Research  - perhaps you have some raw survey 
results from customers that can provide some insight into the 
dynamics of your markets.  
 Intuition & Experience  - if you have access to executive s who 
have been in the industry long enough to know that if you do 
this, that will happen, leverage their experience to provide at 
least a base level of understanding.  
   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
While you are mapping your knowledge base and gaps , you will develop 
hypotheses about the relationships between key data and predictive 
insights. For example, you may draw parallels between client 
satisfaction and customer retention rates which influences profitability. 
The whole goal of a Marketing Dashboard is to help you understand the 
casual links between marketing performance and business results.  
  
  
4.  Select Critical Performance Metrics  
  
Reconsider the agreed -upon role for marketing in your organization to 
determine what information you need to be able to effectively measure 
your performance. Determining the questions that you will inevitably 
need to answer is a precursor when establishing an effective dashboard.  
  
Work backwards from th e business objectives to identify what marketing 
needs to do to support these goals. If market share is the key 
performance indicator, attempt to find that kind of information, so you 
can put a stake in the ground. Alternatively, if you are in a mature 
market, your key benchmarks might be focused on client retention, or 
superb customer service.  
  
After you have documented what you need to know, assess the value & 
cost to obtain that information. Pluck the low -hanging fruit that is high 
value & low cost; di sregard completely what is low value, high cost; 
ignore the low value, low cost; and work slowly towards the information 
that is high value, high cost.  
  
Following is an example of a matrix that you ca n map your knowledge 
needs into:  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
This mapping exercise leads to the identification of your opportunities 
(what you know), risks (what you don’t know), and key success factors, 
which in turn, limit the scope of what could be measured, to what needs 
to be measured. Your goal is to el iminate any potential metrics that 
don’t correlate to business results in a straightforward manner.  
  
In the initial stages of your dashboard, you may have an alarming 
number of “ key performance indicators ” that have been highlighted. 
A typical company will have anywhere from 25 -40 of these measures, 
based on the 7 key categories of metrics.  
  
Over time, you will test & refine your hypotheses regarding the  causal 
chains, eliminate redundant measures, sort, prioritize, and learn which 
are truly the most effective indicators of performance. Keep structure in 
mind, as it will be easier to glean insight and identify patterns if your 
metrics are organized in a s ensible way. In the end, you will likely focus 
on 10 -20 key metrics that help you operate more efficiently & 
effectively.  
  
Most companies are able to effectively measure direct mail, 
telemarketing, and internet marketing, as many software tools have 
these  capabilities. While these areas are certainly important, don’t forget 
that branding, channel marketing, sales & marketing collateral, 
advertising, and market research, represent a significant portion of 
marketing budgets, and therefore need to be analyzed  and measured. 
Build momentum with the easier areas to measure, but don’t omit the 
other aspects.  
  
  
5.  Build a Framework for Measuring Results  
  
The cultural shift to approve corporate initiatives that have immediate 
quantifiable impact is a dangerous dynamic for marketing professionals. 
On the one hand, it is critical that a business invests in areas that have 
short-term benefits and returns, but on the other, it can leave out key 
areas such as Brand Equity. Overcoming this near -sightedness depends 
on your ability to develop a measurement framework that incorporates 
both short -term and long -term financial results.  
  
Instead of focusing on return on investment for each marketing program 
individually, establish a Customer -Base Value (CBV) benchmark that you 
can monitor to track results. Work with Finance & Accounting to agree 
on the calculation for Customer -Base Value. Take the total number of 
customers and multiply that by the net present value of these customers 
(gross profit contribution) over their av erage lifetime. Be conservative 
with your estimates and only take into account the products that your  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
customers are currently purchasing or expected to continue purchasing. 
It may take a few passes to have everyone agree on the formula, but 
once you have t his benchmark you can start measuring performance 
over various periods of time.  
  
Using a standard benchmark like Customer -Base Value will make it 
easier to present business cases for investments, and track results. For 
short-term investments like tradesho ws, you can demonstrate the 
impact over a few months. When measuring long -term programs like 
Branding, you can take a snap shot of your CBV before and 12 -24 
months after. Having a common denominator like CBV is also good for 
measuring the effectiveness and  efficiency of your marketing spend.  
  
Your metric for effectiveness can now be the actual change in CBV for 
each period compared to the expected change in CBV. If a particular 
initiative, like CRM, is expected to increase CBV by a certain amount, 
you can now measure the effect of that program based on a real 
increase in CBV. Similarly, marketing efficiency can be defined as 
change in CBV/dollar spent.  
  
Both efficiency and effectiveness measures are best analyzed from a 
historical perspective and compared to targeted goals. Setting and 
refining goals and expectations will help your organization continuously 
improve and advocate performance measurement. Once you have 
developed your CBV benchmark, you are in a position to analyze the 
return on short & long -term marketing investments from a financial 
perspective.  
  
  
6. Develop a Brand Scorecard   
  
One of the most difficult elements to measure is the impact of your 
brand on future economic value. Marketers tend to convince their peers 
that a solid brand is the foundation for retaining customers, attracting 
new customers, and maintaining prices in a competitive environment.  
  
In reality, measuring the long -term value of marketing investments that 
create “preference” and “loyalty” for your brand is critical. In ma ny 
industries, over half of the annual marketing budget is spent on 
programs that do not clearly relate to incremental profits, but do 
improve the vitality of the brand in the marketplace. Since this type of 
investment doesn’t provide a means of generating  increased revenue in 
the short -term, it needs to be treated as a separate asset.  
  
Given that strong brands produce returns over a longer period of time, 
you need to develop a method of calculating brand equity and track its  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 10 
improvement. This is where a B rand Scorecard can help you; it 
measures your brand strength in the perceptions of your customers and 
prospects. Diverging from the marketing Dashboard, which evaluates 
marketing investments from a corporate perspective, the Brand 
Scorecard asks “what do o ur customers, prospects, and employees, 
believe about our brand?” and “how do these perceptions translate into 
opportunities for economic development, or risks that need to be 
mitigated?”  
  
Use a Brand Scorecard  in conjunction with your Marketing Dashboard 
to track the accumulating goodwill that has yet to transform into 
revenue for your business. Avoid the common mistake of thinking that 
achieving “brand awareness” is an  end in itself. We all know many 
brands that we don’t buy from on a regular basis. Instead, focus on how 
your brand creates value for your business, by leveraging its equity to 
generate profits.  
  
Following is a simple brand value chain that outlines how m arketing 
activities convert unaware  prospects into loyal customers:  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
The successful link between your Activities and Brand Image depends on 
how clear, differentiated, and consistent your messages are. Gaining a 
positive Brand Equity relies on having competitive advantages that are 
relevant to your market, and ensuring that you are correctly positioned 
in the mind of your customers & prospects. Understanding why 
customers buy from you, or from your competitors, will help you adj ust 
your activities to maximize economic value.  
  
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 11 
Your Brand Scorecard should track how effective your activities are at 
developing brand imagery; how your imagery creates the right attitudes 
and beliefs; and how these equities are creating tangible return s in the 
form of Customer -Base Value (CBV). It is essential that you define, test, 
and demonstrate clear links between each of these stages, if you are to 
continue to obtain funding for long -term Branding programs.  
  
Use customer satisfaction surveys , customer relationship 
management tools, and internal/external branding exercises to gather 
the metrics & knowledge you need to add a Brand Scorecard  to your 
Marketing Dashboard . 
  
  
7.  Select a Marketing Performance Measurement Solution   
  
There are many software tools in the market that can assist you  with 
collecting & organizing data, building reports, and establishing your 
Marketing Dashboard. Some companies will find it suitable to build an 
internal Marketing Dashboard solution with help from the I/T 
department; most will find it easier to implement  a standardized, proven 
solution, in the form of an on premise  or on -demand platform. Click 
here to request more information on how to select the right MPM 
solution for your business.  
 
If you don ’t want to invest in a software solution, try using our Sales 
and Marketing Performance Dashboard  to collect, analyze, and 
communicate key performance indicators and metrics for sales & 
marketing.   
 
Key areas in our dashboard include:  
 
 Customers  
 Branding  
 Advertising  & Public Relations  
 Events & Tradeshows  
 Direct Marketing  
 Website & Online Marketing  
 Sales  
 Marketing Collateral  
 Channel Sales  
 Pricing & Discounts.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 12 
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
The requirements for marketing departments in mid -sized enterprises 
are changing. It is more essential than ever to be  able to measure 
results and demonstrate your effectiveness.  Fortunately, there are many 
skilled experts who have helped  companies transform under -performing 
marketing departments  into strategic, aligned, and accountable profit -
centers.  
 
Now that you know what Marketing Dashboards are, what  benefits they 
bring, and have an understanding of the high -level implementation Best 
Practices, discuss this initiative with Senior  Management.   
 
By being up -front and honest about your inability to measure  the 
performance of your department, you will build credibility,  trust, and 
buy-in, to implement a solution. It will be absolutely  critical that your 
Senior Management team is committed to this  initiative.  
 
Invest some time to learn if a Marketing Dashboard is right for  your 
organization. Among other things, it can help you drive  measurable 
increases to the top -line, and justify your exis tence.  If you decide that 
monitoring the performance of your  department is not a top priority, at 
least you will be aware of  how many other market -leading companies 
are operating.  
 
 
 