 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Implementing a Marketing Automation Solution  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report provides practical advice for designing a Marketing 
Automation strategy, aligning Sales & Marketing processes, and 
implementing a Marketing Automat ion solution.  
 
Read this brief 8 -page report to learn:  
 
 Top Marketing Challenges in 2009  
 
 Definition of Marketing Automation  
 
 Marketing Automation Solution Benefits  
 
 Marketing Automation System Components  
 
 Implementing a Marketing Automation Solution  
 
 
Review this report to understand how to implement a Marketing 
Automation infrastructure that w ill provide a consistent supply of 
qualified leads to your sales organization.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Top Marketing Challenges in 2009      3  
 
Definition of Marketing Automation      3  
 
Marketing Automation Solution Benefits     4  
 
Marketing Automation System Components     5  
 
Implementing a Marketing Automation Solution    7  
 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Top Marketing Challenges  
Definition of Marketing Automation   
  
 
 
 
 
According to the CMO Council’s Marketing Outlook 2008  study that 
polled over 820 senior marketing professionals, some of the top 
challenges for marketing leaders in 2008 include:  
 
1. Quantifying the Value  of Marketing : measuring the impact of 
marketing programs and investments continues to be the top 
challenge for marketers.   
 
2. Increasing Credibility of the Marketing Function : while 79% 
of respondents are increasing the perceived value of marketing, 
19% are  losing credibility.   
 
3. Improving Marketing Department Efficiency : many 
organizations will be automating key marketing processes and 
implementing marketing ROI systems.  
 
4. Generating More Qualified Leads : emphasis on leveraging 
analytics to score lead quality, and lead nurturing strategies to 
incubate & develop prospects.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Marketing automation solutions incorporate business strategies, 
marketing processes, and automation technologies to generate, qualify, 
and develop leads along the entire sales cycle.  
  
Key Marketing Automation concepts include: Lead Acquisition, Lead 
Scoring, Lead Nurturing, and Lead Assignment.  
   
Following are definitions for each concept:  
  
 Lead Acquisition : leads are acquired when pro spects inquire or 
respond to marketing campaigns such as tradeshows, email 
marketing, direct mail, cold -calling, search engine marketing, 
online advertising, etc.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Marketing Automation Solution Benefits   Lead Scoring : leads are scored for quality based on explicit 
profile criteria (job title, co mpany size, location, etc) and implicit 
behaviors (website visits, downloads, event registrations, form 
submissions, etc).  
 
 Lead Nurturing : leads are incubated until they are ready for 
follow -up by sales. Typically, nurturing involves a steady flow of 
comm unications designed to educate the buyer and align 
purchasing and sales cycles.  
 
 Lead Assignment : once leads reach a specified quality score, 
they are deemed sales -ready and are assigned to sales 
representatives for immediate follow -up. 
  
In the past, mark eters were using disparate systems for email 
marketing, website analytics, direct mail, online advertising, etc, making 
it extremely difficult to accurately track the results of integrated 
marketing efforts.  
  
New advances in Marketing Automation technology are providing mid -
sized enterprises with systems that can automate manual marketing 
processes and drive efficiency.  
  
Most Marketing Automation solutions can be integrated directly with 
CRM systems to track leads from initial inquiry to sale, pr oviding a 
closed loop reporting mechanism for marketing activities, enabling 
campaign ROI measurement.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Implementing an integrated Marketing Automation infrastructure 
composed of skilled people, automated processes, and integrated 
technology provides numerous benefits, including:  
  
 Alignment of Sales & Marketing : alignment occurs when sales 
and marketing can agree on the definition of a qualified lead; 
systems are integrated to provide visibility into activ ities and 
results; and the loop is closed between lead source and revenue 
generated.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Marketing Automation System Components   Increased Win Rates : leads that are scored and nurtured 
before being handed off to sales close at higher win rates as 
purchasing & sales cycles are more aligned.  
 
 Reduced  Cost per Lead : when key marketing processes such 
as lead scoring, lead nurturing, and lead assignment are 
automated, less resources are required to manage new 
opportunities. Additionally, the use of a web/email -based 
approach can drastically reduce acquis ition costs for new 
prospects and opportunities.  
 
 Improved Accountability & Credibility : marketing leaders can 
provide accountability for their spending once they are able to 
quantify the impact of their investments. When deployed 
properly, Marketing Autom ation solutions increase credibility by 
providing a system of record that tracks and measures marketing 
activities and associated business results.  
 
 Better Allocation of Resources : having detailed analytics on 
prospect behaviors and campaign ROI provides m arketers with 
the insight needed to optimize spending on the most profitable 
marketing programs.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
At a high level, most marketing automation systems provide similar 
functionality: campaign measurement & reporting; marketing 
automation & lead management; individual web analytics & search 
engine marketing; direct marketing & database management; lead 
conversion & landing pages/forms; CRM/MS Outlook Integration.  
  
If you are interested in marketing automatio n systems, consider 
researching the following vendors: Eloqua , Manticore , Marketo , 
Pardot , LoopFuse , and eTrigue . 
  
For more information on key vendors, review Demand Metric’s 
Marketing Automation Vendors Matrix . 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Marketing Automation System Components & Functionality:  
  
 Marketing Automation & Lead Management : leads can be 
automatically scored based on profile criteria and behaviors; 
leads can be added to nurturing campaigns to align purchasing & 
sales cycles; prospects can be routed to the appropriate sales 
representative based on assignment rules; sales users can be 
notified of prospect behavior such as website visits or document 
downloads; auto -responder emails are sent when a prospect 
interacts with the website (completes a form, etc); automation 
rules can be configured to add/delete prospects from programs 
based on their activities.  
 
 Web Analytics & Search Engine Marketing : individual 
website v isitor activity can be tracked and provided to sales 
users; paid search campaigns and online advertisement 
programs can be integrated to track original lead source; website 
search queries can be tracked and tied to prospects; 
natural/organic search traffic  can be tracked and keywords used 
to find your website are identified; non -registered companies can 
be identified based on their corporate IP address.  
 
 Direct Marketing & Database Management : contact lists can 
be imported, stored, and de -duplicated; email marketing 
campaigns can be executed with tracked URLs to determine click -
through rates; prospects from all channels (events, cold -calling, 
direct mail, etc) can be tracked by original lead source; variables 
such as “first name” can be dynamically inserted into email/direct 
mail collateral; bi -directional CRM system integration.  
 
 Lead Conversion, Landing Pages/Forms, & PURLs : web 
forms can be created by marketing without I/T support; unique 
URLs can be used to track leads from advertising, direct mail, or 
other offline campaigns; personalized URLs (PURLs) or landing 
pages can be created to provide more customized interactions 
with customers; data can be captured from web forms that were 
not completed or submitted; forms can block invalid/free email 
addresses (hotmail, yahoo, gmail, etc) to ensure leads are 
qualified; form fields can be customized and set up to capture 
additional information during subsequent web visits.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Implementing a Marketing Automation Solution   
 
 
 
 
Developing an integrated Marketing automation strategy that is highly 
automated and measures return on investment is not reserved for 
Fortune 500 marketing organizations. In fact, there are many affordable 
Marketing automation solutions that can be integrated and implemented 
very rapidly.  
  
If you are charged with generating measurable demand, follow these 
best practices to optimize your processes and leverage advances in 
Marketing Automation technology:  
  
 
1. Learn Best Practices : attend webcasts such as Optimizing 
Lead Generation  or High Performance Demand Creation  
with industry thought -leaders. Alternatively, read b log postings 
from innovative marketing leaders in the Marketing Automation 
industry: Best Practices in Demand Generation , Lead 
Management , and Innovative Marketer .  
 
2. Understand Strengths & Weaknesses : complete our 
Marketing Automation Maturity Assessment  to see how your 
current processes & systems compare to best practices and other 
mid-sized marketing organizations  
 
3. Develop a Marketing automation Strategy : use our Lead 
Generation Scorecard  to set your strategic objectives, 
initiatives, measures, and targets.  
 
4. Agree on “Qualified Lead” Definition : use our Lead Scoring 
Index  and Lead Definition Tool  to build alignment between 
sales and marketing on the de finition of a “qualified lead.”  
 
5. Document Sales & Marketing Processes : define the stages in 
your sales pipeline and clearly document key marketing 
processes & campaigns for lead acquisition, lead nurturing, and 
lead assignment. For assistance, use our Marketing 
Automation Consulting RFP  to hire a consultant to facilitate 
this initiative.  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
6. Benchmark Key Metrics : if you don’t have historical data, 
establish benchmarks for the following metrics:  
 
 Cost Per Lead  = budget / total # leads  
 Win Rate %  = wins / closed opportunities  
 Acquisition Cost  = cost per lead / win rate  
 Lead Conversion %  = # opportunities / leads  
 Lead Source %  = # leads / # total leads  
 Return on Marketing  = pipeline value / spend  
 
7. Research Marketing A utomation Systems : review key 
marketing automation vendors with our Marketing Automation 
Vendors Matrix . 
 
8. Select a Marketing A utomation Vendor : use our Marketing 
Automation System RFP  to document your key busines s & 
system requirements. Next, use our Marketing Automation 
Vendor Evaluation Matrix  to compare solutions based on your 
key requirements.  
 
9. Implement Marketing A utomation System : import contact 
lists; add tracking code to your corporate website; customize 
landing pages & forms for lead conversion; create marketing 
automation rules for sales alerts, lead scoring, lead nurturing, 
and lead assign ment; integrate with MS Outlook, CRM system, 
and online advertising platforms; design HTML email templates 
for campaigns and “drip” programs.  
 
10. Post Value -Added Content on your Website : add content to 
your website to provide an incentive for prospects to re gister 
(complete form) and become leads. Some examples of great 
value -added content include: Whitepapers & Data Sheets, Case 
Studies , Business Cases  & ROI Calculators, and Webcasts & 
Podcasts.  
 
11. Execute Integrated Multi -Channel Campaigns : leverage your 
websites new tracking capability to measure prospect behavior 
and buying signals. Ad d unique URLs to track ads & direct mail, 
or place tracked URLs in your email marketing campaigns to 
monitor response rates and individual website visitor activity.  
 
12. Monitor Results and Refine Processes : evaluate your 
programs to tweak lead acquisition, lead scoring, lead nurturing, 
and lead assignment processes. Report on improvements to key 
metrics and invest in programs that are providing a quantifiable 
return on investment.  