 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Integrating Lead Generation Campaigns  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for integrating 
multi-channel lead generation campaigns.  
 
 
Read this brief 6 -page report to learn:  
 
 Lead Generation Definition  
 Typical Lead Generation Campaigns  
 Best Practices for Integrating  Campaigns  
 Establishing a Lead Generation Scorecard   
 
 
Read this report to learn how to strategically integrate lead generation 
programs and develop a Lead Generation Scorecard that has clear 
objectives, targets, initiatives, and measures.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Lead Generation Definition       3  
 
Typical Lead Generation Campaigns      3  
 
Best Practices for Integrating Campaigns     4  
 
Establishing a Lead Generation Scorecard     5  
 
Conclusion          6 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Lead Generation Definition  
Typical Lead Generation Campaigns    
 
 
 
 
“Lead Generation refers to the creation or generation of prospective 
consumer interest or inquiry into a business’ products or services. Often 
lead generation is associated with marketing activities, such as cold -
calling, targeted at generating new sales o pportunities for a company’s 
sales force.  
  
Therefore a “lead” is correctly described as information regarding, or 
provided by, a consumer that may be interested in making a purchase. 
“Generation” is one of a myriad of activities that produces contact 
information and/or interest.”  
  
 Source: Wikipedia   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Acquiring leads is the most critical activity within the lead generation 
process. There are many methods for gathering contact information for 
prospective consumers.  
 
Following is a brief synopsis of the most common lead generation 
campaigns:  
   
 Paid Bus iness/Consumer Information : there are many 
providers of marketing lists and business information, such as 
Hoovers , Harte Hanks , and Dun & Bradstreet . For a nominal 
fee, you can download thousands of contact names, and business 
information to provide your sales force with unqualified leads.  
 
 Contact Center : many organizations have an inside sales team 
who qualifies leads and generates i nterest for outside or face -to-
face sales representatives. Booking appointments and creating 
opportunities in a CRM system are the mission -critical activities. 
Read our report on Making Cold -Calling Work for You  to learn 
best practices for this cost -effective lead generation method.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Best Practices for Integrating Campaigns   Tradeshows & Conferences : attending tradeshows to gather 
business cards of industry contacts is another common lead 
generati on activity. Use our Tradeshow ROI Calculator  to 
identify which events to attend.  
 
 Webcasts & Whitepapers : read our report Generate Leads 
with Webcasts  to learn how to acquire leads through your 
corporate website. If you don’t have downloadable resources, 
such as whitepapers, webcasts, or case studies, start gathering 
contact inf ormation from prospects by adding a form to your 
website.  
 
 Email Marketing/Direct Mail : build a list of prospects by 
creating a free newsletter on your website, or purchase email 
addresses from an information source such as an industry 
association. Period ically, send an email or direct mail to your list 
and follow up with your inside sales team to book qualified 
appointments.  
 
 Advertising & Public Relations : to save money on advertising 
your products/services, leverage PR and promote your business 
through  the press. Read our reports Building Successful PR 
Campaigns , and Analyzing Competitive Ad vs. PR Spending  
to learn how to differentiate from your competitors and save 
money.  
 
 Search Engine Optimization : pull prospects to your website 
with Google AdWords , or read our report on Simplifying  
Search Engine Optimization  to learn how to increase traffic to 
your website and capture leads.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
1. Centrally Store Prospect Information : it is critical that you 
have a system to store all your prospects and customer profile 
information, and can manage interactions with individual 
prospects based on their interests, activities, and behaviors. 
Using a MS Excel database can be limiting but i s very cost -
effective.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Establishing a Lead Generation Scorecard  2. Use Campaign Building Tools : once you have a system with 
all of your prospect information, you need to segment and refine 
marketing lists to build campaigns that can be executed across 
both online and offline lead generation channels. There are a few 
solutions on the market from ven dors such as Eloqua , 
Manticore Technology , Unica , Salesforce.com , and Pardot .  
 
3. Drive Prospects to Website : make every effort to bring 
prospects to your website where their activities can be tracked 
and analyzed to capture accurate reporting metrics that 
demonstrate your performance. Implement Free Web Analytics 
from Google  if your website doesn’t currently have any 
reporting capability.  
 
4. Maintain Consistent Messaging : use the same key messages 
in your  Sales Scripts , Sales Presentations , website copy, 
email and direct mail o ffers, product literature, tradeshow 
banners, press releases, and webcasts, to drive home your 
competitive advantages and key selling points to your targeted 
audiences.  
 
5. Integrate Systems : work with your I/T department to integrate 
your campaigns into exi sting Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) or sales force automation (SFA) systems. Build a Lead 
Scoring system  to help your sales team focus on the best 
opportunit ies. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Creating a Lead Generation Scorecard is a simple method for organizing 
your strategy. This section will outline the steps required to effectively 
integrate lead generation campaigns.  
  
1. Brainstorm Key Messages :  use our Product Positioning 
Tool and Competitive Product Positioning Map  to create the 
key messages that will be communicated within your lead 
generation activities.  
 
2. Dig up Historical Info rmation : track down any previous 
campaign data such as: email click -thru rates, direct mail 
responses, contact center metrics, tradeshow results, website 
analytics, or other measures that can be used as a baseline to 
compare future results.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Conclusion   
3. Set Lead Gene ration Goals & Objectives : your goals may be 
to increase leads for a particular product, to achieve commitment 
to core messaging from customer -facing representatives, or to 
unify your disparate lead generation activities.  
 
4. Determine Specific Targets & Act ions: this part of your 
scorecard deals with HOW you are going to achieve your goals & 
objectives. For example, you may wish to target similar -sized 
organizations with a product offer.  
 
5. Define Measures of Success : like all objectives, you need to 
determin e how success will be measured, BEFORE you kick -off 
your initiative. These are the Key Performance Indicators  
(KPIs) that will be monitored to demonstrat e improvement.  
 
6. Establish Goal Timescale : you last step is to break the larger, 
overarching goals into more manageable pieces. If you are 
targeting prospects from a tradeshow, create a goal like: 
“contact each prospective lead no later than 60 days following 
tradeshow.”  
 
7. Build your Lead Generat ion Scorecard : now that you 
understand each step of the process, use Demand Metric’s 
customizable Lead Generation Scorecard  to create your own 
framework for integra ting campaigns.  
 
8. Demonstrate Lead Generation Improvement : revisit your 
Lead Generation Scorecard  quarterly and report on the 
success of your initiatives to senior management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Generating a consistent flow of qualified leads is the top priority for 
marketing professionals in mid -sized enterprises. Gain familiarity with 
the concept of scorecards to organize your strategies and integrate your 
lead generation campaigns.  
  
Based on the best practices described in this report, and tools provided, 
you should be able to get started with a lead generation program. If you 
need more clarity, contact your Research Associate who can provide you 
with more advice.  