DAVOS AGENDA
Automation or augmentation? This
is how AI will be integrated into the
jobs of tomorrow
Sep 18, 2023
This article is part of:
Sustainable Development Impact Meetings
Financial services are one of the sectors with the highest potential exposure to artificial intelligence.
Image: Unsplash/Adeolu Eletu
Ian Shine
Senior Writer, Forum Agenda
Listen to the article 10 min listen
Assessing the ways AI could automate or augment various jobs is the focus of the World
Economic Forum’s new Jobs of Tomorrow whitepaper.
Routine and repetitive tasks are the ones AI is most likely to automate, whereas critical
thinking and complex problem-solving could be augmented by the technology.
Ensuring workers are equipped to handle the changing nature of their jobs is vital, and the
Jobs of Tom orrow report has four recommendations for doing so.
Have you read?
While artificial intelligence (AI) is already having an impact on the world of work, AI
could struggle to figure out what exactly that impact will be. That’s because the
critical thinking and analytical skills needed to make such an assessment are
harder to automate. But are they skills that could be augmented by AI?
Assessing the ways AI could automate or augment various jobs is the focus of the
World Economic Forum’s new Jobs of Tom orrow whitepaper. It provides in-depth
analysis of the possible impact of large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT
on 19,000 individual tasks across 867 occupations, and classifies them according
to whether they have high potential for automation, high potential for
augmentation, low potential for either, or could simply be unaffected.
Here’s a breakdown of the report’s main findings:
The jobs with high potential for AI
automation
Routine and repetitive tasks are the ones AI is most likely to take over. This means
credit authorizers, checkers and clerks are most at risk from AI, as 81% of their
tasks are automatable, the Jobs of Tom orrow report says.
Jobs of Tomorrow whitepaper, September 2023 Image: World Economic Forum
This is quite some distance ahead of the next jobs on the list – telemarketers with
68% automatable tasks, statistical assistants with 61% and bank tellers with 60%.
“With 62% of total work time involving language-based tasks, the widespread
adoption of LLMs such as ChatGPT could significantly impact various job roles,”
the Forum report says. “The capabilities of these models, paired with their
accessibility and rapid adoption rate, suggest that many work tasks – and jobs that
emphasize them – could be impacted by the use of LLMs in the years to come.”
The jobs with high potential for AI
augmentation
AI may not be a ble to take over tasks involving critical thinking and complex
problem-solving, but it will be able to lend a hand. This LLM assistance will save
workers time and consequently boost their productivity, especially if they have
roles involving mathematical and scientific analysis.
Insurance underwriters are most likely to benefit from this – 100% of their tasks
have the potential to be augmented, the Jobs of Tom orrow report says.
Jobs of Tomorrow whitepaper, September 2023 Image: World Economic Forum
Next on the list are bioengineers and biomedical engineers, where 84% of tasks
are augmentable. Mathematicians could see AI helping out with four-fifths of their
workload, while editors may be getting help 72% of the time.
“The tasks with the highest po tential for augmentation are those that require
more abstract reasoning skills, especially those that combine interaction with
people,” the Forum report says. This is why journalists, travel agents and training
specialists are on the augmentable list.
The report also cites the example of people who create surveys to gather
information on consumer needs or opinions: “While running a survey could be a
highly automated process … the crafting and wording of survey questions still
requires a high degree of attention and approval by the person collecting the
data.”
The jobs with low potential for AI
automation or augmentation
Jobs requiring higher levels of personal interaction are at least risk from LLMs.
Healthcare professionals, teachers, social workers and careers advisors all fall
into this category, as do human resources (HR) managers.
Only 16.1% of an HR manager’s job shows potential for automation and 22.2% for
augmentation, according to the Jobs of Tom orrow report. The automatable tasks
include “determine resource needs of projects or operations and manage budgets
or finances”, while the augmentable ones include “explain regulations, policies or
procedures and train others on operational or work procedures”.DISCOVER
How is the World Economic Forum ensuring the
responsible use of technology?
Show more
HR managers are less likely than software developers to see parts of their job taken over by AI. Image:
World Economic Forum
Compare this with software developers, who could have 28.7% of their tasks
automated by LLMs and 43.2% augmented. Analyzing data and systems
performance are among the automatable parts of the job, while evaluating the
products and technologies and writing instructions are all augmentable.
Roles that lean more towards physical activity are also less automatable. This
includes manual labourers, hairdressers, agricultural workers and highway
maintenance workers.
Have you read?
These are the jobs that AI can’t replace
Don't fear AI. It will lead to long-term job growth.
The future of jobs in the age of AI, sustainability and deglobalization
The sectors most exposed to AI
Financial services is the sector with the highest potential exposure to AI
automation and augmentation, according to the report. IT and digital
communications are also high on the list, along with the media, entertainment and
sports industry.
Industries with the highest exposure to AI
However, this does not mean jobs will necessarily start disappearing in these
sectors.
“Industries with high potential for exposure to LLMs have high potential for both
automation and augmentation. This suggests that the introduction of these new
technologies will change the nature of the labour market but will not necessarily
eliminate jobs,” the report says.
A report from the International Labour Organization came to similar conclusions,
saying that “Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) is more likely to augment than
destroy jobs by automating some tasks rather than taking over a role entirely”.
Ensuring workers are equipped to handle the changing nature of their jobs is a key
responsibility now facing businesses and governments. The Jobs of Tomorrow
report lists four recommendations for making this happen:
Develop an adaptable workforce – Provide training programs that give workers AI literacy
but also emphasize human skills such as creativity, empathy and strategic thinking.
Collaboration between governments and businesses – This will ensure foresight on the
changes coming, allowing the creation of new systems and processes and helping workers
with job transitions where necessary.
Updating labour laws – Continual refinement will be needed to reflect the changing nature
of work. This includes reimagining social safety nets and addressing issues of income
inequality that AI could exacerbate.
Invest in education systems – Curriculums must be designed for the AI era and encourage
lifelong learning. Educational opportunities must also be accessible and affordable,
ensuring that no one is left behind.
AI will bring not only automation and augmentation, but also acceleration when it
comes to changes in the workplace. The Jobs of Tom orrow report sees these
changes as being broadly positive, and a way to “extend human potential and
strengthen the resilience of our economies”, but achieving this outcome will
depend on cross-sectoral collaboration involving businesses, educators and
policymakers.
The Forum’s Good Work Alliance is helping employers prepare for the major shifts
in the talent and jobs landscape that will arise as a result of developments
including AI and the green transition. It will create a framework of goals, metrics
and targets that will enable organizations to attract and retain the talent they
need.
And for employees, the Forum’s Reskilling Revolution aims to help 1 billion people
prepare for the Fourth Industrial Revolution by providing them with access to
better education, skills and economic opportunities.
'AI will either compete with us or augment u
'AI will either compete with us or augment u
     
Jun 15·Radio Davos
Jun 15·Radio Davos
Save on Spoti License and Republishing
World Economic Forum articles may be republished in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public License, and in accordance with our
Terms of Use.
The views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and not the World Economic Forum.
Stay up to date:
Davos Agenda
Related topics:
Share:Follow
Davos Agenda Artificial Intelligence Jobs and Skills
THE BIG PICTURE
Explore and monitor how Artificial Intelligence is affecting
economies, industries and global issues
CROWDSOURCE INNOVATION
Get involved with our crowdsourced digital platform to deliver
impact at scale
GLOBAL AGENDA
The Agenda Weekly
A weekly update of the most important issues
driving the global agenda
You can unsubscribe at any time using the link in our emails. For more details, review our privacy policy.
Subscribe today
More on Davos AgendaSEE ALL
Electric car sales have surged in Europe - so why is adoption still slow?
Andrea Willige
November 13, 2023
Breathing new life into the SDGs: Wh at is the UN Summit of the Future in 2024?
Kate Whiting
November82023
Annual Meeting 2023 | Cooperation in a Fragmented World
We need to move beyond the idea that AI is the solution to everything, expert
says
Jessica Wanger
October 23, 2023
4:21
The first alliance to accelerate digital inclusion
October 20, 2023
The first alliance to accelerate digital inclusion
October 20, 2023
ABOUT US
Our Mission
Our Impact
Leadership and Governance
Our Partners
Sustainability
History
Careers
Contact Us
EVENTS
Events
Open Forum
MEDIA
Press
Subscribe to our press releases
Pictures
MORE FROM THE FORUM
Strategic Intelligence
UpLink
Global Shapers
Young Global Leaders
Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship
Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
New Champions
PARTNERS & MEMBERS
