Guide 3 of 5
When to Augment 
Decisions With 
Artificial Intelligence
Guides for Effective Business Decision Making
© 2022 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. CM_GTS_1800395Guides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence3 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  95% of decisions that currently use data will 
be at least partially automated.
Source: GartnerBy 2025, Guides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence4 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  In the Gartner 2021 Reengineering the Decision Survey of executives, 47% of 
respondents said they expected decisions to become increasingly complex 
over the ensuing 18 months. This is driving interest in the application of data and 
analytics (D&A) to improve the quality of those decisions. However, organizations 
are also interested in improving the speed and accuracy of decisions, and that 
often requires automation.
Decisions that use data can be automated in a variety of ways but fall 
somewhere between being mostly human-based and entirely automated. 
Organizations that embrace some degree of decision automation are likely to 
achieve competitive advantage through more rapid decision making (algorithmic 
trading outpacing human-based trading in response to market volatility), more 
sophisticated decisions (inventory levels based on a wide variety of market 
signals) and more granular decision making (microsegmentation of customer 
segments).
The key for D&A and business leaders is to understand where to expand decision 
automation for better outcomes.
Gareth Herschel  
VP Analyst, CDO Leadership
The decisions I make are more complex (stakeholders, 
choices) than 2 years ago
There is a higher expectation for me to be able to explain 
or justify my decisions
Source: Gartner65%
Agree
53%
Agree5%
Disagree
5%
Disagree30%
Neutral
42%
NeutralGuides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence5 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  Prepare
Understand the role of 
automation in decision making.Establish
Know how, in practice, to blend 
human and artificial intelligence 
(AI) in hybrid decision making.Engage
Use a decision intelligence 
framework to assess when to 
augment/automate decision 
making.Tips for Delivery
Act intentionally to create an 
organizational competency in 
decision intelligence.How to Use This Guide
1 2 3 4Guides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence6 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  Prepare
Understand the Role of Automation in Decision Making1
Human Machine
Risks must be managed by, for example, 
guardrails or a human-in-the-loop for 
exceptional cases.
Autonomous decision making by machines, 
using predictions, forecasts, simulations, rules, 
optimization or other AI. There are multiple forms of augmentation. 
Machine suggests; human decides. Human 
suggests; machine decides. Human and 
machine decide together. Each has a 
different dynamic.
Machines use AI to generate recommendations 
and may provide diagnostic analytics for human 
validation and exploration.Decision is made by a human, based on 
principles and ethics, experience and bias, 
logic and reasoning, emotion, skills and style 
(solo, delegated, collaborative).
Data and analytics support human decision 
makers with information, data or visualizations.Augment decisions by presenting 
recommendations to human decision makers. 
Hybrid decisions are the realm of robotic 
process automation systems, where the 
decision model includes both attended and 
unattended automation tasks. Machines/devices make decisions 
independently, but humans review automated 
decisions after they have been made to 
maintain control of complex systems.Machines provide visualizations, exploration, 
alerts and other support for human decision 
makers.  Decision Support  
(Human-Based Decisions)  
Example: Medical diagnosisDecision Augmentation  
(Hybrid Decisions)  
Example: Financial investmentDecision Automation  
(Machine-Based Decisions)  
Example: Next best action for digital orderLevel of Involvement
Role of D&AGuides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence7 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  Establish
3 Key Steps to Hybrid Decision Making in Practice
In practice, the role of automation in decision 
making is nuanced, with a series of categories 
defining a transition from decision support to 
augmentation to automation. Use the framework 
to the right to clarify where humans can and 
should be involved in decision making and the 
types of investment required.2
3 Keys to Implementation
   Move from one level to the next on the 
basis of organizational need, not technical 
ability. 
   Blend different levels, even within one 
decision, to balance risk and opportunity. 
   Do not view Level 7 as an automatic best 
practice or objective; the optimal level will 
vary for different decisions and depend on 
your culture.Decision Support Decision Augmentation Decision Automation
Recommendation Approval Audit Autonomous3 6 4 7 5
Veto Human Advisory1 2
Data or Analysis 
UsedLevel
Who Proposes  
the Decision
Role of Human in 
Decision Approval
Decision OversightHuman (potentially using data and analytics)
Human and decision system both create
Decision systemPre-identified in the context of the decisionDetermined by need and preference of human decision maker
Routine review of previous decisions
Exception-based review of previous decisionsReview of decision process and choiceRejection of decision is an explicit actionApproval of decision is an explicit actionThe 7 Levels of Hybrid Decision Making
Source: GartnerGuides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence8 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  Engage
Leverage a Decision Intelligence Framework3
The Gartner Decision Intelligence framework helps you model decisions while ensuring you detail the (re)design 
and application of components needed to support, augment or automate each phase in the decision flow.
Source: GartnerDecision Intelligence
       Human: Actor with bias and goals 
making and supporting decisions
     AI: Actor with goals and bias 
making and supporting decisions
Feedback and Exceptions
Decision CompositionHuman/Machine(s)
OutcomeInterpret
(Investigate)Capture
(Observe)
Act
(Execute)
Resolve
(Contextualize)Model
(Design)LearnGartner Decision Intelligence Loop
(Every decision goes through the same 5 phases)Gartner Decision Intelligence Components
Shared Information and 
Data ArchitectureAnalytics: Supports, augments 
and automates decisions
Data: Informs decisions
Applications: Sequences 
decision steps
Data FabricGuides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence9 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  Tips for Delivery
Act to Build Decision Intelligence Capabilities4
The ability to identify, prioritize and then to model and (re)engineer decisions 
for improvement (i.e., decision intelligence) will be a critical competency for a 
disruption-ready and resilient organization.
Recommended actions:
Start with decision intelligence where business-critical decision making 
must be improved — requiring more data-driven support or AI-powered 
augmentation — or where decisions can be scaled and accelerated 
through automation. (Alternatively, start where there is the greatest 
dissatisfaction with current decision making as this could drive some 
quick wins.)Improve decision making by first explicitly understanding and 
modeling how decisions are currently made and how they could be 
reengineered, and then by incorporating human and/or AI decision-
making capabilities and a feedback loop for measuring results.
Build organizational competency in decision intelligence with a reusable, 
composable decision framework. This enables data-driven organizations 
to get the most out of their data. It turns the data into insights that target 
improvements in business performance and achievement of mission-
critical priorities.Consider creating a role for decision engineers by hiring or 
upskilling experts who can work with decision makers to identify 
critical decisions, which can be improved through engineering 
decision intelligence.Guides for Effective Business Decision Making — When to Augment Decisions With Artificial Intelligence10 Follow Us on LinkedIn                    Become a Client  Explore these additional complimentary resources and tools 
to make better business decisions.This guide is part of the Effective Decision 
Making Series. You can access other guides 
in this series to continue improving how your 
business makes decisions and learn: 
Roadmap
Enhance Your Roadmap for Data and 
Analytics Governance
Set the right governance foundation.
Webinar
Data & Analytics Series: Modernize Your Data 
Strategy to Achieve Digital Success
Connect the strategy to your operating model.Resource Hub
Chief Data Officer to Build Data & Analytics 
Leadership Traits
Create competitive advantage through D&A.
Roadmap
The IT Roadmap for Data and Analytics
Follow D&A best practices to create a strategy.• Which decisions to reengineer and why
• How to prioritize analytics and data 
• What role data fabric will play in your data 
management
• Incorporating the right skills and capabilities 
in your D&A organizationActionable, objective insight
Already a client?  
Get access to even more resources in your client portal. Log In© 2022 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. CM_GTS_1800395Connect With Us
Get actionable, objective insight to deliver on your mission-critical 
priorities. Our expert guidance and tools enable faster, smarter 
decisions and stronger performance. Contact us to become a client:
U.S.:  1 855 811 7593  
International: +44 (0) 3330 607 044
Become a Client
Learn more about Gartner for IT Leaders  
gartner.com/en/information-technology
Stay connected to the latest insights