 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Making Cold Calls Work for You  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide pract ical advice for improving 
your „cold calling‟  direct marketing programs.  
 
Read this brief 7-page report to learn:  
 
 Definition for Cold Calling  
 Cold Calling Benefits  
 Levels of Cold Calling Process Maturity  
 Cold Calling Best Practices  
 
Read this report to learn how to make cold calling an effecti ve method 
for generating leads, increasing sales, developing staff, and achieving 
predictable and reliable results.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What is Cold Calling?        3 
  
Cold Calling Benefits        3  
 
Levels of Cold Calling Process Maturity      4  
 
Cold Calling Best Practices       5 
 
Conclusions         7 
 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What is Cold Calling?  
Cold Calling Benefits    
 
 
 
 
“Cold calling is the process of approaching prospective clients, typically 
via telephone, who have not agreed to such an interaction. The word 
“cold” is used because the person receiving the call is not expecting the 
call or has not specifically asked to be contacted by the sales person.”  
  
       - Source: Wikipedia   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 Lead Generation  - cold calling can be argued to be the most 
effective and efficient direct marketing technique. Leads are 
generated when inside salespeople introduce your company‟s 
product/service to a prospective client and/or book appointments 
for senior Account Execut ives.  
 
 Predictable Results  - cold calling has the potential to be a fully 
defined, repeatable, measured and managed process with 
predictable results. Since there are clear metrics that exist for 
dials, contacts, leads, and sales, this process can be consi stently 
improved until the winning formula is established.  
 
 Direct Sales  - with web -conferencing tools widely available 
these days, many organizations have found that cold calling 
results in direct sales which have a much lower cost than 
traditiona l, face -to-face, outside sales.  
 
 Cost-effective Marketing  - even when a lead or sale is not 
generated from a cold call, value can be extracted in the form of 
inexpensive marketing. A good inside salesperson can make over 
200 calls/day and send out 10 -20 “services overviews” or other 
collateral that increase bran d & product/service awareness.  
 
 Skill Development  - People with limited or no sales experience 
can be quickly taught how to effectively introduce your 
organization, and develop their sales skills very quickly given the 
volume of calls per day.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Level s of Cold Calling Process Maturity   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Level 1 - Initial/Ad Hoc : sales process is not documented. 
Dials, Contacts, Leads, and Sales goals are not established or 
measured. No consistency in productivity levels or sales results. 
Each salesperson uses a different method to create interest, 
demonstrate value, and generate leads.  
 
 Level 2 - Repeatable/Intuitive : sales process is well known 
but not fully documented. Dials, Contacts, Leads, and Sales goals 
are not measured. There is limited consistency in pro ductivity 
levels and sales results. Some information sharing occurs 
between experience salespeople and newer recruits.  
 
 Level 3 – Defined : sales process is documented to include: 
Introduction, Value Statement, Problem, Solution, and Close. 
Scripts are dev eloped to ensure all salespeople follow best 
practices. Goals related to Dials, Contacts, Leads, and Sales, are 
set on a daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual basis.  
 
 Level 4 - Measured & Managed : sales process is fully 
documented including call p rocedure, objection responses, and 
economic value arguments. Metrics exist and are monitored for 
Dials, Contacts, Leads, and Sales. Reporting on leads and 
opportunities is completed with forecasting tools. There is a clear 
formula for effectively convertin g a prospect to a new client.  
 
 Level 5 – Optimized : sales process is defined, repeatable, 
measured, managed, and optimized. Scripts are continually 
adjusted to improve effectiveness. Metrics are used to identify 
poor performers, or areas that need to be wo rked on from each 
salesperson‟s perspective. Sales Growth Teams  are formed to 
share best practices across the inside sales department.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Cold Calling Best  Practices   
 
   
 
 
1. More Activity Equals More Sales : while there are many factors 
that cannot be controlled by your salespeople, dialing the phone 
is not one of them. The more calls that are made, the more 
contacts, leads, and ultimately more sales will resu lt. Top 
performing reps should be making over 200 calls per day when 
dialing into new territory. Of those 200 calls, 10% contact can be 
expected. Of those 20 contacts/leads, 10% (2) are likely to 
become sales, given a solid product or service.  
 
2. Capture Me trics: it is absolutely critical that you capture 
metrics for dials, talk time, contacts, leads, and sales. Use our 
Sales Productivity Metrics  tool to capture metrics daily , 
monthly , and quarterly . Additionally, all contacts with 
prospects should be documented in a CRM system for future 
reference, database scrubbing, market research intelligence etc . 
Determine the reasons why prospects are not buying, such as 
“not interested”, or “not a good fit”, to identify where your 
salespeople need coaching.  
 
3. Pre-call Research : this is a highly debated topic in cold calling. 
One school of thought is that the mo re you know about a 
prospect going into a call, the better you can position your 
products for their needs. Unfortunately, it takes 2 -5 minutes to 
review the prospects website to gather insight, and more often 
than not, the call will go into voicemail witho ut the target 
answering. This leads to lost productivity, and a much reduced 
dial rate per day. Our recommendation is to do very limited pre -
call research, unless a conference call has been scheduled to 
identify the fit with your product, or you are conduc ting a very 
specialized calling program for a very specific target audience.  
 
4. Provide Concise Value Proposition : prospects decide within 
30 seconds whether or not they are interested to learn more 
about your product. The most effective way to generate int erest 
is to provide a very brief value statement such as “we are an 
advisory firm that helps marketing professionals be more 
effective”. The goal is to get the prospect to give you 5 minutes 
on the first call to qualify the opportunity, rather than sending  
info.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
5. Minimize the Risk : the best way to get a prospect to give you 5 
minutes, is to ensure they know that you are not going to keep 
them on the line for more than a few minutes on this initial call. 
Try saying: “you will know right away if this is a fi t. If you like 
what you see, we can continue. If not, I‟ll be on my way.” Then 
be quiet. Let the prospect respond by asking how they can very 
quickly evaluate your product. Usually an online demo of your 
product is a good bet. Delivered effectively, this i ntroduction can 
yield a 70% lead conversion rate, unless the prospect really is in 
a meeting at the time, or cannot spend a few minutes discussing 
this now.  
 
6. Take Control of the Call : once you have a prospect interested 
in learning more about your product,  you need to assume control 
of the call without being aggressive or controlling. To do this, use 
questions that have a limited number of answers, rather than 
open ended questions which may lead to a need that you cannot 
provide a solution for. For example,  asking a question like: 
“between Demand Generation, CRM, or Strategic Planning, which 
is the most important priority for you currently?” This type of 
question lets the prospect feel in control, while the salesperson 
can limit the scope of the discussion t o items where their 
company can add value.  
 
7. Use Questions to Engage Prospect : to keep your prospect 
engaged through the pitch, ask directed questions that stimulate 
conversation in veins that are related to your product‟s features 
and benefits. Top salespeople ask up to 10 times as many 
questions as poorly performing reps. Use our  SPIN Selling 
Questions Tool  to develop strong leading questions.  
 
8. Use Scripts, but Don’t Sound Scripted : it is critical that you 
map out a structured call proce ss with an Introduction, Value 
Statement, Problem, Solution, Objection Responses , and 
Close. For new reps, using a script can be helpful for getting the 
hang of the p itch, but be careful that your reps are not sounding 
like they are reading to the prospect. Practice pitching, like how 
actors practice their lines, is a very effective way to script 
presentations but ensure that the prospect feels like they are 
having a g enuinely unique conversation.  
 
9. Listen Intently & Take Good Notes : top salespeople are 
notorious for taking meticulous notes and leveraging this 
knowledge to demonstrate value on subsequent sales calls. 
Showing that you were listening intently and understa nd the 
prospects needs is a simple way to increase your close rate.  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Conclusion  Don‟t forget to add these call notes to your CRM system so that 
other staff can quickly get up to speed on what was learned 
during your call.  
 
10. Follow Up Diligently : don‟t let leads slip t hrough the cracks. 
Like dialing, this is one element of the sales process that you do 
have control over. At the end of every call, be sure to set an 
actual appointment for your next contact. Knowing that it takes 
about 10 calls to get 1 contact, don‟t wast e time trying to get 
back in touch with prospects; be proactive and set call back 
times.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pound for pound, cold calling is the most effective form of direct 
marketing, since it provides a dynamic, personal touch that can build 
trust unlike a well -crafted email marketing communication. The key 
success factors for making cold calling work include : measuring the 
process to increase productivity; providing a compelling value statement 
to generate interest; and taking control of the call.  
  
Remember that a good rep can make over 200 calls per day, which 
should result in 10 -20 contacts, and 1 sale or highly qualified lead. Be 
careful to monitor burnout, as it is very common in contact centers that 
have high performing reps pumping out cold cal ls and intensely focusing 
on 5 minute sales pitches with an eye toward a “one -call, one -close”, or 
a sale on the first call.  
  
Break your sales process down into its components and coach your sales 
reps to perfect the introduction, value proposition, buil d the 
need/problem, present a convincing solution, handle objections, and 
close. Finally, make results visible with a sales board, and provide 
incentives that keep your salespeople motivated to keep their phone 
engaged for 7+ hours per day.  
 