 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Marketing  Segmentation , Targeting  & Positioning  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report is designed to provide practical advice for segmenting 
markets, targeting specific customers, and working to effectively 
position your product or service within the competitive landscape.  
 
Following are the sections of this report:  
 
 Marketing  Strategy Refresher  
 
 Types of Market Opportunities  
 
 Market Segmentation  
 
 Target Marketing  
 
 Positioning & Competitive Differentiation  
 
 
Read this report if you are looking for practical methods to identify and 
react to new market opportunities that dri ve incremental revenue and 
increased profitability.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
Marketing Strategy Refresher       3  
 
Types of Market Opportunities       4  
 
Market Segmentation        5  
 
Target Marketing         9  
 
Positioning & Competitive Differentiation     10  
 
Conclusion          11  
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Marketing Strategy Refresher    
 
 
 
 
Why is developing a marketing strategy so important?  
 
 
From a high -level, the goal of a marketing strategy is to identify a target 
market and develop a marketing mix that will appeal to those potential 
customers.  
  
Decisions regarding the ideal marketing mix can be organized in terms 
of Price, Promotion, Product, and Price . However, the goal is not to 
just come up with a particular strategy, but rather to focus on the best 
strategies that provide the most opportunity, and least risk, for the firm.   
 
  
What types of analyses need to be completed ? 
 
  
As a st arting point, most marketers conduct an internal analysis or their 
organization to identify which opportunities make the most sense to 
pursue. Use Demand  Metric’s  S.W.O.T. Analysis Tool  to get started. 
This framework identifies the firm’s Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities, and Threats, with special attention paid to the various 
implications stemming from each.  
  
Once you have a clear understanding of your firm’ s capabilities and 
resources, you are ready to analyze the external environment to seek 
market opportunities that fit your organization’s goals and objectives.  
  
Next, download Demand Metric’s  STEP Analysis Tool  to review of the 
Social, Technological, Economic, and Political issues affecting your firm’s 
ability to capitalize on a market. Combining the int ernal and external 
analyses provides a foundation for evaluating potential market 
opportunities, and serves as a basis for objectively comparing the 
attractiveness of each opportunity.  
  
It is helpful to view marketing strategy planning as a process of 
segmenting markets, targeting specific customers, and working to 
effectively position your offering among the competition. The following 
sections in this report will outline how to effectively segment, target, 
and position, your product or service.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Types of Market Opportunities   
 
   
 
 
There are four basic types of market opportunities: Market Penetration, 
Market Development, Product Development, and Diversification.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Market Penetration  is the attempt to increase sales of current 
products in present markets. Some strategies to penetrate 
markets include: more aggressive marketing, increasing service 
to improve renewal rates, or attracting competitor customers 
directl y. 
 
 Market Development  is the effort to increase sales by selling 
current products into new markets. Firms may advertise to reach 
new target customers within a geographic region, or look to 
international markets for expansion.   
 
 Product Development  refers to offering new or improved 
products to present markets. By working closely with your 
customers, you may find new and innovative ways to better 
satisfy your target market.   
 
 Diversification  means opening completely new lines of 
business, with new products in new markets. Many organizations 
diversify their product mix to mitigate risks related to economic 
variables such as recessions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Market Segmentation  The question becomes: which opportunities should be evaluated first? 
The answer falls out of a sound analysis of existing markets and 
potential new markets. Most companies look to markets that are close to 
home, since they are more familiar and can be resp onded to quickly. 
Additionally, it is more profitable to retain, rather than recruit new 
customers.  
  
For these reasons, market penetration is usually the first type of 
opportunity a firm will evaluate. Conversely, many organizations have 
found that marke t development, especially in rapidly growing China and 
India, is the key to their success. The next section will outline what 
“markets” are, and provide pragmatic advice for market segmentation.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Market segmentation is a two -step process of: naming broad product 
markets, and segmenting those markets in order to select target 
markets.  
  
Most segmentation efforts fail because inexperienced marketers attempt 
to find one or two demographic characteris tics to segment a mass 
market. Generally, customer needs and behaviors do not fit nicely into 
one or two demographic characteristics. This section of the report will 
outline Best Practices related to segmenting your various product 
markets.  
 
 
1. Defining Generic and Product Markets  
   
A market  is a group of potential customers who have similar needs and 
are willing to purchase goods or services to satisfy those needs. Good 
marketers focus on the customer and develop marketing mixes for very 
specific target markets. On the other hand, poor market ers focus on 
their products when defining markets, leading to missed opportunities 
and questionable customer satisfaction. The point here is that a market 
is external to an organization; it doesn’t make sense to segment 
potential markets based on the featu res contained in your products or 
services.  
  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
When narrowing down the mass market, it is helpful to think of two 
basic types of markets: generic markets and product markets.  A 
generic market is a market of customers with generally similar needs, 
which or ganizations satisfy in a variety of ways. An example of a generic 
market would be the transportation market for a city; buses, trains, 
cars, bicycles, and walking, are all methods of getting around town.   
  
Contrastingly, a  product market  is a market of cu stomers with very 
similar needs. An example of a product market would be for laptop 
computers, where customers have the choice between products from 
Microsoft, Dell, Apple, Fujitsu, etc.  
 
When evaluating potential market opportunities, look for a definiti on 
that is broader than your firm’s current product market, but not so 
broad that your firm could not handle the demand if it were generated. 
Work to establish a slightly broader definition for your current product 
markets.  
  
When defining your product market, there are four important aspects:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An example of a product market might be “marketing advisory services 
for mid -sized enterprises in North America with limited budgets.” Once 
you have defined your product marke ts, you are ready to continue the 
segmentation process to identify potential target markets.  
 
 
 
2.  Understand Common Market Segment Dimensions  
  
There are common market segment dimensions for consumer and B2B 
markets. Following are two short lists containing sample dimensions that 
can be used to slice and dice your consumer or B2B product markets. Be 
very careful when selecting your dimensions, as these parameters will 
form the basis for defining your target markets.  
 
  
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
* Note: the following lists are meant to provide examples that will 
stimulate your thinking of applicable dimension. There are thousands of 
variables that could be used for this exercise, so be sure to carefully 
select the right dimensions for your market.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using a  Customer Relationship Management  (CRM) database system 
can assist with clustering customers with similar needs, buying patterns, 
or other relevant characteristics.  
  
We also encourage you to conduct surveys  and to aggregate your 
survey data using our Market Segmentation Tool . 
 
 
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
3.  Group Customers into Homogeneous Submarkets  
 
  
In this stage of the segmentation process, your goal is the find 
customers who have similar needs that will respond to a marketing mix 
in a pred ictable manner.  
 
 
Following are 4 criteria that strong market segments have in common:   
  
 
A. Homogeneous  - customers in a market segment should be very 
similar in both their segment dimensions and their likely response to 
a marketing mix.   
 
B. Heterogeneous  - customers in different market segments should 
be as divergent as possible with other segments.   
 
C. Economic Upside  - the segment needs to be large enough, or 
predicted to grow sufficiently, to be profitable.  
 
D. Operational  - the segment dimensions should be h elpful for 
understanding & identifying customers and making decisions 
regarding the marketing mix.   
 
 
 
It is essential that market segments are operational. The whole point of 
segmenting is to assist with better targeting, positioning, and decision -
making; be sure that your segment dimensions are extremely relevant.  
  
 
Once you have established distinct market segments  based on various 
dimensions, you are ready to start targeting your potential customers. 
The next section of the report provides practical advice on effective 
target marketing techniques.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
Target Marketing   
 
   
 
 
Following are 5 criteria that indicate whether you have selected a viable 
target market: size, expected growth, competitive position, cost to 
reach, and compatibility.  
 
  
A. Size - How large is this target market? It is w orth pursuing?  
 
B. Expected Growth  - even if the market is small, it may be profitable 
if there are indications that it will grow.  
 
C. Competitive Position  - low competition equals attractive market.  
 
D. Cost to Reach  - is this market accessible with our tactics  
 
E. Compatibility  - how aligned is this  market to our goals?   
 
 
There are three standard approaches to target marketing. The first 
approach is the Single Target Market approach whereby the firm selects 
one particular market segment and makes every effort to “own” that 
space. The second approach is the Multiple Target M arket approach in 
which the firm selects two or more segments to go after, requiring a 
separate marketing mix for each. The final approach is the Combined 
Target Market approach and results from combining two or more 
submarkets into one larger target marke t, which is managed with a 
single strategy.  
  
Most organizations prefer to adopt a segmentation approach such as the 
Single or Multiple Target Market strategies. These firms adjust their 
marketing mix for each target market to ensure that each segment is 
very satisfied with their offerings.  
  
Generally, it is better to target specific segments with an appropriate 
solution, than to approach combined segments with an “off -the-shelf” 
solution.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 10 
Positioning and Competitive Differentiation   
 
 
 
 
 
The final stage in developing a strategic marketing plan is to analyze the 
target market to identify where competitors are positioned, and which 
attributes are most important when customers are making a purchase.  
  
Product positioning refers to the place an offering occupies in the 
customers mind on important attributes, relative to competitive 
offerings. To understand your current market position, conduct a simple 
market research project to identify which product -class attributes are 
most important, which  brands are perceived to best deliver each 
attribute, and where product improvements need to be made to improve 
customer satisfaction.  
  
There are two basic strategies when it comes to positioning: head -to-
head and differentiation. Organizations that have a solid competitive 
advantage in areas deemed relevant by the target market typically go 
after a large portion of the total market share,  and are not afraid to 
compete head -to-head with new market entrants or established 
competitors.  
  
Those firms who cannot compete head -on with industry giants are better 
off looking for a niche in the market that their offering is particularly 
suited to f ulfill. Conducting a comprehensive competitive analysis in 
conjunction with annual market research is an effective method for 
understanding your role as a supplier within the industry. As the 
environment changes, you will be in a position to capitalize on new 
market opportunities.  
 
Use our Product Position Tool  and Competitive Product 
Positioning Map  to document key buying criteria for each of your 
market segments, analyze & rate your competitors, and develop a 
product positioning map.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 11 
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
Marketing is an organic process that involves understanding 
organizational capabilities &  resources, analyzing attractive market 
opportunities, and executing well -timed campaigns to drive revenue. 
Getting back to the basics and developing disciplined processes related 
to internal, external, and market analyses, are essential for reacting to 
dynamic market conditions.  
 
Discuss the four types of market opportunity (market penetration, 
market development, product development, and diversification ) with 
Senior Management to identify which area your organization will be 
looking to exploit in the near fu ture.  
  
Conduct a market segmentation initiative to define your general product 
market; further segment the market based on the needs of your 
customers and/or other relevant dimensions; and evaluate your 
submarkets to ensure they provide operational intel ligence that supports 
decision -making.  
  
Once market segments and submarkets are established, analyze which 
segment(s) would be best to pursue. Adopt a Single, Multiple, or 
Combined Target Market strategy and further evaluate the competitive 
landscape in each market. Conduct market research to un derstand the 
current competitive positions for each brand in the marketplace, and 
identify areas your organization can provide a competitive advantage.  
  
Finally, tweak your marketing mix to achieve differentiation in the 
markets you serve, and update mar keting materials to reflect your new 
position. Remember, maintaining leadership and revenue in any market 
requires diligence and the ability to listen and respond to current and 
potential customers.  
 