© 2020 Donald Miller
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic,
mechanical, photocopy, recording, scanning, or other—except for brief
quotations in critical reviews or articles, without the prior written permission
of the publisher.
Published by HarperCollins Leadership, an imprint of HarperCollins Focus
LLC.
Book design by Aubrey Khan, Neuwirth & Associates.
Interior art by Kyle Reid.
ISBN 978-1-4002-0380-2 (eBook)
ISBN 978-1-4002-0379-6 (HC)
Epub Edition January 2020 9781400203802
Library of Congress Control Number: 2020930312
Printed in the United States of America
20 21 22 23  LSC  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1Ebook Instructions
In this ebook edition, please use your device’s note-taking function to record
your thoughts wherever you see the bracketed instructions [Your Notes]. Use
your device’s highlighting function to record your response whenever you are
asked to checkmark, circle, underline, or otherwise indicate your answer(s).CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Introduction
Part I
 
The Three Stages of Relationship
CHAPTER 1
 
The One Marketing Plan You Will Never Regret
CHAPTER 2
 
The Actual Stages of a Relationship
CHAPTER 3
 
An Introduction to the Marketing Made Simple Checklist
Part II
 
Create Your Marketing Made Simple Sales Funnel
CHAPTER 4
 
Create Your One-Liner
CHAPTER 5
 
A Wireframed Website That Works
CHAPTER 6
 Lead Generator
CHAPTER 7
 
The Power of Email
CHAPTER 8
 
Nurture Email Campaigns
CHAPTER 9
 
Sales Email Campaigns
CHAPTER 10
 
How to Execute the Marketing Made Simple Sales Funnel
Conclusion
Index
About the AuthorsINTRODUCTION
M
arketing should be easy and it should work.
Whether you run a small business or a large business, the easiest and best
marketing plan starts with a sales funnel.
It doesn’t matter what you sell, if you use words to sell your products, a
sales funnel will work.
A sales funnel is the basic foundation of a good digital marketing plan.
Once you create a sales funnel, your advertising can then support your sales
funnel.
While there is more to marketing than a digital plan, your digital strategy,
including your website, lead generator, and email campaign will serve as the
foundation for all your other collateral.
But, most importantly, you need a sales funnel—and this book will teach
you to create one.
A sales funnel is a way to capture and convert leads.
Every entrepreneur, business owner, and marketer must know how a sales
funnel works. Whether you create a sales funnel yourself or have somebody
else create it for you, the checklist in this book will spell out everything you
need to know to build a sales funnel that works. Each chapter of this book
will give you tips and strategies for creating each piece correctly.
At MarketingMadeSimple.com you can download a free paper wireframe
that, along with this book, will save you an enormous amount of time and
mental anguish.
At StoryBrand, we’ve helped over ten thousand small, medium, and large
size companies create sales funnels that work. Nearly all of them started by
simply filling out these pieces of paper.
When you download your paper wireframe, you’ll also get two sample
wireframes to help you understand where you are headed.This book is all about making the execution of a marketing strategy easy.
We can talk about marketing all day, but you will only make money on what
you execute.
Most marketing plans do not fail in intent or philosophy of
communication, they fail in execution. People simply don’t get it done.
Last year, my contributing writer Dr. J. J. Peterson turned in his doctoral
dissertation on the StoryBrand messaging framework. In the dissertation J. J.
defended the idea that the framework works for any kind of business, large or
small, B2B or B2C. However, J. J. found that success with the framework
hinges on one crucial imperative: execution. This book is all about execution.
It exists to help you get the job done.
If you have a clear message and no sales funnel, your business will not
grow. Your visitors will assume you can’t solve their problem and they will
leave in search of someone who can.
DON’T WASTE YOUR MONEY ON MARKETING THAT
DOESN’T WORK
If you haven’t started spending money on marketing yet, this book will save
you thousands if not millions of dollars. And if you’ve been wasting money
on marketing, this book will stop that waste in its tracks.
Over the years we’ve run StoryBrand, we’ve met lots of marketing
agencies that will sell you new logos, color schemes, and brand guidelines
followed by Facebook ads and slick landing pages. Without a sales funnel in
place, most of that stuff won’t work.
J. J. and I have trained hundreds of StoryBrand certified marketing guides
and in that time experimented with dozens of marketing ideas. Yet we keep
coming back to the old, trusty sales funnel.
The checklist in this book will get results.
If you are an entrepreneur, a business owner, or serve in the marketing
department of a large organization, this book will serve as an easy-to-
understand blueprint.
If you’re in charge of the marketing for your company, consider this your
new playbook. And if you run a company, hand this book to your marketing
team and ask them to create exactly what is in this checklist.PAYING FOR MARKETING THAT DOESN’T WORK IS
WRONG
It is wrong for a marketing company to charge you money and fail to get you
a return on your investment. It’s an equal injustice that you, personally,
would spend your time on an effort that does not pay you for your work.
Your time is too valuable for that.
If you read this book and need help, visit MarketingMadeSimple.com
where you can find a StoryBrand certified guide to create your sales funnel
for you. Even if you hire a guide, however, this book will be important to
show you what the guide will be doing. You will be able to offer valuable
direction and feedback in the creation of your marketing plan after you fully
understand what your marketing plan should be.
Marketing does not have to be complicated. Do what we’ve laid out in this
book and you’ll have confidence in your marketing, you’ll grow your
mission, and you will connect with customers.
Let’s get started
.Part I
THE THREE STAGES OF
RELATIONSHIP1
THE ONE MARKETING PLAN YOU
WILL NEVER REGRET
Twenty years ago I’d just written my first bestselling book. I’d written a book
before that but my mother was the only one who bought copies, so that
doesn’t count. It took me two tries to write a book people actually wanted to
read, and from what I hear, even hitting it big on your second try is pretty
rare. More than 99 percent of book writers fail to sell enough copies to make
a living. I was lucky.
After writing a bestselling book, I thought, everything else would come
easy. I assumed every book I’d release after that would also be a bestseller. I
assumed thousands of people would show up every time I gave a speech. And
I supposed I could make movies out of my books and become some kind of
literary/Hollywood phenomenon.
It turns out that for more than 99 percent of writers who write a bestselling
book, none of that other stuff happens.
Writing a bestseller is a huge help, but thousands of bestselling authors
have dwindled away their money and influence so that, in 
the end, they had
nothing to show for it. And that’s what nearly happened to me.
Instead of building a platform, I rested on my past success. In my
calculation, I wasted about ten years not taking my opportunity as a
successful author (and human being) seriously.
If I could go back in time twenty years, this book is the letter I’d write to
myself.I know it sounds strange to say if I could go back twenty years I’d sit
down and teach myself a basic marketing plan, but it’s true.
Not having a marketing plan cost me millions of dollars, serious
international influence, and the chance to accomplish at least some of my
dreams.
Don’t get me wrong. Things have turned out okay, but the only reason
things worked out is because I executed this plan.
THE FIVE-STEP MARKETING PLAN THAT WORKS
In short, there are five things I should have done twenty years ago to keep the
momentum going. And after I did these five things, I should have done them
again and then again and then again.
They are ridiculously pragmatic. Here they are:
1
. 
Created a BrandScript.
 I should have clarified my message.
2
. 
Created a one-liner.
 I should have distilled that message into a single
sentence.
3
. 
Wireframed a landing page.
 I should have elaborated on that message and
brought it to life on a clear and compelling website.
4
. 
Created a lead-generating PDF.
 I should have used a lead generator to
capture emails.
5
. 
Created an email campaign.
 I should have earned the trust of people who
had given me their email address by sending them helpful emails that
practically solved their problems.
This is a book about building a platform and growing a company. I’m
going to keep it simple and specific.
Most business books are long on theory and short on application, but J. J.
and I are going to tell you exactly what you should do and what order you
should do it in so that your marketing works.
THIS PLAN WILL DIG YOU OUT OF A HOLE
I learned to execute this simple marketing plan because I had to.Twenty years ago, after having sold millions of books, I lost everything.
I put all my money into an investment that failed.
On a bright and cool September morning I got a call saying the investment
hadn’t worked and that my life savings was gone.
It was one of the hardest seasons of my life. I felt like I’d squandered
everything.
In the weeks following that excruciating loss, I realized I’d not taken
responsibility for my career. I’d trusted outside managers, publicists,
investors, and publishers to guide me.
I decided then to become the CEO of my own life. I’d make the decisions.
I rebuilt.
Instead of writing another book, sending it to the publisher, and hoping for
another bestseller, I self-published my next book and started a little company.
I began searching for an inexpensive 
marketing plan that would work, and
after years of experimenting, came up with the plan that is in this book.
Today, my wife and I own a company called Business Made Simple that
is tackling the problem of college debt by offering inexpensive online
business courses to anybody trying to develop themselves.
Today, only seven years later, we give away more to charity every year
than I lost on that Monday morning.
How did all this happen? Following this simple, five-step marketing plan
over and over is what built my company and rebuilt my life.
The good news is, you don’t have to lose all your money to build a great
company. If you follow the five steps outlined in this book, you’ll grow your
brand correctly the first time.
If you work for a large company, this plan will work for every division
and every product within each division. Yes, you can use this book to create
multiple sales funnels. In fact, I recommend doing exactly that. Once you
create your first sales funnel, start working on the next one. Ultimately, your
marketing plan will consist of many sales funnels, each selling your products
and services to varying demographics.
Regardless of whether you’re a small company creating a few sales
funnels or a large company creating hundreds, the plan works.
You do not have to struggle with marketing. You can be confident, proud,
and see a return.
If you execute the plan that is in this book, you will succeed.2
THE ACTUAL STAGES OF A
RELATIONSHIP
Why People Have to Get Curious and Enlightened
Before They Will Commit
Our five-step marketing plan will invite people into a trusted relationship
with your brand. Not only will you sell more products, but customers will
start thinking of you, your salespeople, and even your products as friends
who are helping them on their journey.
Understanding the stages of a relationship is important because it helps us
understand what our sales funnel has to accomplish.
We all want people to understand how our products can solve their
problems so that they will make a purchase. But it turns out, simply asking
people to buy our products doesn’t work. At least not right away.
Asking for a sale is a relational proposition. And relationships have rules.
Most of us ask people to buy our products the way a shy, young boy might
ask a girl to go on a date. We clumsily walk up to her in the hallway, shake
her hand with a strong grip the way our dad taught us, and ask her if she’d
like to go to a movie with us and 
our mom, who just bought a new car. (I’m
relating the story for a friend.)
Who knows whether that relationship will work out. Let’s hope so for the
kid’s sake. Regardless, though, the kid would do a lot better if he understood
how relationships really work. And the truth is relationships are built slowly.
Whether we are talking about a romantic relationship, a friendship, oreven a relationship with a brand, all relationships move through three stages.
And, these stages cannot be rushed.
The stages of a relationship are:
1
. 
Curiosity
2
. 
Enlightenment
3
. 
Commitment
People do not want to be enlightened about you (get to know you more)
unless they are curious about you (you have something that can help them
survive), and until they are enlightened about how you can help them survive,
they will never commit.
Every relationship you have ever been in has gone through these three
stages. Even relationships you have with brands.
THE JOURNEY EVERY CUSTOMER TAKES
Recently I began exploring high-end audio equipment. Betsy and I live in
Nashville and because so many people in this town are in the music industry,
we often find ourselves hosting small get-togethers with artists who are
working on an album.
After the fifth or sixth impromptu listening party, I realized the tiny
Bluetooth speaker in our kitchen wasn’t good enough.I spent a little time on Google and came across a small company named
Oswalds Mill Audio that makes custom audio equipment. The pictures of the
speakers and turntables were beautiful. The turntable itself weighed eighty
pounds and the speakers looked like steel bullhorns pulled from an old
football stadium. Everything was mounted on beautiful hardwood, and the
guy in the picture playing the vinyl record was wearing a cool sweater, which
is the sign of a guy who knows a lot about how a sound system works.
Anyway, there was something different about this sound system and the way
the product was talked about on the website that made me curious.
But how? And curious about what?
I’ll tell you whether I bought the sound system in a minute, but first, let’s
explore what we need to do to help a customer be more interested in a brand.
Stage 1: Curiosity
Can this person, product, or service help me survive? The first stage of a
relationship is curiosity. This is the stage where you meet somebody and you
want to know more about them. At a 
party, this is the person you leave the
party hoping for a second interaction with. Perhaps you went to the same
school or perhaps they are a few years ahead of you in the same career.
Without knowing it, what’s making you curious about this person is one
thing: you sense they can help you survive or thrive.
You might wonder how a person can help you survive just by having gone
to the same school as you. The truth is, the filter that decides what helps us
survive is incredibly nuanced and particular. Your filter is a ridiculously
refined instrument.
That person who went to the same school as you solves the problem of
you not feeling alone, that there is somebody who has a similar life journey
as yours. We tend to collect people with similar life journeys for that very
reason; they make us feel like we have a tribe.
Being alone, by the way, is a vulnerable state. Human beings move in
families and tribes. We may go through seasons where we are alone but
mostly we like being around other human beings.
When we meet somebody who is like us, we feel more safe, mainly
because we understand the person better. Confusion about who somebody is
makes us feel slightly threatened, so similarities break down those threats
faster.If the person we are talking to is a few years ahead of us in the same
career, the way they can help us survive is more obvious. They can help us
avoid pitfalls and may know some strategies so our career can advance a little
faster.
None of this thinking is happening on a conscious level, of course, but it’s
definitely happening.
A person, product, or brand that can help us survive or thrive activates a
survival mechanism within us that piques our curiosity.
Curiosity Is a Snap Judgment
The curiosity stage of a relationship is mostly about snap judgments.
Scanning our environment is like sorting through a stack of mail. 
We place
anything we see as junk, or not relevant to our survival, in the recycle bin.
Bills, letters from friends, catalogs we might be interested in, and such go
into a pile to be sorted later. At the curiosity stage we are really only making
two large piles: 
keep
 and 
discard
.
This is how our customers’ brains work as they scan the three thousand
pieces of marketing collateral they encounter each day. The overwhelming
majority of material gets discarded, but the occasional message gets sorted to
the keep pile.
I know this all sounds harshly utilitarian, but it’s quite normal and healthy.
Each of us are trying to live a meaningful story, and not everybody or
everything is useful to whatever story we’ve decided to live.
Human beings collect physical, emotional, and social resources that help
them survive in the world. Just like the squirrels in my backyard collect nuts,
we collect anything we might need to stay alive on this planet. And that’s not
a bad thing. We are, after all, primates. And primates are terrific at survival.
A person with no curiosity filter would not survive in the world. In fact,
people with no curiosity filter wouldn’t even make it out of their house in the
morning. They’d just stand in the kitchen all day wondering about how the
toaster works. Why? Because their curiosity filter wouldn’t tell them they
don’t need to know how the toaster works and that if they don’t leave soon
they will be late to work and if that keeps happening they will lose their job.
The point is this: if you don’t tell somebody how you can help them
survive, they will set you aside—or worse, discard you.
When it comes to marketing, the header on your website, the subject lineof your email, the opening statement of your proposal, the title of your lead
generator, your entire elevator pitch, the first line of your keynote address,
and a thousand other things need to succinctly express one of the ways you
help people survive. If they don’t, people will not listen.
How Do You Get Past a Person’s Curiosity Filter?
So what made me curious about the expensive audio equipment? Several
things, most of which were being communicated to my subconscious.
The main thing that made me curious was status. More than even a sound
system that sounded good, the beautiful equipment was going to make my
living room look and feel awesome. People were going to think more of me
when they saw that equipment (or so my primate mind believed), and so the
pictures on the website were doing a lot of the heavy lifting. Not only that,
but the guy in the sweater was acting as a proxy for my aspirational identity.
Who wouldn’t want to be ten years younger dressed in a cool sweater
listening to an Al Green record while their spouse mixed them an old-
fashioned in the background? Fantastic!
I know it all sounds irrational, but very little of what makes us curious is
actually rational. People don’t buy products, vote for candidates, or join a
movement because they are thinking rationally. If you look around, that’s
pretty obvious.
Regardless, the point is this: to pique somebody’s curiosity, you must
associate your products with something that will help them survive.
Your Customers Are Not Curious About You, They Are Curious
About How You Can Solve Their Problem
Most businesses make the enormous mistake of telling their story to their
customers, as though their customers are somehow interested. Customers are
not interested in your story. They are, rather, interested in being invited into a
story that has them surviving and winning in the end.
Instead of telling your story, the first stage of your marketing plan should
pique a customer’s curiosity about how their own story could be made better.Curiosity Isn’t Enough
Curiosity aside, I still wasn’t ready to buy the expensive sound system. The
sound system was no impulse buy. I needed more information.
Without knowing it, I was moving into the second stage of relationships. I
wanted the company to enlighten me about how, exactly, their product was
going to increase my chances of survival.
Stage 2: Enlightenment
This is the process by which your customer begins to trust you. If curiosity is
what gets us to pay attention to a brand, enlightenment invites us into a
relationship.
I’m not talking about the “you’ll understand the meaning of the universe”
kind of enlightenment: I’m talking about the kind of enlightenment that helps
us understand how something works.
An enlightened person is somebody who understands and an
unenlightened person is somebody who doesn’t. You are either enlightened
about how the tectonic plates once moved, or you are not. And that goes for
physics, gardening, neuroscience, or how to make snow cones. With the
exception of how to actually eat snow cones, I, for example, am not
enlightened about any of those things.
If you want customers to take the next step in a relationship with your
brand, you need to enlighten them about how you can solve their problem
and help them survive.
After piquing your customers’ curiosity on a website, in an email, or in
some form of advertising or sales presentation, the next question they will
likely ask is “but how?”
You sell a medicine that can cure a hangover. But how does it work?
You can improve education without raising taxes. But how?
You can safely rid their garden of pesky pests. But how?
The next phase of your marketing should enlighten them about how your
products work to solve their problems.
Notice I didn’t say that you should enlighten your customers about how
your product works. That’s hardly important. You should enlighten your
customers about how your product 
works to solve their problem
.
Never forget, we are not telling our story or even talking about our
products. We are always inviting our customers on a journey in which theirlives are made better through the use of our products.
Customers being invited on a journey want to know what tools we have to
help them save the day and exactly how those tools will help them
accomplish whatever task lays before them. If they are confused about how
our products can help them win, they will walk away without making a
purchase.
Customers Will Not Move Into a Fog
Being confused about something is a vulnerable state. If you drive a car in a
country where traffic rules are different, your confusion could get you hurt. If
you are confused about what kind of berries are poisonous and what kind are
edible, you could get killed!
A human brain is designed to experience pleasure when it understands
something and fear or resistance when it doesn’t. This is a basic survival
mechanism and it’s one that very few companies take into account when they
communicate with their customers.
When somebody is confused, in varying degrees, they feel exposed to
danger. Therefore, people move away from situations in which they are
confused and toward contexts in which they understand the situation and feel
in control.
This principle is why politicians with repeatable, simple messaging
statements usually win. It’s not because their plan will work or has even been
thought through, it’s because voters feel a sense of understanding and
associate that feeling of comfort and survival with that candidate.
The answer to confusion is always no.
When you enlighten your customers, you lift the fog and help them see
clearly how your product can help them solve their problem.
If the header of your website, the first words of your proposal, or even the
first thing you say in a keynote is meant to pique curiosity, the next idea you
communicate should answer the “but how.”
Your Marketing Should Enlighten Customers
I built StoryBrand, the marketing division of BusinessMadeSimple, using a
lead-generating PDF called “Five Things Your Website Should Include”because my potential customers wanted to know more. I convinced them
their message wasn’t clear enough and then taught them how to clarify their
message in a specific application. That lead generator was incredibly
successful for me. It was a great “next step” in my customers’ relational
journey with my brand.
There are many ways you can enlighten your customers, including long-
form copy toward the bottom of your website in a lead generator, a live
event, an email sequence, or even a video.
As I did further research on the speaker company, I found a video in
which the founder explained how sound waves work. It turns out sound
waves take up actual physical space. Some sound waves are an inch wide,
and others are two or three inches wide. What this means is if you have
speakers that aren’t the right dimensions to produce the physical sound
waves, those waves become distorted.
The video enlightened me. No wonder the cheap Bluetooth speaker in our
kitchen was so inferior. My speaker was squishing the precious sound waves!
After becoming enlightened, I realized 
why
 the sound coming from these
new expensive speakers would deliver a terrific experience. And, of course, I
wanted the experience all the more.
One thing the video could have done a little better would have been to
connect the enlightenment about how their speakers work with my own
survival. A simple line saying “so that’s why your friends aren’t super
impressed with your current sound system and they will be really impressed
when you install ours” would sell a lot more speakers. Why? Because now
your big bullhorn speakers don’t just help me listen to music, they help me
bond with and serve my tribe.
As you think about your marketing campaigns, are you piquing your
customers’ curiosity and then enlightening them as to how you can solve
their problems, help them survive, and improve their lives?
Later in this book we will give you step-by-step instructions on how to do
this, but for now, know that even these first two steps are not enough. Now
that we are in a trusted relationship with our customers, we have to ask them
to commit.
Stage 3: Commitment
The point at which your customer is asked to make a risky decision. The twomain reasons customers do not place orders are because:
1
. 
The brand never asked them for the sale, or
2
. 
The brand asked them for a sale too early.
The reason asking for a commitment too early in a relationship doesn’t
work is because a commitment is risky, and taking risks works against our
survival mechanisms.
Making our customers curious and then gradually enlightening them
reduces the sense of risk and greatly increases the chance they will commit
their hard-earned dollars on our products.
Timing Is Everything
The day I met my wife I knew I wanted to marry her. I did. Much later, of
course. But the morning we met, it was all I could do to patiently wait and
take small steps.
I was in and out of D.C. working on a government task force, and she
worked at a bed and breakfast I was staying at. My only goal the morning we
first met was to not spill coffee on my shirt as we sat at the breakfast table
and talked. Luckily, I made it through that breakfast alive and could tell she
was open to another conversation in the future.
But that’s when I screwed up. As we e-mailed back and forth over the
next month, I never made my intentions known. Because I wasn’t asking her
out, she assumed I only wanted to be friends and started dating somebody
else. It would be nearly three more years before I had the chance to recover
from my mistake.
What I should have said early on was that I enjoyed talking to her and
whenever I happened to be in D.C. next, I’d love to take her on a date. If I’d
have just said that, I might have gotten an earlier start on a great love story.
The reason I didn’t ask her out, though, was the same reason many of us
don’t ask our customers to commit. We are a little scared of rejection and we
don’t want to come off as pushy.
When the time is right, though, we have to make our intentions known or
we will lose the relationship.
We often believe that being passive is a way of respecting our customer.We don’t ask for the sale because we don’t want them to be bothered.
However, the last thing we want our customers saying is something along the
lines of “I really like that brand, I consider them a friend, but I don’t buy
anything from them. I do, however, make out with their competitor all the
time.”
Blah.
Wise men say only fools rush in, but wise men also make a move
eventually.
Move Slow, But Move
Having a “buy now” button on your website is not pushy. Customers always
want to know where the relationship is going and you want to make sure to
tell them that this relationship is a business relationship that is transactional
in nature. They will respect you for being honest. Having a “buy now” or
“schedule a call” button on your website makes sure they always understand
the kind of relationship you are inviting them into.
Businesses that pretend to be their customers’ friend in order to create
sales come off as users and stalkers. As a business leader, it’s our role to be
trusted advisors to our customers. And customers absolutely love trusted
advisors. We do not have to take the place of their parents or their spouses.
That’s creepy.
Later in the book when we teach you to wireframe a website, we’ll show
you how to always be asking for the sale without being pushy.
And being pushy is a problem.
When a sales relationship moves too quickly, the customer feels
threatened. The reason people feel threatened is because making a purchase is
always a decision to forgo valuable survival resources in exchange for
resources they hope will increase their chances of survival even more. If they
are wrong in that calculation, they are under greater threat than they were
before they made the purchase.
That’s why so many people hate it when a car salesman rushes out of the
building when we walk onto a lot to shop for a car. Nobody wants to be
“tricked” into giving up their resources. They want to be invited into a
journey in which they will discover a product that can help them survive, and
preferably for a great value.
The same is true in social relationships. Commitment in a relationshiptakes time.
Why does commitment take time? Because commitment is the first stage
in a relationship in which a person has to take a calculated risk. Commitment
is when they put skin in the game.
Rushed Relationships Are Not Healthy
We all remember how relationships felt in junior high. We’d have a best
friend one week and a new one the following week. We fell in love one
month only to fall in love with somebody else a month later. As we grew
older, the pace of those transitions slowed down and became healthier.
If an adult falls in love with somebody new every couple months, most
people would think of that person as unhealthy and not want to risk being
with them.
I say that because when we rush in to close a deal or make a sale too soon,
the customer smells "unhealth."
Our sales funnels should invite people into a journey that never attempts
to trick or coerce them to make a decision they will later regret. That’s one of
the keys to staying in business for decades rather than months.
When we push customers to make a purchase, we end up with frustrated
customers—or worse, unhealthy customers who don’t have good boundaries.
The latter tend to light up our customer service lines and create more
problems than the sale was worth.
It’s true you always want to be asking for the sale, but if the relationship is
moving at the right pace asking for the sale, even when the customer isn’t
ready, won’t break the deal. Always piquing their curiosity while
enlightening them allows a customer to reject your offer while still asking to
know more.
The key to marketing—and sales for that matter—is to invite the customer
on a journey at the pace of a natural, healthy relationship.
To Create a Good Relationship You Must Keep in Touch
So what’s the correct pace? In my opinion, for most products a customer
needs to experience about eight touchpoints before they are ready to place an
order.A “touch” in this context is an email, a visit to your website, a radio ad, a
keynote that they hear, or any other piece of marketing collateral you send
their way.
The sad news is, in order for your touchpoints to reach a customer eight
times, you need to send out dozens of pieces of communication they may
actually ignore. In other words, you may have to reach out to them fifty times
just to get your customer to notice.
The less expensive the product, the more likely they are to impulse buy,
which means fewer touches. But the more expensive the product, the more
they will need to hear from you before they will take a risk.
The absolute best way to stay in a relationship with a customer is to email
them. Depending on the kind of email campaign you are creating, you will
continue piquing their curiosity, further enlighten them, and call them to
action.
In the email section of this book, we will help you craft emails that do all
three. Of specific importance to you, though, are the emails that close the
deal.
Customers can be invited on a journey that builds a trusting relationship
and invites them to buy your products all through email.
You should have an email campaign for every product you sell. Likely
your salespeople should be interacting with clients at various stages of an
email campaign.
A Sales Funnel Controls the Pace of the Relationship
In a relationship, you talk about things on a fourth or fifth date you might
never talk about on a first date. Intimacy and trust take time.
The rest of this book will walk you through the creation of a sales funnel
that will build trust with your customers in a way that is natural and safe.
As you create your sales funnel, you will be piquing your customers’
curiosity, enlightening them, and then asking them to commit. Different
pieces of your sales funnel will accomplish these tasks and to some degree
they overlap, but in the end your customer will enjoy interacting with your
brand because you’ve respected their autonomy and space.Assess the Strength of Your Marketing Campaign
Are you piquing your customers’ curiosity with your website, your signage,
the first pages of your proposals, and through the talking points your
salespeople employ?
Are you earning your customers’ trust by enlightening them about how
you can solve their problems and help them survive?
Are you inviting your customers to place an order through a
complimentary and direct ask?
Once you create your sales funnel, you’ll be inviting your customers into a
trusted relationship that feels safe, consistent, and useful in their lives.
People fall in love with brands for the same reason they fall in love with
each other. The brand helped them survive and got 
them a great return on
their social, emotional, or financial investment.
What if a significant amount of trust building could be automated? What
if, by the time you or one of your sales representatives sat down with a
potential client, it felt like that client was already on the fourth or fifth date
with your brand?
How much would your sales increase if by the time you interacted with a
potential customer your customer’s curiosity had already been piqued and
your brand had enlightened them on how you could solve their problem?
Customers can fall in love with your brand too. Just invite them into the
stages of a relationship and do so at the right pace.
The Marketing Made Simple Checklist will show you the way.3
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE
MARKETING MADE SIMPLE
CHECKLIST
Many companies confuse branding with marketing, and this confusion is
costing them millions.
Branding affects how a customer feels about your brand, while marketing
communicates a specific offer.
Branding concerns itself with fonts and colors and design, while
marketing puts the right words together to pique a customer’s interest and
close the deal.
Most of us are so concerned with the way our brand looks and feels, we
neglect to communicate what customers are actually looking for: a solution to
their problem.
Imagine getting a job as an NFL football coach and spending 90 percent
of your time choosing the new team logo, the new jersey designs, and the
“branding” for game-day trinkets the team will hand out to fans? Meanwhile,
your team hasn’t been drilled on the fundamentals of the game.
It doesn’t matter how pretty your jerseys are, your team is going to lose.
It’s easy for us to think of branding as more important than marketing. We
watch the Super Bowl and get sentimental when the new Coca-Cola
commercial comes on. We want people to feel just as great about our
company. What we fail to realize is that Coca-Cola is a household brandname. Coke was invented in the nineteenth century and brilliantly marketed
in the early twentieth century. Hundreds of millions of dollars have been
spent telling the world what Coca-Cola is. And not only this, we’ve all tasted
it and enjoyed it. Coke has extreme brand familiarity, which means they can
afford do to more branding and less marketing.
Now imagine a company that has created an automotive product allowing
you to only change the oil in your car once every year. That would be a pretty
amazing product. Let’s say you can drive up to fifteen thousand miles
between oil changes. Incredible. The problem is, nobody has heard of this
company. A rookie mistake would be to “brand” the company rather than
“market” the product.
A novice marketing director might want to use a tag line like “save time,
save money,” which at first glance sounds great. But look again. To an
outsider, it’s invisible language. Let’s say you’re driving down the street and
see a random company logo on a billboard with giant words that say “save
time, save money.” If you didn’t know what the product did or what problem
the product solved, would that mean anything to you? No! People don’t pull
their cars over to sit on their hood and study billboards. They pass by them at
eighty miles per hour. That billboard needs to say “The oil you only have to
change once a year!”
DON’T BE INVISIBLE
Most brands make what I call an invisible first impression. It’s not that they
make a bad first impression—but it’s also not a good first impression. It’s
just invisible.
A nutritional supplement company we worked with introduced me to their
line of products by saying they give their customers 
more life and more
fulfillment.
 That sounds great but the same could be said of a church, an
executive coach, a gym, or a daycare! Those words go in one ear and out the
other and come off as standard marketing speak. It’s an invisible first
impression.
Consider all of the invisible first impressions you see as a consumer every
day. How many billboards do you drive past that you pay no attention to?
How many commercials run in the background of your TV or radio that
you’re tuning out? Think about how much money was spent to put thoseforgettable ads into the world.
Anecdotally, I’d say more than 50 percent of all advertising makes this
mistake. They create invisible ads that nobody reads or cares about.
MARKETING MADE SIMPLE WILL CAUSE PEOPLE TO
MEMORIZE YOUR OFFER
The one final thing a sales funnel needs to do is help your customers to
memorize your offer.
Good marketing is an exercise in memorization and successful brands
know it.
Repeating the same language in the same way in your one-liner, landing
page, emails, and direct sales letters helps you brand yourself into your
customer’s mind.
We know that in only fifteen minutes, Geico can help us save up to 15
percent on car insurance. Why do we know this? Because their marketing led
us through an exercise in memorization that caused us to memorize their
offer.
After a customer has gone through your sales funnel, they will have
memorized the talking points you want them to memorize. And when they’ve
memorized your talking points, you will take up valuable real estate in their
brains. They will know why you matter in their story, and they will be able to
tell their friends why you matter in theirs too.
The key to going viral is to give people something very simple to think
about and say regarding your products or services.
Before you create your sales funnel, come up with three or four things you
want your customers to know about your brand.
If you understand the StoryBrand framework this is simple. Just use the
words from your BrandScript to populate your sales funnel.
If you don’t understand the StoryBrand framework, consider answering
these questions in your sales funnel:
What problem do you solve for customers?
What will your customer’s life look like if they buy your product?What consequences does your product help customers avoid?
What does somebody need to do to buy your product? (“Click 
buy
now?” “Call today?”)
The answers to these questions should be short, simple, and easy to
understand. Remember, customers do not move into confusion.
If you are a dentist, you might say:
Could your smile be better?
You could be happy with your smile.
Schedule an appointment today.
I know that sounds simple, but we interact with thousands of brands who
fail to tell their customers exactly what they offer and exactly how they can
change their customers’ lives for the better.
In your marketing copy, don’t be cute, be clear. Simplify your message
and repeat it over and over using the same language and customers will
finally figure out where you fit in their lives.
THE MARKETING MADE SIMPLE CHECKLIST
Each sales funnel you create should break through the advertising clutter and
speak directly to customers.
Your sales funnels are the foundation of your entire marketing effort.
Again, once your sales funnels are created, your advertising campaigns
should support those sales funnels, which then sell your product or service.
If you’re a visual learner or are looking for inspiration, start there.
There are many kinds of sales funnels. If done well, they all work. The
Marketing Made Simple Checklist is a collection of best practices we’ve
learned, having helped more than ten thousand businesses create marketing
campaigns that work.
The practical tools we will help you build will guide customers through
the three stages of relationships. We’ll help you create one-liners that pique acustomer’s curiosity, wireframe websites and landing pages that further
intrigue them about the problems 
you solve, lead generators that enlighten
them as to why your products and services will work for them, email
campaigns that establish trust with customers, and sales emails and calls to
action that ask for a commitment without making you sound like a sleazy
salesperson.
The five pieces of your sales funnel will be:
Curiosity
Enlightenment
Commitment
One-Liner
Lead generators
Sales email campaigns
Website
Nurture email campaigns
The next few chapters walk you step by step through how to create a
marketing sales funnel. It is a checklist for you to walk through and make
sure you have what you need and that you are doing it right.
You will start with building curiosity for your business through a one-liner
and website wireframe. Then you will take your customer through the
enlightenment phase by creating lead generators and nurture emails. Finally,
you ask them to make a commitment with a sales email sequence. Each piece
of collateral 
you create from the checklist will further engage your customer
in a relationship with you and lead toward a sale.
So you know you are doing it right, each chapter contains an explanation
of why you are creating the piece you are creating, a step-by-step guide to
writing the material—and then we tell you how to implement it.In the chapter on execution, we even give you a complete plan including a
meeting schedule and agendas so that your team can create a series of sales
funnels together.
EXECUTION IS KEY
We recently hired an independent research company to survey thousands of
our customers to find out who sees greater success from clarifying their
message and creating marketing that sells.
After all the surveys and all the data were compiled, you know what made
the greatest difference? It wasn’t size, background, education, or business
type. The companies that showed the greatest growth in profit, saw greater
ease in the creation of marketing collateral, and saved more time and money
in creating marketing collateral were the ones who actually followed the
exact plan I am going to walk you through. The only thing that had a
statistical impact on growth was how they implemented the framework.
Bottom line: when customers were asked what level of success they saw
compared to how much they implemented the checklist, there was a striking
correlation between the level of success as compared with implementation
across all channels of marketing. This pattern was the same across every
individual area of marketing as well as overall implementation. It also
influenced every area of success. While simply implementing one part of the
checklist still showed positive results, higher levels of implementation
resulted in more positive results. The more thoroughly an organization
implemented the Marketing Made Simple Checklist, the more confidence
employees had in creating marketing messaging, and the more time and
money was saved in creating marketing collateral.
Most importantly, the more a company executed the Marketing Made
Simple Checklist, the more money they made.
In the graphs below you can see clearly, the more you implement the
checklist throughout your marketing, the more growth your company will
see, the more confident your team will become in creating marketing, and the
more time you will save.
The data shows that the Marketing Made Simple Checklist works and it
works for everybody.
You just have to execute.If you want J. J. and I to take you through the Marketing Made Simple
Checklist in video format, visit BusinessMadeSimple.com and register for
our very inexpensive online platform. Use the code “Marketing” to get a buy-
one-gift-one offer, allowing you and your entire team to use the platform for
half the cost.
StoryBrand Messaging has directly contributed to our
organization’s growth.
Graph of relationship between implementation and growth
Whether you’re going it alone with this book, hiring a guide, or learning
from us on video, make a commitment today to follow through on this simple
sales funnel and you will see results.
StoryBrand has made our team more confident.Graph of relationship between implementation and team confidence
StoryBrand has saved us time.
Graph of relationship between implementation and time savingPart II
CREATE YOUR MARKETING MADE
SIMPLE SALES FUNNEL
The second part of Marketing Made Simple is a step-by-step process that will
walk you through the creation of five marketing tools you can use to build a
sales funnel.
Again, the marketing tools you will create will be:
1
. 
A one-liner
2
. 
A website or landing page.
3
. 
A lead-generating PDF
4
. 
An email nurture campaign
5
. 
An email sales campaign
Once you create these five pieces of marketing collateral and put them in
play, your business will begin to grow.
Still, make a commitment now to finish the process. Whether you’re the
CEO or simply lead a department, learning to create sales funnels and
executing this marketing plan puts you ahead 
of an overwhelming number of
professional marketers. Most marketing agents believe marketing is an art,
not a science. We disagree. While there is art involved, it is very much a
science. A science you can learn.
From today on, I deputize you as a part-time marketer. Whatever your job
description is, add “part-time marketer” to the end of it and get to work
creating, perfecting, and executing this plan.And don’t forget to have fun.
Now, let’s start creating a marketing plan that works.4
CREATE YOUR ONE-LINER
The One Magical Sentence That Will Grow Your
Business
Magic spells really do exist.
Remember when we were kids, playing around with the magic wand we
made out of a stick in the backyard? We’d point it at the cat and tell the cat to
become a rabbit, summoning the power of the cosmos with the magic words
“hocus pocus.”
I don’t know about you, but my cat never turned into a rabbit.
I did manage to bring my sister’s dead goldfish back to life one afternoon
when we discovered it floating at the top of its bowl after church. It was quite
a surprise. As I said a little prayer for it while digging a hole in the backyard
with a spoon, it just started flopping.
Other than the goldfish incident (which to this day I consider more of a
faith healing), I’ve had no success in magic.
I let the dream go when, wide eyed and with great focus, I was unable to
get my great uncle to lift the lid of his casket at his own funeral.
So I stopped believing in magic.
Until.
Until I discovered the power of a one-liner.
WORDS MAKE WORLDSOur entire world is made with words. Every manmade thing started with one
person talking to another saying something like “what if we put a wall here?”
or “let’s paint it red.”
Words create worlds—not only physical worlds but the worlds we
perceive.
You and I perceive some people as more important than others, simply
because somebody made up the words 
king
 and 
queen
 and attributed those
words to people with a certain surname.
From words, the world as we know it fell into place. Hierarchies, housing
markets, romances, and global agreements are all constructs made of words.
Appropriately, even Moses attributed the creation of our world to the
breathy words of God.
The most infamous origin story of all time has God speaking us into
existence.
There is no hammer, no knife, no excavator more powerful than a spoken
word.
And yet every day we use them flippantly. The very words we could be
using to build a better life we make no effort to channel.
WORDS PICK LOCKS
My friend Lanny developed the hobby of picking locks. He likes puzzles,
both physical and mental, and said he took up picking locks as a way of
resting his mind.
He actually bought a set of tools and a set of clear, glass locks so he could
practice by seeing how his little tools worked to release the levers.
The hobby paid off. Several times each year he helps somebody get into
their locked car or picks the lock on his hotel room door because he lost his
key. Once, on a runway in Haiti, he picked the lock on an airplane because,
no kidding, the pilot had locked himself out of his own plane!
The truth is I still don’t believe in magic, but I do believe saying the right
words in the right order can pick the lock in somebody’s brain. We just need
a little help. We need tools and a process.
The most powerful tool any of us can use to magically open doors is a
one-liner.THE WORDS THAT OPEN DOORS
A one-liner is a concise statement you can use to clearly explain what you
offer. It is the most powerful tool you can use to make customers curious
about your brand.
A one-liner makes people 
lean in
 rather than tune out at cocktail party.
The idea of a one-liner is unique to the Marketing Made Simple
framework, but it didn’t originate with us.
It comes from Hollywood.
When a screenwriter writes a film, she must also write a one-sentence
description of the screenplay that makes investors want to take a risk on the
story. After that story is turned into a full-length feature, that same one-liner
is used to get you to go see the film.
Whenever you’re scrolling through your phone deciding what movie
you’d like to see tonight, you’re reading through one-liners. Often called a
logline, a one-liner is a one-statement description of the story you are inviting
people to experience.
If the one-liner is confusing or elusive, it will cost the producers millions
at the box office.
A bad one-liner can sink a film, no matter how good that film may be.
Just like some businesspeople are better at creating products than
marketing them, some screenwriters are better at creating a film than they are
at describing what the story is or why it matters.
But to be a financial success, we all need to be good at both.
HERE’S HOW TO CREATE YOUR ONE-LINER
The one-liner is composed of three parts—the problem, the solution, and the
result.
Let’s take a look at what you need to do to create a home run one-liner.
The structure:
Step 1: Problem
When you’re describing the story you’re inviting customers into, always start
with the problem.
The problem is the hook.If a story doesn’t have a problem, the story never gets started.
Here’s an example:
Yesterday morning I woke up, went into the kitchen, and turned on the
coffee maker. I waited for the coffee maker to finish brewing the coffee
and then poured enough into a cup to get the day going. I sat down at
the table in the kitchen, drank my coffee, and read through the morning
paper . . .
Now technically, that’s a story. It has a character who is doing something.
The problem is, it’s not a very interesting story. In fact, 
as you read it, you
were likely wondering when the story was going to get started.
But that’s not what you were really waiting for. What you were really
waiting for was for something to challenge the protagonist.
When we’re waiting for a story to get started, we’re really waiting for a
problem the hero has to overcome. We’re waiting for something tough or
difficult or scary or painful to happen.
A good storyteller knows to get to the problem fast, otherwise they will
lose the audience.
The same is true when we’re talking about our businesses. We need to get
to the problem fast.
Let’s try that story again.
Yesterday morning I woke up and went into the kitchen to turn on the
coffee maker. As I turned the corner to the kitchen I saw several broken
glasses on the floor and cereal spread all over the kitchen. Then, out of
nowhere, a squirrel drops down from the chandelier above the kitchen
island!
Now that’s a decent start to a story. We’re interested.
The story only gets started when you state the problem.
Stating the Problem Adds Value to Your Products
Imagine being at a cocktail party and meeting two different people who had
similar private chef businesses.
When you ask the first person what they do, they tell you they are aprivate chef. You curiously inquire how they got started, who they have
cooked for, and the conversation quickly turns to the chef’s favorite
restaurants in the area. It never occurs to you that you might need their
services.
But then you meet another private chef, and when you ask what she does
she says:
“You know how most families hardly eat together anymore and when they
do, they don’t eat as healthy as they should? I’m a private chef . . .”
The second chef is way more interesting. In fact, as she talks, you start
picturing her in your home, cooking meals for your family.
Why?
Because she stated the problem she solves before she stated the solution
(her service.)
The other reason a one-liner starts with a problem is because stating the
problem adds perceived value to the product.
Stating the Problem Is a Way to Be Remembered in Your
Customer’s Mind
Always start your one-liner by stating the problem.
What’s the obvious response when your coworker tells you he has a
headache?
Coworker: “I have a headache.”
You: “Do you want an Advil?”
You rarely think of a brand unless you associate that brand with the
solution to a problem.
If you want to be remembered, associate your product or service with the
solution to a problem.
Why start your one-liner by stating a problem? (1) Because the problem is
the hook, (2) because the problem adds value to your product or service, and
(3) because stating the problem is a great way to be remembered in your
customer’s mind.
ExerciseStart off by stating the problem or pain point that most of your clients
face.
Example from the StoryBrand one-liner: Most business leaders
struggle to talk about what they do.
[Your Notes]
Other Examples:
Dentist’s office: Most parents get stressed when they think about
taking their child to the dentist.
Nashville bike store: With 110 people moving to Nashville every day,
people are wasting more and more time every day sitting in traffic.
Marketing agency: Most businesses lack the time and expertise to build
a website that gets results.
Things to Consider
1
. 
The biggest mistake companies make in creating this section is not actually
starting with a problem. I know that sounds obvious, but it happens all the
time. Make sure the first statement is a clear problem and make sure it is a
pain people actually feel.
2
. 
Do not try to include every problem your customer faces in your one-liner.
Name only one problem and 
make it the one the most people feel. This is not
the space to talk about every problem you solve. This is the hook to get
people curious. You can talk about other problems in other parts of the sales
funnel, but in a one-liner you want to talk about only one.
3
. 
Make sure the problem you start with is a problem that your company can
actually solve. Your customer may be facing many problems, but if you can’t
solve those problems, don’t talk about them.
4
. 
Think about how you are different than your competition. If you are a part of
a crowded industry, talk about a problem your competition creates with their
services. Use this space as a place to differentiate from the competition.
Step 2: Solution
Now that you’ve opened a story loop by stating a problem, your customer isready to hear about a solution.
Stating the problem first will increase the perceived value of the solution
you offer.
We are all in business because we provide the solution to a problem.
Every single product you buy you buy only because it solves a problem.
The second statement in your one-liner, then, should sound like a reveal.
As the customer listens (or reads) about the problem, they begin to wonder
how this problem can be resolved. A subtle anticipation then grows in your
customer’s mind and they lean in (rather than tune out) when you let them
know what you offer.
Make Sure the Problem and Solution Are Connected
When creating their one-liners, many people fail to connect the problem and
solution. They will say something like this:
Many people struggle with fatigue in the middle of the day. Our
patented vitamin formula was created by ten of the world’s most
recognized nutritionists . . .
The fact a group of nutritionists created your vitamin formula does not
clearly explain how it solves your customer’s problem.
I know it’s tempting to talk about how your grandfather started the
company or that you’ve won all kinds of awards, but don’t fall for it. In your
one-liner, you simply want to state how you resolve the customer’s problem.
Let’s try that again:
Many people struggle with fatigue in the middle of the day. We’ve
created a vitamin formula that gives you balanced energy from morning
till night. . . .
The part about the nutritionist can come later in the conversation. But
don’t miss your chance to clearly state the problem and solution so that the
first impression of your product or service sticks.
Close the Story LoopAnother mistake some people make in stating the solution to the problem
they solve is they become too wordy.
You don’t need to write a play.
The danger with using too many words is that your statement may open up
too many story loops.
The job of the second component of your one-liner is to close the story
loop, not open more.
Statements like “Our GPS technology allows our driverless lawnmower to
be guided by ten different satellites” are going to invite a ton of questions
about satellites and robots, unlike a statement such as “Our lawnmower
works like a Roomba in that it safely cuts your lawn without you having to
break a sweat.”
Don’t Get Cute or Clever
Cute and clever language is almost always the enemy of clarity. Clarity sells,
while cute and clever confuse.
Often, the solution can simply be the product itself.
These are great examples:
We have a new medicine for migraine headaches.
Our trucks run on natural gas.
The shingles we install on your roof last a lifetime and are guaranteed to
never leak.
These simple statements work terrifically to sell products. But you’d be
shocked at how few businesses actually state their solutions so simply.
Instead, we hear statements like “Make migraines a memory” or “Fuel
efficiency for the future” or “Rain ought to stay on the outside of your
house!”
None of those cute and clever statements will sell anything.
Don’t let yourself overthink the solution component of your one-liner. The
solution is the easiest part. It’s your product.
State the product clearly, and after hearing the problem you solve, yourcustomers will begin to associate you and your product with a solution to
their problem.
When stating the solution to your customer’s problem do three things:
Connect the solution directly to the problem.
Close the story loop.
Avoid using cute and clever language as a substitute for clarity.
Exercise
Talk about your solution to the problem you just stated.
Example from the StoryBrand one-liner: At StoryBrand we’ve created
a communication framework that helps people clarify their message.
[Your Notes]
Other Examples:
Dentist’s office: At Kid’s Teeth, our fun and welcoming office puts
kids at ease.
Nashville bike store: Nashville Bike Store will fit you with a Circuit E-
bike.
Marketing agency: At John Doe Marketing we’ll build you an amazing
website at an affordable price.
Things to Consider
1
. 
Keep it simple. Companies often make the mistake of using inside language
that is hard to understand and sounds awkward when saying it out loud. Make
sure this section is something that is easy to repeat and very clear.
2
. 
Use your name in the solution. By including your company name in the
solution, you are associating your brand with the problem you solve.
3
. 
Make sure your solution is connected to the problem you just stated. The one-
liner has to be cohesive.
4
. 
Do not try to explain everything you do for your customer in this section.
This is a short, clear description of what service you offer.Step 3: Result
The final part of the one-liner is the part everybody’s been waiting for.
Every word, every image, and every beat in a movie is heading toward a
specific scene. Sometimes called the climactic scene or the obligatory scene,
this all-important scene happens at the end of the movie and it’s the scene
that resolves all the conflict.
Tommy Boy saves his father’s company.
Rudy finally gets to play football for Notre Dame.
Erin Brockovich wins the court case.
The third part of your one-liner should release all the tension you created
in the first section.
The Problem, Solution, and Result Should Connect
When writing their one-liners, many people fail to connect the problem,
solution, and result.
For instance:
Many families struggle to spend time together, but at Acorn Family
Camp, we solve the problem of boring summers so families create
memories that last.
That sounds good, but look a little closer. The problem was that families
don’t spend time together, but the solution was about summers being boring.
It works okay, but when you connect all three, it works even better.
Example:
Many families struggle to spend time together, but at Acorn Family
Camp time stands still and families create connections that last a
lifetime.
Can you see the difference? When the three components connect, the story
resolves and the hearer gets that little jolt of pleasure that comes with clarity.
Keep Asking “Which Results In . . .” to Get to Your SolutionWhen you write the solution part of your one-liner, you’ll want to get all the
way to the end result your customer will experience. And you want that result
to be tangible. Make it something they can see or feel.
If you’re a roofer, you might be tempted to say “you’ll get a good roof,”
but if you add the “which results in” question at the end of your statement,
maybe you can take it even further.
Example: You’ll get a good roof which results in a worry-free home.
There you go. Now you know what you’re really selling. You’re really
selling a worry-free home.
Exercise
Clearly explain how your customer will feel and what they get after
you solve their problem.
Example from the StoryBrand one-liner: When you clarify your
message word starts to spread about your company and your business
grows.
[Your Notes]
Other Examples:
Dentist’s office: so they aren’t afraid and their parents actually enjoy
their dentist visit.
Nashville bike store: and you’ll get hours back in your day and get to
work faster.
Marketing agency: so you can stand out from the competition and get
more leads that turn into customers.
Things to Consider
1
. 
Make sure the success you talk about is directly related to the problem stated
earlier. This keeps the story cohesive and shows the customer how their life
will be better after you solve their problem.
2
. 
The success should be about your customer, not your company. The one-liner
should not end with something like “we can help you” or “and then you will
be our favorite customer.” Speak to what their life is like after doing business
with you, not what you do or how good you are.3
. 
Commas are not your friend. You may have a ton of success that you would
like to add here. Keep it simple and compelling. By putting too much success
in you actually end up diluting your brand. Focus on one or two success
points and leave it at that.
4
. 
Do not overpromise. Any success you state here should be something you are
able to deliver.
Now, Let’s Put It All Together:
Example from the StoryBrand one-liner: Most business leaders
struggle to talk about what they do, so we’ve created a communication
framework that helps people clarify their message. When you clarify
your message, word starts to spread about your company and your
business grows.
[Your Notes]
Other Examples
Dentist’s office: Most parents get stressed when they think about
taking their child to the dentist. At Kid’s Teeth, our fun and welcoming
office puts kids at ease so they aren’t afraid and their parents actually
enjoy their dentist visit.
Nashville bike store: With 110 people moving to Nashville every day,
people are wasting more and more time every day sitting in traffic.
With a Circuit E-bike fitted just for you, you’ll get hours back in your
day and get to work faster.
Marketing agency: Most businesses lack the time and expertise to build
a website that gets results. At John Doe Marketing we’ll build you an
amazing website at 
an affordable price so you can stand out from the
competition and get more leads that turn into customers.
Things to Consider
1
. 
After putting all the parts together, make sure it not only makes sense but
sounds good when said out loud. Sometimes what looks good on paper does
not translate well when spoken. Say it out loud and see how it sounds.
2
. 
Don’t be afraid to change things up after it is all together. You want to makesure you have all three parts in this specific order, but don’t be afraid to get a
little creative.
3
. 
Make sure it is easily repeatable. If after you put it all together it is hard to
memorize or cumbersome, go back and simplify it so that everyone on your
team can say it easily.
4
. 
Check to make sure it is simple. If you tell someone your one-liner and they
have to ask “what do you mean?” about any of the sections, then you are too
complicated. Go back and make sure each section is clear. Refining is your
friend.
WHAT TO DO WITH THE ONE-LINER
One-liners are one of the most powerful tools we give to our clients. We’ve
watched clients improve sales dramatically, simply by creating a one-liner
and putting it to work.
Once your one-liner is refined, memorize it. Have your entire team
memorize it.
When everyone on your team can repeat the one-liner, your entire staff is
transformed into a salesforce.
Other Ways to Use Your One-Liner
Below are a few ways you can put your one-liner to use right away.
Put it on the back of your business card.
Make it your email signature.
Print it on your wall in your retail space.
Make it the first sentence in the paragraph on your 
about us
 section on your
website.
Use it for your profile descriptions on social media.
You’d be surprised how many opportunities you’re missing to spread the
word about what you do. Whether you’re on an airplane, at a cocktail party,
or even a family gathering, when we explain what we do using a tiny short
story, people pay attention.
You’ll be able to use your one-liner on your website, in emails, keynotes,and elevator pitches. Your one-liner will be the central component to your
entire messaging campaign.
Now that you’ve created your one-liner, you know what you offer your
customers and can say it in clear, repeatable language. That’s half the battle.
When you start implementing your one-liner, you’ll start seeing an
increase in sales. Everywhere you put (or say) your one-liner is like a hook in
the water. You should start catching more fish.
Make sure to visit MarketingMadeSimple.com to download a free “blank”
sales funnel you can physically create on paper. Work with your designer to
execute your sales funnel or visit MarketingMadeSimple.com to hire a
certified StoryBrand guide who can create a sales funnel for you.5
A WIREFRAMED WEBSITE THAT
WORKS
Once a customer gets curious about how you can solve their problem, they
may come looking for more information.
This is where your website comes in.
A great website can be worth hundreds of thousands or even millions of
dollars. The problem is too many brands are getting their websites wrong,
and they don’t know why.
IT’S ALL IN THE WORDS
Most of us intuitively know our website is important so we pay somebody
thousands to design it for us.
Inevitably, whoever designs our website is more concerned with colors,
images, and “feel” than they are with the words we are using. And while
colors and images and feel are fine, it’s words that sell things.
Your website needs to include words that sell.
At the StoryBrand marketing workshop, we take an hour or so at the end
of the second day to put a handful of client websites on the big screen, and I
offer custom feedback.
I’ve done this for thousands of brands and most of them are making the
same mistakes.
Here are a list of avoidable mistakes you’re likely making on yourwebsite:
You are using too much insider language
You are using too many words in the header.
The call to action buttons use passive language.
The call to action buttons are not repeated down the page
The images do not relate to the product or back up the words you’re using on
the page.
The language is cute or clever but not clear.
The site does not promote a lead generator.
You’re using a slide show so the text changes too fast and frustrates potential
customers.
The site tells 
your
 story rather than inviting customers into a story.
The biggest mistake clients make when it comes to websites is making
them too complicated.
Most businesses need a website that serves a single purpose: it creates
sales.
Creating sales may not be the main reason you are in business, but it 
is
 the
main reason you will stay in business.
Your website should be a sales machine.
WIREFRAME A WEBSITE THAT WORKS
Sadly, when most people hire somebody to create their website, the designer
asks them all sorts of personal questions. They ask what their favorite colors
are, their favorite music, how and why they started the company, and so on.
These are the wrong questions to ask. This designer, sadly, thinks he or
she is preparing you for a banquet in which you are receiving an award.
Your website is not a place for you to celebrate yourself. Your website is a
place where you sell your customer a product that solves their problem and
makes their lives better.
The right questions a designer should be asking are:
What is the problem you solve?How does your customer feel after you solve their problem?
How does somebody usually buy your product?
Was there unforeseen value that was added to your customer’s life when
you bought this product?
START WITH A WIREFRAME
If a marketer asks the right questions, they can create a site that uses words
that move more of your products.
But let’s not have them lay out that expensive website just yet. Let’s start
with a wireframe.
A wireframe is a long piece of paper (or digital page) that includes the text
in a rough-draft drawing of what the website might look like.
After your designer does an intake, they should turn in a wireframe. The
wireframe is going to allow you to review the site and perhaps even get
feedback before you spend hard-earned money creating a permanent site.
Remember, words on a website sell products. It’s great if the site is
beautiful, but without the right words, the site won’t sell anything.
Settle on the right words by creating a wireframe that works. Get it all
down on paper before you design that site and you’ll thank me. The last thing
you want to do is create and re-create a website a thousand times through a
process of trial and error.
If there is a proven way to create websites that work, why don’t we just
create one for ourselves?
HOW TO WIREFRAME A WEBSITE
Before you spend thousands to redesign your website, read all the way
though this chapter and complete the exercises.
By the time you’re finished you will have a completed wireframe you can
take to your designer.
No more wasting money on beautiful websites that don’t impact sales.Nine Sections of a Website That Work
It is absolutely possible that a website can be a great work of art and also
dramatically increase your sales. That said, too many businesses spend
thousands on a website that, ultimately, is simply a great work of art and
doesn’t affect their sales at all.
These people are proprietors of the arts. They might as well print out a
copy of their website, frame it, have their so-called marketer sign it, and then
hang it above their fireplace.
If you can create an artistic, beautiful website that still sells, that’s terrific.
But in my view, the artistic statement is icing on the cake. I want your
website to grow your business.
There are nine sections of a website that we’ve seen increase sales time
and time again. Each of these sections are like hooks in the pond: the more of
them you include, the more fish you will catch.
The sections of a website I will help you create are:
The Header.
 The very top of your website, in which you use 
very few
to let people know what you offer.
The Stakes.
 The section of the website in which you explain what you are
saving customers from.
The Value Proposition.
 The section of a website in which you add value to
your product or service by listing its benefits.
The Guide.
 The section of the website in which you introduce yourself as the
brand or person who can solve your customer’s problem.
The Plan.
 The part where you reveal the path a customer must take to do
business with you and solve their problem.
The Explanatory Paragraph.
 A long-form BrandScript in which you invite
your customers into a story. This is also where you will improve your SEO.
The Video (optional).
 A video in which you reiterate much of what was on
the website in more dynamic form.
Price Choices (optional):
 The divisions of your company or your list of
products.
Junk Drawer.
 The most important part of your website, because it’s where
you’re going to list everything you previously thought was important.What Order Do They Go In?
I often get asked, “What order would be put these sections in?”
With the exception of the header going at the top, there is no magical
order. There are an infinite number of possibilities, and honestly, it’s pretty
hard to screw up.
Think of designing of website like writing a song. Each section of the
website is a different chord on the guitar. I am teaching you how to play the
chords. How you use the chords, what order they go in, and how long you
play them is up to you. Your job is to take these chords and make your
website into a beautiful song.
At our marketing workshops, we go through a similar process. At the end
of a couple short hours, the hundreds of businesses leaders in the room have
wireframed a website that will work. After they wireframe these different
sections, they can move them around intuitively to get the flow right.
Take a few hours and complete each section of your website. Try not to
skip a section because you’ll be surprised at what you come up with when
you give it a little time.
Also, make this a multiday process. Often I wireframe a website in phases.
My first draft is just that, it’s a first draft. Then, after a night’s sleep, I see
more clearly how I should structure my site.
With that, let’s get started with the fun part. Let’s wireframe the different
sections of your website.
Section 1: The Header
You only get one chance to make a first impression. The header is the top
section of your website and the first impression a customer has about your
product or service.
You do not get two chances to make a first impression, so getting it right
is important.
According to Chao Liu and colleagues from Microsoft Research, the first
ten seconds a potential customer lands on the page are the most critical for
users’ decision to stay or leave. 
(https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-
long-do-users-stay-on-web-pages/).
If your website survives the first ten seconds, users will look around a
little bit longer. This, of course, translates into either building a relationship
with a customer and growing your business or losing that relationship andallowing your business to decline.
Because you only have ten seconds (Liu also found the amount of time
you have decreases every year), we are going to have to use words that pique
our customers’ curiosity.
Again, what will pique their curiosity? They will get curious about you
only if they think the products or services you provide might help them
survive.
Does Your Header Pass the Grunt Test?
When we train our StoryBrand certified guides, we repeat over and over that
cute and clever don’t sell products, clarity sells products.
Amateur copywriters and marketers try to make a first impression by
branding themselves as cute, clever, or interesting. While there is nothing
wrong with being cute, clever, or interesting, if cute, clever, and interesting
come at the cost of clarity, you’ll lose.
To make sure your website makes a terrific first impression and piques
your customers’ curiosity, make sure your header passes the grunt test.
What is the grunt test?
Passing the grunt test ensures your website speaks to the lowest common
denominator about what you do well.
Remember, marketing is an exercise in memorization. That means you
have to speak in simple, clear language. And that language needs to tell
people how you can help them survive.
Imagine a caveman sitting in a cave by a fire. He’s a simple fellow, but
not stupid. He’s busy defending his tribe, hunting for food for his family, and
sewing the latest bearskin fashions so he fits in with his peers.
Let’s say in our imaginary universe the caveman could look at your
website. But only for ten seconds.
Could that caveman grunt the answer to these three questions:
1
. 
What do you offer?
2
. 
How will it make his customer life better?
3
. 
What does he need to do to buy it?
If a caveman can grunt the answers to these three questions, you’re on tosomething.
You don’t have access to a caveman, of course. But you do have access to
lots of other smart, busy people who, because they are constantly filtering out
information, will need to answer those three questions just as quickly.
When wireframing a website, in fact, we recommend going to a coffee
shop and asking a couple people to take a look at your header. I know it’s
uncomfortable to talk to a stranger, but whether or not a couple of strangers
can say what you offer, how it will make their lives better, and what they can
do to buy it could make or cost you millions.
Remember, clarity is the key.
Let’s look at each of the three questions that will allow you to pass the
grunt test a little more closely:
Question 1: What Do You Offer?
What is the physical, tangible thing you are selling?
You’d be shocked at how many corporations don’t say what they sell right
at the top of their website. Or, worse, they think they’re saying it but really
they’re being elusive.
A financial advisory may offer “A path to a better future” without
realizing that could be confused for a gym, a college, a church, or just about
anything else.
Don’t use the header of your website to differentiate yourself from
somebody else. Clarity itself is going to differentiate you—because your
competition, I guarantee you, is being confusing.
Often, a client will try to explain what they offer in complicated, poetic
language. But what their customer is really looking for is a short explanation
of what they offer in layman’s terms.
What is your product or service?
Lawn care
Coaching
Copywriting
Clothing
Haircuts and colorTake a minute and write down a clear and concise statement of what you
offer.
[Your Notes]
Question 2: How Will It Make Your Customer’s Life Better?
Once you have clearly explained what you offer, let’s sweeten the deal.
If somebody buys what you offer, how will it make their lives better?
You don’t have space here to list a thousand ways that your product or
service makes life better—even though that might be true. For clarity and
brevity’s sake, you’ll have to choose the one most significant way your
client’s lives will improve, and trust that 
choosing one will be remembered
while listing many would be forgotten.
How does your customer’s life improve because they do business with
you? Do they have more money? More time? A higher status in life? More
peace? Better relationships?
You will have space later to expand on other areas you improve their
lives, but for the purpose of the header, lets choose one.
[Your Notes]
Compile your answers to the past two questions into a single statement
like one of these:
1
. 
Injury lawyers committed to helping you get your life back
2
. 
Great managers aren’t born, they’re trained: See how we do it
3
. 
Transform your health, regain your life: a proven, drug-free path of healing
for all of your unresolved health concerns
4
. 
Surprise and delight your guests with handcrafted desserts
Your statement below:
[Your Notes]Question 3: What Do They Need to Do to Buy It?
You’d be surprised how many people don’t have a “buy now” button
anywhere on their website.
You can tell they’ve spent days, months, weeks, years even working to
make their website functional and beautiful and make sure it represents them
well.
Then they send their customers away without even asking them to buy
anything.
The “buy now,” “schedule a call,” or “shop now” buttons are the cash
registers of your online store.
Some business leaders don’t want to appear pushy. I understand the
feeling. The last thing I want to do is strong-arm my customers into buying
from me. That said, not having a clear call to action is the equivalent of
telling customers you don’t really believe in your product and don’t think that
product can solve their problems and change their lives.
Imagine walking through a clothing store and picking out several items
you’d like to buy. When you walk to the front of the store to buy the items,
though, you don’t find a person behind a cash register. You walk around the
store wondering where you can buy the items before finally stopping to talk
to a team member.
“Oh, we hate bothering people with all that corporate nonsense. We’re
about so much more than selling clothes, you know.”
“Right, but I want to buy these things. How do I buy them?”
“Oh, that’s easy. There’s a lady who will take your money in the second
stall of the lady’s bathroom. Like I said, we don’t want to appear too
corporate.”
This interaction would be absurd, of course. And yet many online
businesses treat their customers exactly this way. In the end, not being clear
and direct in your calls to action comes off as either passive or self-obsessed.
What the customer really needs is a clear cash register so they know
where to go when they decide to make a purchase.
If a user lands on your site and wants to purchase your product or service,
what is the next step you want them to take?
Can they buy your product now? Do they need to be added to a wait list?
Do they need to set up an appointment? Should they call? Register? Sign up?
Donate?Don’t Be Passive-Aggressive
Calls to action like “Learn more,” “Find out about us,” “Curious?” or “Our
Process” are weak and confusing.
What a customer really needs is something to accept or reject. Until then,
they are confused about what you want them to do or where you want this
relationship to go.
Often we use passive language like “learn more” or “get started” because
we don’t want to push people. We may use this approach because
relationships with our customers are important to us and we want to make
sure to position ourselves as friends.
Being friends with your customers is a great idea, but don’t forget, this is
a business relationship and business relationships are, by nature,
transactional. And there is nothing wrong with a transactional business
relationship.
You certainly want to be kind and respectful to your customers and even
friendly, but in the end, trying to be their friend while passively trying to get
them to buy from you is just creepy.
Make your intentions known early and often. Use a strong call to action.
Below, list how I can purchase your product. What is your call to action
button going to say?
[Your Notes]
Where Does Your Call to Action Button Go on the Website?
When visitors land on your desktop website, their eyes read your page in
either a Z pattern or an F pattern. Different studies have revealed different
patterns, but regardless, visitors’ eyes do not move randomly across the page.
We teach our marketers to place important text and important calls to
action along the path that the human eye travels when glancing at a website.
Meaning, their eyes are drawn to the top left of the website first, then scan
across to the top right, then diagonally down and across the middle of the
page to the bottom left and then back across to the bottom right.There are two places we recommend placing direct and transitional calls
to action. The first is at the top right of the page, which is by far the most
valuable real estate on your webpage. The second is directly in the middle of
the header beneath your headline and subtitle.
By repeating the call to action twice, even in the header, you will be
letting your customer know that you are:
1
. 
Interested in establishing a business relationship and2
. 
You’d like to solve their problem by selling them a service or product.
Many people reading this book will dramatically increase their sales by
getting rid of passive language on their website and replacing it with direct
calls to action.
Choose Your Images Carefully
While your wireframe won’t have any images, you’ll want to choose your
images carefully.
Few images work better than smiling, happy people enjoying your
products. So if you can’t figure out what images to use, smiling happy people
are a good place to start.
Avoid creating a slide show in your header in which different text and
images continuously change. Customers rarely have time 
to read one message
before it’s changed to another, and after about three of these sliding
messages, they tend to forget all of them.
Looping images (silent film) are terrific on websites but make sure the
text that floats over those images is fixed. Branding is all about repeating the
same simple message over and over until your customers have it memorized.
Sliding text, then, hurts rather than contributes to your branding effort.
Let’s Build Your Header
Let’s put the three components of the grunt test together and build the header
on your new website.
Write out the headline for your header, plus a subtitle if you need one, and
write your direct call to action in the empty boxes below.
In the parentheses, describe what image (or looping film) you’d like to use
in your header. If you build playgrounds, show children enjoying playing on
your equipment. If you bake cakes, show some of those beautiful cakes being
decorated and happy customers picking them up and gazing at them in
wonder. Don’t worry about taking pictures just yet. You’ll do that later. Right
now, decide what kind of images would best sell your product or service and
describe those images in the header.Next, list your calls to action. Your actual website may include both direct
and transitional calls to action (we will cover transitional calls to action in the
next chapter
), but for now, consider this a simple drawing toward your
header.
Now it’s your turn. Fill in the box below.
Check your work.Imagine walking down to the local coffee shop with the header you just
sketched. If you were to tap the first person you see on the shoulder, show it
to them, and give them ten seconds to look at the page would they be able to
say what you offer, how it will make their lives better, and what they’d need
to do to buy it?
If so, your header passes the grunt test.
If you get the header of your website right, you’re 50 percent done with
your website. Yes, you have a lot of other sections to create, but that’s how
important your header is. It’s up to 50 percent responsible for whether a
customer spends any more time on your site and eventually makes a
purchase.
Tomorrow morning, go back over your header. Fine tune the text and
images. Survey a group of friends and perhaps even ask a stranger or two for
feedback.
When you get the header right, your business has no choice but to grow!
From here on out, the order of the sections of your website matters a little
less. If you structure your website in the exact order we lay out these
sections, you’ll do fine, but it’s hardly necessary.
That said, I really love making the second section of the website illustrate
the stakes. Showing what can be won or lost depending on whether I do
business with you is a great way to add some drama into the story you are
inviting customers to live.
Visit MarketingMadeSimple.com to download a free “blank” sales funnel
you can physically create on paper. Work with your designer to execute your
sales funnel or visit MarketingMadeSimple.com to hire a certified
StoryBrand guide who can create a sales funnel for you.
Section 2: The Stakes
This is the Failure section. Stories love tension. A story without stakes is no
story at all.
For example, let me tell you a story and you try to figure out how we can
make the story a little better:A young man wakes up in his Venice Beach apartment, opens the
windows, and breathes in the fresh, ocean air. He makes a cup of coffee
and sits down to read the morning paper. Just as he opens the paper,
though, his best friend calls and lets him know that he and another
group of friends are playing volleyball down on the beach.
The young man loves to play beach volleyball so he folds his paper
and heads down to the beach. They play several games of volleyball,
each ending in a tie when one of the guys says he’s getting pretty
hungry. The young man let them know there is a new taco shop across
the street and suggest they try it out. They walk over to the taco shop
and, amazingly, tacos are buy-one-get-one free and so, together, they
devour several of them . . .
Okay, technically, that’s a story. It’s a story about a guy who wants to
play volleyball and then wants to eat tacos.
The problem is, it’s not a very interesting story. In fact, some of you read
that story and wondered to yourself “when is this story going to get started?”
A story that fails to get started always has the same problem: there is no
conflict!
A story gets started and hooks the reader the second the character
experiences conflict.
In fact, most stories start with a character who wants something followed
by a scene in which an enormous challenge is placed 
between where the
character is and what the character wants. It’s the crossing of that distance
that makes the story work.
If our hero in the above story were to walk down to the beach for a game
of volleyball only to experience a terrible earthquake in which the beach
opened up and swallowed the other team, we’d have a story!
If a positive scene followed by a negative scene is how enthralling movies
work, then why not follow the same formula on our website?
The first section of the website told our customers what their lives could
look like if they purchased our product or service. Let’s make the second
section of our website speak to the current pain our customers are
experiencing because they haven’t bought our products yet.
What Is the Cost of Not Doing Business With You?What is it costing your clients to not do business with you?
When you help your clients understand how much it is costing them to
live without your products, the perceived value of those products increases.
Years ago when I first started StoryBrand, I asked an outside consultant to
look over our website and offer constructive criticism. The consultant I’d
chosen had attended our workshops and was familiar with our messaging
framework. After looking at our site, though, she said we weren’t following
our own advice.
“What do you mean?” I asked.
“You talk about how important it is to include stakes, to demonstrate the
cost of 
not
 doing business with you, but there isn’t a single mention of the
stakes on your site.”
She then sent me a paragraph and told me to place it directly over the
section of the website where we let people know how much the workshop
costs.
“How much is a confusing message costing you every day? How many
customers are bouncing from your website? How many people are ignoring
your brand? How many customers are you losing to the competition?”
I asked our designer to include the new paragraph but I didn’t feel good
about it. I told my wife that night that it just didn’t sound like our voice. We
don’t strong-arm customers into doing business with us. It’s not who we are.
Betsy, my wife, said that if it bothered me so much I should ask our
designer to remove the paragraph the next day.
I walked into our designer’s office the next day and asked her opinion
about the paragraph. She understood how I was feeling. It didn’t quite feellike our voice.
“However,” she said with a smile. “We did get five new orders last night!”
That paragraph is still on our site all these years later.
Why? Because story is a trustworthy guide. And if there are no stakes in a
story, there is no story.
At our workshops, I teach that in a story there must always be pain and
conflict, and yet when we talk about painful things in our marketing it can
feel a little heavy. But don’t be tricked into telling a boring story. The stakes
matter, and if you don’t let people 
know what pain you are helping them
avoid you’ll lull them to sleep rather than stimulate them to place orders.
What pain are you helping customers avoid? What pain are they currently
dealing with that will be ended if they buy your products or service?
Some examples are:
More wasted time
Missed opportunities
Lost business
Embarrassment
Loss of sleep
Frustration
Weight gain
Confusion
Isolation
Lack of access
Lack of guidance
Loss of status
Not reaching potential
Losing to the competition
When It Comes to Communicating the Stakes, Just a Little Bit
Goes a Long Way
Unlike talking about our customers’ potential success, the negative stakes in
the story we are inviting customers into can be overdone.
We definitely want to include negative stakes on our website, but don’t
overdo it. When we get too negative, our customers will begin to tune us out.The brain is only willing to go so far before it decides it would rather live in a
happy world, even if that world is a fictional construct.
I like to look at the components of a clear message like ingredients in a
cake. To make a cake, you need cups and cups of flour 
(success) but only a
tablespoon of salt (negative stakes). If you use too much salt, you ruin the
cake, but if you leave it out, the whole thing tastes bland.
The singer Sarah McLachlan used to show up on television every once in
a while as a spokesperson for the ASPCA. In her sweet, soft voice she’d talk
about the plight of neglected and abandoned dogs while images of these
adorable but sad animals slid across the screen.
When it comes to dogs, I’m about as sensitive as they come but even I
couldn’t face that commercial. I’d always change the channel as fast as
possible. My wife and I donate to our local dog shelter and have rescued a
dog ourselves, but having to face those sad eyes was too much!
My guess is that commercial did pretty well for the ASPCA, but I also
believe if they’d have shown happy dogs in a home with only a pinch of sad
dogs being abused, they’d have done even better. After all, the purpose of
negative stakes in a story is to contrast with the happy ending we all want to
experience.
What Are You Helping Customers Overcome or Avoid?
Without overdoing it or exaggerating the stakes, what kinds of problems are
you helping customers overcome or avoid?
Examples:
1
. 
No more sleepless nights, tossing and turning on a mattress that doesn’t work
for you.
2
. 
Most people don’t realize how much time they’re wasting in their email
inbox every day. We have a solution.
3
. 
We meet people all the time who are wasting their money because they don’t
know how to invest it.
4
. 
Are you tired of paying money for marketing that doesn’t get results?
There are many ways to illustrate the stakes section of your website. You
can include a few sentences describing the pain you help customers avoid,you can include a testimonial in which a customer explains how you helped
them overcome a challenge, or you can simply list the problems you resolve
in bullet points.
Here are some examples of stakes as they may appear on a website:
What pain or problems are you helping your customers avoid? List the
pain points and challenges you resolve in the section below:
[Your Notes]
Again, you can be creative in how you illustrate the stakes on your
website. Is it a checklist, a sentence, a series of questions, bullet points? Take
a moment and sketch out what this section could look like.
Section 3: The Value Proposition
What could your customers life look like if they bought your product or
service? Like I said earlier, from here on out you can put the sections of your
website in any order you like. But one reason I like putting the value
proposition third is because it follows the positive and negative flow we often
see in stories.
Stories love to demonstrate contrasts. One character will be blunt and off-
putting, and the character standing next to her will be kind and gentle. One
scene will be visually dark and brooding, and the next will be bright and airy.
You’ll notice contrast the most, though, in the positive and negative
movements of the screenplay. Every story has an obligatory or climacticscene that the narrative is heading toward. In this scene, which usually
happens several minutes before the end of the film, all the conflict is
resolved.
A Good Story Loves Contrast
If we deconstruct the screenplay backward from the climactic scene, we will
notice that in one scene the hero moves closer to a positive climatic scene
(the guy winning the girl’s heart, for example) and in the next, he experiences
a setback (the girl flirts with the guy’s brother).
It’s this contrast that keeps the audience on their toes and paying attention.
It’s as though the story works like this:
Scene one (+): Our hero really wants something.
Scene two (-): But the opportunity to get that something has been taken
away.
Scene three (+): An opportunity arises that might help the hero get
what they want.
Scene four (-): But that opportunity falls through.
Because these contrasting scenes have worked for centuries to captivate a
human mind, let’s use them to captivate people browsing our website.
Again, the simple use of contrast (positive and negative messaging) on our
website will suffice, but directly writing the first three sections so they
vacillate from positive to negative to positive is going to give your message a
familiar and attractive flow.
What Value Will Your Customer Receive if They Do Business
With You?
Not only will the inclusion of a value section contribute to the contrast you’re
inviting customers into, but it will also add a perceived value to yourproducts and services.
For instance, if you’re selling your customer a maintenance package when
they buy an HVAC system for their home, you’d increase the perceived value
of that maintenance package if you listed a few benefits:
Never worry about your air conditioner breaking down.
Never have to schedule maintenance again.
Breathe cleaner air without having to change filters.
Where some companies would simply mention they have a maintenance
package, this company is “adding perceived value” to that package by listing
other benefits the package gets me.
If the maintenance package costs $200 per year, and I perceive that
package as being accurately priced and truly worth about $200, then saying I
never have to worry about it breaking down increases the perceived value to,
let’s say, $300. And never needing to schedule maintenance increases the
perceived value to $350. Not only 
this, but breathing clean air all year is
something I’d pay a premium for and so that raises the perceived value to
something like $500.
Customers are much more likely to buy a $500 item if they can get it for
only $200.
By using words, we just raised the perceived value of our products and
gave our customer a much better deal.
How much would it cost you in overhead and supply to raise the value of
your products by over 100 percent. You’d have to add a lot of gizmos and
services to do that, right?
We just raised the value of our product by more than 100 percent simply
by using words.
And words are free.
Tell Your Customer Everything They Get
For some customers, the bottom line question is What do I get in exchange
for my hard-earned money?
In this section of the website, you’re going to tell them.Can they save money?
Can they save time?
Will they reduce risk?
Are they getting quality?
Will this help them simplify life or avoid hassles?
If so, this section of the website should spell out the added value.
Be Specific. Be Visual.
The biggest mistake people make when it comes to writing their value
proposition is they aren’t specific enough.
If your product will help save your customer time or money, you want to
say so. Avoid elusive language like “fulfilling” or “satisfied” 
and instead use
specific language like “you’ll save time this summer” or “your lawn will
make your neighbors jealous.”
It also helps to be visual. Of course the actual images you use in this
section will help, but we can also use language that helps people “see, smell,
and taste” the life they can experience.
“You’ll come home to a clean, fresh house that will make you feel like the
queen’s own cleaning staff has come through your house.” Or “You’ll be
wearing the tux you got married in within a few weeks!”
Can you see how this kind of language is more motivating than “Your
house will be clean” or “You’ll lose weight”?
Here are a few examples of how other companies have illustrated the
value they offer customers:
In the section below, list the value your products or service can deliver toa customer:
1
. 
____________________________________
2
. 
____________________________________
3
. 
____________________________________
4
. 
____________________________________
5
. 
____________________________________
6
. 
____________________________________
7
. 
____________________________________
8
. 
____________________________________
Include a Headline
Is there a common theme among all these problems? Is there one glaring
header you could use to encapsulate the stakes?
Remember to always include a headline above each section. A website
section without a headline is like a newspaper article without a headline.
People will skip it.
Here are some example headlines that work great:
“Our customers no longer struggle with . . .”
“You don’t have to be confused anymore.”
“The stakes are high!”
“Act now and avoid the hassles.”
“Our heart breaks when we see people struggle with . . .”
With a header and a list of problems you help people solve, you’ll
demonstrate both your understanding of your customers’ problem and your
compassionate desire to help them find resolution.
Now, sketch out what this section of your website could look like below.Section 4: The Guide
Help your customer win at all costs. At StoryBrand we certify existing
marketing agents in both our messaging framework and our Marketing Made
Simple checklist. At the end of their training, our StoryBrand guides take an
oath. One of the agreements of that oath is that they will “obsess over their
customers’ success.” By this we mean that they will not simply try to get
money out of their customers but rather provide an incredible return on their
investment.
The day you stop losing sleep about your own success and start losing
sleep over your customers’ success is the day your business will start
growing again.
Every hero needs a guide, and in this fourth section of the wireframed
website, we’re going to position ourselves as the guide.
Again, these sections can go in any order. Now that you’ve established the
first three sections as a positive, negative, and then positive movement in the
story, your customers are likely hooked.
Not only are they hooked on the story you’re inviting them into, but
because you’ve illustrated the stakes, they’re in desperate need of help.
A Guide Is Empathetic and Authoritative
All good guides in a story exhibit two crucial characteristics. They
understand the challenges their customers are experiencing and they have
been able to solve those challenges for other people.
At StoryBrand we call this empathy and authority.
To position yourself as the guide your customer needs, you need to
express empathy and demonstrate authority.
When we demonstrate empathy and authority, our customer instantly
recognizes we are the person who can help them win the day.
The One-two Punch of Empathy and AuthorityTogether, empathy and authority make a powerful one-two punch.
Imagine if you went to a fitness trainer and told them that you were
interested in losing twenty pounds, toning some muscle, and getting on a
healthy eating plan. Maybe you even explain to the trainer some of the
problems you’ve been facing with your diet and weight loss plan—
specifically that you crave ice cream late at night and that you have a hard
time staying motivated to do any kind of cardio workouts.
Now imagine two different potential responses from the trainer. . . .
1
. 
In the first scenario,
 the trainer tells you, “I feel your pain. I hate doing
cardio too and could probably stand to lose ten pounds as well. Come to think
of it, I also love ice cream. Maybe we should go get some together. I know
this great place right down the street.” 
How likely would you be to pay this
trainer any money?
2
. 
In the second scenario,
 the trainer takes his shirt off and shows you how he
can make his six-pack dance. He tells you he doesn’t eat crap like ice cream
and launches into a spiel about how the latest research shows a diet of kale
and cabbage is really the way to go, so you’re just going to have to suck it up
and get that temptation out of your house. 
Again, how likely would you be to
pay this trainer any money?
Empathy without authority falls flat, as does authority without empathy.
But it’s the guide who can empathize with your pain while also
demonstrating a competency to get us out that we ultimately trust.
If the same trainer said to you, “I totally understand ice cream cravings. In
fact, I used to really struggle with that too before I learned what I know now
about regulating your blood sugar. I can teach you a plan I’ve used to help
hundreds of guys just like you get in shape and feel really good about their
bodies without losing 
all of the things they love about their life, ice cream
included. And the cardio isn’t bad. Twenty minutes at a time. You can do
this.”
That’s
 the trainer you want to hire.
In this section of your website, you’re going to clearly express empathy
and demonstrate authority (or competency).
Here are a couple ways to communicate authority on your website:Testimonials.
 All testimonials aren’t created equally—below we will discuss
testimonies.
Logos of companies you’ve worked with.
 This works especially well for
B2B.
A simple statistic.
 Talk about how many people you’ve helped, how many
years you’ve been in business, or how many clients have worked with you.
Examples:
This is why we’ve spent the last twenty years helping clients just like you get
in shape.
Join the 100,000+ who have already changed the way they sleep at night.
With our collected 100+ years of experience in the industry.
You don’t need much. Just a little authority does the trick.
Here are a few ways to communicate empathy on your website:
Mention their primary pain point. Few messages are more endearing than
“We understand how it feels to struggle with . . .”
Testimonials in which customers state how much you cared for them are
powerful.
Stating plainly “I feel your pain” helped Bill Clinton become president and
will help you grow your business.
Empathy
How can you resonate with your clients’ pain or problem?
We trust people who are like us, so you want to create a statement that
shows you not only understand your customers’ pain, but you have felt it.
You have been there before or experienced it through previous customers.
Here’s a trick: Complete this sentence: “we know what it feels like to
______________ .”
Examples:
We know what it feels like to be overlooked for a promotion.We know how frustrating it is to have a great looking website that doesn’t
result in sales.
We know what it feels like to worry you’re not doing the right thing.
Now It’s Your Turn
What pain are your customers feeling? What problem is bothering
them the most? And what single, short statement can you make to
express the empathy you feel regarding their struggle? Feel free to use
this section of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your results
over to the paper wireframe you downloaded at
MarketingMadeSimple.com to see it all come together.
[Your Notes]
Authority
How can you reassure your customer you have what it takes to help them
solve their problem?
You don’t need to brag about yourself, but you do need a few key items
that illustrate that you have the ability to help solve your customer’s problem
because you have helped others.
When thinking through what type of authority you want to place on your
website, make sure that the evidence of your authority directly relates to
solving the problem your customer is facing. For instance, if you are a
certified yoga instructor, but your business is lawn care, you do not want to
put this on your website. This will confuse the customer. They will not have a
category in their brains to put you in. Are you a yoga instructor or lawn care
specialist? It would be better to put something like, “We’ve saved customers
thousands of hours of working in their yards so they can spend more time
enjoying it than working on it.” Only put authority on your site that directly
relates to their success.
In this next section we will walk through each type of authority and what
to consider in choosing what goes on your website.
Don’t Overdo the AuthorityBe careful. If you communicate too much authority and not enough empathy,
you will confuse your customer about who the story is about. Is it about you
or them? Always make the story about them.
Express empathy and demonstrate authority through testimonials.
Including three or four customer testimonies on your website will greatly
enhance your empathy and authority.
But most companies get testimonials wrong.
The main problem we see when our clients use testimonials is they are too
long. And the second problem is they ramble.
When we train our StoryBrand certified guides, we ask them to listen for
soundbites. We have them interview customers and report 
back to us on what
they heard. Were there any soundbites that could be used to succinctly
convince others to buy?
When collecting testimonials, you want to think of yourself as a news
editor. If a television news station sends out a reporter to interview somebody
on location, they likely come back with twenty minutes or more of footage.
That footage is cut into soundbites that may last a few seconds. Why?
Because not everything the interviewee says is actually interesting.
Here are a few different soundbites you can look for when collecting
testimonials:
1
. 
Overcoming objections.
 Look for (or ask for) testimonials that speak
directly to a client overcoming the primary objections customers have about
doing business with you. For example, “I worried this course was going to be
a waste of time. I was wrong. I made more progress in six hours than I’ve
made in ten years.”
2
. 
Solving problems.
 Look for (or ask for) testimonials that speak to a specific
problem you helped a customer overcome. For example, “I’m on my feet all
day at work, so by 5:00 p.m. my lower back is usually aching. I wore XYZ
shoes for the first time, and by 5:00 p.m. I felt like I could do another shift
without blinking. I haven’t felt this good in ten years.”
3
. 
Adding Value.
 Look for (or ask for) testimonials that help clients pass the
payment threshold by speaking to how much value they received. For
example, “I was skeptical at first because of the price. But I can’t tell you
how glad I am I used XYZ lawn services instead of another company. I’ve
never been so proud of my lawn.”Keep Testimonials Short
Once you have the right testimonial, make them short and scannable. You
can even write them for your customer and then send the testimonials to them
for approval. I’m not saying make something up or lie, I’m saying that you
might have heard them tell you how you changed their life and you will know
how to write it better than they do. Put a couple short sentences together and
send it to them for approval.
Your customers are not writers. And they are not marketers. You may
think you aren’t a marketer either but even having read this far in your book,
you know more than 90 percent of professional marketers out there.
Use a Head Shot
Consider using a head shot of the customers so the testimonials have an even
greater personal appeal and are more believable and relatable.
People trust others who are willing to publicly stand behind their words.
Unless you’ve got NDAs to deal with, use your customer’s name and
image.
Now It’s Your Turn
Collect a few testimonials for your site. Feel free to use this section of
the book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over to the
paper wireframe you downloaded at MarketingMadeSimple.com to see
it all come together.
Testimonial #1:
[Your Notes]
Testimonial #2:
[Your Notes]
Testimonial #3:[Your Notes]
Including Images of Customer Logos on Your Site Adds
Authority
Another way to demonstrate authority is to include logos from B2B
interactions, or even logos of press outlets in which you have been featured.
The great thing about including logos is it doesn’t take up much room on a
website and yet allows the person scanning your site to check off the “these
people know what they’re doing” line item in their brain.
At StoryBrand we often get the question “But will it work for me?” To
overcome this objection we put logos from a variety of companies on our
site. We change our website from time to 
time, but we have featured logos
from nonprofits, small businesses, national and international brands, large
companies, and small companies. We also have a section that says
“StoryBrand Works for B2B and B2C Companies.” Then we list all the
different types of sectors that have gone through a StoryBrand workshop.
This quickly gives authority while also overcoming a perceived objection that
they’re the only company StoryBrand won’t work for.
You do not have to have logos on your website, but if you work with a
variety of different customers this is a great space to answer the question “Do
they work with companies like me?” Show a variety of logos to show the
breadth of your work.
Now It’s Your Turn
What logos will you include on your website? Feel free to use this
section of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over
to the paper wireframe you downloaded at MarketingMadeSimple.com
to see it all come together.
Logos
[Your Notes]
Including Statistics Speaks to the Authority You HaveStatistics can be another great way to demonstrate your authority. The kinds
of statistics you want to share should quickly and clearly let people know
they can trust you to solve their problem.
Here are some examples of statistics that demonstrate your competency:
Number of years helping people (number of years in business)
Awards you’ve won
Number of clients you’ve served
Number of hours you’ve saved your clients
Amount of money you’ve made your clients
Now It’s Your Turn
What statistics will you include on your website? Feel free to use this
section of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over
to the paper wireframe you downloaded at MarketingMadeSimple.com
to see it all come together.
[Your Notes]
Let’s Put the Guide Section Together
We’ve given you plenty of examples for the guide section on your website.
But remember, this section does not have to be long and involved.
You don’t need to use each of these examples. If you don’t have
testimonials, don’t worry. You can collect those and include them in the
future. If you’ve not won awards, don’t worry. All you need to do is quickly
express empathy and quickly demonstrate authority and then move on. Never
forget, you aren’t telling a story about yourself 
here, you are inviting
customers into a story. In that story, you play the guide, not the hero, so
position yourself as the customers’ guide and then get back to inviting them
into a meaningful story.
Here are a few examples of how the guide section on your website can
look:Now It’s Your Turn
Sketch out a guide section for your website. Feel free to use this
section of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over
to the paper wireframe you downloaded at MarketingMadeSimple.com
to see it all come together.
Section 5: The Plan
Pave a path for the customer and they will follow it. The plan section of your
website tells customers what path they need to follow to do business with
you.
By visually demonstrating what path your customers need to take, they
see how easy it is to work with you and identify their next steps.
The reason we recommend a plan section is because people will not walk
into a fog. If a customer is confused about what steps they need to take to buy
your product or service, they will bounce from your site, using the excuse
that they will come back later and figure it out. Of course we know they will
not come back. They will likely never come back.
Although it may be obvious to you how a customer can buy your product
or service, it is not obvious to them. Remember, customers are bombardedwith commercial advertising and pitches every day and they will not spend
mental bandwidth “figuring out the obvious,” no matter how easy the obvious
is to figure out.
When customers are thinking about buying, give them a few simple steps
they can take to engage your brand and buy your products.
Comedian Brian Regan has a bit in his stand-up about looking at a box of
Pop-Tarts and seeing directions on how to eat them. He mocks the simplicity
of the instructions and how this should be obvious to anyone who has ever
eaten anything.
Does anyone really need to know a three-step process to eat a Pop-Tart?
Of course not. But all comedy aside, the “plan” is on the side of the box as
a way to communicate to the unconscious mind of the consumer that getting
to a successful result is even simpler than they thought. The visual
representation of three steps, open the Pop-Tart package, warm the Pop-Tart,
and then eat the Pop-Tart, 
actually says, “This is going to be easy. You’re
going to have some sugar running through your veins in just a few minutes!”
And that simple message translates into sales.
When you add a plan section to your website, it’s as though you’re saying
to your customer, “It’s impossible to mess this up.”
Using Three Steps Is the Key
We recommend a three-step plan. You can use four if you like, but don’t go
much past four. The more steps you have in your plan, the more complicated
it looks visually and the less a customer will be willing to take the journey.
The reality is there may be seven or eight steps a customer needs to take to
do business with you, but do yourself a favor and combine some of those
steps into three phases. Having three steps keeps things simple and easy.
If you’re shopping for a caterer for an upcoming party, for example, you’ll
be more likely to do business with a company that breaks down their process
into three steps:
1
. 
Tell us about your event.
2
. 
Let us create a custom menu.
3
. 
Host the party of your dreams.Imagine searching for a caterer and their website simply said, “We will be
your favorite, caterer, we promise,” but didn’t spell out a simple plan. Likely,
you’d feel a little tension and confusion about how the process would work.
Hiring a caterer and getting all that food to your house is involved, and
because you don’t know how it works, you are more likely to pass in favor of
a business in which you better understand the process.
Keep the Plan Visually Simple
You’ll want each step of your plan to be represented by a word or simple
phrase. Remember, people scan websites before they read them so make your
website easy to scan by putting key words in bold text or using bullet points
for easy reading.
You can also use icons for each step, bolded headers, and short
descriptions so the visitor doesn’t have to burn very many mental calories to
figure out how you’re going to lead them to their successful result.
Exercise
Can doing business with you be broken down into three steps? What
would those steps be? For instance, 1. Call 2. Plan 3. Build.
Below, write your three step process plan—how are you going to
lead your customers to a successful result?
1
. 
______________________________
2
. 
______________________________3
. 
______________________________
Now that you have the words that represent each step, you can use a
sentence or two underneath the headers to further describe each step. In
these short sentences talk about the benefits the customer will see if
they take these steps or share any information that will make the
process more clear.
For instance, if step one in the plan is to “set up a call,” what
benefits will they receive from that call? Will it save them time, will
they find out if they’re a good fit, will they get information they
currently don’t have? If step two in the plan is to “get a plan,” will they
stop wasting time, will they get your expert advice, with they have a
clear path forward?
Each step of the plan should have a few words that discuss the
benefits for the customer. Take a minute and brainstorm what benefits
the client will get when they take each step?
Step 1 benefits.
[Your Notes]
Step 2 benefits.
[Your Notes]
Step 3 benefits.
[Your Notes]
Now put it all together. Sketch out below what the plan section of your
website should look like. Use icons or numbers to represent the steps in theplan and then put the short descriptors underneath.
Now It’s Your Turn
Sketch out a plan section for your website. Feel free to use this section
of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over to the
paper wireframe you downloaded at MarketingMadeSimple.com to see
it all come together.
Section 6: The Explanatory Paragraph
We often hear from clients who worry that trimming their text to make it pass
the “grunt test” means they won’t be able to answer all of their client’s
questions, provide them with the necessary information—especially for
products or services that are more complicated—or communicate everything
they believe their clients need to know to do business with them.
As the landing page or website gets deeper, though, you can use more and
more text.
Most people bounce from a website because there are too many useless
words at the top. By designing your website the way we’ve recommended,
your customer is already hooked. Because you’ve told them what you offer,
how it can make their lives better, and what they need to do to buy it, we can
further elaborate on your offer because your potential customers are willing
to give us a little more time.
The Explanatory Paragraph Is Where Your SEO Will Come
From
If you are worried about search engine optimization (SEO) on your website,
the explanatory paragraph is going to ease your fears. While SEO algorithms
change often, simply including long-form text using words that sell your
products is going to help.
In addition, including a long-form explanatory paragraph allows
customers to feel like they’ve done due diligence in researching whether ornot to buy your product or service.
Most people don’t like to buy impulsively. They have a healthy regulator
in their brain that wants to check off a few boxes that make them feel as
though they’ve done a little research. For most potential customers, your
explanatory paragraph will scratch that itch.
Still, the explanatory paragraph is easy to mess up. If you ramble on and
on about the history of the company and how proud 
you are of your
accomplishments, you’ll waste your customers’ time.
What your customer really wants is to be invited into a story. And your
explanatory paragraph is going to accomplish exactly that.
Invite Customers Into a Story
If you’ve read my book 
Building a StoryBrand
, you already know how to
invite customers into a story. But if you haven’t, don’t worry. I’m going to
share a quick and easy formula with you that will make the writing easy. I
recommend following this formula word for word for your first pass, then
nuancing it so that it feels true to your voice.
Your explanatory paragraph is going to do the following:
1
. 
Identify who your customer wants to become.
2
. 
Identify what they want.
3
. 
Define the problem setting them back.
4
. 
Position you as their guide.
5
. 
Share a plan they can use to solve their problem (which includes your
product).
6
. 
Call them to action.
7
. 
Cast a vision for their lives.
This magical paragraph is essentially a story your potential customers can
lean into. And they will feel that as they read it.
Let’s look at the paragraph Mad Lib–style, then I’ll slowly explain each
piece so you can fill it out on your own.
A Sample Explanatory Paragraph
At______________[your company name] we know you are the kind of
people who want to be______________[aspirational identity. What
kind of person do they want to become?]. In order to be that way, you
need_____________________[As it relates to your product, what does
your customer want?]. The problem is______________[What’s the
physical problem holding them back?], which makes you
feel______________[How is that problem making them feel?]. We
believe______________________[Why is it just plain wrong that
anybody should have to deal with that problem?]. We
understand______________[Include an empathetic statement]. That’s
why we______________[Demonstrate your competency to solve their
problem]. Here’s how it
works____________________________[What’s your three-step plan:
step one, step two, step three]. So______________[Call them to
action], so you can stop______________[What negative thing will
happen or continue to happen if they don’t order?] and
start____________________[What will their life look like if they do
place an order?].
Write and rewrite your explanatory paragraph until it is smooth and makes
sense. You’ll notice that what you’ve really done with this paragraph is
created a mental map for your customer. After reading this paragraph, they
suddenly know what’s been troubling them, how to overcome whatever has
been troubling them, and what steps they need to take to move forward. Their
world, as it relates to your product and service, now makes sense.
And remember, people move toward clarity and away from confusion.
I’ve had many, many clients tell me they went to my website and decided
to make a purchase after reading the explanatory paragraph. What they’re
really telling me is that they placed an order once my product started making
sense and only after they felt like they’d done due diligence.
The explanatory paragraph is a great way to accomplish both.
Another Option for the Explanatory Paragraph: Overcome Your
Client’s ObjectionsAnother way to write your explanatory paragraph is to overcome customer
objections.
Every potential customer who comes to your website has questions or
fears about doing business with you. Your explanatory paragraph is an
opportunity to overcome those fears and remove any hurdles that would keep
them from doing business with you. Sometimes just overcoming one
objection can lead to a sale.
To do this, you want to start by listing the top five reasons why someone
would 
not
 want to do business with you.
What are the five excuses or questions you hear from customers who are
unwilling to place an order?
These questions could be:
The product is too expensive.
I doubt it will work for me.
What happens if it doesn’t work for me?
I doubt the quality is as good as they’re saying it is.
The process is going to take too long.
I won’t know how to use it once I place an order.
I’ve tried something like this and it didn’t work.
After you have listed the top five excuses, craft a sentence or two that
overcomes each objection. For example, if the question is “Is the process
complicated?” you could write a sentence that 
says, “We guide you through
an 
easy
 process to help you use our product so you never have to worry about
X again.”
If the question is “What happens if I’m not satisfied?” you could write
“we have a 100 percent satisfaction money-back guarantee.”
Once you have those sentences written out, turn them into a paragraph that
can go on your website.
Below, list the top five reasons why someone would not want to do
business with you, followed by your response to overcome this objection.
Reason #1 __________________________________________Response #1 ________________________________________
Reason #2 __________________________________________
Response #2 ________________________________________
Reason #3 __________________________________________
Response #3 ________________________________________Reason #4 __________________________________________
Response #4 ________________________________________
Reason #5 __________________________________________
Response #5 ________________________________________
If you’d like to use both examples of explanatory paragraphs, feel free.
Your customers can continue scrolling down your landing page forever. No
landing page is too long, as long as the text and images are interesting. If you
do use both explanatory paragraphs, just make sure to separate them by a few
sections so your landing page doesn’t look like it contains too much text.
When a customer sees a lot of text, they start thinking you’re going to make
them work too hard to buy your product and they’re more likely to bounce.
Never forget, your customer wants the process of 
buying and receiving your
product to be easy. So even with these long-form paragraphs, don’t waste
words.Now It’s Your Turn
Write your explanatory paragraph (one or both types) in the space
provided. Feel free to use this section of the book as a rough draft and
then transfer your results to the paper wireframe you downloaded at
MarketingMadeSimple.com to see it all come together.
Section 7: The Video
This is another opportunity to present your sales pitch. The next section of
your website is where you will include the video. While you don’t have to
include a video, we recommend creating one that repeats your message
narratively and visually.
Many potential customers will simply scroll down to the video section
without reading much of anything. For this reason, your video simply needs
to repeat what’s already been said.
And even if they do read your page word for word, repeating those words
in your video goes a long way in helping them memorize your offer.
Creating video does not have to be complicated. In fact, if you simply read
your explanatory paragraph into a microphone and lay that text over “B-roll”
of people using your product, you should be fine.
If you’d like to get a little more advanced, consider elaborating on your
explanatory paragraph with customer testimonials or even a message from
your CEO.
If you’re going to include a video, though, here are some rules we
recommend following.
Keep it short.
 Most experts say a commercial video on a website shouldn’t
extend much beyond three minutes. I agree with that as a general rule, but of
course if a video is interesting, it can go for five minutes or more. That said,
though, I’ve rarely seen a five-minute video that couldn’t have been trimmed
down.
Hook the viewer:
 One study shows that 33 percent of viewers click away
and move on after the first thirty seconds of a web video. Ensure you grab theviewer’s attention quickly. How? Make sure the first thing the viewer hears
and sees is a problem. What problem do 
you solve for your customer? State it
right out of the gate and move on from there.
Consider giving a longer video away in exchange for an email:
 If a
potential customer has given you their email address in exchange for
watching a video, they will actually watch a great deal longer? Why?
Because they’ve “invested” something and will take the video more
seriously. If you have a longer video, like a fifteen- or twenty-minute TED
talk, with useful and engaging information, consider giving it away in
exchange for an email as a lead generator. That said, don’t post the entire
video on your homepage. Create a separate landing page to deliver the longer
video.
Give your video a title.
 Many people simply post a YouTube link on their
homepage and check the “video” box off their website to-do list. This is a
mistake. Actually give your video a title that makes people want to watch it
and then place that title in bold text above the play button for that video.
You’ll find that the number of plays increases dramatically. Consider titles
like “How we’ve helped thousands solve X problem” or “Here’s how our
process is different.”
The general rule here is that your video should be a sales pitch. It should
help you close the deal. Don’t make the mistake of being vague and elusive
in your video, turning it into some sort of brand identity art installation. Your
customer wants to hear your pitch in a concise, clear, and interesting form,
and your video is a great opportunity to accomplish this.
Now It’s Your Turn
What will your video be called? What narration do you want over your
video? What do you need to shoot in order to create a video? Write
some thoughts below and consider creating a video an important
project over the next few months. Feel free to use this section of the
book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over to the paper
wireframe you downloaded at MarketingMadeSimple.com to see it all
come together.
Notes on Creating a Video:[Your Notes]
Section 8: Price Choices
Let’s get to the bottom line. Many clients either have custom pricing or too
many products to list prices on their website. Don’t feel like you have to list
your prices.
But, if you’re working with products with a fixed cost, and you are willing
to put those on your site, spell out the cost followed by bullet points of what
the customer gets with each price point.
Also, if a customer clicks on one of the prices or products, that link should
go to a page only talking about that specific product. To create that landing
page, simply follow the exact same formula you’ve used on the main landing
page, only make the text and images specific to that product.
In this way, you can have a complex tree of links and websites but
continue using this clear methodology so that your customer never feels
confused or lost.
When listing the prices of your products, we recommend having three
different options. Even if you only have one product, consider packaging
other items or services with that product so you can have three different price
points. Why? Because customers like having options, and when you give
them a few options, they are more likely to choose and purchase one.
If you are selling many products, simply list your bestselling products on
your landing page here and then move into a more catalog-style layout when
customers click “shop.” Or perhaps include divisions of your offering like
“Men,” “Women,” and “Children,” and then use the three-price-point option
on each product when you create those separate landing pages.
Speaking of three price points, many of our StoryBrand certified
marketing guides have discovered that customers usually choose to buy the
item featured in the middle. They don’t want the cheapest or the most
expensive, but they do want good value.
Again, make sure to spell out what customers get with each price point
and you’ll have much more success.
Here are a few examples of simple price options laid out on a website:Now It’s Your Turn
What will the pricing section of your website look like? Feel free to
use this section of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your
results over to the paper wireframe you downloaded at
MarketingMadeSimple.com to see it all come together.
Section 9: Junk Drawer
The most important section of your website. Because it’s where you’re going
to put everything you previously thought was important!
Many websites feature too many buttons and options at the top of the
page. We strongly recommend putting most of these options at the bottom of
the website in what we call the junk drawer.
The reason you don’t want too many links at the top of the page is because
you’ll cause a potential customer to experience decision fatigue. The most
important links are for your direct call to action and your transitional call to
action, which I’ll cover in the 
next chapter
.
People will scroll to the bottom to find a link to employment
opportunities, contact info, and even “about us,” so reserve the 
top of the
page for those who aren’t yet committed to giving you much time.Simply move the contact, FAQ, about, employment opportunities, and so
forth to the bottom of the page so that if people want to find them, they can.
Use your junk drawer to clean up the clutter!
Exercise
What are you going to include in your Junk Drawer?
[Your Notes]
Sketch out everything you will feature in your junk drawer. Feel free to
use this section of the book as a rough draft and then transfer your
results over to the paper wireframe you downloaded at Marketing
MadeSimple.com to see it all come together.
LET’S PUT TOGETHER A WEBSITE THAT WORKS
While there can be many other sections on a website, these nine sections are
the ones we consider to be critical. Hundreds of guides helping tens of
thousands of businesses create websites that work can’t be wrong. If it works
for other businesses like yours, it will work for you.
Now that you have all the different sections created you can lay them out
in a way that feels right for you.
Use the sales funnel wireframe you downloaded at
MarketingMadeSimple.com to wireframe your new website.
While there are many digital tools that allow you to create websites, Irecommend using paper and pen to write all the text. Why? Because by
handwriting the text you’re paying a great deal more attention to what you
are saying and how many words you’re using. You also aren’t getting
distracted by digital images that may look pretty but sell nothing.
In addition, wireframing a website on paper takes time. It’s a slower
process, and you’re more likely to meditate on what you’re presenting. That
time and focus is going to translate into increased sales.
Not only will you have spent more thoughtful time wireframing your
website, but if you do bring your site to a designer, you’ll have already done
the majority of the work.
If you’re using a StoryBrand certified guide, they will already know why
you’ve laid out your website the way you have, but if you’re using somebody
who isn’t familiar with our framework, don’t let them talk you out of
wireframing your website using these exact tools. Again, we’ve proven that
these sections of a website work terrifically to create and increase sales.
Don’t be fooled by mood boards and motion graphics. This website
framework will work!
After you wireframe your website, you will have completed the first two
components of your sales funnel. You now have a one-liner and a wireframed
website.
But that’s just the beginning. The real key to increasing sales is the
process of collecting email addresses and sending out emails and sales
scripts. That process leads to orders in an automated system.
Let’s move on to the third component of our sales funnel: the lead
generator.6
LEAD GENERATOR
Give Them a Reason to Give You Their Email Address
or They Won’t
Imagine meeting somebody you find interesting but not exchanging contact
information. Unless you happen to meet again somewhere, you’re likely to
forget about that person in a short period of time.
But sometimes those first encounters are awkward. It doesn’t feel quite
right to ask for contact information or to give it out uninvited.
In business relationships, lead generators are a great excuse to exchange
contact information without being awkward. Think of the exchange going
something like this: “Hey, let me send you that information I was talking
about. What’s your email address?”
Lead generators that capture emails make sure that when someone finds
you interesting you are getting their contact info. Stop missing out on the
opportunity to 
get those digits!
PEOPLE WANT TO STAY IN TOUCH WITH YOU IF YOU
ARE INTERESTING AND CAN HELP THEM SURVIVE
Now that you have a one-liner and website, your potential customer is
curious about how you can help them solve their problem and they want more
information.
Now that you’ve earned the right to be heard, they will be willing to spendmore time with you. A good lead-generating PDF should take about twenty
minutes to read, which, while it doesn’t sound like much, is actually quite a
commitment from any customer.
Congratulations. Because you’ve piqued your customers’ curiosity and
positioned yourself as the guide, they’re willing to put skin in the game.
You’re officially in a committed relationship.
Think of the one-liner as the first introduction to somebody and your
website as the first, second, and third date. Your lead generator, then, is going
to be the first time your customer actually commits.
Of course it’s not time yet for a financial commitment, but when they
gave you their email address, they definitely entered into a healthy business
transaction with you.
While giving you their email address is not a financial commitment, don’t
be fooled. It’s still a very big commitment.
Most people do not part with their email address easily. For a potential
customer, parting with their email address is the equivalent of them giving
you a ten or twenty dollar bill. They don’t want to receive junk mail or spam
and they don’t want their email box to be cluttered with trash, so they give
out their address sparingly.
In fact, most people don’t want to give out their email address at all, and
fewer and fewer people are willing to do it. Still, that’s good news for you.
Why? There is one reason: anybody who is willing to give you an email
address is very interested in your product or service.
The more culture changes and the less people want to give you their email
address, the better the lead they actually are.
How do we get somebody to give us their email address? We give them
great value in return and we honor their inbox.
FREE VALUE LEADS TO TRUST
A lead generator is (usually) a free asset you offer potential clients as a way
of building authority and trust.
Your lead generator can be a PDF, a video series, a free sample, a live
event, or anything you can give your potential customer that helps them solve
a problem.
We recommend starting with a lead-generating PDF.StoryBrand, the marketing and messaging division of Business Made
Simple, was built using a single PDF called “The Five Things Your Website
Should Include.” This simple PDF was downloaded by thousands of people,
and hundreds of them ended up coming to our live marketing workshops.
Without that PDF, we’d have never gotten off the ground.
From that PDF, we created more sales funnels that offered more PDFs,
and then we added free video courses and webinars and even free live
teaching events. Soon, we were collecting hundreds of email addresses each
day and our business started to grow quickly.
The great thing about starting with a lead-generating PDF is that they are
cheap to create. Unlike the old days where you’d have to print a book, a lead
generator can be short, visual, compelling, and helpful and yet can be created
and designed in a weekend.
Lead generators should position you as the customers’ guide, answer your
clients’ questions, solve their problems, pique their interest, stir a sense of
reciprocity, build trust in what you have to offer, challenge a potential
customer to take small action, give 
them a vision of the successful result they
could experience, and ultimately 
lead
 them to a nurture campaign, a sales
campaign, and hopefully a sale.
WHAT SHOULD A LEAD GENERATOR ACCOMPLISH?
A great lead generator should do the following things:
1
. 
Position yourself as the guide.
 This is an opportunity to share empathy and
authority with your potential customer. Show how you are the right guide to
help them solve their problem.
2
. 
Stake claim to your territory.
 Take this opportunity to differentiate from the
crowd. Share your unique knowledge on a subject and demonstrate how you
can solve the customer’s problem.
3
. 
Qualify your audience.
 Your lead generator should speak to the specific
audience you are trying to reach. If there are varying segments of people
you’re reaching out to, you can create different lead generators to reach those
different audiences. For instance, if you are a financial advisor who works
with different types of clients, target those specific audiences. If one audience
you are targeting is just getting started in investing, you can offer a leadgenerator titled “Five mistakes people make with their first investment.” If
you are targeting a demographic that is further along in the process you can
offer a lead generator titled “How to pass on your money without spoiling
your children.” These will be downloaded by different demographics of
people. Then you can create email campaigns that market to each
specifically.
4
. 
Create trust by solving a problem.
 We keep saying it over and over, so you
should notice that it’s important. The purpose of any business is to solve
somebody’s problem. Unless you talk about that problem, nobody will know
why you exist. But even though your product solves a problem, your lead
generator should also solve a problem. For free. Once you start solving your
customers’ problems, they will trust you with more of their problems. For
instance, you can share nutritional tips for eating organic in your lead
generator and then invite people to classes teaching them to grow a backyard
garden. Some marketing experts say it this way “Give away the why but sell
the how.” I like that rule, but I also like giving away some of the how just to
be generous. At StoryBrand we give more away in our podcast—Business
Made Simple daily advice videos and lead-generators—than most
universities sell in their MBA programs. But that’s okay. I don’t think it has
cost us a thing. I’ve never been punished for being generous, and besides, not
everybody has the money. But that doesn’t mean they don’t deserve a place
at the table. Be kind and generous to your customers and they will remember
you when they are successful.
5
. 
Create reciprocity.
 When you give value for free, customers feel indebted to
you and to your brand—even if it’s not conscious. When you give away great
content and value, customers want to return the favor and are more likely to
place orders.
6
. 
Have an interesting title.
 Make sure to use a title people will want to
download. Nobody wants to download a “white paper” or “case study,” but
they do want to download “The five mistakes most people make when
training a puppy” or “How Nancy doubled her revenue without leaving the
house.” Make your title catchy and bold.
WHAT KIND OF LEAD-GENERATING PDFS CAN YOU
CREATE?Lead-generating PDF’s do not have to be complicated. Again, you should be
able to create an effective lead generator in a long weekend. The key is not to
overthink it.
The reality is, in your industry, you’re likely an expert. And if you aren’t
an expert, you certainly know a lot more about whatever products you
represent than your potential customers. By sharing some of that knowledge,
you position yourself as their guide. And that’s half the battle.
Let’s look at ten ideas for PDFs that will be easy to create and offer
terrific value to customers:
1. Capture an Interview With an Industry Expert
A great way to establish your authority and stake claim to your territory is to
interview an expert with an intricate knowledge of your industry.
If you work within a specific niche, find an influencer and schedule some
time to meet with that person. Ask questions that you know your customers
are asking and guide the interviewee toward answers that contain practical
knowledge that solve real problems.
For example, a pet shelter might sit down with their head of adoption and
ask: “What are the seven things every family should consider before adopting
a puppy?”
If you do marketing for a tax firm, interview a CPA and ask: “Tell me the
five biggest mistakes people make when they do their own taxes.”
This interview isn’t just limited to a PDF, by the way. You can distribute
the conversation via live webinar, audio recording, podcast, or PDF article.
Exercise
Who are three people you could interview who would provide
exceptional value for your customers?
[Your Notes]
2. Checklist
A checklist is a great place to start if you want to try a lead-generating
content strategy but don’t have a lot of time.
A checklist is simple. It walks your readers through a list of ideas toconsider related to solving their problem.
Let’s say you run a health clinic. Your checklist could ask a series of
health questions, such as:
“Do you get winded walking up the stairs?”
“Do you feel tired every day around 3:00 p.m.?”
“Do you ever have trouble sleeping at night?”
With each question, you can highlight the ways that your clinic can help
them solve the problem they’ve identified.
If you sell cookware and kitchen supplies, your checklist might be built
around the “fifty items every well-stocked pantry needs.”
A checklist is often a great way to make customers aware of what they’re
lacking—and how you can help.
If you sell intellectual property or training, consider a checklist that
informs your customer about how to become better at whatever rests in your
area of expertise. If you’re a speaking coach, 
think about a PDF called “Ten
terrific ways to start a speech” or “Three things that make a speaker look like
an amateur.” Anybody interested in growing their speaking ability is
undoubtedly going to download that checklist.
Exercise
What are some checklists you can create to help your customer realize
they are missing the product you have?
[Your Notes]
3. Make a Worksheet Your Audience Will Use Over and Over
Think of an area in your clients’ lives that you can help facilitate, and create a
repeatable worksheet that solves their problem.
A worksheet could be anything from a weekly marketing planner to a
goal-setting page.
Daily or weekly worksheets might take something overwhelming andmake it simple.
Have the worksheet be something they can use repeatedly so they’re
reminded weekly or even daily that you exist and can help them.
Worksheet ideas can be anything from nutrition journals, homework
schedulers, lawn maintenance journals, birthday reminders, to any other area
in which a person might need to organize their thoughts.
Exercise
What are three areas in which your customers could use help
organizing their thoughts and you could create a worksheet to help?
[Your Notes]
4. Host an Educational Event
Educational events aren’t always gimmicky. They can be extremely valuable
if the offer helps your customers solve a problem.
A giveaway can also remind people what it is you offer. A free cooking
class for a local catering company is a terrific idea. A seminar on how to save
and buy your first home could be great for a mortgage company.
People are often hungry for more information before they are willing to
buy. If you offer that information, they’re more likely to buy from you!
Exercise
What kinds of educational events could you host that might build trust
with your customers?
[Your Notes]
5. The Sampler
Depending on the kind of products and services you offer, you may be able to
give away a sample to your potential customers.
For example, if you’re selling an annual planner, you could feature a PDF
about effective time management along with seven days of worksheets to fill
out. This way, your lead receives something of value, but you’ve also created
an opportunity to sell them on the annual planner.If you have a food product or specialty product, see if there is a sample
you can give away. Grocery stores give away samples for a reason. Samples
lead to sales!
Other examples could be dinner recipes, cocktail recipes, a stylebook of
new hairstyles, one free lawn mowing coupon, a free makeover, or even a
free meal.
If you have a physical location, you can offer a coupon that is redeemable
by coming into the store.
Exercise
What is something small you can give away to build trust with your
potential customers and introduce them to the quality of your product
or service?
[Your Notes]
6. Webinars
Webinars are a great way to engage your customers.
The goal of a webinar should be to offer training or information that will
help your customer overcome a specific problem.
Your customers will attend the webinar for free—in exchange for their
email address—and at the end of the webinar, you not only have the
opportunity to make an offer for a paid product, you are also able to follow
up with a nurture or sales campaign in the weeks and months that follow.
After the webinar is concluded, you can also take the exact same
information you shared and turn it into a lead-generating PDF that is
downloadable from your website.
Exercise
What are some topics you might be able to cover in a webinar?
[Your Notes]
7. Develop a Keynote Presentation Into a Lead-Generating
EventDelivering a keynote is an excellent way to generate demand for your
services.
No matter what type of product or service you offer, find an area where
you are an expert and create a speech you can deliver at events. You might
even be able to create your own event and invite the public.
Creating talks like “Five mistakes accountants make that are costing you
money” or “Get the most out of your team without killing them” will attract
customers that likely need your respective products or services.
If you are B2C, find interesting facts or information that people don’t
know. If you sell shoes, consider a talk called “Couch to 5k is easier than you
think” or “How your shoes could be making you feel lazy!”
Exercise
What are three areas of expertise that you could turn into keynote
presentations that position you as an expert?
[Your Notes]
8. Scratch the Curiosity Itch
We’ve all lost precious time by clicking on a link just because we were
curious. What do those childhood celebrities look like now? How did they
build the world’s biggest boat?
Without knowing it, by clicking on these clickbait titles we’ve lost five
minutes of our lives we will likely never get back. But you have to admit they
are kind of fun.
Once, while working with a global pet food brand, I recommended they
turn their network of dog parks into lead generators. The company was
incredibly generous to create dog parks all over the world, but none of them
were being used as lead generators. My recommendation? Create a lead
generator called “Five 
things your dog thinks about at a dog park” and allow
people to download it to their phones. After all, most dog owners just stand
around looking at their phones anyway. Might as well tell them why all those
dogs are sniffing each other’s rears!
ExerciseWhat are your potential customers curious about as it relates to your
product or service and how could you turn that curiosity into a lead
generator?
[Your Notes]
9. Pitfall List
Much like the checklist, there are pitfalls and challenges that your potential
customer is experiencing you can help them avoid.
Titles like “Five money mistakes to avoid making when buying a house”
or “Three fatal mistakes managers make when coaching their teams” or “Ten
interview blunders that will ensure you don’t get the job” help potential
customers avoid pain and help you earn their trust as an expert.
Exercise
What are three titles that would represent lists of pitfalls you can help
customers avoid?
[Your Notes]
10. Open House
You might be surprised to learn that open houses have nothing to do with
selling that specific house and everything to do with the real estate agent
building a relationship with potential clients.
For our real estate clients, open houses are a tremendous way to capture
contact information and lead them into a nurture campaign where you begin
solving problems.
An open house doesn’t have to just be for real estate agents, though.
Offering a free product demonstration, cooking classes, craft nights, inviting
people over to your home to hear about what you do, all create a sense of
community and build relationships.
ExerciseWhat’s a good reason to invite people into your home or business to
hear a pitch? What types of events could you host that might bring
potential clients together?
[Your Notes]
NEVER STOP THINKING OF LEAD GENERATORS
Most people hate to sell, and one of the great thing about lead generators is it
gives you an excuse to talk about your products and services without asking
for money. If somebody downloads your lead generator or shows up to hear
your speech, they want to know more, and it makes the sales conversation
that comes later much more natural and authentic.
Never stop thinking about lead generators. You should probably spend
about as much time thinking of lead generators as you do creating products.
Why? Because without them you probably aren’t going to sell many products
anyway.
I hope these ideas have been helpful.
With a lead generator, you’ll attract the kind of customers who really need
and want the service you have to offer, you’ll dramatically grow your email
list, and you’ll be able to close sales in a natural, nonsleazy way.
NOW LET’S MAKE YOUR LEAD-GENERATING PDF:
HERE’S A STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE
Create Your Captivating Title
The first thing to consider is the title of your PDF. Again, you want it to be
catchy and strong. Give people a reason to download the PDF by showing the
value you’re offering right there in the title.
Here are some sample PDF titles that have been well received:
Five mistakes people make with their first million dollars.
 A
downloadable PDF guide offered by a financial advisor who wanted to
identify young, newly wealthy clients.
Building your dream home: Ten things to get right before you build.
A free e-book offered by an architect who wanted to establish herself as aguide to families looking to build a custom home.
Cocktail club: Learn to make one new cocktail each month.
 This was a
monthly event put on (surprisingly) by a garden center. They taught attendees
how to infuse alcohol with herbs. The objective for the promotion was to
create community and to educate people about how to grow an herb garden.
Did it work? Business is booming—or should I say blooming!
How to become a professional speaker.
 A free online course offered by
a business coach for those who wanted to become professional speakers. This
generated leads for long-term subscriptions to his coaching service.
How to get your dog to stop barking when people knock at the door.
This was offered by a pet store and helped establish them as an expert in dog
training and pet care.
Five surprising aches and pains caused by your shoes (and how to fix
them).
 A pitfall list offered by an athletic wear store to highlight how cheap
shoes are not worth the low cost.
Five mistakes most managers make that are squashing productivity (I
bet you did number three this morning).
 Another pitfall list offered by a
management consultant.
Now that you’ve considered your title, let’s move on to the meat of the
PDF. Remember, you do not have to use a great deal of text. You simply
need to solve your customer’s problem and earn trust in the new relationship.
Content: The Meat in the Middle
There are a million ways to write a PDF, but I’m going to give you a little
formula that will make it easy.
If you aren’t a professional writer, don’t worry. All you need to do is
create a little outline and hire a copywriter to flesh it out. 
Believe me, this
little outline is going to make the copywriter’s job much more easy, and the
end product will be terrific.
Here we go:
Catchy Title:
 ____________________________
Section 1:
Paragraph 1: What’s a problem your customers are experiencing?Paragraph 2: What is an empathetic statement you can make about
their pain? And what have you accomplished that would elicit trust that
you can solve their problem?
Section 2:
Paragraph 1: Agitate the problem a little further. Speak, perhaps, to the
emotional frustration a person may experience when dealing with the
challenge you help solve.
Paragraph 2: Offer a solution to the problem. Three tips, a paradigm
shift, a recipe or formula, something that resolves the conflict for your
customer.
Section 3:
Spell out the solution in a step-by-step plan or in a list of tips. Offer the
five tips, expert advice, or worksheet 
that can help your customers
overcome their problem. This is the main content of the PDF.
Step/Tip 1 ____________________________
Step/Tip 2 ____________________________
Step/Tip 3 ____________________________
Section 4: Define the Stakes
What’s at stake if they do or don’t heed your advice? What will be won
or lost if they don’t take action on what you’ve recommended?
Paragraph 1: List the negative consequences that might happen if they
don’t act on your advice followed by the happy ending they may
receive if they do.
Paragraph 2: Call them to action. What should they do next?
This is a basic template for creating a lead-generating PDF, but it works
quite well.
Here is the actual text from a lead-generating PDF we created for a fake e-
bike company. We used this very template:Now It’s Your Turn
Create the four sections that will give you the foundation you need to
create a great lead-generating PDF. Feel free to use this section of the
book as a rough draft and then transfer your results over to the lead-
generating PDF outline you downloaded at
MarketingMadeSimple.com. Work with your designer or visit
MarketingMadeSimple.com to hire a certified StoryBrand guide who
can create a PDF for you.
Catchy Title:
 _________________________________
Section 1:
Paragraph 1: (Problem)
[Your Notes]
Paragraph 2: (Empathetic statement and elicit trust)
[Your Notes]
Section 2:
Paragraph 1: (Agitate the problem)
[Your Notes]
Paragraph 2: (Offer a solution)
[Your Notes]
Section 3: (Step-by step plan or list of tips)[Your Notes]
Section 4:
Paragraph 1: (Negative consequences if they don’t act and include a
happy ending if they do)
[Your Notes]
Paragraph 2: (Call them to action)
[Your Notes]
WHAT DO YOU DO WITH YOUR LEAD GENERATOR?
Once you have your lead generator created, the first thing you want to do is
promote it on your website. You can create a section on your website to
advertise it, but I also recommend a pop-up ad.
Yes, I know, pop-up ads are annoying, but they work. They typically have
a higher click rate than regular ads and are an effective way of capturing
potential customers’ emails before they leave your site.
A few tips for pop-up ads:
1
. 
Give the visitor time to browse.
 Don’t make the pop-up ad show up
immediately. Give them around ten seconds on the website before bringing
up the ad. You can also create an “intent to exit” pop-up. This type of pop-up
ad only comes up when the visitor moves their mouse to click off your site.
This allows users to browse without being interrupted but still works to
capture information before they leave.
2
. 
Know the rules.
 Search engines are constantly changing the rules about how
you can use pop-ups. You can be penalized for them being too big and
covering too much of the site. Because the rules are changing all the time, we
recommend talking to a professional or doing the research first before
designing your ad.
3
. 
Don’t let them close the ad with an X.
 It has become second nature for
most of us to close ads as soon as they pop up by hitting the X in the top right
hand corner without even reading the ad. Instead, make your website visitor
click on a sentence to close out the ad. The sentence can say something like,
“No thanks, I don’t want to save money” or something even stronger like“I’m okay letting the competition win.” This might feel like clickbait, but it
forces them to actually read what you are offering before opting out.
PROMOTE YOUR LEAD GENERATOR
We actually spend more advertising dollars promoting our lead generators
than our products. They are that effective at leading to sales.
Consider promoting your lead generators on social media or even using
paid advertising.
To promote our lead generators, we include ads for them on our websites,
but we also create separate landing pages that focus on each lead generator
exclusively. This way, we can link to specific pages in specific posts, ads, or
podcast episodes.
The landing pages don’t need to look exactly like your homepage, but
make sure the copy on each page adheres to your brand’s StoryBrand
messaging principles or you’ll risk confusing your customers. Keep the text
clear, easy to understand, and punchy.
TIPS ON GOOD WRITING
As I mentioned before, you can be very creative with lead-generators, but the
simplest and most cost effective is a lead-generating PDF.
Before you begin the writing process, keep in mind a few common
mistakes clients make when it comes to crafting a lead-generating PDF.
The biggest mistakes people make are:
1
. 
Focusing on too many problems at once.
 Sure, your clients have many
problems they need solved, but if you try to solve more than one problem for
them at a time, they may experience a little fatigue reading your PDF. Try
focusing on one problem at a time.
2
. 
Using too much text.
 Make sure to have the PDF laid out so the text flows
and is easy to read. Make your PDFs scannable. Think about images, drop
caps, callouts, and anything else that will move a reader through the
document with ease. Less text is better!
3
. 
Being too vague.
 This is not the time to get cute or clever with your
language. If you are vague about what problem you’re hoping your customersresolve, they’ll be confused about what you offer. Don’t say “The beauty of a
canine companion,” instead say “Three things to remember when selecting a
puppy!”
4
. 
Not using a catchy title.
 Make sure your title sounds interesting. If you’d
never heard of your product or service, would you want to read an article
titled “A study of market irregularities as it relates to home equity” or would
you rather read “How to increase the value of your home in a down market”?
TEST YOUR METHODS AND ADJUST AS NECESSARY
Test, test, and test again.
Once you put the lead generator on your page, make sure to track how it is
working.
As long as it is working, keep using it. If it isn’t working, take the time to
create a new one and start all over. I’d say about 60 percent of the lead
generators we’ve created have found an audience and 40 percent were duds.
Like I said, we built our entire early business on a PDF called “Five
Things Your Website Should Include,” but I was shocked that a seriously
robust PDF called “How to Prepare Your Business for a Recession” got
almost no response. I guess people don’t want to think about a recession.
The most important thing is to have at least one lead generator that is
working well for you and then to keep adding to it until you’ve got a pretty
good number of emails coming in daily.
Once you create your first lead generator, you’ll start collecting email
addresses. Sadly, many people don’t do anything with those email addresses.
What an enormous missed opportunity.
This brings us to the fourth element of a sales funnel that works: email
campaigns.
If you’d like to hire one of our StoryBrand certified guides to write a lead
generator for you, visit our directory of guides at
MarketingMadeSimple.com. Again, we do not participate financially in their
business, but we did train them to create terrific lead generators!7
THE POWER OF EMAIL
How to Earn Space in Somebody’s Inbox
What should you do once you get an email address?
The whole point of a lead generator is to get an email address. Remember,
when potential customers gives you their email address you should consider
them a hot lead.
Sending them regular, valuable emails is your best opportunity to continue
building a relationship and selling them a product that will solve their
problem.
While a few people will buy a product immediately, most will need to
continue to learn more about your company before feeling a sense of trust.
Not following up with your customer after they download your PDF is
like getting somebody’s phone number after asking them out and then never
calling them back.
If somebody gave you their email address, they are expecting you to email
them. You got those digits, now follow through!
In this section of the book, we are going to guide you through two kinds
of email campaigns you can send. Both will grow your company.
The two types of email campaigns we recommend are:
1
. 
Nurture campaigns.
 These are designed to keep in touch with a potential
customer and earn trust over time.
2
. 
Sales campaigns.
 These are designed to close the sale.IMPORTANT QUESTIONS ABOUT EMAIL CAMPAIGNS
We get lots of questions about emails from our clients. Most people are a
little nervous about sending emails because it feels like they are broadcasting
to the world. The truth is you aren’t. You’re simply broadcasting to a group
of people who have asked you to keep in touch.
Emails are pretty hard to mess up. Nevertheless, let’s cover some of the
basics.
Question: How Many Emails Do I Send?
As many as you can while always adding value and staying interesting.
People often want to know what the “magic number” of emails is to send
in an email sequence. But don’t get so focused on the number of emails that
you forget the purpose of the sequence is to keep customers engaged. We
recommend sending at least one email per week. However, if you have
something interesting to say, you can send with greater frequency. I have a
personal nurturing campaign at BusinessMadeSimple.com that offers a free
business tip every single weekday. Even though that may sound like a lot of
emails, I’ve had tens of thousands of people subscribe and very 
few
unsubscribes. I just make sure to keep the videos short, topical, helpful, and
never boring!
Question: How Do We Master the Art of Writing Email Copy?
Learn from others and practice, practice, practice.
First of all, we have to remember it’s not a mastery. You won’t get it all at
once, and that’s okay. Just get a little bit better each day and you’ll be on
your way. In 
Chapter 10
 I will walk you through some more in-depth
practices for writing great emails, but if you have no idea where to start, here
are a few tips:
1
. 
Read email subject lines you get from other companies.
 Which ones get your
attention and why did you open them?
2
. 
Read magazine headlines.
 If you look at the magazines on the stand as you’re
checking out at the grocery store you will see what type of headlines get
people’s attention.3
. 
Write in a conversational voice.
 Write the way you talk, the way you would
write to a friend or family member
4
. 
Always be thinking,
 “What problems can I help my reader overcome, what
value can I add, and what empathy and authority can I show to my potential
customer?”
And the final four pieces of advice I’ll just lift from Ernest Hemingway:
5
. 
Use short words.
 By trying to sound smart and interesting, we often sound
dumb and dull. There’s no reason to use big words. While the written and
spoken word are different, reading your email out loud is a great way to test
whether or not it is clear. Using big words, insider language, and complicated
phrases is a great way to confuse your customers. Never forget: if you
confuse, you’ll lose.
6
. 
Use short sentences.
 When somebody clicks to open your email, they’re
certainly willing to give you a little more time than if they were browsing
your website. But don’t overdo it. Keep your sentences short so the email is
easy to read. Long sentences require your reader to burn mental calories. At
some point the reader will opt out if the calorie expenditure you’re requiring
is too great.
7
. 
Use short paragraphs.
 When somebody clicks to open your email, make sure
the text that unfolds doesn’t look like a book. They didn’t sign up to read
Tolstoy. By breaking up the text into short, separated paragraphs the email
looks like it will not take them much time and so they’ll be more likely to
read it.
8
. 
Use active language.
 Active verbs make a sentence interesting. Instead of
saying “we are having a sale” say “you’re going to want to barge through our
door because we’ve walked through the shop and lowered prices on most of
our products.” Words like “barge” and “walked” and “lowered” are
interesting because they connote movement.
LET’S WRITE SOME EMAILS!
With those things in mind, let’s look specifically at how to write both nurture
campaigns and sales campaigns that your customers will actually want to
receive.8
NURTURE EMAIL CAMPAIGNS
Now Let’s Nurture the Relationship!
What is a nurture email campaign?
Nurture emails are designed to be ongoing email campaigns that continue
to “nurture” your relationship with a client.
Some people calls these 
drip campaigns
 because they slowly drip
information to customers over a long period of time.
With a nurture campaign, you’ll be dripping information to customers
about how you can solve their problems and offer them value.
STAY IN THE GAME
The reason a nurture campaign is important is because most customers don’t
want to buy your product right away. Often, they have to hear about a
product five or six times before they’re willing 
to make a purchase. Why?
Because they trust the familiar and don’t trust the unfamiliar. And what
makes something or somebody familiar? Hearing about them over and over
from different outlets in different contexts.
So, imagine a customer hears about you from a friend. That’s touchpoint
one. Then they hear about you again from another friend. That’s touchpoint
two. Then they check out your website and because you used our framework,
you invited them into a clear story and they have a much deeper
understanding of how awesome your product is. That’s touchpoint three.
Then they download your PDF and that takes care of touchpoint four. Thenthey start getting emails from you, which represents, let’s say, touchpoints
five through seven. They discuss your product with a friend at work and that
represents touchpoint eight. Then, that same weekend, they get another email
from you, which represents touchpoint nine, and they realize they’ve been
meaning to buy your product for a few weeks but just hasn’t made the time.
They finally sit down at the kitchen counter and pulls out a debit card to
make that purchase.
That’s how a relationship with customers tends to work. And because
you’re sending them emails, you sped up those touchpoints and entered into a
relationship of trust much more quickly.
In fact, without those emails, they may have never placed an order at all!
PEOPLE BUY WHEN THEY ARE READY, BUT ONLY IF
YOU ARE STILL AROUND
The truth is people buy when they’re ready to purchase, not when you’re
ready to sell. It goes without saying, you are most likely to close the deal if
you are around when they’re ready to buy. Sending out a weekly email
ensures that when they hit the buying window you, and not your competitor,
are fresh in their minds.
Not only this, but by sending them a weekly email, you’re showing up in
the most intimate device they own: their phone.
Customers are walking around all day, staring at their phones. If you can
send them a weekly email that reminds them you are a guide who can help
them solve a problem, offer them assistance and support, and provide them
with an immense amount of value for free, they are more likely to stay
subscribed as you’re communicating with them on the same device as their
friends, family, and coworkers. Earning the right to be in that sacred space is
critical. And it’s an honor.
If you aren’t leveraging the power of an email nurturing sequence, and
your competitor is, they will beat you in the marketplace. It’s absolutely
essential that you are emailing your list consistently with valuable content.
NURTURE EMAILS ARE A GREAT WAY TO PLAY THE
LONG GAMEBy creating a nurture campaign you’re committing to the long game.
Don’t be discouraged. You could send nurture emails to a customer once a
week for seven years before they make a purchase.
Stay connected until they want to make a purchase.
You may ask for the sale a number of times before they’re ready, but if
you’re providing enough value in your nurture emails, they will stay
subscribed even if they aren’t interested in making a purchase right now.
Commitment in a relationship takes time. It’s true in romance, friendship,
business relationships—and especially in the relationships we build with our
customers.
WHAT ABOUT UNSUBSCRIBES?
The unsubscribe button is your friend. You don’t want to waste your
customers’ time and you don’t want an email list full of people who don’t
want to receive them.
Because your customers can unsubscribe from your emails at any point,
you don’t have to feel guilty about bothering them. Everybody knows how to
unsubscribe these days, so if they’re not unsubscribing, they like you. And
you should feel great about that.
You don’t have to worry about them not opening your emails, either.
There are plenty of companies whose nurture campaigns I subscribe to that I
hardly open. But those emails are super powerful anyway. Why? Because
once a week or more I am seeing the name of that company as I swipe and
delete that email. It’s fantastic branding. Even though they are sending me a
bunch of emails I am not reading, because those emails come from them, I
am being reminded that they exist. So when I am ready to actually buy a pair
of shoes or a power tool or a vacation with my wife, I have a company fresh
in my mind to call.
WHAT SHOULD AN EMAIL ACCOMPLISH?
Many, if not most, people will not open your emails—but a good percentage
of people will. That means we need to write some really great emails.
Later I’ll give you some formulas so that writing emails gets easier. And
more fun. But for now here’s a high-level overview of what emails shouldaccomplish:
Solve a problem.
 Never miss an opportunity to tell people why you matter.
And why do you matter? Because 
you solve a specific problem. Tell
customers what that problem is and they will remember you forever.
Offer value.
 What information, access, and tips can you offer your potential
customers that help them get what they want?
Remind them you have a solution
. Don’t mention a problem if you aren’t
going to position yourself as the one who resolves it. What products do you
have that solve your customers’ problems?
Send customers back to your website
. They came once, downloaded your
lead magnet, and showed interest. Now it’s time to bring them back with
fresh eyes. Your website is the perfect elevator pitch: by bringing them back
you get to make that pitch again.
Many of our clients feel timid about selling their products and services.
They don’t want to come off like infomercial pitchmen, emotionally strong-
arming customers out of their money.
One great characteristic of an email nurturing campaign is that it offers
free value. Of course you always want to mention that you have more
products, but this is hardly strong-arm selling.
A nurturing campaign does something even more powerful than selling
your product. It positions you as the forever guide your customer has been
looking for. Really, the goal of a nurturing campaign is to make sure the
customer knows that, in the area of your expertise, you’re the first person
they need to call.
This means all the information you give away should be your expert
advice on what’s going wrong in your customers’ lives and how their lives
can be made better.
If you sell athletic shoes, you can tell your customers why the shoes they
used to wear don’t last, why people have back pain, and how the right pair of
shoes can turn them into an athlete.
If they want to take a deeper dive, they can purchase your shoes.
If you sell a management consulting services you can talk about why
common management assumptions are wrong, about mistakes managers
make, or about the need to set up an actual execution plan.If they want to take a deeper dive, they can purchase your consulting.
You want to keep giving your customer information on 
why
 the way they
are living their lives without your product is not working, all the while
positioning your product as the 
how
 that will fix their problem.
THE STRUCTURE OF A BASIC NURTURE SEQUENCE
There are many ways you can nurture customers. For the purposes of
allowing you to create an initial, effective campaign, I am going to walk you
through three types of nurture sequences that are easy to create and will work
right away.
Kinds of Email Nurturing Campaigns
Weekly announcements.
 Every Monday morning we send out a nurture
email with a preview of our podcast. Our podcast delivers content from
experts that will help companies grow, which means every week our entire
list receives some kind of beneficial content.
The real power of the email podcast announcement is that it gives me an
excuse to send an email to my list, week after week. And each email explains
how we’ve interviewed an expert to deliver even more value.
Honestly, it’s hard to know what is more valuable in terms of growing our
business, the podcast or the email we send each week announcing each
episode’s guest. Both are terrific touchpoints for our customers.
What could you email your customers about each week? A weekly
product focus? A Monday morning management tip? An educational series
that will turn them into a great guitar player?
Find a reason to email your customers so you remind them you exist.
Even though the point of a nurture email is not to sell product, you should
still include a mention of your product at the end of each email. This mention
is not a hard sell, just a small reminder that lets customers know what you do
and what products you create that may solve their problems.
In our weekly podcast announcements, we take it a step further. While the
purpose of the email is to let people know about our podcast, we include an
ad at the bottom of the email reminding subscribers about our products.
Here’s a sample of one of those weekly emails:Catchy Title:
Is the Financial System Ripping You Off?
Short Description of Content:
How much do financial markets actually impact your small business?
More than you probably realize. And in this case, what you don’t know
really can hurt you—and your employees. Today on the podcast, Josh
Robbins will arm you with the information you need to make smart
decisions about your financial advisors, investments, and 401k plans—
without getting taken advantage of.
Call to Action:
Listen now
Short Ad:
Story Brand Live Marketing Workshop May 19–20
As more companies experience the power of the StoryBrand
Framework, our marketing workshops get bigger and bigger. But this
next one is a little different.Our next workshop is happening May 19–21, at Clementine Hall in
Nashville. Clementine Hall is a beautiful venue with a really intimate
feel, and it’s probably the last time we’ll do a Live Marketing
Workshop with this small of a group. Don’t miss it!
Second Call to Action:
Register now
Share weekly tips.
 Another kind of weekly email you can send would be a
collection of tips that will make your customers’ lives better as it relates to
your products and services.
You can offer something consistent every week, like a weekly cocktail or
cooking recipe, or you can offer tips that help them organize their homes,
their time, or their lives.
If you are having a hard time deciding what type of tips to send, survey
your subscribers to see what kinds of content they want to receive. What dothey need help with? What are the top three problems they encounter every
week?
You can also look at your social media platforms and analyze which posts
have the most interactions. Are there pictures or tips that your tribe is
typically drawn to? Use those as launching points for creating new and
helpful content.
If you are a store that sells cookware, your customer wants to be a great
at-home chef, but they don’t know the first thing about seasonings. Take
them to seasonings school! Every week, send them a description of a feature
seasoning. Tell them where to use each seasoning, where it came from, and
why it’s so wonderful to include in a dish. And for heaven’s sake, include
recipes. (If anybody creates this nurturing campaign, by the way, sign me
up!)
Here are a few kinds of weekly tip emails that have been powerful for our
clients:
Weight loss tips
Cocktail recipes
Fashion tips
Leadership tips
Motivational Monday tips
Weekly activities to do with your kids
New yoga poses
Tips on social media marketing
Dog-training tips
Tips on personal safety
Each-week-of-the-year gardening projects
A parent-to-adolescent language translator
There is no end to the list of what you can offer your customers.
Remember, you’re an expert and they want to know more. Step into your
authority and teach them what you know!
The structure of these types of emails is fairly simple.
Think of the email as a blog post or short magazine article.
Start with a clear title.
 This is not the time to be clever. The title can becatchy, but be very clear about what you’ve included inside the email. If I
have to guess about the content, I’m not going to open the email.
State the problem.
 Use a short description that addresses the customers’
problem and lets them know you are going to reveal a solution.
Deliver the strategic tip or value.
 Simply let them know how to solve their
problem. Break the problem down into steps if you can. Remember, even
emails should be visual.
Position yourself as the guide.
 You position yourself as the guide by
expressing empathy and demonstrating authority or competency. Make sure
you have a short statement about how or why you care that your customers
are struggling and then let them know why you are qualified to help.
Let them know you have a product to sell.
 Finally, make sure to mention
your product or service. You will get a few orders when you do this, but
that’s not the point. The point is to continue taking your potential customers
through an exercise in memorization. You are teaching them to memorize
what problems you solve and what products you sell.
Here is an example of a weekly tip email that works:
Clear Title:
Ten Tips for Losing Fifteen Pounds
We know that when it comes to losing that last fifteen pounds, the old
rules no longer apply.
With the final fifteen, suddenly you’re in a whole new universe.
Our doctors and researchers have discovered a reason and it’s this:
your set point has changed. What that means is that even though
you’ve got fifteen pounds left to lose, your body thinks you are skinny!
But don’t worry. We’ve helped thousands of people drop the final
fifteen and we can help you too.
The key is to stay active and get serious. You’re going to have to
approach this like a baseball player approaches an opposing pitcher.
Get your strategy set, and you’ll find success.
So without further delay, here are our top ten tips to losing the last
fifteen pounds.
Ten Tips to Lose The Last Fifteen Pounds1
. 
Let those who are around you know what you’re doing and find an
accountability partner and/or group.
We believe that when you surround yourself with like-minded,
motivated individuals, you drastically increase your chances of
succeeding. (We see it happen daily!)
2
. 
Remove all unhealthy temptations from your cupboards, refrigerator, and
pantry.
Why have tempting foods in your house that don’t align with
your goals? Temptation removed = setbacks removed!
3
. 
Create a specific shopping list based on healthy 400–600 calorie meals.
Do not go into a grocery store blindly. Have a preplanned list
and stick to the outside perimeter of the store where you will find
whole, healthy food items. (P.S. Bonus tip: In addition to a list, give
yourself 
a time limit so you’re not tempted to browse. If you’re a
parent, your kids will love this game!)
4
. 
Skip a few meals.
If your doctor approves, feel free to skip breakfast, lunch, or
dinner every once in a while. More and more studies are revealing
that your intestines think a little break is actually good for you. It
teaches you to live without food, stabilizes your blood sugar, and
ignites your body to start burning fat. Plan to skip three or four
meals each week and enjoy the break your body has really been
hungry for. Want to know more? Google “intermittent fasting” and
do some research for yourself.
5
. 
Drink more water! You need to drink at least half of your body weight in
ounces every single day.
Find a water bottle that helps you track your ounces consumed
per day. If you have a hard time remembering to drink water, set an
alarm on your phone while you are working to develop this as anew habit.
6
. 
Write down what you eat.
Keep a calorie journal. But don’t just keep a calorie journal to
count calories, keep a journal to practice awareness. Most people
forget nearly half of what they eat in a day. By writing down what
you eat, you’ll start to see patterns and trends you can improve on.
Plus, who wants to write down that bowl of ice cream at the end of
the day?
7
. 
Increase the amount of protein you are eating daily. Look for products that
contain undenatured whey protein.
Your body doesn’t store protein as quickly as it stores carbs.
Plus, protein is the building block of lean muscle, which actually
helps you burn more 
calories. Increase the amount of protein that
you eat, then, and you’ll be more likely to lose weight.
8
. 
Stop your stress.
You’re not imagining it when stress and weight gain seem to go
hand in hand. Stress raises the levels of cortisol in your body, which
makes your body store fat at a higher rate.
9
. 
Drink whey protein right before your head hits the pillow at night.
When your body breaks down protein while you sleep, it also
helps the release of stubborn belly fat. (You really can add to your
results while you rest!)
10
. 
Get adequate, uninterrupted sleep every night. Include a healthy dose of
natural melatonin.
Sleep is essential to any healthy lifestyle. Your body requires a
full seven to eight hours of rest per night. Sleeping any less, even if
you don’t “feel” tired, is stopping your body from performing at its
best.We know how hard it is to lose the final fifteen, but we also know it’s
possible. And it’s not only possible, it’s can also be fun.
We’ve helped 1,245 people lose fifteen pounds right here in our
gym. That’s because when you sign up for our biweekly workout class,
we don’t even have you lift a finger without sitting down and learning
a little about how your body burns fat.
If you’d like to attend one class for free, just call us today. We’d be
glad to help.
When it comes to losing the final fifteen (or the first twenty!) we
just might be the people you’ve been looking for.
Call us right now and we’ll book you in the next class.
Contact info:
 _____________________
Sincerely,
Jim Smith, Health and Wellness Gym
P.S. If you bring a friend, we’ll give both of you the first two workouts
for free! Call us today.
The great thing about this email is it offers to solve a problem whether the
customer pays the gym anything or not. But it also offers to hold the
customer’s hand if they’d like to solve the problem together.
The chances of losing that final fifteen pounds would obviously increase
dramatically with your help. Even if you think the information is obvious,
your customer may be approaching their weight-loss journey for the first
time, or need a reminder. This email would work to earn trust and increase
customer engagement.
Another great thing about the content of this email is it could actually be
turned into ten consecutive weekly emails. Take each tip and elaborate on it a
little further and ten weeks’ worth of terrific content are ready to go. That’s
ten touchpoints with a customer!
Share a weekly notification.
 Like you, I subscribe to many marketing
emails from companies who have product I want to know about. While some
of their emails may have helpful information, mostly I’m on their lists to see
what new products they are developing or to be notified about special
promotions.If you have a brand that consistently makes or carries new products, your
nurturing email can simply contain a catalog-style page revealing what’s
new. You don’t have to overthink it.
That said, including the occasional email about how your products are
made (always to solve a customer’s problem) or tips for 
best uses of your
products will add to the overall depth of your offering. And they will also add
some personality to the brand.
A recent shoe brand I consulted with wanted to know the fastest way to
increase revenue. They’d spent a great deal of effort and money on branding
and had sent their customers’ email after email talking about the mission of
the company, but they’d failed to do the one thing that would grow their
company the fastest: send emails with pictures of their shoes.
I recommended they split their list into four: women, men, teens, and
parents of children and then send a weekly email featuring images of shoes
that fit those specific demographics.
Another company I worked with in Fort Worth, Texas, grew their
company by simply sending out pictures of trucks. They were (and are) the
largest seller of used lifted trucks in the world. What weekly notifications did
we decide to send out? Truck Tuesday: a weekly email showing images of
trucks recently added to their inventory. What truck guy wouldn’t want to
receive that email each week? I already have a truck and I still open every
email.
The key to weekly notifications that feature products is to make sure
you’re always letting customers know about something that is new and
exciting.
In these types of nurturing campaigns, of course, you’ll want to include
the “buy now” or “shop” direct calls to action next to the product.
Other types of weekly notifications emails that have been successful for
our clients include:
Calendar of events for the week
Weekly specials for a restaurant
New weekly inventory
Plant of the week (for a nursery)
New houses on the market in your neighborhood
Stocks to watch
Specials such as 10 percent off this weekWeekly recipes
Weekly how-to videos
One critical mistake we’ve seen a few companies make is to fill their
nurture emails with information about them as a company. Hitting your list
with weekly introductions to the different members of your staff doesn’t
solve your customers’ problems, and they won’t be interested.
Also, keep the email titles clear and consistent so people know not to miss
what they are looking for.
START SLOW AND ENJOY THE PROCESS
The nice thing about your nurture campaign is it’s all automated, and you
don’t have to add to it every week. Simply start by crafting a few great
emails, and when you start seeing customer engagement increase, you’ll be
motivated to add a few more. Pretty soon you’ll have fifty-two emails that are
delivering value and earning trust.
If you haven’t been sending consistent nurture emails and the idea of
doing something every week feels overwhelming, don’t worry. Start slow.
Repurpose content you have already created. And if you aren’t a writer, hire a
writer to help you out. I like to think I’m a pretty good writer, but I hire
copywriters all the time because I love seeing what they come up with, and I
love sending out words from a fresh, fun new voice.
WHERE CAN I GET EMAIL IDEAS?
Once you realize how easy and fun it is to send emails, you’ll start seeing
opportunities all the time.
Many of you came up with five or ten PDF ideas, but you’re only going to
create one. What about using those other four or nine PDF titles and turning
them into emails?
You can also ask customers what they would like to receive from you.
Would a weekly recipe be helpful? A weekly workout motivation? Your
customers may have some terrific ideas.
The bottom line is this: if you are not emailing your customers at least
once each week, you’re missing out. And worse than missing out, you’rebeing forgotten.
You can grow your company the same way I convinced my wife to marry
me. Just keep riding your bike by her house. Eventually, if you are helpful
and nice and not scary, they just might marry you. Or, um, buy your product.9
SALES EMAIL CAMPAIGNS
How to Close the Deal
While the nurture campaign is focused on adding value and building trust, the
sales campaign will focus on closing the deal.
Creating an email sales campaign is your opportunity to share the full
story of how your product is going to help solve your customers’ problems
and actually ask them to buy it.
An email sales campaign is not about being shy, it’s about challenging
your customers to take a step in solving their problems. Today.
GIVE THE CUSTOMER SOMETHING TO ACCEPT OR
REJECT
The idea behind an email sales campaign is to give customers something to
accept or reject. Remember, the relationship you 
have been cultivating all
along is a friendly, kind, helpful 
business
 relationship. And business
relationships are transactional.
If you fear asking people for money in exchange for your product or
service, you 
do not believe in your product or service
. You do not believe it
will solve your customers’ problems, resolve their pain, or improve their
lives. If that’s the case, find a new product. But if you truly have medicine
that will take away people’s pain or problem, sell it to them! It’s the right
thing to do.
Many people use passive-aggressive tactics to sell their products. Theymention that they have products, but they never say “Why don’t you pick one
up today?” or “How many would you like to order?”
The customer translates passive-aggressive sales techniques as weak. It’s
not unlike back when I was dating. If I kept mentioning to a girl that she
looked nice today or that I liked her taste in music or that we were reading the
same book without, at some point saying, “can I take you on a date sometime.
I’d love to keep talking,” the relationship could have gotten creepy. People
want to know what you want and where this relationship is going. People
want something to accept or reject.
It’s true that if you ask for a commitment too soon, it gets weird. But at
this point in the relationship you’ve built with your customers, you can ask
for a commitment. I give you permission.
NOT EVERYBODY IS WILLING TO COMMIT
Another thing to remember is that a sales campaign doesn’t convert
everybody. Most people will still not make a purchase. But that’s okay.
You’ve been respectful of their time and earned the right to be heard and
nobody is going to fault you for asking for a commitment. By putting
yourself out there and asking for the sale, you are going to be rejected quite a
bit. But you are also going 
to be taken up on your offer. There is a name for
businesspeople who fear rejection. We call them broke.
WHICH COMES FIRST, THE NURTURE CAMPAIGN OR
THE SALES CAMPAIGN
We recommend starting with the sales campaign and letting it run for about a
week. Then we want you to put people into your nurture campaign so you can
stay in the relationship.
If you’re wondering why we start with sales without earning the right to
be heard, don’t forget we’ve already earned that right with the one-liner,
website, and lead generator. It’s time to ask for the sale. And if the customer
does not make a purchase, we will stay in the relationship with our nurture
campaign, so they remember us when they’re ready to make a commitment.
Often, we recommend creating the email nurturing sequence first and then
inserting a sales email campaign later. Why? Because most companies willgrow even if they don’t have a sales email campaign. A nurture campaign is
truly that powerful. But make no mistake, a sales email campaign works.
We’ve seen customers doing terrific only with great websites, lead
generators, and nurture campaigns double their sales once they inserted a
sales campaign.
You are going to love this valuable tool.
Here are a few things to keep in mind when it comes to creating a sales
campaign:
1
. 
Determine which product you’re selling.
 A sales campaign, unlike a
nurture campaign, works best when it’s focused on selling a single product.
You can create multiple campaigns for multiple offerings, but don’t confuse
your customers by offering multiple products in the same campaign or by
trying to sell multiple products at once.
2
. 
Identify the problem this product solves.
 I know, I know. I keep saying
this. But I keep saying it because so many people forget. If you were writing
a screenplay, I’d bark the same reminder. Every story, every scene, every
character only makes sense when there’s a problem to be solved. The same
goes for your sales campaign. Your sales campaign is not just selling a
product: it’s designed to solve a problem, and the product is the tool people
are going to use to solve the problem. Your product gets to shine only if it
helps the customer overcome a problem or defeat a villain. If you forget the
problem, the product makes no sense. Decide what specific problem this sales
campaign is going to help people solve and talk about it over and over and
over and over again inside those emails.
3
. 
Turn the entire email into a call to action.
 Nurture emails contain calls to
action, and so they do a pretty good job selling. But sales emails are different.
While a nurture email is trying to add value by solving a problem and then
adding a call to action at the end, a sales email is going to make the call to
action its primary focus. It’s the point of the email. Every word, every
sentence, and every paragraph must serve one purpose: to challenge
customers to place an order. It is not good enough to ask them to place the
order. In a sales context, polite requests sound weak and make you look like
you don’t really believe in your product. In a sales email, you are going to
strongly encourage your customers to place an order.
4
. 
Give them a short window in which to buy.
 You don’t have to create a
limited-time offer with every email, but if you can, you should. Tell thecustomer their opportunity to buy or to receive a bonus is going away. You’ll
notice in most movies the hero is up against a deadline. The fact of expiring
time is forcing the action. If it works in movies, it will work in your
marketing campaign. When clients 
know they don’t have forever to make a
choice, they’re more likely to act. Unlike a nurture sequence, you don’t want
your sales sequence to be long or open ended. Create a sense of urgency and
you’ll get better results.
LET’S CREATE THE CAMPAIGN
Writing a good sales sequence is more art than science, but there are formulas
that will make your first attempt more successful. As you get better and better
at creating sales emails, you’ll be able to mix and match some of these ideas,
but starting with a template or two won’t hurt. I’ve been writing these emails
on behalf of clients for a long, long time and sometimes I still come back to
these formulas.
With that, here is an easy first sales sequence you can create:
Email #1: Deliver the asset (“here’s how to use it”).
 Likely, your first
email will deliver whatever content/lead generator you promised when they
signed up with their email address. This email should be nice and short and
shouldn’t sell anything. Just deliver the free content you promised. The only
thing you should add is your one-liner, so your potential customers are
reminded, once again, why you exist and what problem you solve. After
thanking them for downloading the asset and including your one-liner, let’s
give them a day or two to enjoy the read. We’ll wake them up soon enough.
Email #2: Problem + solution.
 In the second email, perhaps sent a few days
later, you’ll want to identify the problem you’re going to solve for the
customers. Once you identify the problem, acknowledge and empathize with
their pain. Then introduce your product or service as the solution that is going
to resolve that exact pain point. While you’ll definitely be selling the product
at this point, don’t expect them to place an order. Often it’s the third, fourth,
or fifth email that closes the deal. But in this email we’re definitely letting
them know we’re going to pitch them. Don’t forget, you want to give the
customer something to accept or reject and that’s what we’re doing here.
Email #3: Customer testimonial.
 If successful, your last email made yourpotential customers want what you’re offering. But they don’t want to make
an impulse buy. One of the feelings they may have is that they’re going to be
played for a fool. Of course, we know they aren’t, but we need to help them
understand they’re safe. One of the ways we feel safe is if there are more
people involved. That’s one of the reasons customer testimonials are so
important. Find someone who has experienced success with your product or
service, and capture that experience in writing. Remember to keep the
testimonial short and full of soundbites. Don’t let this email ramble. Often,
this is the email in which you’ll start seeing exciting results.
Email #4: Overcome an objection.
 At this point many customers want to
buy and maybe even know they are going to buy but have one doubt that is
holding them back. In the fourth email, you want to help the customers
overcome a common objection people have for not buying your product. And
don’t worry if you’re not addressing whatever mysterious objections your
email recipients may individually have. Your potential customers likely have
an emotional objection, and by bringing up a similar objection, you’ll give
that emotion a focus. By helping them overcome that objection, you’ll help
them overcome their emotional resistance to buying your product.
Email #5: Paradigm shift.
 A paradigm shift email is another way of
overcoming a customer objection. Many customers will feel like they’ve
already tried whatever it is you’re selling. Comfortable yoga pants? Tried
that. A housecleaning service that uses only organic cleaners? Did that. If
customers feel that they’ve already used your product or service and it didn’t
work, you’re done. They rightly will not place an order. But if you can
explain to them how you’re different and that they actually haven’t tried
something like this, exactly, they’ll be more likely to look at you through
fresh eyes. A paradigm shift is language that says, “You used to think this,
but now you should think this way.” It’s a powerful tool used to make people
reconsider buying your product.
Email #6: Sales email.
 In this sixth email, only ask for the sale. You heard
me right. Don’t sell, just ask for the sale. At this point, we don’t want your
customer thinking about anything other than whether to accept or reject our
offer. This is a great time to bring up the limited-time offer. Is an opportunity
going to expire? Is the bonus that comes with the offer going to expire? If so,
bring that up in the P.S. of this email and you’ll have great success.A sales email campaign is more art than science. There are a million kinds
of sales emails you can create, but these individual emails, and this specific
order of six emails, has worked for thousands of our clients.10
HOW TO EXECUTE THE MARKETING
MADE SIMPLE SALES FUNNEL
A Step-by-Step Guide
Now that you have all the individual tools for creating a sales funnel, you’re
going to want to create an execution strategy that ensures you will follow
through and bring the sales funnel to life.
EXECUTION IS PARAMOUNT
Many people who read this book will feel like they’ve found hope. And I
believe you have. But none of the feeling of hope amounts to anything
without execution.
My friend Doug recently told his wife he intended to help out more
around the house. His wife looked at him slyly and explained that intentions
do not cook the rice. Doug got the point. Stop talking and do the work.
Remember at the beginning of this book when I mentioned JJ’s
dissertation? He proved that our messaging framework will help 
any business
grow, but only to the degree that they actually execute the plan.
Having a strategy to execute your sales funnel will help insure it actually
happens.
SCHEDULE SIX MEETINGS NOW SO YOU WILL BESURE FINISH LATER
In order to execute your sales funnel, you’ll need to schedule six meetings.
The people who need to attend these meetings will be web designers,
copywriters, managers whose approvals will be needed, and any support staff
who help these team members execute.
The reason you want to develop and execute your sales funnel through a
series of strategically scheduled meetings is to create a system of objectives
and scheduled accountability so that your team will produce a well-executed
plan. All team members will understand their roles and tasks and be given
deadlines to reach those benchmarks.
If you are creating a sales funnel on your own, stick with the meeting
schedule anyway. Feel free to invite outside contractors. Outside contractors
attending these meetings will help to ensure they understand expectations and
will save you creative hours in the long run. If you are working with a
StoryBrand Guide, your guide can work to schedule these meetings on your
behalf and make sure you are in the room and contributing as the project
moves forward.
Here are the six meetings you will want to schedule in advance:
1
. 
Goal Meeting
2
. 
BrandScript Script and One-Liner Meeting
3
. 
Wireframe Website Meeting
4
. 
Lead Generator and Email Sequence Meeting
5
. 
Content Refinement Meeting
6
. 
Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting
Meeting #1: Goal Meeting
The main objective of the first meeting is to decide which sales funnel to
create first.
This may seem like an easy question to answer, but it will be more
complicated than you previously thought. What are the objectives of the
company? Is the company in a transition? Are we aiming purely for revenue
growth or are we trying to grow a specific division?
When I conduct one-day marketing strategy sessions I start by trying to
find out if the objective of the sales funnel we are creating is simply toincrease revenue, or not. If the objective is to increase revenue and grow the
company, my job is easy.
If the company leaders want to grow the company by increasing revenue,
my second question is “What is the most profitable division or product that
the company currently has on the market?”
The reason I ask this is because many leaders are so close to their products
and services they can’t see the obvious direction the company needs to go.
To understand how a business works, I normally think of it using the
analogy of an old sailing ship. You know, one of those giant ships with
twenty or more sails, all stacked on top of each other, billowing and
propelling the ship forward.
By asking what the most profitable division or product is, I’m asking
which sails are powering the ship forward. I also want to know what the least
profitable (or successful) product or service is, and then I ask a series of
questions to determine how much bandwidth is being spent on something that
isn’t working.
What Product Are We Going to Sell?
My theory on growing a company is to decrease the size of the sails that are
not billowing and increase the size of the sails that are.
This differs from the way most business leaders approach their products
and services. In order to grow their companies, most people ignore what’s
working and try to make something else start working too. But unless you
have market dominance with the product that’s working, the greatest
opportunity is to pour gasoline on the fire that’s already burning!
Regardless, the purpose of the goal meeting is to figure out exactly what
we are going to sell.
After deciding what we are going to sell, we should set goals and
expectations. We usually set goals by establishing three specific numbers.
The first number is the actual goal, the second is a significantly lower number
that represents a failure. By failure, I mean that if we sell only this few
products, we need to analyze the product itself and then the sales campaign to
see if the problem was with the product or if it was how we tried to sell it.
The third goal is the fun one, and that’s the stretch goal. If we hit the stretch
goal, we know we’re on to something.
Once you know what product you’re going to sell and what your goalsare, you can move on to clarifying your message around the product itself.
Meeting #2:
BrandScript Script and One-Liner Meeting
After you decide which sales funnels you want to create first, get started
writing some of the content you’ll use in the sales funnel itself.
In the first content meeting you are going to create your BrandScript script
and a one-liner. If you are not familiar with BrandScript, use the free tool at
MyBrandScript.com. Using this simple tool will help you come up with
language you can use to populate 
your entire sales funnel. It will save you
hours—if not days—off your workload and ensure the language you are
using will engage customers.
The BrandScript and one-liner meeting should take between three and
four hours.
After creating your BrandScript, transfer your answers to the BrandScript
script. Another blank BrandScript script is printed below.
The purpose of the BrandScript script is to make sure you understand
exactly what kind of story you are inviting people into. Once you define the
story, you must stick with the script. Keep bringing up the same internal,
external, and philosophical problems. Keep telling people what their lives
will look like after their problem is solved. Continue to position yourself as
the guide. Under no circumstance should you wander from the basic script—
otherwise the story you are inviting people into will become confusing.
Here’s another BrandScript script you can use in the second meeting. You
can also download new paper wireframes at
www.MarketingMadeSimple.com for free.
At_________________[your company name] we know you are the kind
of people who want to be_________________[aspirational identity]. In
order to be that way, you need___________________[what your
character wants]. The problem is_________________[external
problem], which makes you feel_________________[internal problem].
We believe________________________[philosophical
problem/statement]. We understand_________________[empathy].
That’s why we_________________[authority]. Here’s how it
works____________________________[plan: step one, step two, stepthree]. So_________________[call to action], so you can
stop_________________[failure] and
start_________________[success].
Once you have completed the script, read it out loud to make sure it makes
sense and sounds natural.
Sometimes what looks good in writing doesn’t sound good when spoken
out loud. Use this opportunity to change some of the wording around so it
sounds great.
This BrandScript script can now act as a filter for the rest of your content
creation.
Meeting 2 Part 2: Create Your One-liner
Your one-liner is simply a truncated version of your BrandScript script. Use
your BrandScript script as a filter to create your one-liner and the process will
be fairly easy.
What problem are you going to focus on? What will be the result the
customer will experience?
Take your time and make sure it sounds good and easy to repeat.
Ask these four questions to make sure your one-liner passes the
StoryBrand test:
1
. 
Does it sound normal when you say it out loud?
2
. 
Is there anything that can be changed to make the one-liner sound more
conversational?
3
. 
Is it easy for your staff and customers to memorize?
4
. 
Are all the parts simple but give enough info that nobody would need to ask
the question “What does that mean?”
Your one-liner can be used in almost every piece of collateral you create
for the campaign. It can even be used as the email signature in all of your
nurture and sales emails. You can use it on your website or landing page, on
brochures, on in-store signage, and more.
Not only this but your one-liner will serve as the controlling idea behind
your entire campaign. If anything you write doesn’t feel 
like it meshes withthe one-liner, change it. Your customers will get confused if the story you are
inviting them into is not consistent.
The final thing to do before leaving this second meeting is to decide who
will be responsible for each task and what the deadlines are for each item.
Here is a sample agenda for Meeting #2:
1
. 
Meeting opening:
a
. 
Introduce all those in the room to highlight that the reason they are there is
because they bring something important to the table.
b
. 
Talk about the purpose for the day: to get everyone on the same page with a
clear message about what the company does.
c
. 
Introduce the concept of BrandScript script and one-liner.
2
. 
BrandScript script activity
a
. 
Introduction and purpose
b
. 
Group brainstorming
c
. 
Decision
3
. 
One-liner activity
a
. 
Introduction and purpose
b
. 
Group brainstorming
c
. 
Decision
4
. 
Assign tasks and deadlines
5
. 
Remind people about the next meeting for website wireframe.
Meeting #3: Wireframe Website
At the beginning of the third meeting the room will feel different. Your team
will be energized and focused and excited about 
the possibility this campaign
will be a radical success. The group will also feel organized and on track,
which will add to the excitement.
The objective of the third meeting is to wireframe the website or landing
page.The great thing about wireframing the website or landing page is it’s also
an exercise in memorializing your entire pitch.
The website will include nearly every talking point and will organize
those talking points so they are clear and make sense to potential customers.
Just as importantly, though, the pitch will start making sense to the members
of your team. Don’t be surprised if, during this exercise, people stand back
and say, “Man, I’d buy this. This product looks really good!”
I can’t tell you how many marketing strategy sessions I’ve done in which I
had no interest in the product but by the time we finished wireframing the
website found myself wanting to buy the very thing I was helping somebody
else sell!
Wireframe the Website or Landing Page
Try not to have any agenda during this meeting other than to wireframe the
website or landing page. Once you’re done, call the meeting to an end. The
reason you want to stay focused is your website will likely be the most
important tool you create when it comes to closing sales. The emails will be
important, of course, but every one of those emails will direct people back to
this website. So don’t get distracted.
The design team will ultimately help with colors, images, and the overall
feel of the site, but your job in this meeting is to get the language and basic
layout completed.
I usually wireframe the website on a whiteboard, asking everybody in the
room to record our final decisions on their own paper wireframe. Why have
everybody memorialize our decisions individually rather than just have one
team member write it down? 
Because by having everybody write down the
words we’ve decided to use, you’re getting the entire team, quite literally, on
the same page. In their own handwriting.
Once I explain how we’re going to go about the process, I start with the
header, then move on to the stakes, value proposition, and so on.
As I mentioned in the chapter about wireframing websites, you don’t have
to follow the exact order I’ve created in this book. But the order I’ve put
sections of the website in is great all the same. Feel free to improvise, but
beware of getting too creative in your interpretation of what we’ve instructed.
The word 
creative
 is often just confusion in disguise.
Remember the sections of the landing page from Chapter 5? You will usethose to wireframe your page in this meeting:
The Header
The Stakes
The Value Proposition
The Guide
The Plan
The Explanatory Paragraph
The Video (optional)
Price Choices (optional)
Junk Drawer
Feel free to use the chapter on wireframing a website in this book as a
guide.
Also, have your BrandScript script and one-liner available to make sure
you are using consistent language all the way through your landing page.
Ultimately, the third meeting should be a lot of fun. You should come in
with some positive energy and leave with even more.
Here is a sample agenda to make this meeting simple, clear, and easy:
1
. 
Meeting opening:
a
. 
Introduce all those in the room if necessary and explain why they are there
and what they bring to the table.
b
. 
Talk about the purpose for the meeting: to create a website wireframe
complete with all the sections of the website homepage.
c
. 
Introduce the sections of the website you will be covering today.
2
. 
Review BrandScript script and one-liner and explain the website needs to
stay on theme as much as possible.
3
. 
Website copy creation
a
. 
The Header
i.
Does it answer the questions:
What are you offering?
How does it make our customers’ lives better? Where can I buyit?
How can they buy it?
ii.
Do the pictures you intend to use support the sales pitch or
confuse customers about what you are selling?
b
. 
The Stakes
i.
What is life going to look like if the customer does not buy your
product or service?
ii.
What negative experiences are you keeping your customers from
having to deal with?
c.
The Value Proposition
i.
What positive results will a customer receive if they buy your
product?
ii.
What does your customer’s life look like if they buy your
product or service?
d.
The Guide
i.
Empathy: what empathetic statement can you make that
expresses your care, concern, or understanding about your
customer’s problem?
ii.
Authority: how can you reassure your customers you are
competent to solve their problem?
iii.
Testimonials
iv.
Other: logos, statistics
e
. 
The Plan
i.
Three or four steps: What is the path a customer needs to take
before or after buying your product?
ii.
What are the benefits of each of those steps?
f
. 
The Explanatory Paragraph
i.
Simply use your one-liner followed by your BrandScript script tomake this section simple, clear, and easy.
g
. 
The Video (optional)
i.
Decide on video
ii.
Decide on title
h
. 
Price Choices (optional)
i.
How will you visually display the price or prices of this product.
i.
Junk Drawer
4
. 
Assign tasks and deadlines.
5
. 
Schedule or remind the team about the next meeting in which you will
discuss email sequences.
Meeting #4:
Lead Generator and Email Sequence
For meeting four, you may not need the entire team. The task assigned in this
meeting will mostly go to copywriters. Although photographers, designers,
and whoever is handling your email marketing platform will also need to be
kept in the loop.
The purpose of the fourth meeting is to decided what language will go into
your lead generator and emails for your nurture and sales sequences.
The reason you want to address these pieces of collateral together is
because some of the language you use will overlap.
By the end of this meeting, you want to have the title of your first lead
generator, the basic content outline for the lead generator, a list of possible
nurture emails, and a list of topics and types of sales emails you’ll then ask
copywriters to create.
Keep a list of all the lead generator and nurture email ideas you come up
with in the meeting because any lead generator ideas you reject can be
repurposed as nurture emails.The first goal of the meeting is to decide on a lead generator. Don’t let this
conversation drag on and on. The key here is to agree that you’ve got a good
one, quickly outline the content, assign the writing to a copywriter, and move
on.
The second task is to either create a sales email sequence, a nurture email
sequence, or both.
I recommend outlining the sales sequence first, but only if you can follow
the sales sequence with at least six or seven nurturing emails. This insures
that your potential customers don’t just feel sold to and then dropped.
If you only have time or bandwidth to create eight or ten emails, start by
creating a good nurturing sequence then come back later and create a sales
sequence you insert between the lead generator and nurturing sequence.
The perfect campaign would include a great lead generator, followed by a
sales sequence, followed by a very long nurturing sequence. You may not get
all of that laid out in this meeting, but you can make some serious progress.
The only mistake you can make in this meeting is to close it out without
making firm decisions the team can act on. This time should result in an
actual lead generator that collects email addresses followed by emails that
build trust with customers and begin to close sales.
If you have time, you can dive into writing some of the emails together,
but be sure to turn whatever copy you come up with to the copywriter who
will be responsible for putting the entire campaign together.
A graphic designer should also be in this meeting so you can discuss the
images you will use in the lead generator along with the images you will use
(if any) in the emails themselves.
Sample Agenda:
1
. 
Meeting opening:
a
. 
Introduce all those in the room if necessary and explain what their role will
be as it relates to the campaign.
b
. 
Talk about the purpose for the day: to decide on a lead generator, create
content for the lead generator, and outline the various email campaigns you
have decided to create.
c
. 
Introduce the concept of the lead generator, nurture emails, and sales emails.
2
. 
Review BrandScript script and one-liner as an effort to stay consistent in yourcontent.
3
. 
Lead generator
a
. 
Brainstorm a list of ideas for lead generators.
b
. 
Decide on the first one to create.
c
. 
Create an outline for content.
d
. 
Save unused lead generator ideas for potential nurturing email content.
4
. 
Nurture emails
a
. 
Brainstorm possible types
i.
Weekly Announcements
ii.
Weekly Tips
iii.
Weekly Notifications
b
. 
Make a decision and create subject lines and brief talking points for each.
Your copywriter will love the head start this brainstorm delivers.
5
. 
Sales emails (outline the contents of each type as you go)
a
. 
Title of Deliver the Asset Email
b
. 
Title of Problem + Solution Email
c
. 
Title of Testimonial Email
d
. 
Title of Overcome Objection Email
e
. 
Title of Paradigm Shift Email
f
. 
Title of Sales Email
6
. 
Assign tasks and deadlines.
7
. 
Discuss when the next meeting will take place. In the next meeting you will
refine the content.
Meeting #5:
Content Refinement Meeting
During meeting five, the campaign finally comes together.
I recommend printing out a physical, designed copy of everythinginvolved, from the one-liner to every email.
Use Post-it notes and tape to put physical pieces of paper on the wall so
you can see the entire campaign visually.
Why physical paper? Because these campaigns live inside computer
screens and from here on out you will never be able to see them at a glance.
Have a member of your team prepare the wall so you don’t waste a lot of
time figuring it out. Once everything is on the wall, hand out printed copies
of just the emails so you can read through them together.
Think of this meeting as similar to the table reading of a movie or sitcom.
Before shooting a movie, actors and directors often get together and read the
script while sitting around a table.
The process of a table read reveals the highlights and flaws of the script. If
you follow our instructions, you’ll be shocked at how good your campaign is
and how much you’ve accidentally left out.
At our last table reading, we realized we hardly talked about our
customers’ problems at all. What an enormous mistake!
We were able to fix that mistake by writing language that defined our
customers’ problems and then inserted that language into every single email.
This process is so important that sometimes I will take different colored
Hi-Liters and highlight text to make sure we’re encompassing all the
elements of a good story. I may use green Hi-Liters to highlight all the
benefits our customer will get and red Hi-Liters to highlight all of the
problems or consequences our customers are struggling with.
Looking at your campaign visually, using color-coded sections, allows
you to see if your campaign flows and is even in its execution.
During the last part of this meeting, you’ll want to schedule when
everything will be launched.
What day will the new website launch? How often will you send out the
emails? Which email campaign will you run first?
Here is a sample agenda for meeting five:
1
. 
Meeting opening:
a
. 
Talk about the purpose for the day: to go over all the collateral created in
order to get ready for the launch and to set the calendar.
2
. 
Review and edit one-liner.3
. 
Review and edit website.
4
. 
Review and edit the lead generator.
5
. 
Review and edit the nurture emails.
6
. 
Review and edit the sales emails.
7
. 
Decide when you are going to launch the campaign.
8
. 
Assign tasks and deadlines.
9
. 
Set date about one month after the campaign launches to review the campaign
and make changes and improvements.
Meeting #6:
Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting
It is important to make sure the collateral you created is working. I know that
sounds simple, but it is so easy to launch a campaign and just let it ride
whether it works or not. Don’t make this mistake. Even the greatest of results
can and should be improved upon.
What parts of the campaign are working and what parts are not? What can
and should be changed? Who will make those changes?
Questions to ask?
1
. 
Does one email seem to be working more than the others?
2
. 
Can we duplicate what is working in other emails by adding P.S.’s or similar
language?
3
. 
What are customers responding to in terms of our message?
4
. 
What are customers not responding to in terms of our message?
5
. 
Are our calls to action strong enough?
6
. 
What is the most confusing aspect of our campaign and how can we fix it?
If you have data, review the data. What emails are being opened? What
percentage of people who come to the landing page are making a purchase?
What’s the open rate for each email? (I love to replace the least-performing
email with something completely new.)
The objective of this meeting is to refine, refine, refine.
Here is a sample agenda for the sixth meeting:
1
. 
Explain the objective of this meeting is to refine a specific campaign.2
. 
Pass out the emails for the campaign.
3
. 
Review the data. What’s working and what isn’t?
4
. 
Revise, edit, or replace anything that is not working.
5
. 
Discuss what is working and see if you can use some of the language in other
places on the website or in the emails.
6
. 
Assign the revisions to those who will be responsible to execute.
If you execute these six meetings, you should see very positive results.
Most, if not all of the clients our guides have worked with have been blown
away by how much these simple but clear campaigns have grown their
businesses.
While creating a sales funnel takes creativity and hard work, it should not
be hard. In fact, it should be fun.
Years ago I took up the hobby of fly fishing. I mostly fish to hang out with
my buddies and the truth is I’m not very good, but I still love getting out on
the rivers.
Every time I fish, I can’t help thinking about marketing. As a fisherman,
you’re always asking yourself where the fish are eating and what they are
eating.
If you approach each of the six execution meetings wondering the same
thing, you’re going to do just fine.CONCLUSION
Imagine a year from now that you have created one or two sales funnels that
will grow your business. What does your life look like? What does your
revenue look like? And what does that revenue allow you to do?
If you follow the plan we’ve outlined in this book, you will see results.
While there are other aspects to marketing, these are the basics. This really
is Marketing Made Simple and it will work for you.INDEX
active language, 
140
adjustment, of lead generators, 
136
agendas
for BrandScript Script and One-Liner Meeting, 
173
Content Refinement meeting, 
182
Lead generator and Email Sequence Meeting, 
179–80
Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting, 
183
Wireframe Website Meeting, 
176–77
ASPCA, 
74
audiences, qualifying, 
116
authority
B2B interactions as, 
89–90
communicating, 
86
guides with, 
82–84
B2B interactions, 
84
, 
89–90
branding, 
23–24
BrandScript, 
26
, 
170–73
BrandScript Script and One-Liner Meeting, 
170–73
Building a StoryBrand
 (Miller), 
99
Business Made Simple, 
6
, 
117
, 
138
business relationships, 
64
calls to action
buttons for, on websites, 
63–66
in sales email campaigns, 
162
checklists, 
119–20clarity
in emails, 
139–40
in headers, 
59
in lead generators, 
135
in one-liners, 
44
in plan section, 
95
in solutions, 
61–62
in stating offerings, 
60–61
in videos, 
106
clever language, 
44
Clinton, Bill, 
84
Coca-Cola, 
24
commitment
lack of customers’, in email campaigns, 
160–61
with lead generators, 
114
in nurture email campaigns, 
143
in relationships with customers, 
16–22
in sales funnel, 
28
company name, use of, 
45
confusion, 
14–15
and plan section, 
93
with price choices, 
107
on websites, 
175
connections, with others, 
10
content
in Content Refinement Meeting, 
180–82
for PDF lead generators, 
128–29
Content Refinement Meeting, 
180–82
costs of not doing business with you, 
71–73
curiosity
piqued in headers, 
59
in relationships with customers, 
9–13
in sales funnel, 
28
satisfying, with lead generators, 
124–25
curiosity filters, 
11–12
customers
engaging, with lead generators, 
114–15nurture email campaigns to engage, 
142–43
raising value perceived by, 
78–79
cute language, 
44
digital planning, of websites, 
111
direct sales tactics, 
159–60
drip campaigns, 
141
. 
see also
 nurture email campaigns
educational events, 
121
email(s)
in exchange for lead generators, 
113
in exchange for videos, 
106
ideas for content of, 
144–46
, 
157–58
length of campaigns, 
138–39
power of, 
137–40
as touchpoint, 
20
empathy
communicating, 
84–85
guides with, 
82–84
enlightenment
in relationships customers, 
13–16
in sales funnel, 
28
evaluation
of lead generators, 
136
in Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting, 
182–83
execution, 
167–84
BrandScript Script and One-Liner Meeting, 
170–73
Content Refinement Meeting, 
180–82
Goal Meeting, 
169–70
Lead generator and Email Sequence Meeting, 
178–80
of Marketing Made Simple Checklist, 
29–31
meetings for, 
168–69
Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting, 
182–84
Wireframe Website Meeting, 
173–77
exercises
checklists, 
120
educational events, 
121explanatory paragraphs, 
104
expressing empathy, 
85
guide sections, 
92
headers, 
68
interviews with experts, 
119
junk drawers, 
110–11
keynote presentations, 
124
lead-generating PDFs, 
131–33
one-liners, 
49–50
open houses, 
126
piquing curiosity, 
125
pitfall lists, 
126
plan sections, 
95–97
price choices, 
109
samplers, 
122
stating problems for one-liners, 
41–42
stating results for one-liners, 
47–48
stating solutions for one-liners, 
45–46
statistics, 
91
testimonials, 
88–89
use of logos, 
90
videos, 
107
webinars, 
123
worksheets, 
121
explanatory paragraphs, 
57
, 
98–105
failure goal, setting, 
170
films, one-liners for, 
37–38
first impressions, of websites, 
58–59
“Five Things Your Website Should Include,” 
15
, 
115
free value
lead generators as, 
115–16
nurture email campaigns as, 
145
Geico, 
26
Goal Meeting, 
169–70
God, 
36grunt test, 
59–60
guides, positioning self as, 
116
, 
151
guide section, 
57
, 
82–92
headers, 
57
, 
58–69
headlines, on websites, 
81
head shots, 
88
Hemingway, Ernest, 
139
images, on websites, 
66–67
industry experts, interviews with, 
118–19
interviews, 
118–19
invisible message, 
25
journeys, sales as, 
9–22
judgments, snap, 
10–11
junk drawer, of websites, 
57
, 
109–11
keynote presentations, 
123–24
landing pages
for lead generators, 
134
wireframing of, 
174–75
language
active, 
140
in BrandScript script, 
170–71
consistent, on website, 
175
cute or clever, 
44
for lead generators and email campaigns, 
178
and one-liners, 
36
power of, 
36
used on website, 
53–54
in value propositions, 
79–80
in wireframe process, 
56
writing tips, 
135
, 
139–40
Lead generator and Email Sequence Meeting, 
178–80
lead generators, 
113–36
constant generation of, 
127creation of, 
127–33
delivering, in sales email campaigns, 
163
engaging customers, 
114–15
evaluating and adjusting, 
136
as free value, 
115–16
promotion of, 
134
purpose of, 
116–17
types of, 
118–26
uses of, 
133–34
videos as, 
106
writing tips for, 
135
life journeys, 
10
limited time offers, 
162–63
, 
165
links, in junk drawer, 
109–10
Liu, Chao, 
58
, 
59
lock picking, 
36–37
loglines, 
37–38
logos, of companies you work with, 
89–90
looping images, 
67
magic, 
35
marketing
assessments of, 
21–22
branding vs., 
23–24
enlightenment in, 
15–16
ineffective, 
vi–vii
Marketing Made Simple Checklist, 
23–31
execution of, 
29–31
and invisible messages, 
25
and repetition in message, 
25–27
marketing plan, 
3–6
McLachlan, Sarah, 
74
meetings, 
168–69
BrandScript Script and One-Liner Meeting, 
170–73
Content Refinement Meeting, 
180–82
Goal Meeting, 
169–70
Lead generator and Email Sequence Meeting, 
178–80Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting, 
182–84
Wireframe Website Meeting, 
173–77
memorization
in email campaigns, 
151
of offers, 
25–27
of one-liners, 
50–51
mental maps, 
100
message(s)
on headers, 
66–67
invisible, 
25
simple language and repetition in, 
27
Microsoft Research, 
58
Moses, 
36
MyBrandScript.com, 
170–71
nurture email campaigns, 
141–58
email content for, 
144–46
to engage customers, 
142–43
ideas for content, 
157–58
meetings to create, 
178–79
sales email campaigns vs., 
161–63
starting, 
157
as touchpoints, 
141–42
unsubscribes in, 
144
weekly announcements, 
146–49
weekly notifications, 
155–57
weekly tips, 
149–55
objections, overcoming
in explanatory paragraphs, 
101–4
in sales email campaigns, 
164–65
in testimonials, 
87
offerings, stating your, 
60–61
one-liners, 
35–51
creation of, 
38–50
, 
172–73
for films, 
37–38
as lock picks, 
37opening doors with, 
36–38
and power of words, 
36
uses of, 
50–51
open houses, 
126
options, in pricing, 
108
Oswald Mills Audio, 
9
pain points, 
74–76
paper and pen planning
of content, 
180–81
of websites, 
111–12
paradigm shift, in email campaigns, 
165
passive-aggressive sales techniques, 
160
PDFs, 
115–21
perceived value, raising, 
78–79
pitfall lists, 
125–26
plan section, 
57
, 
93–97
podcasts, 
146
Pop-Tarts, 
93–94
pop-up ads, 
133–34
price choices, 
57
, 
107–9
problems
connected to results, 
46–47
connected to solutions, 
42–43
curiosity about solutions to, 
12
enlightenment about solutions to, 
14
focusing on too many, 
135
as hooks for one-liners, 
38–42
in sales email campaigns, 
162
, 
163–64
solving, with emails, 
144–45
solving, with lead generators, 
117
in testimonials, 
87
in videos, 
105–6
in weekly tip emails, 
149
, 
151
products
selecting, in Goal Meeting, 
170
selling, in sales email campaigns, 
161weekly notifications of new, 
155–56
pushiness, 
18
, 
63
questions, answered by header, 
60–64
real estate agents, 
126
reciprocity, 
117
Regan, Brian, 
93
relationships, 
7–22
commitment in, 
16–22
curiosity in, 
9–13
enlightenment in, 
13–16
rushed, 
19
sales as, 
7–9
stages of, 
8
transactional business, 
64
repetition
in message, 
25–27
video as, 
105
results, in one-liners, 
46–49
Results Analysis and Refinement Meeting, 
182–84
sales
pitching products in nurture emails, 
147
as relationships, 
7–9
sales email campaigns, 
159–65
creation of, 
163–65
direct sales pitches in, 
159–60
and lack of customers’ commitment, 
160–61
meetings to create, 
178–79
nurture email campaign vs., 
161–63
sales funnel(s)
effectiveness of, 
v
elements of, 
28–29
email campaigns in, 
136
in Goal Meeting, 
169–70
and pace of relationships, 
20–21steps in, 
4–5
using BrandScript in, 
26
wireframe for, 
111
samplers, 
122
sample weekly announcement, 
147–49
sample weekly tip email, 
151–55
search engine optimization (SEO), 
98–99
short paragraphs, 
140
short sentences, 
140
short words, 
139
slide shows, 
66–67
snap judgments, 
10–11
solutions
connected to results, 
46–47
in headers, 
61–62
offering, in emails, 
144–45
in one-liners, 
42–46
providing, with lead generators, 
117
in sales email campaigns, 
162
, 
163–64
in testimonials, 
87
soundbites, 
86–87
sound waves, 
15–16
stakes, 
57
, 
70–76
statistics, 
84
, 
90–91
status, 
12
stories
contrast in, 
77–78
as guide, 
72
inviting customers into, 
99
problems in, 
39
tension in, 
70–71
StoryBrand
lead generators of, 
15
, 
115
marketing agents certified at, 
82
podcast of, 
117
research on effectiveness of, 
30–31
sales funnels, 
vi–viistakes on website of, 
71–72
story loops, closing, 
43
stretch goal, setting, 
170
success
in one-liners, 
48
and stakes, communicated on websites, 
73–74
Super Bowl, 
24
table readings, 
181
TED talks, 
106
testimonials
communicating authority with, 
84
, 
85–89
in sales email campaigns, 
164
in video, 
105
text
on landing page, 
103
using too much, 
135
three-step processes, 
94
timing, importance of, 
17
titles
for lead generators, 
117
, 
135
for PDF lead generators, 
127–28
for videos, 
106
for weekly tip emails, 
151
touchpoints
for customer engagement, 
19–20
nurture email campaigns as, 
141–42
transactional business relationships, 
64
trust
with lead generators, 
117
with nurture emails, 
155
in relationship, 
20–21
unsubscribes, 
144
value
adding, with statements of problem, 
39–40in emails, 
145
free, 
115–16
, 
145
lead generators as, 
115–16
in testimonials, 
87
in weekly tip emails, 
151
value proposition, 
57
, 
77–81
videos, 
57
, 
105–7
webinars, 
123
websites
mentioning, in emails, 
145
purpose of, 
55
wireframing of, 
174–75
see also
 wireframed website
weekly announcements, 
146–49
weekly notifications, 
155–57
weekly tips, 
149–55
wireframed website, 
53–112
building effective, 
111–12
explanatory paragraphs, 
98–104
guides on, 
82–92
headers, 
58–69
junk drawer, 
109–11
language used on, 
53–54
plans on, 
93–97
price choices on, 
107–9
stakes discussed on, 
70–76
value proposition on, 
77–81
video, 
105–7
wireframe process, 
55–58
wireframe process, 
55–58
Wireframe Website Meeting, 
173–77
words, power of, 
36
worksheets, 
120–21
writing tips, 
135
, 
139–40ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Donald Miller is the CEO of Business Made Simple and creator of the
StoryBrand Marketing Framework. Over ten thousand businesses have used
his framework to clarify their marketing messages. He sends out a daily
business tip to more than a hundred thousand business leaders at
BusinessMadeSimple.com
Dr. J.J. Peterson serves as Chief of Teaching and Facilitation of StoryBrand,
as well as cohost for chart-topping podcast 
Building a StoryBrand
 with
Donald Miller. J.J. is a PhD in Communication and prior to joining
StoryBrand spent the previous twenty years teaching and practicing
communication in the entertainment industry and higher education.BUSINESS MADE SIMPLE CAN HELP
YOU DEVELOP YOURSELF AND YOUR
ENTIRE TEAM
Want to become a StoryBrand marketing guide?
If you have experience as a marketing agent and want to use the StoryBrand
Frameworks to get better results for your clients, take the first step to become
a StoryBrand certified guide. You can apply at
www.MarketingMadeSimple.com
Want to develop your team to be competent business
professional?
Business Made Simple is an online learning platform that is disrupting the
university system. You and your people do not have to go back to college to
learn tangible skills that will grow a company. Visit
www.BusinessMadeSimple.com today and develop yourself and your people
for an incredibly low price.