 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Measuring Marketing Governance Maturity  
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
Governance refers to formal management processes engaging cross -
functional steering committees for strategic planning, project 
prioritization, and performance measurement initiatives.  
 
For many large enterprises, Sarbanes -Oxley has been the catalyst for 
implementing and refining these business processes.  
 
Advanced Marketing professionals are capitalizin g on the Governance 
function by adopting their own formal processes to plan, select projects, 
and monitor performance. By adopting Best Practice Marketing 
Governance processes, you can better:  
 
 
 Align your strategy and project selection with the business’ 
goals and objectives;  
 Gain C -Level buy -in; and  
 Measure project success using standardized tools and 
methodologies.  
 
Most North American mid -sized companies do not have a mature 
marketing governance process in place. Use this report to learn the Best 
Practi ces for Marketing Governance and follow the step -by-step action 
plan to set up and maintain this function in your organization . 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
Introduction         3 
 
Benefits of Marketing Governance      3 
 
The Capability Maturity Model       4 
 
The COBIT Standard        5 
 
Establishing a Governance Benchmark      6 
 
Developing Marketing Governance      6 
 
Maintaining Best Practice Governance      7 
 
Conclusion           7  
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Introduction   
 
 
 
 
Marketing has the unenviable reputation as the line of business that is 
not held accountable for achieving specific, measurable, bottom -line 
results. Finding a bean counter that does not view Marketing as a cost 
center - producing intangible results - is a daunting task.  
 
One of the primary reasons for this is the notable absence of a 
Marketing Governance function in most organizations.   This lack of 
structure has led to decreased confidence among senior level peers, 
reduced budgets, and a feeling around t he boardroom table that 
marketing should not be involved in “strategic” decisions. Establishing a 
culture for Marketing Performance Management (MPM) requires that 
sound infrastructure is in place for evaluating decisions and results.  
 
 
 
What is Marketing G overnance?  
 
Marketing Governance is a structure of processes, procedures, and 
policies used to optimize the management of Marketing functions.   
 
 
 
What are the benefits?  
 
 
 Aligned business & marketing strategy  
 Goals & Objectives map to quantifiable metrics  
 Increased accountability & support from senior management  
 Ability to execute integrated multi -channel campaigns  
 Established decision -making & prioritization processes  
 Ability to measure marketing performance  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
The Capability Maturity Model   
 
   
 
 
In order to improve an organization’s marketing function it is important 
to understand the maturity of its current processes and procedures. The 
Capability Maturity Model (CMM), originally designed by Carnegie Mellon 
University as a method for improving Software Engineering Process 
Management, can be used to assess the maturity of other business 
processes including Marketing Governance.  
 
 
CMM (see diagram below) helps organizations understand and deploy 
Best Practices related to process management. Since governance is a 
business process, it can be plugged into the CMM model to provide a 
benchmarking tool for companies wishing to systematically improve 
organizational maturity in this area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
The COBIT Standard   
 
 
 
 
Another management tool that can be used to develop and refine 
Marketing Governance is the COBIT standard. Developed by the IT 
Governance Institute to help IT organizations address Sarbanes -Oxley 
regulations, COBIT is a Best Practice framework for process 
manageme nt that can be easily adapted for Marketing Governance.  
 
Use the summarized & adapted COBIT framework below to understand 
the Marketing Governance process management maturity levels.   
 
For more information on COBIT, please consult: www.isaca.org/cobit/   
 
 Level 0 – Non-Existent: No senior management oversight of 
Marketing activities.   
 
 Level 1 – Initial/Ad Hoc: Regular governance practices such as 
review meetings, creation of performance reports, and 
investigation in to problems take place, but rely mostly on the 
initiative of the Marketing management team.  
 
 Level 2 – Repeatable/Intuitive: Senior management is involved 
only when there are major problems or successes. The 
measurement of Marketing performance is typically limited to 
technical measures and only within the Marketing function.   
 
 Level 3 – Defined Process: Specific procedures for management 
covering key governance activities have been developed. These 
include regular target -setting, reviews of perform ance, and 
project planning and funding for any necessary Marketing 
improvements.  
 
 Level 4 – Managed & Measurable: Target -setting has developed 
to a fairly sophisticated stage with relationships between 
outcome goals in business terms and Marketing process 
improvement measures now well understood.    
 
 Level 5 – Optimized: The Marketing governance practices have 
developed into a sophisticated approach using effective and 
efficient techniques. There is true transparency of Marketing 
activities, and the board fe els in control of the Marketing 
strategy.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Establishing a Governance Benchmark  
Developing a Governance Benchmark   
 
   
 
 
Developing Marketing Governance Review the Capability Maturity Model 
in conjunction with the summarized COBIT Standard to identify what 
level of maturity best describes your current state of Marketing 
Governance.  
 
Once you understand your current state, look at what processes and 
procedures are required to move your organization to the next maturity 
level. These points can be used as goals & objectives that guid e your 
steering committee.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Follow this step -by-step action plan to adopt Marketing Governance:  
 
 
 Understand the value of Marketing Governance  
 Determine your organization’s current maturity level  
 Establish sponsorship from the senior management team  
 Build cross -functional steering committee of key executives  
 Hold kick -off meeting & schedule quarterly conferences  
 Set goals & objectives for improving Marketing Governance  
 Determine how marketing results will be  measured (ROI etc)  
 Assign action items to the appropriate attendees  
 Manage allocated responsibilities on a proactive basis  
 Conduct next meeting to track achievement of objectives  
 
Use Demand Metric's Steering Committee Charter Template  to set 
the direction and ground rules for your committee.     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Maintaining Best Practice Governance  
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
Marketing professionals at mid -sized enterprises need to be disciplined 
and keep their colleagues committed to governance. Holding quarterly 
meetings to measure results on Marketing initiatives is a great way to 
engage C -level executives and improve the profile of t he marketing 
function in the organization.   
 
Use Demand Metric ’s Meeting Agenda Templa te and Meeting 
Minutes Template  at each meeting . Make sure to distribute the agenda  
to attendees before the  meeting to facilitate the discussion. Periodic e -
mail updates on progress keeps the steering committee  in-the-loop 
with rega rd to their agreed priorities.  
 
Demonstrate leadership by introducing standardized corporate  
performance measurement systems like the Balanced Scorecard, which 
is much more effective than ROI to illustrate how Marketing adds value, 
and ensures Customer -Centricity is at the top of every executive’s 
mind.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governance is critical for improving marketing performance and 
increasing the strategic role of the marketing function to the 
organization. It establishes a framework for aligned decision -making  and 
results -driven action. Do not delay adopting these Best Practices in your 
Marketing department.   
 
 