 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Nurture Leads and Prospects with Podcasts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
 
This report provides practical advice for understanding the value of 
podcasting, learning best practices, and getting prepared to develop and 
launch a successful podcast program.  
 
 
Read this brief 7 -page report to learn:  
 
 What is a Podcast?  
 Business Ben efits of Podcasting  
 Attracting Listeners to Podcasts  
 How to Record a Podcast  
 Action Plan  
 
 
Review this report to understand the business benefits of adding 
podcasting to your marketing mix. Additionally, follow our Action Plan to 
get started with your podcasting initiative.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What is a Podcast?        3  
 
Business Benefits of Podcasting       3  
 
Attracting Listeners to Podcasts       4  
 
How to Record a Podcast        5  
 
Action Plan          6 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What is a Podcast?  
Business Benefits of Podcasting    
 
 
 
 
“A podcast is a collection of digital media files distributed over the 
internet using syndication feeds for playback on portable media players 
and personal computers.  
  
Although podcasters’ web sites may offer direct download or streaming 
of their content, a podcast is distinguished by its ability to be 
syndicated, subscribed to, and downloaded automatically when new 
content is added. This is done using an aggregator or feed reade r 
capable of reading feed formats such as RSS (really simple 
syndication).”  
  
       Source - Wikipedia   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Podcasting has quickly become an important part of many permission 
based marketing campaigns because it provides high value at a low 
cost.  
  
Companies are using podcasts for the following reasons:  
  
 Branding : effective podcasting is an excellent medium to reach 
our generation’s  tech-savvy consumers. Additionally, podcasts 
can position your organization as an industry leader, provided the 
content is relevant and timely for your target audience.  
 
 Lead Generati on & Nurturing : keep prospects engaged with 
your brand by providing a trusted source for value -added content 
and industry best practices. Set up a simple form on your 
website to capture visitor information as they register/subscribe 
to podcasts.  
 
 External  Communications : keep investors, media contacts, 
industry analysts, and current customers informed with company 
news and product updates.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Attracting Listeners to Podcasts   Search Engine Optimization : search engines rank websites 
with high download activity as more “important”, thus incre asing 
organic search results.  
 
 Website Content Improvements : if you are looking to beef up 
the “resources” section of your corporate, consider adding a 
series of podcasts.  
 
 Marketing Opportunities : many organizations are sponsoring 
solid third -party podc asts, advertising during the buffering time 
period as the podcast loads, and using podcasts to promote 
brands with listener prizes. Consider adding a revenue stream to 
your podcasts to increase the return on investment for your 
program.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
A podcast is useless if nobody is listening. In order to attract the right 
audience and keep them listening, follow these simple guidelines:  
  
 Keep it Concise : most listeners have an attention span of 15 -30 
minutes maximum for a given topic. Keep your podcast concise, 
and offer different podcasts on various topics rather than 
grouping them into one huge podcast.  
 
 Flexible File Format : use MP3 format for on -demand podcasts 
(after the original broadcast) as it can be played on mo st rich 
media players. Avoid .wav files as the industry has clearly 
adopted MP3 as the standard.  
 
 Use an RSS Feed : promote and deliver your podcasts through 
an RSS Feed  to keep listeners coming back.  
 
 Don’t Sell to Hard : while it is fine to communicate the benefits 
of your product, ensure that your podcast is informational in 
nature, and not a canned sales pitch.  
 
 Optimize your Podcast : provide a detailed description of the 
content of your podcast, and add m eta-tags and keywords to 
pages containing your podcasts to enhance natural search engine 
optimization.   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
How to Record a Podcast   
 Promote your Podcast : use an integrated approach to 
promoting your podcast, including the following channels: contact 
center, email, blog, website, and  podcast directories such as 
www.podcast.net   
 
 Brand your Podcast : have a clearly branded introduction and 
conclusion to your podcast to engage listeners, thank them for 
their time, a nd invite them to  attend any future planned 
podcasts.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Podcasting provides a great opportunity to reach your target audience 
but comes with its own unique risks. When recording a podcast make 
sure to use the right equipment and delivery methods to mitigate user 
and brand experience risks.  
  
Follow these steps  to create an effective podcast:  
  
1. Identify Target Audience : determine the audience that is most 
likely to join your podcast and consider what they would like to 
learn about your organization.  
 
2. Determine Podcast Content : brainstorm potential podcast 
themes, such as: investor reports, product upgrades, business 
cases, best practices, competitive insights, executive interviews, 
company strategy, etc.  
 
3. Write Podcast Script : create a script that will be used to guide 
speakers through their podcast recording.  Practice the script until 
it does not sound scripted.  
 
4. Select a Podcast Solution : strongly consider using Audacity  
(free) for recording your podcast and Podifier  for de livering your 
podcast to your audience.  
 
5. Get a Solid Microphone : Ambient noise can be a major 
problem. The quality of your podcast can be greatly increased if 
you take the time of day into consideration and by using noise 
canceling filters in the recordin g software. Consider using a USB 
audio capture device .   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Action Plan   
6. Record your Podcast : record your podcast with key speakers, 
ensuring it is no longer than 30 minutes or more than 10MB in 
size. Re -record your podcast until it sounds extremely polished. 
Consider using Pinnacle Systems. Pinnacle Podcast Fact ory 
solution for an end -to-end recording solution. Add text notes to 
make your podcast easily searchable for specific content.  
 
7. Test the Podcast : check your bandwidth package with your 
website hosting provider as podcasts can be expensive to deliver 
if you are have to pay for incremental downloads and traffic. Ping 
your podcast with  AllPodcasts  to ensure your podcasts are 
updated at any podcast directories you are posting on.  
 
8. Deliver Podcast  to Audience : upload an MP3 version of your 
podcast to your website (to be made available following the initial 
broadcast) and create an RSS Feed to distribute your podcast to 
your audience. Podifier’s  solution automa tes to creation of an 
RSS Feed by enclosing one or more MP3 files, and providing the 
FTP application to upload the files to a server.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Before you launch into your podcasting initiative, consider the following 
action items to get prepared for a successful project:  
  
 
1. Learn Best Practices : read thought -leader, Rodney Rumford’s 
whitepaper called “ How to Leverage this New Media 
Marketing Tool .” Review IBM’s investor podcast  section of 
their website, to see a solid finished product. Join and interact 
act Paul Colligan’s blog dedicated to podcasting, and check out 
the post: “ 7 Things to do Today to Make your Podcast More 
Valuable .”  
 
2. Sell the Benefits Internally : discuss podcasting with senior 
management to build the business case  for purchasing any 
podcast -related software or services.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
3. Identify Podcasting Use Cases : discuss this media option with 
internal and external stakeholders to identify what type of 
content would be valued and in demand:  
 
 Product Management - technical podc asts?  
 Senior Management - strategic vision?  
 Current Customers - product enhancements?  
 Prospective Customers - best practices?  
 Media Contacts - company news?  
 Investors - company performance?  
 
4. Select a Podcasting Solution : view vendor demonstrations an d 
select the equipment and services you require to get podcasting 
going in your company.  
 
5. Record your First Podcast : record the most impactful podcast 
in your line -up first to build momentum and secure senior 
management commitment to this medium.  
 
6. Broadc ast your Podcast : market your podcast to key 
stakeholders and monitor who is signing up.  
 
7. Measure Results : track leads that were generated from your 
podcast to determine the ROI of your program.  
 
8. Tweak the Process : with each new podcast take lessons 
learned from your previous experience to improve your 
capabilities. Ask audience members for feedback during your 
podcasts, or send out a short survey following the podcast to 
measure your success.  
 