COVER OPTION 2
20
1914 Trends  
Shaping Tech2
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 20192019 Trends
The hyper-personalization of everything   4 
The smart home targets the senior citizen market 7 
Malls are out. Retail moments are in.   11 
Maps become a layer for all kinds of real-world data 14 
Last-mile delivery gets automated    17 
Tech comes for your sleep    20 
Data becomes a hot-button geopolitical issue  23 
Smart buildings maximize comfort,  
       wellness, and efficiency    26 
Buses and logistics providers go green   29 
China sets the bar for social network innovation 32 
Electric vehicle makers expand into  
       lifestyle products and services    34 
Tech apprenticeships grow in popularity  36 
Digital swag makes big money    38 
The new healthcare clinic is your home  41
3
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Technology is now central to every industry — from building construction 
to healthcare administration to food production. 2019 will be the year 
we see new use cases emerge as AI creates new possibilities for 
personalization, monitoring, and marketing. It will also create new 
challenges around how to regulate data and access. 
As a more tech-savvy generation ages up, we’ll see the smart home begin 
acting as a kind of in-home health aide, monitoring senior citizens’ health 
and well-being. We’ll see logistics players experiment with finally moving 
beyond a human driver. And we’ll see cross-industry collaborations, 
whether via ancestry-informed Spotify playlists or limited-edition  
Fortnite game skins. We’ll also see technology brands expand  
beyond their core products and turn themselves into a lifestyle. 
We asked our industry analysts at CB Insights to look back over a year’s 
worth of research briefs, data crunching, and reports to identify the trends 
they believe will shape the tech sector in 2019. 
In each case, we examine the tea leaves pointing to each trend as 
something to watch out for next year. From at-home health kits to 
personalized makeup to data governance, these are 14 of the tech  
trends we’ll be watching.
The smart home and healthcare are 
converging. Autonomous vehicles  
are coming for last-mile delivery.  
And data is becoming a hot-button 
geopolitical issue. We look at the trends 
poised to reshape industries in 2019.
4
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The hyper-personalization  
of everything
5
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019In 2019, we’ll see an increase in cross-industry collaborations to 
better understand users and offer them more fine-tuned products. 
In September 2018, for example, Spotify partnered with Ancestry.
com to utilize DNA data to create unique playlists for individuals. 
Playlists reflect music linked to different ethnicities and regions. A 
person with ancestral roots in Bangalore, India, for example, might 
see Carnatic violinists and Kannada film songs on their playlists. 
DNA data is also informing how we eat. GenoPalate, for 
example, collects DNA info through saliva samples and analyzes 
physiological components like an individual’s ability to absorb 
certain vitamins or how fast they can metabolize nutrients. From 
there, it matches this information to nutrition analyses that it has 
conducted on a wide range of food and suggests a personalized 
diet. It also sells its own meal kits that use this information to map 
out menus. 
The more data collected about 
an individual, the more intimately 
companies believe they can 
understand and market to them.6
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Critics believe that some of these DNA-based personalization 
tactics rely on pseudoscience. Other more straightforward 
personalization tactics are emerging via tools like image recognition. 
For example, patents indicate that the beauty industry is looking at  
image recognition to create products catered to individual customers. 
A patent filed in August 2016 by L ’Oreal describes using some type 
of visual mechanism, like a smartphone camera or in-store video 
device, to gather data on the texture and color of a shopper’s skin 
and hair. From there, the company would use the information to 
create a blend that best fits a shopper. 
Personalization is inspiring more than just new product features. 
It’s also helping set preferences for services that are otherwise  
one-size-fits-all.
Autonomous vehicles, for example, might use personalization data 
to offer responsive car settings.
In July 2018, Amazon and Apple were both granted patents that 
would personalize features for autonomous vehicles. 
7
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Amazon’s patent outlines passenger profiles that build in 
preferences for how AVs should operate. Preferences include 
safety, like automatically detecting a child passenger and child 
locking the doors of a car accordingly. Amazon might even use its 
technology to limit a car from going to certain locations, like a bar if 
an underage driver is in the car. 
Apple’s patent focuses on comfort profiles. Comfort in an 
autonomous vehicle includes acceleration, braking, and turning. 
Hypothetically, when a customer enters a car, Apple’s facial 
recognition algorithms will recognize a passenger and monitor 
things like posture, eye movement, and heartbeats to gauge 
comfort level.
In 2019, get ready for even more tangential streams of data to 
broaden the opportunities for personalization. 
Amazon has patented a system to activate in-car preferences based on the 
passenger that gets in.
8
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The smart home targets  
the senior citizen market
9
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019And as tech-friendly generations age up, new markets open up  
as well. 
But technology that requires user inputs can be a difficult sell, 
especially to senior citizens. It’s a big ask to input blood sugar 
data into a device or weigh yourself every day. And what if a senior 
suffers from a heart attack? There’s little chance they’ll be able to 
summon a doctor through Alexa while in pain. 
For this reason, we’ll see smart home-based healthcare technology 
enter the senior citizen market in 2019 as a passive tool. Patents 
outline this broad, surveillance-enabled future. 
In January 2018, Google patented the use of always-on optical 
sensors in places like bathrooms to capture data on cardiovascular 
function. Theoretically, the sensors will track changes in colors in 
skin to see if blood flow was disrupted. Every time a senior steps 
into the bathroom to brush their teeth or wash their hands, they will 
passively provide blood flow data to these sensors.
There’s a major difference between 
the senior of 10 years ago and seniors 
today — older people are much more 
comfortable with technology.10
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019In October 2018, Amazon was granted a patent to detect 
“abnormal” voice conditions like coughing, sore throats, and even 
different emotional states like sadness and excitement. If a senior 
is coughing, Alexa might suggest that they order medicine. If 
programmed to do so, this coughing data might even go directly to 
a loved one or a care provider. 
11
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Surveillance technology also helps with passive tracking. The 
Amazon Echo’s drop-in feature allows people to broadcast to any 
speaker within a home, which means that a user can reach out to a 
senior without them having to pick up the phone. Indoor cameras 
like Google Clips use artificial intelligence to keep specific people 
within its line-of-vision. 
12
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019An initiative from Amazon-backed smart thermostat Ecobee urges 
customers to share their data anonymously to help the company 
understand behavior better — especially seniors.
Ecobee’s sensors might use this data to better understand the 
movement and changes in behavior of an elderly family member. If 
a senior has reduced the number of times they go up and down the 
stairs, for example, they might be experiencing knee pain.
The more passive behavioral data we have on seniors, the more 
likely these devices will be used to detect major behavioral changes 
that signal a medical problem. 
13
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Malls are out.  
Retail moments are in.
14
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019According to Adobe, shoppers spent nearly 24% more this year on 
Black Friday than in 2017. Cyber Monday hit $7.9B — up nearly 20% 
from last year.
But retail isn’t just moving online. It’s also starting to infiltrate other 
aspects of our offline world, like car rides.
Startups like Cargo are tapping into the idle moments that riders 
spend in cabs. Cargo installs boxes with products from big brands 
inside the cars of ride-hailing companies like Uber. If a customer 
gets into a Cargo-equipped car, they can scan a QR code or enter 
a numerical ID to browse the car’s inventory and choose a product 
to purchase. Now, the 30 minutes that might have otherwise been 
wasted in traffic can be used to buy an iPhone charger or a bag  
of chips. 
Major brands are already signing on to these new retail moments 
and using them as an opportunity to pilot and sell products. Cargo 
sources products from big brands, from Kellogg’s to Coca-Cola. 
Theoretically, these retail moments aren’t limited to cab rides. 
They can be anywhere, enabled by the rise of technologies like 
augmented reality, cashierless stores, and smart factories.  
Patents outline what the future might look like.
In August 2018, for example, Walmart was granted a patent that 
would allow customers to strap on virtual reality headsets and 
sensor-laden gloves to interact with a Walmart store in a virtual 
world. Autonomous robots would then fulfill these virtual orders in 
a Walmart factory.Traditional retail outlets might be 
struggling, but shopping itself is still 
as popular as ever, the channels are 
just changing.
15
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019An older patent filed by Walmart showed that the company might 
also be envisioning retail pods that can be set up in office spaces, 
malls, and even in apartment buildings. 
16
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019In the future, you might be able to pick up dish detergent on your 
way home from work at the Walmart pod that sits in your lobby.
17
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Maps become a layer for  
all kinds of real-world data
18
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019But there’s more potential for maps than just locating nearby 
happy hour spots — in the future, maps might offer a user bar 
recommendations based on past preferences, connect them with 
friends in the area, and even warn them from visiting locations that 
have high pollen counts. 
In 2019, maps will begin to become a layer on which we do 
everything from communicate to compile data. 
We saw an inkling of these possibilities with the smart home 
in October 2018, when Roomba-maker iRobot partnered with 
Google Maps. As the Roomba cleans a home, it collects mapping 
information based on low-resolution photos and how far its  
wheels move. 
The new partnership aims to make the smart home more 
responsive. Map-based data would make the smart home easier 
to set up and allow for a more complex chain of commands, 
like summoning a robot arm to “fetch a beer.” To carry out that 
command, the robot arm would have to know where the kitchen 
was, where the refrigerator was, and where a beer might sit. For most, maps are a feature of a 
smartphone. A user pulls up Google 
Maps, types in “bars, ” and navigates 
over to the nearest one.
19
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Beyond the smart home, new streams of data are making other 
kinds of mapping possible. In October 2018, Google rolled out 
detailed electric vehicle charging station information, including  
the number of chargers and charging speeds available.
A project last year launched in collaboration with the Environmental 
Defense Fund and Colorado State University involves adding 
sensors to Google’s Street View cars so they can track methane 
leaks as they pass through streets. 
20
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Methane, which contains 80 times the warming power of carbon 
dioxide over a twenty-year period, can leak from outdated 
infrastructure meant to transport natural gas into homes. Data 
from these maps can help utilities decide when infrastructure 
replacements might be needed.
Google Maps is also starting to add social aspects to its features. 
In September 2018, Google Maps officially rolled out a polling 
feature to Maps users. Users can now create a list of places and 
poll their friends to pick the ones they’re interested in.
While Google Maps is the front-runner, Apple Maps is improving its 
own mapping software as well to better compete.
The company announced plans to build out an entirely new maps 
interface using its own data. Apple has also mentioned human 
editors that will go street-by-street to understand the unique and 
specific geometrics that make up our world. 
Its fleet of information-collecting cars have even been spotted  
with lidar arrays, which help with precise 3D mapping. It also  
plans to crowdfund this data using “anonymous probes” collected 
from phones. 
These maps will only become smarter and more robust, allowing 
them to become the latest layer on which we interact.
21
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Last-mile delivery  
gets automated
22
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Driving humans across long distances without a driver? Difficult. 
Driving groceries across short distances without a driver? Much 
easier. The latter is less of a risk and has immediate use cases. The 
technology is also easier to develop than full-size passenger-based 
vehicles — it’s smaller, slower, and lighter, and the stakes are lower 
without human cargo.
Last-mile delivery with a human driver is actually a pretty expensive 
undertaking. Last-mile costs per delivery can range between 1.50 
and 4.00 euros ($1.75 and $4.56 in USD), according to McKinsey. 
More general approximations across the industry place last-mile 
delivery costs at about 30% of delivering a good. It’s a massive 
industry with a lot of money to be made by solving its inefficiencies. 
Uber’s standalone food delivery app Uber Eats, for example, is the 
most profitable part of the company. 
Major grocery companies and retailers have started piloting 
autonomous vehicles for last-mile delivery in communities across 
the US. AVs can reduce fuel costs because they are often electric 
and need less power to carry cargo than people. They also, of 
course, save on the cost of paying a human driver.
These pilots are part PR and part strategic initiatives — both for the 
retailers and the vehicle makers. The promise of autonomous driving 
hasn’t quite arrived, but last-mile 
delivery may be the first place  
where we see fully autonomous  
fleets deployed.
23
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019For example, Kroger partnered with self-driving startup Nuro 
to deliver groceries from its Fry’s Food Stores to residents in 
Scottsdale, Arizona. The pilot launched in August 2018.
Another example involves automaker Ford and Domino’s. In 
July 2018, the duo began a two-month partnership in Ann Arbor, 
Michigan where customers would order food and have Ford Fusion 
hybrids deliver it. 
24
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019While human drivers were still in control of the car, there was 
minimal interaction with the customers. Instead, they typed a code 
in a keypad to retrieve food. However, Ford still pitched the pilot as 
an autonomous vehicle test — autonomy is a powerful buzzword. 
Buzzwords aside, the pilot allowed the company to collect data 
on what autonomous delivery in the region would look like. Small-
scale, low-risk pilots can help companies train their vehicles for 
future rollouts. 
Pilots can also contribute to user research to understand how 
customers might interact with AVs once they’re fully launched. 
In 2019, expect more companies to begin using autonomous 
vehicles in their last-mile deliveries. Some of these use cases might 
even potentially move beyond pilots depending on regulations, 
which tend to vary widely by state.
25
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Tech comes for your sleep
26
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019From smart mattresses to smart pillows, the products that are being 
released into the sleep market aim to improve sleep by tracking some 
of the most enigmatic hours of our days. In 2019, we will see that the 
trojan horse into this industry is wearable technology.
FitBit announced in August 2018 that it had plans to launch a sleep 
tracking program known as SleepScore. The technology will use 
heart-rate tracking sensors on newer FitBits to give users nightly 
sleep scores and comprehensive views on how they’ve been 
sleeping. The sensors can measure oxygen levels in the blood  
and detect events that might be disrupting breathing during sleep.Tech has already infiltrated your 
waking hours. Now, it’s coming  
for your sleep.
27
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019But Fitbit’s devices aren’t FDA-approved (yet) which means that 
they can’t offer users a diagnosis on what might be ailing them. 
However, we’ll likely soon see more healthcare-based wearables for 
sleep diagnoses.
In October 2018, Beddr’s SleepTuner became one of the few 
consumer sleep wearables to receive FDA approval. The SleepTuner 
is a small sensor-equipped patch that a user can place on their 
forehead while sleeping to track factors that change through the 
night, like heart rates and sleeping position. 
And while the Apple Watch doesn’t explicitly track sleep patterns, 
it has received FDA approval for other health-related technologies. 
We may soon see the company enter the growing sleep market.
28
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Other companies are moving into your dreams as well. Dreem, 
which has raised $58M in funding, sells a headband that customers 
can wear around their heads while asleep. The band is equipped 
with sensors that measure key biological signals, like brain activity, 
heart rate, or movement. It claims that its artificial intelligence tools 
are precise enough to achieve the same results that a customer 
might have while testing sleep activity in a laboratory. 
The band is also equipped with audio that can coach a customer 
through meditation and breathing exercises, and emit sound waves 
that the company claims can help increase the quality of deep 
sleep. It also attempts to improve waking hours. Its smart alarm 
only goes off when it detects that a user has moved into light sleep.
While companies have piloted all sorts of technology to try and 
track sleep data, wearables offer an extra level of precision and 
granularity that was previously hard to achieve. Expect to see more 
sleep technology enter the market in 2019 piggybacking on the 
success of wearables. 
29
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Data becomes a hot-button 
geopolitical issue
30
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Alphabet’s Sidewalk Labs entered Toronto earlier this year with a 
plan to launch a “smart neighborhood” in Quayside, a pedestrian 
walkway by the water. But the company’s entrance was met with 
backlash. Toronto residents wanted to know what the company 
planned to do with the behavioral data that it would collect from 
this project. If data really is the new oil, we’re 
starting to see owners of this  
data protect it like they would  
a precious resource.
Then, in October 2018, Sidewalk Labs released initial proposals on 
how digital governance might look in the new Toronto waterfront. 
They proposed that the information collected from the Quayside 
environment should be kept in a “Civic Data Trust.” Any entity — 
including Sidewalk Labs — that hoped to collect or use smart city 
data would have to submit an impact assessment of their data  
with the data trust. Furthermore, the company promised that all 
data would be stored on “open standards” — anyone could plug in.
31
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019But critics pushed back against it. Because Alphabet’s technology 
allowed it to do m uch more with that public data than the average 
organization, the data trust would actually grant equal access to 
players that were unequal in their technological prowess.
Solutions to this issue have ranged from selling this data for a price 
or partially walling it and only allowing access to some. 
This kind of clash between citizens, governments, and tech 
companies over how to protect, access, and manipulate user data 
is likely to intensify in the coming year. Across the world, we’re 
seeing a data localization trend start to take hold.
India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi mandated in October 2018 
that all non-Indian fintech companies operating within the country, 
like Mastercard and Visa, had to keep payment data on domestic 
transactions within the country. 
32
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The country is also working on a law that will localize all data 
produced in the country, including e-commerce and cloud data. 
These moves aren’t pure protectionism. They also provide Indian 
companies with a fighting chance to win over the country’s 
customers that are being aggressively pursued by tech companies 
from United States and China. While lobby groups that represent big 
tech, including FAMGA, are fighting against these laws, the Indian 
government has shown little sign that it will change its mind. 
In neighboring China, data localization is already the norm, with 
stringent regulations around companies across industries, from 
telecommunications to fintech.
With tech company data breaches and misuse in the spotlight, and 
more people recognizing the power that comes with owning mass 
user data, expect to see more push back around who gets to hold 
and own data in 2019.
33
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Smart buildings maximize  
comfort, wellness, and efficiency
34
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019We want our offices to be places where we can do our most 
productive work, from ergonomic chairs to the right type of lighting.
The problem is comfort is hard to define. No two people necessarily 
agree on what comfort looks or feels like. (Think co-workers 
disagreeing over the best temperature to set the thermostat.) In 
2019, expect to see the word “comfort” used as a metric more 
often, and to see increased effort to bring greater comfort to 
buildings and workplaces.
Rooms are warmer when there are more people in them, but are 
often cooled with the same settings regardless of occupancy. New 
sensors will track the number of people present at any given time 
and adjust aspects like heating, cooling, and lighting to match. In 
2018, Amazon-backed Ecobee released an occupancy sensor to 
track the number of people that are in a room and adjust HVAC 
systems accordingly.Whether it’s home offices or coworking 
spaces, we’re seeing a new emphasis on 
comfortable, intuitive office spaces .
35
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Envairo, on the other hand, uses sensors that take in data on 
factors like heat, carbon dioxide, and moisture to determine the 
number of people in a room. From there, HVAC systems are 
adjusted to match occupancy.
Occupancy metrics are also useful for energy efficiency.  
Buildings are not left wasting energy once people have left. 
Buildings will also begin to emphasize personalization. While 
sensors in different zones can gather data on larger areas, it’s 
much more difficult to get a data-driven understanding of what’s 
happening at each employee’s desk. And different weights,  
clothing styles, and preferences change how each person 
experiences their workplace. 
GreenMe’s Cubes are small enough to be placed on individual 
desks, and they measure parameters from lighting and temperature 
to air quality, noise level, and light flickering. In aggregate, this data 
feeds into a building monitoring and control system. From there, 
operators can come to a consensus on heating and cooling norms.
In addition, by providing employees with controls over HVAC 
systems, office workers can monitor how cold or warm they like 
their workplaces.
36
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Comfy, which was acquired by Siemens in June 2018, has created 
limited, occupant-facing controls that can be used with existing 
HVAC systems. The company installs sensors and IoT devices in 
buildings so that occupants can adjust temperature and lighting.
Many companies also crowdsource information on controls.
BuildingIQ’s app comes with a “Comfort” module, which allows 
tenants to notify the facilities team if an area is too hot or too cold. 
The module creates a heat map from this information and compares 
it with the building’s heating and cooling system settings.
Similarly, CrowdComfort allows occupants to send locations and 
images of issues detected in their workplace. They can also send 
in temperature control requests. CrowdControl describes this 
community as a “human sensor network.”
Why now for smart(er) buildings? Wellness, mental health, and 
productivity are all top-of-mind. And fancy tech offices and 
coworking spaces have made the workplace environment a new 
battleground for recruitment.
37
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Buses and logistics  
providers go green
38
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019This is likely why we’re seeing electrification come first for larger 
fleets of vehicles, often operated by governments and companies. 
Buses and trucks emit more toxic materials than the average 
vehicle. And with larger budgets, the move to electric vehicles — 
and the long-term financial payoff — can be an easier sell.
Buses, especially for school and public transit, will see increased 
electrification next year. Bus electrification circumvents some of 
the problems that an individual electric vehicle owner might face: 
routes are static and predictable, and infrastructure is easy to build 
out and plan for. And, just like electric vehicles, studies have shown 
that the elevated upfront costs eventually pay for themselves  
over time. 
Many school buses have operated on the same engines for the past 
several decades, with the Diesel Technology Group estimating that 
roughly 95% of school buses in the US still burn diesel fuel. Perhaps 
most importantly, school buses carry precious cargo who may be 
adversely affected by emissions — children.
In September 2018, electric bus maker Proterra raised a round of  
funding with participation from Daimler. Together, the two 
announced plans to work on electrifying Daimler’s line of school 
buses. While the duo haven’t announced any initial buyers, they have 
guaranteed that electric school buses will soon enter the market.
Convincing individual consumers to 
change out their conventional gas-powered 
cars for electric vehicles is a steep ask.  
It’s expensive, and owning an electric 
vehicle can still be inconvenient.39
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Estimates place school bus counts across the United States at 
480,000, making it the country’s largest form of mass transit. In 
White Plains, New York, electric buses got on the road in fall 2018. 
Each bus cost around $380K, much more than the $100K expense 
of traditional buses. 
But there are ways that these buses might be able to balance costs 
over the long-term. White Plains bus operator National Express 
partnered with New York utility Con Edison to figure out how to use 
these buses to help power the grid during the summer. This is a use 
case that is particular to school buses: with long stretches of idle 
time, including peak hours in the evening and all summer, they have 
the capacity to help balance the grid.
Public transportation buses are also getting electrified. In January 
2018, New York’s MTA began a pilot with Proterra and New Flyer to 
roll out ten electric buses across its fleet. The pilot also included 
plans to build out infrastructure for buses to charge in the future, 
including charging stations at warehouses.
Another broader vehicle demographic that will begin electrification 
in 2019 is trucks. Earlier this year, Volvo partnered with Greenlots, 
which builds electric vehicle charging infrastructure and 
management software, to build out infrastructure in warehouses  
in Southern California. 
40
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019
Across the trucking industry as well, greener vehicles are gaining 
traction. In May 2018, beer-maker Anheuser-Busch placed an order 
for 800 fuel cell-powered trucks from Nikola Motor Company. 
These trucks use hydrogen fuel to refuel, and can drive longer 
distances than electric vehicles. 
Coupled with the urgency of decreasing emissions and the long-
term lowered costs that come with electrification, expect to see 
other large fleets of vehicles go green in 2019. 
41
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019China sets the bar for  
social network innovation
42
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The company operates a video mashup app TikTok, which allows 
users to record videos, overlay them with music and filters, and 
share them with friends. 
$75B for a video app may seem like a lot, but the company is 
popular across the globe. After it acquired Shanghai-based rival 
Musical.ly in November 2017, it rebranded the company under 
its name. Musical.ly was popular in the West, while TikTok was 
popular in the East — together, they had millions of users. In July 
2018, Bytedance estimated that 500M users across the world were 
active users of its app every month.
To keep up, Facebook launched a similar app known as Lasso in 
November 2018. Just like Musical.ly, Lasso users can film short 
videos, edit them with soundtracks and filters, and share the results 
with friends.
As of October 2018, the world’ s most 
valuable private tech company is China’s 
Bytedance, valued at $75B.43
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019This isn’t the first time we’ve seen a major American tech  
company copy popular features piloted by Chinese companies. 
The face filters that are so ubiquitous now, on Snapchat and 
Instagram. The idea first came from popular Chinese photo  
booths from the early 2000s — in 2008, face filter app Meitu 
became operational.
In October 2018, Facebook-owned WhatsApp enabled the use of 
stickers. Stickers are already a big part of popular messaging apps 
from Asia, like Line and WeChat. Many of these companies even 
charge for more premium stickers — according to Japan’s Line’s 
filings when it went public two years ago, it made about $270M  
on stickers.
In the future, we expect to see more China-based social networking 
activity influence Western tech, especially as companies from  
China start to cross borders and gain market share with  
non-Chinese users. 
44
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Electric vehicle makers expand  
into lifestyle products and services
45
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019But electric vehicles also require a lot of time from their owners 
who must wait for their batteries to charge for anywhere from 30 
minutes to two hours. 
That’s a lot of idle time — and is sometimes the reason cited by 
conventional car owners for not buying an EV. Now electric vehicle 
companies are trying to turn this idle time into an asset.
China’s NioHouse couples charging stations with a host of 
activities. At the NioHouse, a user can visit the library, drop  
children off at daycare, cowork, and even visit a nap pod to rest  
while charging.
Nio has also partnered with fashion designer Hussein Chalayan 
to launch and sell a fashion line, Nio Extreme. The pieces in the 
line are inspired by Nio’s EP9, which it claims is the world’s fastest 
electric vehicle.
Buying an electric vehicle is an 
environmental choice for some  
and a luxury purchase for others.46
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Elon Musk has also teased the idea of rolling out similar lifestyle 
options at Tesla charging stations. 
Right now, Supercharger stations have small convenience stores 
and lounges. But the Tesla charger of the future might include a 
restaurant with a drive-in movie theater and waiters on roller skates, 
according to Musk. 
As electric vehicles inevitably overlap with the luxury vehicle 
market, many customers may be ready to buy into alternative 
lifestyles. And for electric vehicles to compete against traditional 
combustion engine vehicles, they need to sell everything — the 
luxury, the environmentalism, and the lifestyle. 
47
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Tech apprenticeships  
grow in popularity
48
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Meanwhile, students rack up thousands of dollars in debt. 
Tech companies are attempting to bridge the gap between 
academia and the career market. 
Companies like the Lambda School and Flatiron School offer 
courses to train students on exactly the skills they will need to 
get a job. These apprenticeships mostly focus on tech skills like 
computer science and coding. Training comes with the explicit goal 
of employment and students only need to pay their tuition once 
they’ve landed a job that pays them above a certain range.
These schools aren’t just reaching out to students. They’ve also 
partnered with tech companies who recruit from these more 
vocational-focused training programs. Lambda School partners 
with major technology companies to build out curriculums and set 
up post-graduation introductions. 
The tech industry moves fast. It’s not 
always easy to gain skills in college  
that employers are still looking for  
after graduation.49
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Big tech companies are also starting to offer their own internal 
apprenticeship programs. IBM, for example, takes in apprentices 
and trains them on the specific skills needed for roles that involve 
cybersecurity, data analytics, and product management within the 
company. Apprentices are all ages and come from a diverse range 
of backgrounds. 
So does this signal the end of college? Probably not. But for the tech 
savvy, apprenticeships are an emerging, more affordable option.
50
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Digital swag  
makes big money
51
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The entirety of that money came from in-game purchases,  
like skins. 
Skins change how your player looks, not how they play, and can be 
bought with V-bucks for the equivalent of $8 to $20. 
They’re so popular, they’re even bringing in partnerships. 
Early in November 2018, NFL partnered with Epic Games to add 
NFL skins to the game. They were taken off within a week, with 
many speculating that the addition might have sparked controversy 
at a time when the NFL is under scrutiny. However, the partnership’s 
short time frame might also be a part of the business model:  
the skins become limited edition and more valuable when  
they’re scarce. 
The craze around digital goods and collectibles is a trend that 
will continue into 2019. While these goods can’t be owned in the 
physical world, they come with clout, and offer personalization 
and in-game experiences to otherwise one-size-fits-all characters. 
They’re also just fun.
In July 2018, Epic Games’ free-to-
download game Fortnite hit over  
$1B in sales. 52
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Investors are betting on the rise of these goods. CryptoKitties, 
which is an Ethereum-based game that lets people buy, breed, 
and collect different types of rare digital cats, has raised $27M 
in funding from a star-studded list of backers, including Google 
Ventures, Andreessen Horowitz, and Union Square Ventures. 
CryptoKitties is using the notion of scarcity to its benefit. Limited 
edition first-generation cryptokitties go for high rates. In May 2018, 
a buyer purchased a cryptokitty, pictured below, for $140,000 worth 
of ether. CryptoKitties continues to make its kitties scarce. In 
February 2018, it capped the number of Fancy Cats, a type of digital 
kitten, thereby making them “limited edition.”
53
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019For individuals, digital collectibles open the door for personalized, 
immersive experiences. And for companies, digital collectibles  
are one way to offer a diverse range of experiences within  
their ecosystem.
Most importantly, users are willing to shell out for digital swag. 
54
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The new healthcare  
clinic is your home
55
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019In rural areas, hospitals and clinics are often many miles away. 
There aren’t always certified professionals available and patients 
often put off trips to the clinic if the issue doesn’t feel urgent. While 
telemedicine can solve some of these problems, tech startups in 
2019 will start to focus more on another distribution method: at-
home kits. 
Companies are launching home kits for everything from sequencing 
the microbiome to DNA testing to check for health risks. Most 
importantly, these companies are adapting best practices from 
other D2C (direct-to-consumer) companies, like enabling automatic 
refills and allowing for personalization.
The need is particularly urgent for stigmatized health services, 
like women’s reproductive health, which is regulated and limited in 
different parts of the world. Nurx, for example, sells birth control 
pills in states like Texas, where some areas have limited access to 
women’s reproductive health services. It connects customers with 
local physicians who are equipped with the credentials needed to 
write prescriptions. The company can also automatically refill and 
renew these prescriptions.
The lack of affordable, widely available 
medical care is a well-documented problem.56
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019Another perk of having in-home kits is that more data can be 
gathered when kits are used regularly at home. Quanovate’s 
Miracare, which helps women track their fertility cycles, sends 
customers a urine tracking device and analyzer. It collects 
information on changing fertility hormone levels and sends this 
information to an app. 
This data can then help personalize fertility predictions to match an 
individual’s cycle. 
These kits can help make services that may otherwise be expensive 
and hard-to-access more affordable.
57
14 Trends Shaping Tech In 2019The CB Insights platform 
has the underlying data 
included in this report
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR FREEWHERE IS ALL THIS DATA FROM?