Partners Connect 
event handbook 
Topic: Retail & Shopping 
Presenters: 
● Simon Balfe (UKI Agency Development 
Manager, Google) 
● Dearbhla McGuinness (UKI Account Manager, 
Google) 
NOV 
14
2017 You’re one step closer to 
finding new business. 
By signing up to host this Google Partners Connect event, you’ll have the 
opportunity to connect with prospective clients and turn them into new 
ones, showcasing your relationship with Google along the way. 
As you prepare to host, we’ve put together some tips and best practices 
to help ensure your event is a success. 
Have questions or need support? We’re here to help. Email your Google 
representative directly or reach out to partners-support@google.com. 
2
Table of contents 
●Setting up your event 
○ Setting up your event site /4 
○ Sample event details page /5 
●Promoting your event 
○ Using email /6    
●Hosting your event 
○ Sample programme /7 
○ Event best practices /8 
○ The event kit /9  
○ Technical best practices /10 
●After your event 
○ Managing your lead pipeline /11 
○ Setting up a pitch /12 IMAGE HERE 
Creating your event site 
12
3Info for your event site 
Date:  14/11/2017                                      Start time:  09:00 AM                                       End time:  10:00 AM 
Agenda Event date and timetable 
Start time:  09:00 AM       End time:  09:25 AM          Title:  Retail - Trends For 2018          Speaker:  Google 
Start time:  09:25 AM       End time:  09:35 AM          Title:  Up to you                                  Speaker:  You
Start time:  09:35 AM       End time:  10:00 AM          Title:  Coffee & Networking                Speaker:  [none] Event name:  Up to you                          URL:  connect-your-agency                              Capacity:  Up to you 
Description:  Join [your-agency] and Google to explore the challenges and opportunities facing the retail 
industry in 2018. See how customer education and buying habits are evolving, and learn the best practices 
that will help you stay ahead of the curve.  The event will kick off with a livestream from Google before 
handing over to [your-agency], a badged Google Partner agency, to help you get started. 
Venue:  Your agency or other space you’ve booked Promoting your 
event with email 
Customise this email template with your event 
information. Then, send it out to prospective 
clients to build awareness. 
We also suggest sending a day-prior reminder email 
to individuals who have registered on your custom 
web page. You can download this information here. IMAGE HERE 
New Message _   /   X 
To: [Prospect’s Email] 
Subject: Join us for a livestream event with Google on 14/11 
Hi [First Name], 
We’re partnering with Google to host a free event on Tuesday, November 14th that’s all 
about growing your business with retail & shopping campaigns. We’ll cover some tips and 
tricks on how to find new leads and make the most of your online marketing investment. 
We’d love for you to join us and invite anyone you think would benefit. 
What: Retail & Shopping Campaigns 
When: Tuesday, November 14 at 9am UTC 
Where: [Office Location] 
<YOUR LINK> RSVP Now <YOUR LINK> 
We hope to see you there. 
Sincerely, 
[Your Name] 
[Your Organization] 
Google Partner 
Send Sample Programme 
The sample programme on the right will help you structure 
your time with prospects. 
We recommend hosting your own presentation after 
Google’s live broadcast, as we plan to only cover the 
basics of getting your business online. 
In your presentation, we suggest covering the benefits of 
working with you and how to get started. 
Last, guests love 1-on-1 sessions with you and/or the 
opportunity to ask additional questions. We recommend 
setting aside extra time for this as well. 
Sample event programme (UTC) 
8:30a 
9:00a 
9:50a 
10:15a 
10:30a 
Networking and light refreshments 
Google live broadcast begins 
Google live broadcast ends, Partner 
presentation begins 
Q&A or individual breakout sessions 
Guests depart Event best practices 
To make sure the event runs smoothly on the day, we suggest you: 
● Leverage Google Partners resources to build a deck balancing insight and AdWords 
getting started basics (resources kit) 
● Test your equipment and sound before guests  arrive if you plan to use a presentation. 
● Setup your event room to encourage an informal setting with guests actively 
participating 
● Provide light snacks to encourage people to stick around and mingle Make an impression with your 
event goodie bag 
If you registered prior to October 31th and received five RSVPs on your custom web 
page, keep an eye out for this free event kit to arrive by November 7th. 
It contains Google Partners-branded pens, notebooks and tote bags to help you set the 
stage for your event. 
If you don’t receive your kit by November 7th, please email us directly at 
partners-support@google.com. 
Technical best 
practices 
To make sure the event runs smoothly on 
November 14th, we suggest you: 
● Test your equipment and sound before guests  
arrive by watching any HD YouTube video. 
● Use a large TV or projection screen to display 
our livestream presentation. 
● Watch the livestream at 1080p quality and in 
full-screen mode. 
● Provide free WiFi for your guests as a courtesy. 
Managing your lead 
pipeline 
Once the event is over, the events tool gives you a 
convenient way to manage your leads: 
● Log who attended and use that to follow up 
contextually. 
● Track who you’ve followed up with to make sure 
no one falls through the cracks. 
● Use “Status” to record which leads you’ve won, 
and which leads are worth following up with in 
the future. 
Setting up a pitch 
After the event, we suggest following up with your prospects 
within one business day. Write a note, like this sample on the 
right, adding a level of personalisation to make it meaningful. 
Your aim should be to schedule a time to discuss your 
prospect’s needs over the phone or in-person. 
Here are a few best practices that have proven successful: 
● Use industry-specific statistics from Think With 
Google’s data gallery to provide the most relevant 
information possible. 
● Present a customer success story of yours. 
● Include a photo of your team and reference material 
we covered during our broadcast (or in your own 
presentation). 
New Message _   /   X 
To: [Prospect’s Email] 
Subject: It was a pleasure hosting you at [Your Organization Name] 
Hi [First Name], 
We’re so glad you could join us this week for the Partners Connect session at our office. Our 
team greatly enjoyed meeting you and sharing a bit more context around the importance of 
using online video to find your next customers. 
Now that you have some background on video ads, we’d love to set-up some time to help 
your business make the most of your advertising budget.  
We can help you with: [List Company Capabilities here]. 
Thanks and we hope to hear from you soon. 
Cheers, 
[Your Name] 
[Your Organization Name] 
Google Partner 
Send 