DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER 
MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUPPresented by
Direct-to-consumer (D2C) brands have historically relied on performance-based digital advertising strategies. 
Many leverage social platforms to target audiences and unconventional business-to-consumer tactics to 
go “over the top” of traditional media channels to reach and acquire customers. eMarketer has curated this 
Roundup of articles, insights and interviews to understand the key trends in D2C marketing today. September 2019DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3 Sponsor Message 
4 Overview
5 D2C Brands Claim Another Victim by Accelerating Demise of Payless ShoeSource
7 Consumer Goods Brands Hope to Fend Off Amazon by Investing in D2C
9 Where are D2C Brands Investing Their Marketing Dollars?
11 How D2C Marketers Are Adapting to Changes at Facebook
13 As DTC Expands, The Search for Alternative Channels for DTC Begins in Earnest 
15 Traditional Retailers Invest in D2C Strategies: An Interview with Charlie Cole of Samsonite
17 How Jersey Mike’s and Mack Weldon Harness Their Loyalty Programs
19 About this RoundupDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     3
SPONSOR MESSAGE 
Customer acquisition is the lifeblood of any company. However, in the last few years,  
the cost of acquiring new customers has increased by more than 50 percent. This new 
reality requires marketers to fundamentally rethink their marketing funnels. No longer 
can top-of-funnel lead generation activities be siloed from bottom-of-the-funnel  
customer conversion drivers. 
In this new era, the marketing funnel must be viewed holistically, and through a  
performance-driven lens. PCH is sponsoring this Roundup because we understand  
the challenge of customer acquisition and the importance of marketing channel  
diversification in finding new customers and earning trust. 
Advertisers can access premium inventory across PCH’s entire portfolio of websites and 
apps through Publishers Clearing House Media, the digital advertising arm of PCH. PCH 
Media helps brands and performance marketers acquire new customers by offering  
creative and effective ways to engage with the PCH community.  DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     4
OVERVIEW
D2C brands have taken incumbents by surprise in 
part because of their unconventional marketing 
strategies that bypass much of the existing media 
and commerce supply chain. Traditional brands 
across virtually all segments of retail tend to run 
a marketing playbook predicated on mass media 
vehicles—usually TV—and owning or controlling retail 
distribution channels. Because D2C brands take their 
wares directly to consumers, their primary focus is 
bringing the right message to the right customers in 
a cost-effective manner.
The saying “necessity is the mother of invention” is one D2C 
brands internalized, resulting in their creative approaches 
to marketing. By relying on a combination of earned media, 
targeted digital ads and cheap inventory, many D2Cs were 
able to keep marketing costs to a minimum as they scaled 
their customer base. But they largely remain focused on 
direct-response advertising, keeping a close eye on customer 
acquisition costs while considering the lifetime value of a new 
customer. They religiously adhere to a test-and-learn approach 
that leverages the immediacy of digital data in order to shift ad 
budgets to the media channels and programs that drive sales.
According to Activate’s Seref Turkmenoglu, that’s why D2C brands 
“don’t necessarily have chief marketing officers, they have chief 
growth officers. It’s all about taking this marketing spend and 
moving it from an expense line to a ‘cost of goods sold’ line—in 
other words, seeing it as a real investment that will be tied directly 
to revenues, and then organizing the entire company around that. ”Echoing similar sentiments in the presentation “Fire Your CMO, ” 
LUMA Partners CEO Terry Kawaja said, “The way D2Cs approach 
advertising is fundamentally different. D2C brands know the 
lifetime value (LTV) of a customer and can thus calculate the 
bounty to pay for a qualified new customer, which is just 
customer acquisition (CAC) math. Accordingly, these brands 
treat advertising as a profit center, effectively moving it up the 
income statement from a discretionary expense to a cost of 
goods sold. ”
D2C brands have historically relied on performance-based 
digital advertising strategies. Many leverage social media to 
target audiences and direct response podcast ads to drive 
conversions. Even unconventional business-to-consumer tactics 
like content marketing are being used to go “over the top” of 
traditional media channels to reach and acquire customers. In 
this Roundup, you’ll uncover these trends and more.“It’s all about taking this marketing spend and moving it 
from an expense line to a ‘cost of goods sold’ line. ”
Seref T urkmenoglu  
Senior Partner, Activate
DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     5
D2C BRANDS CLAIM ANOTHER VICTIM BY ACCELERATING  
DEMISE OF PAYLESS SHOESOURCE
In February, Payless ShoeSource announced that 
it was seeking Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, 
with plans to close its 2,500 locations across North 
America. Following bankruptcies of other retail 
stalwarts from a bygone era, like Sears, Toys “R” Us 
and Mattress Firm, Payless’ demise doesn’t come as 
a shock. Instead, it is another cautionary tale of a 
retailer that failed to evolve its brand.
Payless trafficked in commodity footwear with a low-price value 
proposition, but it committed many of the same sins as other 
victims of the so-called “retail apocalypse” by incurring too 
much debt, wielding too large a store footprint and struggling to 
keep pace with consumer trends.
These factors were exacerbated in recent years by the rise of 
formidable digital competitors that squeezed the retailer from 
both ends. And Payless could never quite get its footing to 
build a functional ecommerce destination that actually attracts 
customers. While other brands used digital channels to grow, 
Payless was increasingly reliant on in-store foot traffic, which 
became harder and harder for a retailer known for its presence 
in malls.
Meanwhile, Amazon and Zappos.com began to commandeer the 
online shoe market—at least for nonspecialty footwear. If you 
needed a basic pair of sneakers, boots or Oxfords, you might 
start your shopping journey there.For those with more specialized tastes, but still looking for 
an attractive price point, a wave of direct-to-consumer (D2C) 
brands—Allbirds, Bucketfeet, Greats, M.Gemi, Rothy’s and 
Toms—has cropped up in recent years to carve out their 
respective niches of the footwear market. Made from recycled 
plastic or using limited edition artists’ designs, each brand 
possesses a modern and differentiated take on foot fashion, a 
compelling brand story and ethos—and reasonable price points 
“to boot. ”
It’s no wonder that, according to a study by Feedvisor and 
Morning Consult, D2C brands rank as the most pressing 
ecommerce challenge for brands (27%), even outpacing shipping 
costs (21%) and the threat of Amazon (20%).
Payless took notice of the D2C invasion, and in what you could 
now argue was the company’s final Hail Mary pass to stave 
off bankruptcy, tried a stunt straight from the D2C marketing 
playbook. Payless hosted a “pop marketing” event in the heat 
of the 2018 holiday season, in which the company adorned 
a vacated storefront in Santa Monica with the hip-sounding 
“Palessi” moniker, flashy displays and dozens of social media 
influencers in attendance, ostensibly for the launch of a hot new 
luxury brand.
Payless offered the same discount shoes at severely inflated 
prices under the fake brand to see whether customers would 
pay more for an experience with greater cachet—which of DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     6
—CONTINUED
course they did, as some shelled out up to $600 for a pair. 
When “Palessi” pulled back the curtain to reveal these were the 
same styles that could be bought at Payless, fashion-conscious 
customers couldn’t believe their eyes. In this instance, the legacy 
retail brand used a clever tactic designed to generate earned 
media and attract attention from the social media crowd, doing 
so by highlighting its value—stylish shoes at affordable prices—
much like D2C brands.Credit for trying, but it was too little too late. A long-declining 
brand can’t be revived overnight, and while its low-cost value 
proposition has an audience, the competition has gotten too 
fierce. Product differentiation and a brand that customers care 
about is the likeliest path to survival in the D2C era, and Payless 
simply fell short.
Let this be a lesson to other legacy brands feeling the heat from 
digital natives. Turnarounds can happen, but they’ve got to start 
by giving the people what they want.% of respondents,  Sep 2018What Is the Biggest Ecommerce Challenge Facing US
Brands?
Direct-to-consumer 
competitors
27%
Shipping and 
storage costs
21%Amazon's growing
inﬂuence
20%Counterfeit 
products
11%Private-label 
products
10%Other
12%
Note: numbers ma y not add up to 100% due to r ounding
Source: F eedvisor , "Brands & Amazon: Insights,  Opportunities,  and
Concerns in the Age of E-Commer ce" conducted by  Morning Consult,  Jan
23, 2019
244787 www .eMarketer.comDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     7
CONSUMER GOODS BRANDS HOPE TO FEND OFF AMAZON BY  
INVESTING IN D2C
As retail store closures continue at an alarming rate, 
consumer goods brands have fewer channels to 
sell their products outside of retail and ecommerce 
behemoths like Amazon, Walmart and Costco. This 
reality has many in the consumer goods industry 
looking to sidestep retail and online marketplaces 
altogether by selling to their customers directly.
An overwhelming 99% of consumer goods leaders surveyed 
by Salesforce in February 2019 said that they were investing in 
direct-to-consumer (D2C) strategies of some kind, leaving 1% 
who said it was not a priority.
In the current retail and ecommerce climate, it’s no surprise that 
brands are seeking alternatives to the limited options they have 
now. Some 42% of consumer goods leaders polled said the 
challenges of brick-and-mortar retailers were negatively affecting 
their business. This is perhaps because the same companies that 
are putting smaller retailers out of business also sell private-
label brands online and in-store—leaving consumer goods 
brands not only with fewer options, but increased competition 
within search results and on the shelves next to them.
Nearly half of consumer goods leaders said that retailers’ private-
label products were seen as a threat to their business, Salesforce 
found. Amazon in particular has hundreds of private-label brands 
across virtually every product category, according to a March 2019 
study by ecommerce research firm Marketplace Pulse.% of total and number of br andsShare of Amazon's Private-Label Products , by Product 
Category , March 2019
Clothing,  shoes & jewelry
Home & kitchen
Grocery & gourmet food
Health & household
Sports & outdoor
Electronics
Beauty & personal care
Industrial & scientiﬁc
Baby
Tools & home improvement
Ofﬁce products
Pet supplies
Video games
Patio, lawn & accessories
Automotive
Cellphones & accessories
Appliances
Musical instruments
Toys & games
Arts, crafts & sewing% of total
47.7%
11.1%
8.4%
8.0%
5.7%
3.3%
2.9%
2.9%
2.6%
2.4%
1.5%
0.9%
0.6%
0.5%
0.4%
0.4%
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%Number of brands
188
72
56
110
71
18
51
36
25
17
13
19
4
8
7
6
7
2
9
3
Note: numbers ma y not add up to 100% due to r ounding
Source: Mark etplace Pulse,  "Amazon Private Label Br ands.," Mar ch 18,
2019
246226 www .eMarketer.comDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     8
—CONTINUED
In the Salesforce survey, 51% of respondents saw Amazon’s 
Marketplace (where products are purchased through Amazon, 
rather than purchased by Amazon at wholesale cost) as a critical 
threat, and 68% believed that consumers were more loyal to 
Amazon than their own brands.
Traditional consumer goods brands face another hurdle: 
competition from native D2C brands that have already won over 
a large online audience. US brands said that D2C competitors 
were a bigger ecommerce challenge than private-label brands 
and Amazon’s growing influence, according to a September 2018 
survey conducted by Feedvisor and Morning Consult.For some larger consumer goods companies, the idea of 
investing in a D2C strategy has manifested as acquisitions of the 
successful startups that disrupt their industry. The purchase of 
razor company Harry’s by Schick owner Edgewell Personal Care 
in May 2019 evokes the age-old business adage: If you can’t beat 
them, acquire them.
D2C competitors [are] a bigger ecommerce challenge than private-
label brands and Amazon’s growing influence, US brands say.DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     9
WHERE ARE D2C BRANDS INVESTING THEIR MARKETING DOLLARS?
Direct-to-consumer (D2C) companies continue to 
disrupt traditional retail, and taking note of their 
marketing investment strategies might benefit 
traditional retailers that see these digitally-native 
newborns as competition.
According to a February 2019 survey from customer acquisition 
company CommerceNext, sponsored by Oracle, more than 
three-quarters of D2C digital retailers indicated that their 2019 
ecommerce marketing budgets were higher than last year’s. By 
contrast, 60% of traditional retailers said they were increasing 
their ecommerce marketing budgets this year.“D2C brands have certain advantages over traditional retailers 
when it comes to marketing spend, ” said Andrew Lipsman, 
eMarketer principal analyst. “They are typically subsidized by 
venture money with a mandate to grow quickly, while many 
traditional retailers are public companies that need to keep a 
close eye on the bottom line. ”
So what are D2C marketers doing with this money?
Last year, 93% of D2C digital retailers in North America said 
acquisition marketing was their leading ecommerce marketing 
investment, according to findings from CommerceNext. Other 
investment priorities included retention and loyalty marketing 
(44%), brand marketing (33%), omnichannel (30%) and 
personalization (26%).
Similarly, traditional retailers said that acquisition marketing 
and retention/loyalty were their largest ecommerce marketing 
investment priorities in 2018, at 81% and 43%, respectively. 
However, traditional retailers prioritized promotions and mobile 
optimization over D2C brands, pushing omnichannel and 
personalization efforts lower on their list of priorities.
“ Although there are similarities in their approaches to marketing, 
the subtle differences can be revealing, ” Lipsman said. 
“Traditional retailers are used to pushing promotions, which 
might make the sale today but does little to encourage long-
term brand loyalty. D2Cs appear more focused on the overall 
customer experience, which has been a big part of their early 
success and a reason their customers keep coming back. ”% of respondentsChange in Ecommerce Marketing Budget in 2019*
According to Direct-to-Consumer Digital Retailers in
North America,  Feb 2019
Increase
78%Same budget
14%Decrease
7%
Note: *vs.  2018; numbers ma y not add up to 100% due to ro unding
Source: Commer ceNe xt, "How Leading Retailers and Direct-to-Consumer
Brands Are Investing in Digital" sponsored by  Oracle, May 30, 2019
247609 www .eMarketer.comDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     10
—CONTINUED
Providing that well-rounded customer experience starts with 
knowing how to properly reach your consumers. And research 
from marketing cloud company Yotpo and consumer intelligence 
platform Toluna suggests that D2Cs’ investment in customer 
acquisition initiatives is, indeed, money well spent.
April 2019 polling from Yotpo found that the leading customer 
acquisition channels for D2Cs included social media, SEO 
and direct traffic. And in a March 2019 survey from Toluna, US 
internet users said they were most likely to hear about the first 
D2C brand they purchased from via social media ads, at 34.6%. 
Online search was the second most popular channel, at 24.8%.
That being said, D2Cs’ investment in social media advertising 
and SEO is paying off, as nearly six in 10 US internet users were 
pushed to purchase after first encountering a D2C brand via 
these channels, per the Toluna research. For traditional retailers 
looking to keep up, mirroring a D2C marketing approach and 
knowing how and where to reach potential consumers is the first 
step in engaging more return purchasers.Providing [a] well-rounded 
customer experience starts with 
knowing how to properly reach 
your consumers.% of respondents,  March 2019How Did US Internet Users Hear About the First
Direct-to-Consumer (D2C) Brand They Bought?
Ad on social media
34.6%
Online search
24.8%Word of mouth
16.4%Ad on general 
news or 
information 
website
14.3%Out of home
6.5%Other
3.5%
Note: n=896 ages 18+; among internet users who have pur chased a D2C
brand; numbers ma y not add up to 100% due to r ounding
Source: Toluna,  "D2C Surve y," Mar ch 6, 2019
247171 www .eMarketer.comDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     11
HOW D2C MARKETERS ARE ADAPTING TO CHANGES AT FACEBOOK
Direct-to-consumer (D2C) brands have traditionally 
relied on Facebook for cost-effective, performance-
based marketing. But with climbing rates and 
uncertainty surrounding the roll back of Facebook’s 
ad-targeting features, D2C marketers have started 
diversifying their advertising strategy.
Investing in social was crucial in the rise of D2C brands. According 
to a March 2019 survey conducted by consumer insights firm 
Toluna, 34.6% of US internet users who purchased something 
from a D2C brand were first exposed via a social media ad.
Facebook is still the No. 1 platform for new brands to reach 
a large audience, according to Fabian Seelbach, CMO of D2C 
skin care brand Curology. After branded search on Google, he 
recommends that startups look to Facebook when setting up a 
marketing strategy. However, he warns against becoming overly 
reliant on the platform.
“[Facebook] is great, but it has its limitations, ” Seelbach said. “ And 
it’s important to create a healthy mix of unbranded search, various 
social platforms and other channels like connected TV. You have 
to be able to shift very quickly when there are difficulties with the 
Facebook algorithm or changes on the platform. ”
While it’s the largest social network, Facebook is also appealing 
for its advanced targeting. We forecast that Facebook will have “It’s important to create a healthy mix of unbranded 
search, various social platforms and other channels like 
connected TV. ”
Fabian Seelbach  
CMO, Curology
DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     12
—CONTINUED
171.5 million monthly active users on its platform in 2019, far 
exceeding that of any other network. Instagram ads can be 
purchased on the same interface as Facebook ads, making it a 
one-stop shop to reach social media’s two largest audiences.
Even if targeting becomes less effective, as long as users remain 
on the platform, there will be creative ways to reach them.
D2C fashion company Betabrand said it often receives 
thousands of comments on its Facebook ads, and hopes to get 
extra mileage out of each impression by engaging with potential 
customers firsthand.
“We noticed that we were getting a lot of comments on ads, and 
we saw patterns where people were talking about the products 
in ways that weren’t true, ” said Douglas Hoggatt, vice president 
of digital marketing at Betabrand. “We needed to reply to these 
comments and start a dialogue with our customers. That’s what 
we did, and we realized that it started a conversation about our 
products before anyone even got to our website. ”
Toluna data shows that this kind of marketing does work. When 
asked how positive user comments on social media affected 
consumers’ behavior or perception toward a brand, more than 
half of US internet users said it helped them remember the 
brand, while just under half said it made them more likely to 
purchase their products.For Betabrand, this creative approach to Facebook marketing 
helped turn negative comments into positive ones.
“We noted that some of the sentiment in our comments could 
be very negative, and they would feed on each other, ” Hoggatt 
said. “We went in and helped steer that conversation. ”
% of respondents,  March 2019How Do Positive User Comments on Social Media
Affect US Internet Users' Perceptions of
Direct-to-Consumer (D2C) Brands?
Will likely remember the brand or recognize it when I see ad s
52.9%
More likely to purchase from that brand in the future
48.8%
Will likely think that the brand is leader in their respective
industry
32.7%
Will likely bring up the brand in conversation with friends an d
family
23.8%
Won't affect behavior towards the brand
12.3%
Note: n=896 ages 18+; among internet users who have pur chased a D2C
brand
Source: Toluna,  "D2C Surve y," Mar ch 6, 2019
247172 www .eMarketer.comDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:    13AS DTC EXPANDS, THE SEARCH FOR ALTERNATIVE CHANNELS 
FOR DTC BEGINS IN EARNEST 
This post was contributed and sponsored by PCH.
Marketing has become transfixed by insurgent DTC 
brands and their potent, disruptive methodology 
for acquiring and retaining loyal customers through 
digital media. That methodology, and the culture of 
accountability that powers it, has emerged as the new 
imperative for marketers of all scales and disciplines.
The hype is justified. DTC represents a real and lasting 
transformation in how companies approach growth in the digital 
age. Large social platforms and other premium digital environments 
now offer companies a way to message directly to addressable 
segments of users, and do it when they are highly engaged in 
media. Digitally native DTC brands have shown that taking a 
sophisticated, performance-driven approach to digital media can 
transform any industry. Following the strength of their example, 
“DTC” has become shorthand for a marketing playbook centered 
on performance, efficiency and accountability—and that playbook is 
hardly limited to brands we would today describe as DTC. 
Acquiring customers and keeping them is the key. In spite of the 
wide diversity between products, every DTC company is all-in 
on efficient customer acquisition, and so too is every company 
looking to adopt the DTC’s performance ethos. There’s more 
pressure than ever on marketers to deploy media budgets in a way 
that maximizes ROAS, delivers performance and converts into to 
lifetime value. That’s true for many brands, where the customers 
they pay to acquire can only become profitable if they remain 
engaged long term. 
DTCs are leading the entire marketing discipline into an arms race 
for customer acquisition, and we’re seeing its impacts across every 
corner of the marketing ecosystem.The Search for a Viable Alternative to Social 
The overwhelming beneficiaries of this arms race in performance-
driven marketing dollars have been social platforms. They’ve 
provided an environment well-suited to the needs of a lean, 
customer acquisition-focused brand: barriers to entry are low, 
audience scale is massive, engagement is higher than average and 
deterministic targeting is baked in. 
This dynamic is starting to change. Performance-driven marketers 
are rapidly approaching a saturation point with social, where 
fierce competition and diminishing returns are leading many 
performance marketers to explore alternatives. But there aren’t 
many viable options out there. 
Commerce companies are the largest force making headlines 
in this area right now. They have the scale, identity and high-
intent purchase data to rival social platforms. But unlike social, 
commerce companies represent a more difficult competitive 
dynamic for DTCs seeking to build and retain their customer 
relationship and own it as a brand.
That leaves a white space for a real contender, but it’s a difficult 
space to fill. Any serious alternative channel for performance 
marketing must provide competitive audience scale, precise 
targeting, brand-safe inventory and measurement against 
performance outcomes, all within an engaging environment that 
compels the user toward action and is sticky enough to keep those 
users coming back. 
—Steve Bagdasarian, Assistant Vice President and General 
Manager, Publishers Clearing House MediaAcquire new customers with  
Publishers Clearing House
Qualified Leads • App Downloads • Email Opt-ins  
Co-Branded Sponsorships • Private Marketplace
~ $1B
Products Sold Per Yearavg
Per Session8min 4X
Conversion Rates
75%
Completion Rate for Videovs. industry average
PCHPublishers
Clearing
House
media.pch.comAdvertising Solutions 
for Performance MarketersDIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     15
TRADITIONAL RETAILERS INVEST IN D2C STRATEGIES:  
AN INTERVIEW WITH CHARLIE COLE OF SAMSONITE
Direct-to-consumer (D2C) brands thrive on their 
abilities to build strong customer relationships, 
optimize data and identify the unmet needs of modern 
customers. More and more, brands see these digital 
natives as a threat.
According to a February 2019 survey from customer acquisition 
company CommerceNext, 52% of digital retailers in North 
America were dissatisfied with their ability to achieve a single 
view of the customer last year, noting “unified customer 
data” performed below their expectations. For this reason, 
respondents planned to increase their investments most in 
customer data platforms and personalization technology, with 
hopes of making the customer experience more relevant.
To stay ahead of the game, some legacy brands are investing in 
D2C strategies—like merged companies Samsonite and Tumi, 
who are taking data optimization and personalization tactics 
straight from the D2C playbook. Samsonite, the world’s largest 
luggage company, acquired luxe-luggage brand Tumi in 2016. 
This union solidified Samsonite’s place in the upscale market 
and allowed Tumi to expand internationally. Now the brands 
have their sights set on transforming the digital travel space.
We spoke with the Charlie Cole, chief digital officer at Samsonite, 
about replicating a D2C model, prioritizing personalization and 
the benefits of being channel-agnostic.% of respondents,  Feb 2019How Will Marketing Departments at Digital Retailers
in North America Invest in Select Emerging
Technologies in 2019?
Visual search
16% 35% 49%
AR/VR
15% 17%5% 63%
Increase in investment
Same level of investmentDecrease in investment
No investment
Note: vs.  in 2018
Source: Commer ceNe xt, "How Leading Retailers and Direct-to-Consumer
Brands Are Investing in Digital" sponsored by  Oracle, May 30, 2019
247608 www .eMarketer.comCustomer data platform
65% 25% 1% 9%
Personalization technology
52% 22% 2% 24%
Alternative payments
47% 30% 3% 20%
Chatbots & other AI for customer service
45% 22% 2% 31%
Programmatic TV
34% 17% 2% 47%
Voice-enabled search
13% 22% 3% 62%DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     16
—CONTINUED
What is the most appealing aspect of a D2C model, and how are 
you attempting to replicate that?
The ultimate benefit of having a direct-to-consumer model is 
the pure, unvarnished relationship you have with the consumer.  
That brings with it a number of benefits: data, real-time feedback 
and, more importantly, trust with the brand.  When selling 
through other folks, you have some dilution in data, but you also 
have a level of dilution with the relationship itself.
We’re attempting to replicate that model by understanding 
customer needs in a way we could never achieve if we worked 
exclusively through third parties. This becomes a combination of 
conversations directly with consumers and the use of predictive 
data to optimize on a grand scale.
What is the benefit of a customer data platform for Samsonite 
and Tumi, and how does it help with bettering your 
personalization efforts?
We have more data on consumers purchasing travel products 
than probably anyone on Earth.  If we’ve learned anything from 
the success of Amazon, Netflix, Uber (although their success 
is not our kind of success because of the cash burn needed), 
having data that you can use as the fabric for your predictive 
marketing and personalization is a massive advantage—if it’s 
done well and done in a way that respects user privacy.
In what ways might being a traditional brand benefit the 
adoption of a D2C strategy?For traditional brands taking on some of the characteristics 
of a D2C company, the greatest benefit is that they have been 
investing in a unified customer view since day one. They don’t 
have data silos. They also have a more holistic view of the 
many marketing channels. And they have a big-picture view of 
everything, from brand marketing to performance marketing—
they’re channel-agnostic.
In what ways might it hinder D2C adoption?
We shouldn’t forget that digitally native brands are typically 
private companies with venture capital backers. They face a 
different set of realities compared with mature companies, 
traditional retailers, wholesalers or brick-and-mortar-first brands 
(who often must first please shareholders with profits). They 
have a different set of growth goals and internal stakeholders 
to please—and to not mince any words: D2Cs get to burn a lot 
of money. For some traditional brands, it’s not feasible to do a 
total overhaul of their marketing stack to unify customer data, at 
least not all at once. They aren’t able to respond as nimbly as D2C 
brands because of the profit expectations their shareholders have.
What advice would you give other brands who are thinking of 
investing in a D2C strategy?
You can’t fake it. You are competing against brands that have 
carte blanche to burn tens of millions—if not hundreds of 
millions of dollars. If you want to compete, you may have to 
change your definitions of near-term success to allow for long-
term viability.DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     17
HOW JERSEY MIKE’S AND MACK WELDON HARNESS THEIR  
LOYALTY PROGRAMS
Loyalty marketing goes beyond loyalty programs, 
but they are still an important part of the customer 
experience and a vital channel for keeping customers 
engaged and spending.
According to November 2018 polling by YouGov, 64% of US 
internet users are members of some type of loyalty program. 
Women were more likely to be members than men, and chances 
of membership tended to rise with age and household income. 
Still, a solid majority of adults ages 25 and older said they were 
loyalty program members.
The same survey found that loyalty program members 35 
and older were most commonly members of supermarket 
loyalty programs. Those under 35 were more likely to report 
membership in general retail programs, including online. Both 
of those categories, along with pharmacy loyalty programs, 
were popular with at least two in five loyalty members across all 
age groups.
Loyalty programs often involve points or other rewards for credit 
card spending. Coupon code tracking firm CouponFollow found 
that more than a third of internet users polled in May 2019 had 
a card with reward points. Smaller shares had credit cards that 
earned retail rewards, airline miles, gas points or other travel-
related points.“Marketers’ understanding of the customer journey doesn’t 
end at the conversion, ” said Nicole Perrin, eMarketer principal 
analyst and author of our “Customer Experience 2019—Loyalty 
Marketing” report. “It’s important to investigate how their 
customers want to reconnect after a purchase, whether that’s 
to get help, to make a return or to research another purchase. 
This can inform what type of loyalty program communication is 
best for members. User research and voice-of-customer data are 
also key to understanding what kinds of rewards or membership 
benefits the brand’s customers actually want. ”
For this report, we spoke with several industry experts about 
their own loyalty programs and how they came to fruition. 
Here’s what they said:
Through our text message program, we ask people what they 
want out of our loyalty program, and the overwhelming majority 
of our customers said, “We want free subs. That’s what we want. ”
Our loyalty program has been pretty successful. Right now, 
we’re averaging about 30,000 sign-ups per week, and we 
currently have about 11 million members. On any given Rich Hope  
CMO, Jersey Mike’s
DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     18
—CONTINUED
week, between 45% and 47% of our sales comes through the 
loyalty program.
The gauge for an effective loyalty program is 20% of your sales. 
If 20% of your sales comes through a loyalty program from your 
most loyal customers, that’s considered successful. We’re well 
beyond the barometer for what makes a program successful, so 
we haven’t really changed it much, because we feel like we’re 
giving the consumer what they want, and that’s free product for 
coming in frequently.
The only change that we’re considering right now—that we did 
once for a promotional period—is letting customers earn points 
by purchasing items besides subs, like desserts, chips and drinks. 
Right now, customers earn points only for sub purchases. We’re 
considering adding these additional items to the program on the 
point-earning side, but continuing redemption for subs only.
Instead of building out a new subscription program, which has 
inventory and a lot more logistical challenges, we set our sales 
goal of creating a loyalty program. We looked at some third 
parties and chose to keep it in-house, after investigation research 
and focus groups with our customers. It took about nine months 
to confirm that the structure of a loyalty program, as we had been thinking about it and evolving it, was something that we 
really wanted to go forward with. Then we launched Weldon Blue 
in November 2017 .
So, your first purchase gets you into the Weldon Blue loyalty 
program with Level 1 status, which gives you free shipping 
on every order. Now, free shipping is usually only on orders 
over $50—and for anything less than $50, it’s $2.50. It’s not a 
big hurdle, or a huge benefit. But what we found was some 
customers were holding off on buying a new product or a new 
color of underwear, or anything new, because they were either 
waiting to have a shopping cart of more than $50 to get the free 
shipping, or to have more than a $100 or $200, which would get 
them our Savings Meter discounts. With that, any order outside 
of the loyalty program rewards you: If you spend $100, you get 
10% off. If you spend $200, you get 20% off.
We think shopping should be simple and straightforward. If you 
want it, you should be able to get a good deal then and there. 
So, we remove the free shipping hurdle after a customer has 
placed their first order. And once you spend a total of $200, then 
you lock in that top-tier 20% discount for a full year. Now we 
see that people are no longer waiting to buy the newest pair of 
sweatpants until they’re ready to load up on some t-shirts and 
socks as well, because they’re in the loyalty program. They’re 
getting the maximum discount, and they don’t have to bulk up 
their shopping cart to do so.Brian Fesen 
Vice President of Performance Marketing, 
Mack Weldon (a direct-to-consumer men’s 
clothing brand)
DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER MARKETING TRENDS ROUNDUP  SPONSORED BY:     19
ABOUT THIS ROUNDUP
Read Next
Direct-to-Consumer Brands 2019: How Digital Natives Are Disrupting Traditional Brands and Retailers
Advanced Marketing Attribution: A Two-Part Series on Making Holistic Attribution Work 
Watch Next
On-Demand, Meet the Analyst Webinar: Direct-to-Consumer Brands
Listen Next
Podcast: CommerceNext’s Scott Silverman Talks D2C Brands’ Digital Investments
Start your day with info you can trust and data you can use. Subscribe to the eMarketer Daily Newsletter   
for our latest articles, videos and podcasts.
Contributors and Production
Danielle Drolet Senior Editor & Program Director, Content Studio
Dana Hill Director of Production
Stephanie Meyer  Senior Production Artist
Adrienne Skinner   Senior Sales Director, Advertising SalesInquire about your subscription at sales@emarketer.com or give us a call at 1-800-405-0844.Your one-stop-shop for digital intelligence
emarketer.com/corporate/proHome to all eMarketer research, eMarketer PRO connects you to powerful 
data and analysis on nearly every digital topic. Request a quote today.
