 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Product Management Tools, Techniques & Roadmaps  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for improving 
your product management capabilities  and for building product 
roadmaps that guide development resources.  
 
 
Read this brief 9-page report to learn:  
 
 Importance of Product Management  
 Product Management Definition  
 The Product Lifecycle Stages  
 Product Management vs. Product Mark eting  
 Product Management Roles & Responsibilities  
 Product Management Tools & Techniques  
 Product Roadmap  Description  
 Benefits of Product Roadmaps  
 Implementing a Product Roadmap  
 
 
Read this report to learn how to make prod uct management a core 
competenc e that drives competitive advantages in your marketplace  and 
to organize product development initiatives, schedule product feature 
releases, and create a product roadmap that aligns with your target 
market segments.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
Importance of Product Management      3  
 
Product Management Definition       3  
 
The Product Lifecycle Stages       4  
 
Product Management vs. Product Marketing     5  
 
Product Management Roles       5  
 
Product Management Tools &  Techniques     6  
 
What is a Product Roadmap       7  
 
Benefits of Product Roadmaps       7  
 
Implementing a Product Roadmap      8 
 
Conclusion          9 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Importance of Product Management  
Product Management Defined    
 
 
 
 
Being market -driven requires organizations to build a strong product 
management capability. Most organizations struggle to create a role in 
their business that is exclusively geared towards listening to their 
market. Those who do, gain a better understandi ng of what drives 
VALUE, and incorporate that insight into the product development 
process.  
 
In a mid -sized organization, it is the job of the CEO to take feedback 
from each department and drive the product development process. 
Unfortunately, most CEOs ar e so busy with meetings, fire fighting, 
purchasing, and other important business issues, that they don’t leave 
time to adequately manage product development. This results in many 
problems.  
 
One approach that is working well for mid -sized enterprises is to  
introduce a Product Management business leader. This change in 
organizational structure relieves much of the pressure on the CEO 
related to product development, and provides an internal representative 
for customer & prospects.  
 
If you are struggling to m ake sales, having problems with time -to-
market, or need to improve profitability, strongly consider revamping 
your product management infrastructure.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Product Management is an organizational function dealing with the 
product planning, development, and marketing, for all product lines, at 
all stages of the product lifecycle.  
 
Essentially, the role of Product Management is to analyze & identify 
market pro blems, quantify opportunity size, and determine risks & 
costs, to provide business cases to senior management for decision -
making. Once approval is given, Product Management is responsible for 
building the right product for the market, and supporting sales  in their 
efforts.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Product Lifecycle Stages   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stage 1: Development  - this is the most costly stage of the 
cycle as there are no revenues to support development efforts. 
Losses occur in the short -term, as precious resources are 
allocated to development efforts.  
 Stage 2: Introduction  - losses continue in this stage due to  
high costs and low revenues. There is little or no competition and 
demand needs to be g enerated. Customers need to be “sold” on 
trying the new product.  
 Stage 3: Growth  - costs reduced from economies of scale, sales 
volume increases significantly, and pro fits are earned. 
Competitors begin to develop competing products while prices 
are at their maximum.  
 Stage 4: Maturity  - costs are relatively low as the need to 
generate demand has decreased; sales volumes peak, 
competition starts to heat up. Prices drop b ased on competitive 
pricing, mergers & acquisitions occur, and brand & feature 
differentiation becomes more important. This is usually the most 
profitable phase of the lifecycle.  
 Stage 5: Decline/Stability  - sales volumes level off or begin to 
decline as competitors chip away at market share. Prices 
diminish and production & distribution efficiency become top 
drivers of profitability.  
 
 
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Product Management vs. Product Marketing  
Product Management Roles   
 
   
 
 
Product Management  Product Marketing  
Product Planning & Design  Sales Support & Collateral  
Functional Requirements  Market Needs & Problems  
Product Lifecycle Management  Product Messaging  
Product Portfolio Management  Product Promotion, PR, etc  
Product Differentiation  Product Positioning  
Sales &  Service Training  Outbound Marketing Efforts  
Analyst Briefs & Keynote Talks  Tradeshow/event Facilitation  
Product Requirements Doc.  Market Requirements Doc.  
Product Development  Product Launch  
Win/Loss & Profit Analysis  Competitive Analysis  
User Personas & Use Cases  Lead Generation Activities  
Technology Assessments  Channel Devel opment   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
In “Crossing the Chasm ”, Geoffrey Moore defines and recommends two 
separate positions: “A product manager is a member of either the 
marketing organization or the development organization who is 
responsible for  ensuring that a product gets created, tested, and 
shipped on schedule and meeting specifications. It is a highly 
INTERNALLY FOCUSED job, bridging the marketing and development 
organizations, and requiring a HIGH DEGREE OF TECHNICAL 
COMPETENCE and project management experience. A product marketing 
manager is always a member of the marketing organization, never of 
the development group, and is responsible for bringing the product to 
the marketplace and to the distribution organization. It is a HIGHLY 
EXTERNA LLY FOCUSED job.”     
  
Be sure to differentiate between Product Management and Product 
Marketing, as these roles require much different skill sets. Use our 
Product Management Director Job Description  and Product 
Marketing Manager Job Description  for help.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Product Management Tools & Techn iques   
 
 
 
 
1. Understand Distinctive Competence : determine what makes 
your firm stand out. Use our Product Management Maturity 
Assessment  and conduct an internal SWOT Analysis  to 
document strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. 
Evaluate win/loss reports, operational product metrics, and 
market share statistics.  
 
2. Target Market Analysis : read our report on Market 
Segmentation, Targeting, & Positioning  to start analyzing 
your market segments. Use our Market Segmentation Tool  to 
analyze  the size of your market and understand prospective 
client issues. Use this information to build a product Business 
Case .  
 
3. Determine Market Requirements : conduct research and 
survey customers and prospects to identify opportunities for 
product development. Document each opportunity with a 
Product Development Charter  and present to senior 
management for approval to allocate more resources. Complete 
Market Requirements Document  and Product 
Requirements Document .  
 
4. Product Development : create Product Development 
Schedule , Feature List Priority Analysis , and Product 
Sanity -Check  to document development effor ts. Reprioritize and 
sanity -check throughout the process.  
 
5. Product Marketing : use our Product Launch Checklist  to 
organize your product marketing campaign. Followin g is a list of 
other helpful tools for managing this process:  
 
 Competitive  Product Positioning Map   
 Customer Profile Template   
 Case Study Template  
 Feature, Advantage, Benefit Tool  
 SPIN Selling Questions Tool  
 Competitive Analysis Tool  
 Product Positioning Tool   
 Sales Script Template  
 Sales Presentation Template   
 Sales Proposal Template     
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
What is a Product Roadmap   
 
 
 
 
A product roadmap is a management communication document that 
outlines market segments, estimated revenues, market/technology 
trends, future customer needs, products to address needs, and 
technology required to build/refine products.  
 
Product Roadmaps are  high-level and typically used with Product 
Development Schedules and Product Feature Release Schedules which 
provide more detail related to proposed delivery dates.  
 
 
 
Benefits of Product Roadmaps  
 
 
 Retaining Customers : providing customers with a high -level 
roadmap of where your product is heading is critical for 
communicating reasons why they should continue to do business 
with your organization.  
 
 Support Product Marketing : communicate your product 
roadmap when speaking with industry analysts to gain further 
exposure. Submit press releases that highlight new product 
feature releases and timelines.  
 
 Build Internal Alignment : guide your engineering and product 
development st aff, and identify resources that will be required to 
build or refine your products.  
 
 Secure Financing : product roadmaps may be requested by 
potential investors looking to acquire mature businesses or invest 
in start -up organizations.  
 
 Reporting to Senior  Management : product roadmaps help 
senior management understand your product development plan 
to ensure that you have the resources required to create or 
refine existing products.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
Implementing a Product Roadmap   
 
 
 
 
1. Determine Scope of Roadmap : discuss product roadmaps with 
senior management to determine the level of detail and 
complexity that is required for your organization. Assess the time 
required to create and maintain your roadmap and assign 
resources to the project.  
 
2. Conduct an Externa l Analysis : use our STEP Industry 
Analysis tool  to document market conditions, technology 
landscape, and identify market opportunities. Read our Market 
Segmentation, Targeting, & Positioning report  if you need 
help with identifying new market opportunities.  
 
3. Perform a Competitive Analysis : organize yo ur product 
features into high -level categories and use our Product Feature 
Competitive Analysis tool to identify areas to drive feature -
based differentiation in your market. Also use our Competitive 
Product Positioning Map  to document key buying criteria for 
each of your market segments, analyze & rate your competitors, 
and develop a product positioning map.  
 
4. Identify Product Feature Requirements : distribute our 
Product Feature Request Form  to your Sales & Customer 
Service staff to document new product ideas and work with 
customers and prospects to develop a Market Requirements 
Document . Create your Product Requirements Document  
and use our Product Feature Priority Tool  to prioritize 
requirements for new or existing products and identify “silver 
bullet” features.  
 
5. Conduct an Internal Analysis : use o ur SWOT Analysis tool  
to assess internal skills and resources and evaluate your 
technology environment. Using your Product Requirements 
Document  as a starting point, perform a Product GAP 
Analysis  to strategically plan for improv ements to Market 
Research, Product Strategy, Capabilities, Technology, and 
Product Marketing.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 9 
Conclusion  6. Develop your Product Roadmap : use our Product Roadmap  
to communicate new marke t opportunities, and document 
technology required to support product development. Create a 
Product Development Schedule  for new products or a 
Product Feature Release Schedule  to organize delivery of new 
features for existing products.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improving product management capability is a key priority for mid -sized 
enterprises. Firms who develop a competitive advantage in product 
management usually experience higher revenue growth rates, better 
profitability, and larger market share than their co mpetitors who are 
more internally focused.  
 
While it may take a few more minutes to document your analyses than 
to have a “fly -by-the-seat-of-your-pants” type of meeting, the time 
spent should be considered well invested. Demonstrating a clear 
business ca se for a new product, managing the requirements gathering 
process, and deploying an effective go -to-market strategy are critical 
keys for success.  
 
If you need more assistance than this report & tools can provide, 
consider attending a seminar from Pragmatic Marketing , who are 
considered to be the leader in the field.  
 
 