  
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Preparing for a Website Redesign  
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for preparing 
for a website redesign project.  
 
Read this brief 7 -page report to learn how to:  
 
 
 Conduct a Website Effectiveness Audit  
 
 Gain Approval for Website Redesign  
 
 Define Website Program Requirements  
 
 Build a Website Program Action Plan  
 
 Develop your New Website  
 
 Drive Traffic to your Webs ite  
 
 Proactively Maintain your Website  
 
 
Read this report to learn how to prepare your organization for effective 
website development. Use our tools to develop a Website Program 
Action Plan that meets your requirements.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
Conduct a Website Effectiveness Audit      3  
 
Gain Approval for Website Redesign      3  
 
Define Website Requirements       4  
 
Build a Website Program Action Plan      4  
 
Develop your New Website       5  
 
Drive Traffic to your Website       6  
 
Proactively Maintain your Website      7  
 
Conclusion          7 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
Conducting a Website Effectiveness Audit  
Gain Approval for Website Redesign    
 
 
 
Over 70% of mid -sized organizations are currently involved in a website 
redesign initiative, or have one planned for this year. Before you go to 
your CFO to get some budget for this program, conduct a brief website 
effectiveness audit to build the need.  
 
Step 1 - Evaluate Internal Web Capabilities : use our SWOT 
Analysis Tool  to identify your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats, when it comes to website program effectiveness . 
 
Step 2 - Conduct an Industry Analysis : determine if there is a 
general trend in your industry regarding website design and 
development.  Document your insights with our STEP Industry 
Analysis Tool  and Compe titive Analysis Tool . 
 
Step 3 - Perform a Competitive Website Audit : learn website design 
best practices by reading our Evaluating Website Effectivene ss 
Report , then perform a Competitive Website Analysis , and insert 
your results into our Website Audit Report Tool . 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Step 1 - Identify Key Success Factors : it is critical that you 
understand, and document any risks and contingencies for this project. 
Use our Key Success Factors Tool  to start the process of building a 
sound, conservative business case.  
 
Step 2 - Build Website Program Charter : use our Project Charter 
template  to document project purpose, scope, and plan. Your project 
plan should include start date, anticipated end date, project team, 
communications plan, deliverables, a nd milestones.  
 
Step 3 - Create Website Program Business Case : use our Business 
Case template  to outline the qualitative/quantitative benefits as 
compared to the costs  and risks of the initiative.  
 
Step 4 - Achieve Approval for Website Program : use your 
Business Case  to sell this idea internally to senior management.  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Define Website Requirements  
Build a Website Program Action Plan   
  
 
 
Step 1 - Determine Website Objectives & Measures : what are your 
future web marketing initiatives? What analytics/metrics do you want to 
have in place? Use our Web Marketing Scorecard  and Web Metrics 
Reporting Schedule  to define your h igh-level objectives, targets, 
initiatives, and measures for this program.  
 
Step 2 - Gather Functional Requirements by Department : work 
with each department to develop a Web Requirements Document  
which can be handed off to I/T for technical implementation. This 
document will act as your list of deliverables.  
 
Step 3 - Prioritize Website Requirements : have a meeting with the 
website team and work through our Web Requirements Priority Tool . 
This exercise is critical for achieving consensus.  
 
Step 4 - Analyze Infrastructure Requirements : website 
infrastructure is composed of  People, Processes, and Technology. Use 
our Website Infrastructure Checklist  to determine if you have any 
gaps in your existing infrastructure.  
 
Step 5 - Perform  a Web Program GAP Analysis : use our GAP 
Analysis Tool  to evaluate your functional & infrastructure 
requirements. Determine the feasibility of closing each gap and  make 
adjustments to your requirements document accordingly.  
 
Step 6 - Decide to Outsource or Build Internally : work with your 
project sponsor to complete a Build vs. Buy Analysis  and make a 
decision with regard to website staffing and support.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Use Demand Metric‟s Website Program Action Plan Tool  to pull 
together all of the internal, external, and GAP analyses that have been 
completed so far. This document will provide a high -level overview of 
the entire program for any senior executives who now need to get 
involved.  
  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Develop your New Website     
 
 
 
 
If you haven‟t done so already, read our Evaluating Website 
Effectiveness Report  to understand what makes a solid website.  
 
Step 1 - Define your Target Audience(s) & Purpose : most websites 
cater to prospective customers, existing customers, potential 
employees, investors, media, partners, & community. Think about the 
objectives of eac h audience to create pages and sections that deliver 
valuable content based on each perspective.  
 
Step 2 - Organize Content & Structure : work to build a hierarchy of 
pages (which will become your sitemap) and foc us on minimizing the 
amount of „ clicks‟ it takes for a user to get to their end destination. Your 
homepage should make it very easy to navigate to any section or sub -
section off the website. Many organizations like to create a URL/favorites 
icon to reinforce their brand or logo. Go to www.favicon.com/  to learn 
more.  
 
Step 3 - Establish Privacy Policy and Terms of Use : protect your 
organization from potential litigation resulting from website usage. Use 
our Privacy Policy  and Terms of Use  templates to save time with 
getting these do cuments over to legal for approval. If you have a Blog 
on your website, you may need a Blog Policy . 
 
Step 4 - Integrate Analytics and Web Reporting : if you aren‟t using 
analytics , read Free Web Analytics from Google . 
 
Step 5 - Handoff to Technical Staff for Development : now that you 
have your functional requirements completed, and have organized the 
content and structure of the website, handoff the delivery component of 
the project to your technical web team.  
 
Step 6 - Build, Test, & Launch Website : work closely with the 
development team to ensure that the website that is built accuratel y 
reflects the web requirements document. Conduct e xternal penetration 
testing or „white -hat hacking‟  to ensure your website is secure and will 
not allow unauthorized access. Test each page and document to ensure 
that the proper business rules have been ap plied (i.e. whitepaper 
download form creates a lead for Sales, sends a download link, and has 
a real -time message to thank them for their interest). If everything 
works, launch your new website with some internal/external promotions.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Drive Traffic to your Website   
 
 
 
 
Step 1 - Develop an External Linking Strategy : search engines like 
Google and Yahoo make assumptions about the “importance” of your 
website, based on many factors including external links that point to 
your website.  
 
Consider implementing  an affiliate or online marketing initiative to drive 
traffic. Affiliates are partners, or other third -party websites who promote 
your organization and send traffic from their website to yours. If your 
business does not lend itself to affiliate marketing, consider ads.  
 
Step 2 - Submit your Website to Search Engines : Google and Yahoo 
need to index your website before it will appear in the search results 
organically. You can go to each search engine directly and look for a link 
or tab that says “Submit” or “ Index”.  
 
Step 3 - Conduct Search Engine Optimization : there is organic and 
paid search. Read Simplifying Search Engine Optimization  for more 
help i n this area. If you know you want keyword ads, read Pull 
Prospects with Google AdWords . 
 
Step 4 - Build up your Reference Library : to promote repeat 
visitor s, add to your base of whitepapers, case studies , webcasts, best 
practices, and other collateral, on a very regular basis.  
 
Step 5 - Integrate Website with Other Channels : consider using 
your new website for lead generation (website demo), post press 
releases, promote events and speaking engagements, add a newsletter 
to build up your email marketing database, etc.  
 
Step 6 - Consider Adding a Customer -Facing Blog : many 
organizations are using blogs to informally communicate with 
customers, and to gather company & product feedback. Read 
Successful Bl ogs Increase Customer Satisfaction  for more advice.  
 
Use our Blog Policy template  if you plan to use this new medium.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
Proactively Maintain your Website  
Conclusion   
 
 
 
 
 
Step 1 - Develop a Maintenance Schedule : set up a weekly or 
monthly website maintenance schedule to update content, check for 
broken links, evaluate structure, and add new features.  
 
Step 2 - Re-organize as Content Grows : most websites start with a 
base-level of co ntent and add incrementally over time. As your amount 
of content grows, you may need to re -organize the website to keep 
navigation simple and easy for end users.  
 
Step 3 - Evaluate Website Program Annually : once you have 
completed this initiative, don‟t let three years go by before you make 
any strategic changes. Make a point to re -evaluate your website 
program on an annual basis, at a minimum.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corporate websites are one of the most important aspects of the 
marketing mix, yet surprisingly, most organizations are not happy with 
the results they are achieving through online marketing. You don‟t need 
to have technical skills or a huge budget to make your website an 
effective lead generation and customer support tool.  
 
Start by con ducting an audit of your current effectiveness; build a 
business case for a redesign project; define your business requirements; 
develop an action plan; design your website; and drive traffic to 
demonstrate measurable marketing results.  
 
Based on the best practices described in this report, and tools provided, 
you should be able to get started with a website program. If you need 
more clarity, contact Demand Metric and we will provide you with more 
tailored advice.  
 
 
  
 