  CHRIS ZOOK WITH JAMES ALLEN Preface
 vii
Acknowledgments
 Xi
1 1 
Desperately Seeking Growth
 1
2 The Profitable Core
 23
3 The Alexander Problem
 63
4 The Redefinition Dilemma
 109
5 Growing from the Core
 143
Notes
 151
Bibliography
 157
Index
 167
About the Authors
 179
 The global financial crisis and the rough road to recovery have 
brought the
power of a company's core business back into sharp 
focus. Like a collective
commercial death wish, global market values 
rose in 2007 by a staggering 20
percent (denominated in dollars), 
reaching $61 trillion by year end. In just
five years, $38 trillion had 
apparently been created in the stock markets-more
value in terms 
of market capitalization than the global stock markets had
recorded 
in their entire history.
But where did it really come from? In some cases, as we have 
found, not the
right places. Crises of the core have appeared everywhere. AIG, the poster
child of the financial collapse, described its 
error as getting too far away from
its "core" of insurance products 
by falling in love with the seductive
interloper of complex, hedged 
securities. When Citibank combined with
Travelers insurance it was 
heralded by its CEO Sandy Weill as the "model
financial institution 
of the future " Yet, here was Citi in 2009, plummeting
close to zero 
valuation, having created no economic value (precrisis).
These "crises of the core" have been epidemic, and not only in 
financial
services. The bankruptcy of General Motors in June 2009 was 
foreshadowed
by its remarkable loss of market share, from 44 percent 
in 1983 to just 22
percent in 2009, in its core U.S. light-vehicle market. 
Yet, over these decades
GM was investing to enter businesses ranging from robotics to IT consulting
(EDS) while its rival, Toyota, was waging mechanized warfare on the core of
GM in the United States. Or 
consider Eastman Kodak, the company that in
1996 ruled the roost in 
photography. Kodak has seen its share price plummet
since that time 
by 97 percent, with a market capitalization level in early 2009
of only 
about $700 million for this iconic core business.
During a single week in 2008, the global indexes declined by 
$8 trillion, as
much as in the first eighteen months of the Internet 
bubble burst. In fact, we
have seen this picture-or something 
resembling it-once before. In 1999,
fueled by investor hyperbole, 
the value of stocks on all global exchanges
blew away the previous 
world record for expansion. During that year, the
total value of all 
traded stocks increased by $10 trillion, a staggering sum atthe time, 
driving the global valuation to $35 trillion.
It was in these heady days, at the height of the Internet bubble, 
that Profit
from the Core was first published in 2001. When the bubble collapsed, $12
trillion of market value quickly evaporated into 
the ether. "Focus on your
core" became a watchword of the day, and 
this book was embraced by many
management teams, who used it as 
a Rorschach test to ask themselves
whether they had strayed too far 
into cyberspace, and, just perhaps, had lost
sight of their real 
strength-their real core. Even Intel, one of the world's most
focused 
and sophisticated companies, was struggling to overcome a crisis of
the core, having redirected massive cash flow and attention into 
more than
150 new dot-com-related investments and allowing 
defeated, historic
competitors like Advanced Micro Devices back 
into the game. Andy Grove,
former CEO of Intel, recommended this 
book for reading by his management
team, and the ideas about 
strategic focus in Profit from the Core became a
centerpiece in their 
internal debates about strategy.
Profit from the Core was a paean to industrial sobriety in an era 
of "anything
goes." It chronicled a litany of examples in which companies lost sight of
what they were really good at, moved away from 
their strengths, and let their
real competitive advantage erode in the 
process.
Our analysis and case examples showed that most companies 
with truly
sustainable performance shared an extraordinary focus 
on a core, leadership
economics to reinvest in the core, a uniquely 
loyal core customer base, and a
well-defined repeatable model to 
extend the core.
Over the last few years, as the downturn loomed, we began to 
encounter more
and more companies wondering whether they 
needed to return to focus on
their core. That shared concern accelerated dramatically as management
teams recognized the need for a 
more focused platform to use as a foundation
for growth coming 
out of the financial crisis. The answer for most companies
lies in a 
renewed focus on the core. Consider the following results of our
analysis:
• During downturns, "weak cores" (followers) are the shock 
absorbers of the
system, revealing margin swings that are 
two to five times that of the leader-a
hidden liability of nurturing too many weak cores. That presents companieswith 
strong, focused cores with an opportunity to take advantage 
of these
weaknesses.
• Since the financial crisis started, we estimate that followers 
in a market
have seen their values decline by nearly twice as 
much as leaders-presenting
leaders with acquisition 
opportunities.
• About half of all of the profit in the world during 2007 came 
from six major
industries-all of which are undergoing 
fundamental changes in their core
business models above and 
beyond normal business investment. In a world of
much 
lower profits, especially for weak core businesses, the future 
belongs to
the smart leaders investing in their cores.
Against this background of once-in-a-generation challenges and
opportunities, the idea of a revised edition of Profit from the Core 
took shape.
The principles and findings of the book seem even more relevant given the
structural crisis in business that the world is 
now facing:
• Sustained and profitable growth requires a strong, welldefined core.
• Most sustained profitable growth companies have leadership 
positions in
their cores that form the epicenters of their 
strategies.
• The number-one rule of strategy is to discourage your 
competitors from
investing in your core.
• The greatest source of strategic error, we find, stems from an 
inaccurate
understanding of the core and its full potential.
• Strong cores often contain hidden assets that prove to be the 
seeds of the
next wave of growth-the topic of my most 
recent book, Unstoppable.'
• The key to sustained and profitable growth is to find 
a repeatable formula
that utilizes the most powerful and 
differentiated strengths in your core and
applies them to a 
series of new "adjacent" markets.
To make this revised edition of Profit from the Core a useful 
guide to the
search for sustainable growth, we have updated the key 
examples, added newones, and rendered the lessons learned in a 
way that management teams can
use as a tool to reflect on the way 
forward in today's economy. Turbulent
conditions create confusion, 
blurred boundaries, less time to react, less
tolerance for error, and 
often fewer resources. Yet they also create unique
opportunities to 
strengthen and expand strong cores, and even to invest to
reshape 
the structure of your industry ahead of competitors.
We hope you enjoy the book and prosper from its ideas.
 Our first debt of gratitude is to the clients of Bain & Company, who 
allow us
to participate on a daily basis with them on the front lines 
of some of the
most dynamic and challenging business battlegrounds. It is to these smart and
hardworking executives, some in 
seemingly impossible jobs, that we dedicate
this book.
We also thank our partners at Bain & Company. Although we 
did the writing
of the book on our own time, the data, client contacts, anecdotes, and support
infrastructure are all Bain. Our first 
version of this acknowledgment, which
included the name of each 
person who contributed an anecdote, advice, or an
idea, listed more 
than eighty individuals, so we abandoned the idea of the
itemized 
list, opting instead for this single heartfelt and deep thank you.
We especially are grateful to Tom Tierney, former managing 
director at Bain,
who encouraged our writing of this book from the 
beginning. Steve
Schaubert, our mentor and a senior Bain director, 
was one of the first to
suggest this project and has been our most 
constant muse. Steve read every
draft, generously leaving thoughtful and extensive voice mail messages the
next day in response. 
Darrell Rigby has been a copilot through the entire
project. He 
urged us to consider writing a book. Darrell has contributed ideas,
material, contacts, wisdom, and friendship throughout.
Current and past partners of Bain Capital, especially Mitt Romney 
and Steve
Pagliuca, were generous in sharing their experiences and 
making available to
us case studies from their investment experiences.
I would also like to thank Phebo Wibbens, a brilliant consultant 
in
Amsterdam, for assisting me in updating the key data in this revision. Marci
Taylor returned to help me update the key examples, as 
she has done with
every other book of mine. She added insight, 
accuracy, and inspiration
whenever needed. Maggie Locher and 
Paul Judge were masterful in driving
the editorial process and helping it all come together smoothly at the end. I
have been consistently blessed with amazing people to work with at Bain,
without 
whom this would not have been possible.In addition, we have been blessed with excellent research assistants for
support on specific pieces of work throughout. Tanya 
Lipiainen responded
patiently whenever we requested "one more 
analysis." Murthy Nukala and
Aditya Joshi were the first research 
associates to help with some of the
original analyses that spurred 
this project forward.
Brenda Davis typed much of the manuscript, made editorial 
suggestions,
provided psychological counseling, and has been the 
perfect assistant in
every way.
Our editors at the Harvard Business School Press, Melinda Adams 
Merino,
Barbara Roth, Sylvia Weedman, and Marjorie Williams, have 
provided
inspiration when it mattered and have patiently nursed us 
through our first
attempt to write a book. Thank you. In addition, we 
thank Walter Kiechel for
urging us to write a book on growth several 
years ago, when he first saw our
early Bain presentation.
We especially wish to thank Donna, Chris's wife, who allowed 
her dining
room table to become "ground zero" for the most intense 
writing phase,
which also displaced our wonderful families in some 
way on a regular basis.
Finally, Chris thanks his father, Nicholas Zook, a newspaperman 
and writer,
for patiently trying to teach his son to write-perhaps 
the toughest task of all.
 In a world of turbulent economies and scarce resources, are you 
wondering
where your next wave of profitable growth will come 
from? Perhaps your
industry is changing in a way that makes you 
wonder whether it might be
time to redefine the business model 
that has been so productive for so many
years. Or maybe your 
resources are spread too thin and you are fighting
competitors on 
too many global fronts. Perhaps you suspect that your core
business 
still has untapped profit growth potential, but you are not sure 
where
it is.
If you can see your company in any of these situations, the findings of this
book may surprise and interest you. The most important issue faced by all
management teams is how to grow their 
companies profitably over the long
term. Today, the odds for winning the long-term growth game are worse than
ever. Many management teams need to reconsider and even rediscover their
real 
core. Consider how the goal posts have moved for management:
• Investors are giving management teams less time than ever to 
prove
themselves. For instance, shareholders are shifting in 
and out of stocks at five
times the rate they did a few decades 
ago, demanding not merely growth, but
growth each and 
every quarter.
• Even in the best of times, our analysis shows that nine 
out of ten
management teams fail to grow their companies 
profitably. Given investor
expectations of quarter-by-quarter 
growth, ninety-nine out of one hundred
management teams 
will fail to meet shareholder expectations.
• Shareholders tolerate failure less than ever before. Between 
1999 and 2006,
the average tenure of departing CEOs in the 
United States declined from ten
years to just over eight. One 
study of departing CEOs in America found that
the 40 
percent with the shortest tenure had lasted an average of 
fewer than
two years. The lower half of this group had stayed 
on the job for only eight
months.The rules of the game are continually changing. As we demonstrate later in
this book, turbulence in industries has increased 
by a factor of more than
three over the past few decades. An 
unprecedented two-thirds of businesses
and more than 50 percent 
of profits (reinvestment funds) in the world are in
turbulent industries such as telecommunications, media, newspapers, airlines,
and 
automobiles.
It is no wonder, then, that participants in a game that's impossible to play,
much less win, are now particularly receptive to the 
soothing, dulcimer tones
of pundits who suggest deceptively simple 
(and consistently incorrect)
strategies for winning an extremely 
complex, multifaceted game. Their siren
song seduces with its revolutionary appeal: "Discard the old, leave your
historic core business 
behind, and set out for the promised land." Sometimes
this advice 
leads to the right course. Yet, as we argue in this book and
demonstrate with examples and extensive empirical data, it usually does 
not
solve the fundamental problem and can even aggravate the 
underlying cause
of inadequate profitable growth. Like the ancient 
mariners of the Iliad, those
managers who respond to the siren song 
of growth can experience brief
periods of euphoria. But when they 
finally awaken to reality, they often find
themselves heading straight 
for the shoals.
Moreover, during and following the world economic crisis that 
started in
2007, the weaker businesses are proving to be the "shock 
absorbers" of the
system. These businesses face far greater swings in 
margin and drops in
valuation than the leaders, and they risk losing 
it all. During such times, it is
especially incumbent on each management team to understand its core and
remember that in strategy 
and the application of force in business, it is the
choice and depth of 
focus-and not the breadth and speed of expansion-that
lead to 
sustained, profitable growth.
We have found that the key to unlocking hidden sources of 
growth and
profits is usually not to abandon the core business 
but to focus on it with
renewed vigor and a new level of creativity. 
We have also found that often
the most successful businesses are 
at greatest risk of succumbing to the siren
song. Ironically, our 
research shows that the management teams running the
strongest 
core businesses are the ones who most consistently underestimate
their full economic potential. Consider the following examples of 
fourcompanies that moved away from a core business in search of 
greener
pastures.
Case 1: Bausch & Lomb
Bausch & Lomb got started in the ophthalmic business in 1853, 
when
German immigrant Jacob Bausch opened a small store in 
Rochester, New
York, to sell European optical imports. Over the 
next 120 years, the business
developed slowly and carefully, step by 
step, just like the work of the
meticulous eye doctors whom it 
served. By 1973, Bausch & Lomb had grown
to $235 million in sales 
and was the leader in its instrument and lens
businesses.
Then everything changed. In the mid- 1970s, Bausch & Lomb 
obtained from
an independent Czechoslovakian scientist the patents 
for spin casting, a
process for making soft contact lenses. Spin casting 
not only produced lenses
that were more comfortable than those 
on the market but did so at a lower
cost. At the time, the standard procedure for creating a lens was to lathe it
from a button of hard 
plastic. With spin casting, a drop of polymer is spun in
a shaped dish 
and then stabilized under ultraviolet light to make the lens. The
lenses created are "soft" because the liquid polymer sets in a form 
that is
softer and more flexible than that of the hard plastic used in 
lathing. These
more flexible lenses have proven to be better for the 
health of the eye and are
easier for the optometrist to fit. They have 
also allowed for greater
productivity throughout the value chain, 
from manufacturer to end user.
The soft contact lens was one of those breakthroughs that crack 
open and
transform the competitive dynamics and market size in an 
industry.
Throughout the mid1980s, Bausch & Lomb developed and 
executed brilliant
strategy, driving one competitor after another out 
of the market and causing
others, locked into high-cost lathing methods, to disinvest in the business.
The company's share of new lens 
fittings rose to 40 percent of the market,
several times larger than that 
of its nearest competitors, American Hydron
and Coopervision. 
Bausch & Lomb continued to invest in the business,
buying the leading manufacturer of gas-permeable lenses, Polymer
Technologies, to 
round out its product line. The company became a darling ofWall 
Street, outperforming the market over this period by more than 200
percent, with high, growing, and consistent earnings reports.
Then, as competitors began attacking its position with new technologies such
as cast molding (also a low-cost method), Bausch & 
Lomb began to divert its
attention from its core business, spending 
the cash flow from its lens and
solutions businesses in new areas. 
"The core business is eroding, margins will
erode as competitors 
enter ... Use the cash to find new sources of growth,"
sang the 
sirens. The management team invested in products sold by other
health professionals, such as electric toothbrushes, skin ointments, 
and
hearing aids, but they established no obvious linkage between 
these products
and the core lens business.
Slowly but surely, with resources and management attention 
distracted,
Bausch & Lomb's contact lens business flattened out. 
The stock that had risen
from $3 per share in 1973 to $56 per share in 1991 plummeted to less than
$33 per share in 2003. Moreover, 
Johnson & Johnson entered the contact lens
business by heavily 
funding a new acquisition, Vistakon, with a new product
idea: disposable lenses. Of course, disposable lenses are not much different
from regular lenses, except that they are sold at a lower price in 
packages of
twelve or twenty-four. What better company to have 
introduced this product
than the one-time cost and technology 
leader, Bausch & Lomb? Instead,
Bausch & Lomb's market share 
declined to 16 percent, which put the
company in third place 
behind Johnson & Johnson and Ciba Vision.
With its core strength squandered, Bausch & Lomb never really 
rebounded.
In 2006, the company recalled one of its key eye-care 
products. The
following year, Bausch & Lomb faced 344 product 
liability claims. Sales
were again slipping, leading one analyst at J.P. 
Morgan to comment: "Returns
across all of Bausch & Lomb's businesses are poor and notably behind
competitor averages" By May 
2007, when Warburg Pincus agreed to
purchase the company for 
$4.5 billion, Bausch & Lomb was completely
focused on eye care 
again, but it was now up against well-funded competitors
like Alcon, 
Johnson & Johnson, and Novartis. If the company had not lost its
focus on the core, it probably would not have turned out this way.'
Case 2: Amazon.comAmazon.com began as the poster child of the Internet economy, 
and ended up
as one of the few lasting success stories of that era. 
Most of the dot-com
businesses that began during the heady years 
of the Internet bubble have not
survived. But a few, such as eBay 
and Amazon. com, have successfully
navigated the dual challenge of 
retaining focus even as they faced pressure to
constantly adapt and 
redefine their core.
Amazon.com got its start in 1995 with the online selling of 
a product with a
notoriously inefficient, multitier distribution 
channel: books. The typical
offline bookstore returns more than 40 percent of the books that appear on its
shelves for credit. The reasons returns are so high are that it is impossible for
bookstores to 
predict which titles will become bestsellers and that a large
number 
of "standard" books must be stocked in inefficient lots of two or
three. The Amazon model bypasses this inefficiency by centralizing
distribution and by getting its money from the consumer up front, 
often
before the publisher needs to be paid. Moreover, Jeff Bezos, 
Amazon's
founder and CEO, recognized that Amazon had the potential to be more than
just a low-cost channel for book purchasing. 
With the introduction of book
reviews written by customers, Amazon made itself a community website
through which consumers 
could voice their views about the books they were
purchasing. Based 
on the power of this business model, market capitalization
rose to 
more than $30 billion in 1999 on $500 million of sales. During this
period, Amazon raised the stakes, trying to become what Bezos calls 
"a place
where you can buy anything and everything."
Suddenly, Amazon no longer confined itself to targeting the 
inefficient,
multistep value chain of the bookseller (and, somewhat 
later, the video store);
it began to compete with Wal-Mart and The 
Home Depot. Amazon moved
with lightning speed into power 
tools, consumer electronics, garden furniture,
and even cosmetics. 
By 2000 cumulative losses had mounted to $1.2 billion,
and investor 
nervousness was high, reflected in a 70 percent stock price
decline.
But, unlike Bausch & Lomb, Amazon parlayed this period of turbulence into
a view of its "core of the core" that was even more compelling than the
product itself. Its unique online software-the 
commercial engine of thecompany-proved much more fundamental than a new model for selling
books. In 2008, the company hit 
$19.2 billion in revenue, with a 23 percent
return on invested capital. 
Though media (books, movies, music) still remain
a highly profitable 58 percent of revenues, other areas have grown. Yet a
closer 
look reveals that 30 percent of Amazon's total sales come from its
third-party seller business.
Amazon's journey has led it to a strong and stable core, despite 
the dangers it
has had to navigate along the way. In Jeff Bezos's words: "It helps to base
your strategy on things that won't change ... 
I very rarely get asked, `What's
not going to change in the next five 
to ten years?' At Amazon.com we're
always trying to figure that 
out",
Case 3: Cooke Optics
Cooke Optics was founded in England in 1890 for the purpose of 
creating the
highest-quality lenses for still photography, a new and 
fast-growing market at
the time. Cooke quickly became the gold 
standard in the industry, and the
camera taken to the South Pole in 
1907 by explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton and
his crew was fitted with 
a Cooke lens. During World War I, Cooke lenses
were critical for 
high-resolution aerial photography. The advent of silent
films put 
Cooke lenses on the front of many cameras in leading movie
studios. As the small company evolved, it expanded into specialized 
zoom
lenses and even higher-quality "prime" nonzoom lenses. In 
1946, Cooke was
sold to the Rank Group, a company with no 
related holdings or interest in
preserving Cooke's quality image. 
Over the next few decades, Rank moved
into postproduction 
studios, resorts, and casinos, leaving Cooke at the end of
the line 
when it came to getting attention from management or resources 
for
investment. Cooke stagnated. Comparing this state of affairs 
with the
company's proud history, a thirty-seven-year employee 
lamented, "The place
was so run down that sea-gull feathers would 
float down through the holes in
the roof."3 The company was finally 
rescued in 1998 by Les Zellan, a
theater-lighting specialist who had 
kept an eye on Cooke for decades,
watching its once-valuable core 
business erode. In 1998, he got his chance
and took it, buying Cooke 
for only $3 million. Since then, the core lens
business, neglected for 
nearly five decades, has been brought back to lifewith a new lens 
that has superior focusing technology. The lens caught on
almost 
immediately and has been used for shooting such hit films as
Hairspray, three of the Harry Potter movies (Prisoner of Azkaban, Goblet of
Fire, and Half-Blood Prince), and The Bourne Supremacy 
and such television
series as Bones and Grey's Anatomy. The company's continued success and
growth show the potential to profit 
from and renew a once-strong core.
Case 4: The Gartner Group
The Gartner Group was founded in 1979 by Gideon Gartner, a 
stock analyst
at the securities trading firm of Oppenheimer who 
specialized in tracking
IBM and its few competitors in those days. 
The original purpose of the
Gartner Group was to sell information 
about IBM to investment bankers and
stockbrokers. Shortly after 
the founding of the company, its focus was
broadened to include 
customers deciding on equipment to buy or starting
negotiations 
with IBM for hardware. In the burgeoning market for business
computers, consumer need proved to be large, and Gartner focused 
entirely
on becoming, in a sense, a consumer clearinghouse for customer data and
expert opinion on products.
Saatchi & Saatchi purchased the company in the mid1980s as 
part of its
attempt to unify consulting and advertising services in a 
single company-a
misconceived growth strategy in itself that soon 
imploded. Saatchi became
disillusioned with the consulting business in 1989 and sold Gartner to Bain
Capital, a private equity firm 
specializing in buying noncore or
undermanaged corporate assets.
For $60 million, Bain Capital purchased a company that was 
growing at
about 15 percent annually, had reached $55 million in 
revenues, and had
margins of only about 10 percent, a disappointment to its former parent. But
Bain Capital saw something more in 
the Gartner Group than a small, low-
margin consultancy. The more 
Bain managers studied the company's core
business, the more they 
began to believe that Gartner would have a much
greater opportunity for growth and for margin expansion if they looked at it
not as 
a consulting business but as a vehicle for collecting, packaging, and
distributing high-value syndicated data.Under the ownership of Bain Capital, Gartner refocused on 
becoming a
consumer clearinghouse for customer responses and 
an honest broker of
advice on hardware and software purchases. 
Gartner's growing company
subscriber base gave it proprietary 
access to thousands of companies whose
managers were willing 
to comment for the record on their experiences with
buying 
and installing computer systems. No longer did a corporate
management information system department need to commission 
expensive
outside consulting studies for the purpose of obtaining 
objective data; it could
rely on Gartner studies, which were less 
costly and more timely than its own.
Gartner built strong barriers 
to imitation through its subscriber base and its
database of benchmarks that allowed it to expand its margins from about 10
percent 
to 30 percent.
Bain Capital had a three-part growth strategy for Gartner:
1. Turn Gartner into a syndicated data and research company 
with a much
more scalable model than consulting.
2. Expand geographically beyond its high East Coast customer 
concentration
into the West and Europe by adding 
salespeople.
3. Deepen the product line in the most leveraged, vertical, 
industry-focused
application markets.
The suggested strategy of looking at the original core business in 
a new way
was successful. The company grew from $55 million in 
1980 to $295 million
in 1995 under Bain Capital's ownership to 
$734 million in 1999 as a public
company. Over this period, Gartner 
solidified its hold in its core business.
Bain Capital sold the company to Dun & Bradstreet for approximately a
twenty times return 
on its equity, and Dun & Bradstreet subsequently sold
Gartner in an 
initial public offering at an additional twenty times multiple.
Ten 
years later, in 2008, Gartner continued its momentum, achieving 40
percent share of the IT research market (four times the size of its 
nearest
competitor), $1.3 billion in revenues, and $213 million in earnings before
interest and tax-growing at a healthy 12 percent 
through the period.
What is notable about this growth story, other than the four 
hundred times
return on equity invested, is the fact that the new 
owners had a different takeon the core business, seeing it as a syndicated data and research enterprise
rather than a consultancy. The 
ability to creatively see the core in a new light
and act on it is a 
theme that we will return to throughout this book.
Our Mission
In each of the above cases, and hundreds of others that we have 
examined,
we see a tendency for strong core businesses to lose 
momentum by virtue of
premature abandonment, miscalculation, 
or overreaching in search of new
growth. Our intention in this book 
is not to suggest that we have a one-size-
fits-all solution for problems with growth. Rather, our intention is to suggest
that many of 
the common cures prescribed in the popular business literature
need to be balanced against the weight of evidence on real company
experiences. What we offer is a set of practical and proven principles,
diagnostic tests, and questions for management teams to use as 
tools for
reexamining or revising their strategies in search of the 
next wave of
profitable growth. In our quest to understand the 
dynamics of growth, we
drew on the following fact base:
• About two hundred case studies in Bain & Company and in 
the public
record
• Interviews and discussions with about one hundred senior 
executives
• A database of 1,854 public companies in seven countries 
followed for more
than ten years
• Numerous pieces of focused empirical analysis concerning 
sources of
profitable growth
• The records of many private equity firms-including Bain 
Capital, which
generously shared many of its case studies 
with us
• Extensive examination of the existing literature (cited 
throughout the book)
and of secondary data
The lack of empirical data behind many business "cure-alls" has 
promptedone Oxford don to proclaim management science a 
"phony academic subject,
a shallow contemporary shibboleth promoting a noxious cant"4 We are not
that cynical. We consider management science to be highly productive, but
we also understand 
that it is in its infancy. More important, we maintain that
there do 
exist a few lasting principles of business strategy that have clearly
driven results year after year, that apply across a wide range of 
industries, and
that explain the results of both success and failure.
Defining Profitable Growth
We explored many definitions of profitable growth and settled 
on one that
involves several dimensions. Throughout this book, we 
define sustained
growth as growth in both revenues and profits over 
an extended period of
time while total shareholder returns (share 
price and dividend reinvestment)
exceed the cost of capital. Empirically, few companies in the long term create
shareholder value 
without earning their cost of capital.
When we looked at the data, we identified targets that were at 
or below most
of the strategic planning targets we found in a survey 
of strategic plans.
These targets are (1) achieving 5.5 percent real 
(inflation-adjusted) growth in
revenues and earnings and (2) earning one's cost of capital over an average of
ten years. We examined 
the data company by company to control for
accounting anomalies 
and one-time charges. The results of our screen are
depicted in 
figure 1-1, showing the percentages of our full sample of
companies 
that meet our revenue criterion, income criterion, and shareholder
value creation criterion. Even with these relatively conservative and 
modest
targets, we found that only about one company in eight, or 12 percent, or
about one in ten companies, achieved sustained and 
profitable growth (or
could be classified as a sustained value creator) over a decade that many
would rank as among the best for the 
world economy. In contrast, our internal
sample of targets from 
strategic plans showed that more than 90 percent of
the companies 
examined had aimed at returns well in excess of these levels.1-1 Few Companies Achieve Sustainable Growth Strategies
Source: Worldscope database; Bain analysis.
Note: Earning cost of capital defined as above average total shareholder
return. 5.5% required growth rate is 
in real terms (i.e., after correction for
inflation). Analysis of 2,000+ companies in 12 developed and emerging
economies.
When we tightened the criteria a bit more, requiring 8 percent 
real growth
(about 11 percent to 12 percent nominal currency 
growth in most of our
major countries in this period), the percentage of sustained value creators
declined to only 9 percent. In a survey 
of strategic plans, we found that the
target of more than two-thirds 
of the businesses examined was at least at
these levels. Yet the reality 
is that fewer than one in ten achieved it.
We found that companies that grew revenues but not profits 
did not createeconomic value in the long term (though they can create shareholder wealth
in the short term in the stock market). 
Companies that grew profits but not
revenues were on an unsustainable growth path that eventually petered out.
Companies that 
grew both revenues and profits but did not earn their cost of
capital eventually (recall that our period of analysis is ten years) lost 
their
ability to find investors.' An extensive body of work on 
investor value
creation supports this point of view.
Other measures of profitable growth that we considered are 
worth noting,
along with their specific limitations. Stock price 
growth (adjusted for splits)
is alluringly simple, but is dependent on 
the specific company's pay-out
policy in dividends or share buybacks, which have, in the short term, only an
indirect relation to 
operational or financial performance. Total enterprise
market value 
growth is somewhat better. However, it is possible to grow total
market value through mergers that neither help earnings nor create 
a
sustained growth trajectory. Moreover, putting together several 
poorly
performing companies to create a new one is not what our 
project was about.
Share of total industry profits or share of total industry value is 
an interesting
measure of relative competitive success. However, it 
does not take into
account absolute levels of growth or profitability, 
which could be declining.
Moreover, it begs the question of the 
business boundaries, of what to include
or exclude.
High total shareholder return is critical to sustained, profitable 
growth. Yet a
company that did not grow, had no assets, and had 
positive cash flow would
have infinite returns. Looking at returns in 
the absence of growth is as
limiting in the context of our study as 
looking at growth in the absence of
returns.
Finally, there are more specialized or exotic measures of profitable growth.
One such measure is profit or value creation per 
employee. But this is at least
as much a function of labor and capital 
intensity of the business as it is of
sustained, profitable growth. A 
derivative measure of this is growth in value
per employee. This, 
however, could be as much a function of shifting to more
capital 
intensity as it is of performance and growth. These are interesting
measures, but not what we were after.Using the screen of earning the cost of capital in the long term 
and growing
both revenues and profits worked well for us, though 
we urge management
teams to supplement this metric with others, 
both short term and long term, in
considering their own growth 
pattern.
Defining the Core
It is our thesis in this book that the foundation of sustained, 
profitable growth
is a clear definition of a company's core business. 
A business can be defined
from two related perspectives. The first 
(outside-in) is from the point of view
of the outside world, with 
natural business boundaries defined by underlying
market economics. The second (inside-out) is from the point of view of those
inside the company, with the company's business boundaries 
defined by its
unique core.
Here is an example of the distinction. Enterprise Rent-A-Car, 
Dollar Thrifty,
and Avis are clearly in a business that external criteria define as car rental.
The business involves purchasing and managing fleets, running automated
reservation centers, managing a 
branch network, and serving customers who
rent cars for various 
purposes. Within this business, however, the three
companies have 
different cores. Enterprise is the market leader for insurance
replacement and repair rentals. The company got its start in this 
distinct
segment, building its suburban locations and business 
model to meet the
needs of body shops and insurance companies. 
Dollar Thrifty's core business
comes from leisure renters who don't 
mind having to pick up their rental cars
and in conditions with 
minimal amenities. Avis's core is airport rentals. It
sells heavily to 
corporate renters requiring speedy service, newer cars, a
variety 
of business amenities, and, obviously, a network of prime airport
locations. Each of these companies would view its core differently, 
and each
would be right. Yet each participates in a rental car business that external
economics is treating more and more as one 
competitive arena.
A different type of example is Gillette, which has had men's 
shaving products
as its core business since its founding nearly one 
hundred years ago. After
achieving a 70 percent market share in its 
core, Gillette sought growth in an
unconventional way, looking 
beyond the limited shaving market. It redefined
its core business 
more in terms of control and share of the checkout-counter
displays at retail stores, leading it to expand into writing instruments,Duracell batteries, and other distribution-related products. The 
jury is out on
the full success of this strategy. However, it is a case in 
which a company has
redefined its core such that it no longer sits 
within the external boundaries
marked on the map held by the rest 
of the business world.
To identify your core business, first identify the five following 
assets:
1. Your most potentially profitable franchise customers
2. Your most differentiated and strategic capabilities
3. Your most critical product offerings
4. Your most important channels
5. Any other critical strategic assets that contribute to the 
above (such as
patents, brand name, position at a control 
point in a network)
When we begin a consulting assignment at Bain, we almost always 
ask first:
"What is the business definition of where you compete?" 
"What is your core
business and source of potential competitive 
advantage?" The answers to
these questions require an understanding 
of each of the five dimensions.
A Wall Street Journal article in a past downturn announced 
"Corporate
America Confronts the Meaning of a'Core' Business." 
The article went on to
recognize the complexity inherent in this 
task, noting: "Focus is in these days,
both on Wall Street and in 
boardrooms across America, and this raises a
surprisingly complex 
question: What constitutes a core business? Is it a
product? A cache of intellectual property? A process? Or, is it a business
design ... that 
can be deployed across multiple industries?"6 That complexity
has 
only increased over time.
For some companies, the definition of the core business is not 
overly
difficult; for others, it is extremely vexing. For all, it is important to have the
clearest definition possible. In the case of Gillette, the 
core business would
appear to be men's shaving products. This part 
of Gillette's business was its
fastest-growing and most profitable 
component in 1910, and it remains so
today. The key assets that constitute this core include some deep areas ofcompetence such as 
expertise in the manufacturing of high-precision
miniature items, 
proficiency in blade-sharpening and -handling technology,
and skill 
in brand management. Gillette has used these assets to enter a
variety of related businesses ranging from hair care products (Toni) to 
small
electronic appliances (Braun) to toothbrushes (Oral-B) to batteries (Duracell).
In some cases, as we discuss later in the book, these 
expansions were
successful and drew on Gillette's core strength; in 
others, they proved
unrelated distractions.
Companies such as Coca-Cola, UPS, Toyota, SAP, Nokia, WalMart, and
even Bain & Company have relatively well-defined cores 
that most
executives can understand and use as platforms for profitable growth. In
some companies, such as PepsiCo, there may be 
several different and distinct
cores-in this case, the cola business 
and the salty snacks business of Frito-
Lay.
For other companies such as AOL Time Warner, 3M, General 
Electric, or
Siemens, however, the core business is much more difficult to define. These
companies are the exception. Moreover, these 
types of highly complex or
conglomerate-like companies less often 
appear in the ranks of sustained value
creators.
Most conglomerates have not been able to manage multiple strong 
cores
successfully. Conglomerates are underrepresented among our 
sustained value
creators, consistent with the findings of many past 
studies on diversification.
Moreover, we find that, overwhelmingly, 
the strongest performing multi-
industrials, like Danaher or United 
Technologies Corp (UTC), exploit
leadership positions in a few strong core businesses, which they drive into
adjacent territory step by 
step, extending them to new customers, channels,
products, or applications. Moreover, they often create value across these
businesses with 
a relatively well-defined repeatable formula that is proved
over and 
over and becomes central to the corporation in three ways:
• The way the company describes its strategy
• The way managers view the core of the company
• The way analysts perceive the company's distinct advantages 
andopportunities for growth
For the purposes of this book, we define the core business as that 
set of
products, capabilities, customers, channels, and geographies 
that defines the
essence of what the company is or aspires to be to 
achieve its growth
mission-that is, to grow its revenue sustainably 
and profitably. We recognize
that this is a loose definition that can 
lead to significant debate among
management teams. There can be 
tension between what a company is and
what it aspires to or needs 
to be for competitive reasons. And there is often a
lack of proportion in the number of customers overall and the number of
customers who really support profits-the classic 80/20 rule, which 
states that
less than 20 percent of a customer base accounts for 80 
percent of a
company's profits. Inversely, this implies that most customers often do not
define the core business; that is, they do not 
contribute to the growth mission.
The essence of a company's 
growth strategy is to define the core business as
we have defined it 
and to pour company resources into this core business
until it 
achieves its full potential.
How to Approach This Book
In this book, we focus on a single theme: the extraordinary importance of
creating a strong core business as a foundation for driving 
company growth.
We define the growth metrics that management should use 
precisely-the goal
of management is to grow revenues and profits 
sustainably. Only this will
create shareholder value over the long term. 
We define the core business as
precisely as possible, emphasizing that 
the process of defining the core
business is at the heart of what a management team must do and is inherently
an imprecise science.
We fully acknowledge that the theme of seeking profit from the 
core is not
new, and throughout the book we acknowledge extensive 
work done by
others on this and related topics. We feel compelled to 
return to the theme for
three reasons. First, the empirical data on 
the frequency with which
management teams undervalue their core 
business is overwhelming. Why are
their expectations so low? Second, focusing solely on a strong core businessis necessary to but not 
sufficient for achieving sustainable growth.
Management teams 
constantly meet with opportunities to move into related
businesses, 
and at times such moves are absolutely necessary to strengthen
the 
core and add new profit streams. How should management teams 
respond
to this basic tension in business-when to focus on the 
core, when to pursue
adjacent opportunities? Third, a management 
team must sometimes choose to
make a fundamental change in 
the essence of the company's core business if
it is to create new 
and sustainable growth. This is especially the case in any
industry 
experiencing turbulent times. How should managers think about 
this
decision-which involves more risk than any other they will 
make-to change
the core in the interest of protecting the core?
To address these questions, we have structured this book around 
the three
basic issues management must face in seeking profit from 
the core:
1. Build market power and influence in the core business or in 
a segment of
that business.
2. Having done that, expand into logical and reinforcing adjacencies around
the core.
3. Shift or redefine the core in response to industry turbulence.
In chapter 2, we discuss how to define a core business and illustrate how to
obtain the full potential from a core business. We introduce the first paradox
of growth: The better performing of your 
business units are likely to be those
operating the furthest below their 
full potential. We have found that when
most management teams 
seek to revitalize the growth of a company, they
focus on the underperforming business units. We argue that growth requires
focusing 
instead on increasing the performance of the best businesses, no
matter how well they are doing at present. The best business is in 
the best
position to deliver better growth.
We begin by presenting evidence that a strong core is the key 
source of
competitive advantage and then go on to define core business boundaries,
means for differentiation through gaining market 
power and influence, and
reasons why many of the best core businesses often are performing below
their full growth potential and 
have a set of classic sources of "hidden value."In turbulent industry 
situations, however, the ability to define the boundaries
of a core 
business becomes more challenged and the importance of traditional
measures of market share, therefore, less relevant. In many 
traditional
industries, competition among identical business models is the rule, yet more
and more today we are observing competition among fundamentally different
business models. Dealing with 
this increased competitive complexity is one
of the primary issues 
facing business strategists in many industries.
In chapter 3, we shift to the topic of what we call adjacency 
expansion,
moving into a set of new but related businesses around 
the core business. In
discussing adjacency expansion, we introduce 
the second paradox of growth:
The stronger your core business, the 
more opportunities you have both to
move into profitable adjacencies 
and to lose focus. Chapter 3 examines the
typical patterns exhibited 
by those companies with the best records of
historical growth. 
Some businesses, such as Toyota, Tetra Pak, McDonald's,
Intel, 
Cisco Systems, and UPS, have grown for decades, if not longer, by
systematically expanding into logical business adjacencies around a 
relatively
stable core. We reinforce the findings of dozens of studies with our own data
showing how many of the most promising 
growth strategies were derailed by
overexpansion or choice of the 
wrong adjacency. Industry turbulence,
however, sometimes makes 
it necessary for managers to place more bets at
the periphery of the 
business to hedge against uncertainties instead of
marching forward on a planned path for growth, year after year, as seen in the
expansion of stores in retail.
In chapter 4, we address when and how to redefine a core business, 
especially
when faced with industry turbulence. Here we introduce 
the third paradox of
growth: The management teams that have been 
most successful in building a
strong core business and that have benefited 
from adjacency expansion are
also the most vulnerable to industry turbulence. In some ways, this theme of
redefinition runs sotto voce 
throughout every chapter of the book. The record
of long-lived strong 
core businesses successfully redefining themselves and
reasserting 
leadership is not an encouraging one for legacy companies.
Chapter 4 also examines the increasingly close linkage between 
organization
and growth strategy. In these situations of turbulence 
and short response
times, the popular epithet "structure follows 
strategy" is being rewritten as"sometimes structure determines 
strategy." The ability to react quickly and
refine strategy based on 
marketplace events is a major source of competitive
advantage for 
many successful companies.
In chapter 5, we provide some guidelines for the process of developing and
refining growth strategy. We also conclude with the fourth 
paradox of
growth: All organizations inhibit growth. In today's turbulent business
environment, change-in company strategies, structures, and people-is crucial
to achieving sustained profitable 
growth. To master change, managers must
pursue it, not resist it.
While the message of profit from the core is simple, the challenges
management faces in translating it into action are extraordinary. Each
paradox of growth threatens to defeat management, to 
decrease the odds of
achieving sustainable, profitable growth. The 
failure rate is as high as 99
percent.
We believe that the three elements of growth strategy listed 
above are as
relevant to stable industries, such as food processing or textiles, in a long-
term equilibrium as they are to turbulent industries, ranging from electric
utilities to online retail, careening from 
disequilibrium to disequilibrium.
However, in turbulent conditions 
many of the common strategic rules of
thumb need to be adapted.
A great deal of excellent work has been done by academic 
researchers and
business practitioners on the topic of how traditional rules of strategy, first
developed for a stable, capital-intensive 
industry, now must be adapted for
businesses facing the need to 
redefine themselves (especially information-
intense businesses) 
around economic turbulence. For instance, Clayton
Christensen 
has described brilliantly how new competitors can emerge and
thrive using "disruptive" technologies, building power in low-profit 
marginal
customers as the incumbent helplessly watches on.' Carl 
Shapiro has
described how the peculiar economics of information 
businesses require a
new set of economic rules to develop robust 
business strategies.' Others have
examined why large companies are 
slow to adapt to change or why market
share is less important than 
it used to be. Throughout the book we gratefully
acknowledge and 
build on this foundational work.We have referred repeatedly to the paradoxical aspects of growth 
strategy in
business. Certainly, the world is full of paradoxes. To hit 
a golf ball farther,
you hold the club more loosely. To right a car during an icy skid, you take
your foot off the brake. To make a plant 
grow stronger and more quickly, you
cut it back.
Overlying all of the analysis in this book is a final paradox: From 
focus
comes growth; by narrowing scope one creates expansion. It is 
remarkable to
us how, despite the array of growth opportunities 
presenting themselves to
most management teams, the most reliable and consistent solution is to profit
from the core.
 The idea of a core set of economic activities is as old as management 
science
itself. David Ricardo's writings in 1817 on comparative 
advantage in trade
were, in part, an attempt to determine the core 
set of activities around which a
nation should focus its resources. 
Alfred Marshall's work in the late 1800s on
increasing returns to 
scale anticipates the idea of business definition and
competitive 
advantage from a growing core. Economists in the 1930s and
1940s 
examining antitrust matters constantly encountered the issues of
business definition and how far market power extended from a core 
business.
During the 1980s, an era of breakup artists and corporate 
restructuring, many
business writers, such as Michael Porter, documented how corporations'
returns declined as their activities 
became more diffused and their core
became less well defined. The 
issue of strategic focus has been examined in
writings ranging from 
the stick-to-your-knitting theme of In Search of
Excellence to the 
work on core competence by Hamel and Prahalad to the
idea of a 
central core vision in Built to Last.'
Profit from the Core builds on this by providing overwhelming 
evidence that
shows how often a strong core coupled with focused 
leadership-the stronger
and more focused, the better-is often at the epicenter of the most successful
cases of sustained and profitable growth. By contrast, we find equally
overwhelming evidence 
of how inadequate self-knowledge about the real
potential of 
the core-or misjudgments about the extent to which perceived
strengths can really be extended into new areas-leads to strategic 
difficulties.
In the rest of this book we discuss how to define and 
strengthen a core, how
to determine the best growth opportunities 
emanating out from a core, and
when to step back and redefine 
the core.
The Power of Focusing on the Core
Companies that have very few highly focused core businesses account 
for
most of the sustained growth companies. The historical record 
shows thatmost diversified companies should narrow and focus their 
activities to create
fewer growth platforms, while companies with 
multiple mediocre business
positions are better off restructuring 
their portfolios to develop, strengthen,
and reinforce a single core if 
they can create one that possesses what we refer
to as leadership economics. The evidence clearly supports this viewpoint:
• Most companies that sustain value creation possess only one 
or two strong
cores.
• Private equity companies often achieve their greatest success 
by buying
orphan businesses from diffuse conglomerates, 
thereby creating focus where
there had been none before.
• Spin-offs usually create both focus and value.
• Diversification is associated with lower average valuations 
than are typical
of companies with focused cores.
• Acquisitions made for the purpose of expanding scale in a 
core business
have a success rate that is at least twice that of 
acquisitions to diversify and
expand "scope"
• The few companies that became smaller and still created 
value-that "shrank
to grow"-are those that restructured to 
focus on a strong core, often
eventually to turbocharge their 
growth again.
Evidence from Sustained Value Creators
An examination of the companies that have sustained both value 
creation and
at least 5.5 percent annual growth over ten years shows 
that nearly 80 percent
of these sustained value creators had one 
core business with a leadership
position in its "core of the core" 
(figure 2-1). These businesses were the
source of most of their companies' profitable growth. Another 17 percent of
sustained value creators had multiple cores around which they built their
growth. We 
also looked at the difference between multi-core companies and
single-core, more focused companies. Our findings show that conglomerates
typically have a somewhat lower probability of attaining the 
sustained value
creator threshold than single-core companies. However, there is a strongexception to this rule. Those conglomerates that have a large percentage of
their portfolio in positions of leadership 
economics, and have a well-defined
repeatable formula for adding 
value uniquely to businesses and new
acquisitions (a differentiated 
management system), do outperform. Examples
would be "themed" 
conglomerates like Procter & Gamble in consumer
products, or purer 
conglomerates like Danaher and United Technologies.
Each of these 
companies has a well-defined "way," a repeatable formula, that
adds 
value from the center, at the corporate level. In fact, each company
actually defines the description of its strategy around the elements of 
this
repeatable formula such as the ACE program of United Technologies or the
highly successful Danaher Business System.
Source: Worldscope database, OneSource, industry reports, Bain analysis.
Note: Core is defined as the business that creates a majority of the company's
revenues. Leadership is 
defined as relative market share greater than 1.2.Many of the sustained value creators that we examined followed 
a common
pattern: a tightly focused, sustained value creating company pulls farther and
farther ahead of its rival, which is embedded 
in a diversified company with
no clear focus or core. For example, in 
soft drinks, PepsiCo (a food
conglomerate until its recent breakup) 
trails Coca-Cola, a more focused
competitor, in the soft drink business. Anheuser-Busch leads in the U.S. beer
business, followed by 
Miller, which was part of a packaging foods
conglomerate until 
combining with SAB. Motorola and Ericsson, both
companies with 
many separate parts, follow Nokia in the cellular phone
business. 
IBM and numerous other technology conglomerates follow EMC
Corporation in data storage devices.
It is almost as if most growth strategies harbor a dark, destructive force that
causes companies to reduce their focus on their core 
business and thereby to
depart from the basis of their real differentiation. Consider the following
questions: Why did Citibank acquire 
Travelers, an insurance company, in
1998 despite manifest opportunities and challenges in its banking core? Why
did GM purchase 
Electronic Data Systems when it was under the greatestpressure in 
its core automotive business? Why did Vivendi pursue the
noncore 
entertainment business so aggressively (and at great cost) when its
core business was environmental services involving waste and 
water? Or, to
return to an earlier example, why did Bausch & Lomb 
seemingly abandon its
eye-care leadership to invest in hearing aids, ointments, and dental products-
moves that collectively proved 
disastrous? These companies are run by smart
people who must be 
familiar with the body of evidence proving the power of
business 
focus and the need to outinvest competitors in their core business.
So what happened?
Evidence from Private Equity
Impressive evidence of the strategic value of focusing on a 
strong core comes
from companies that change their status from 
orphan businesses in large
conglomerates to become freestanding 
businesses whose only cores are
themselves. It is no wonder that 
private equity firms love to purchase noncore
businesses from 
large conglomerates.
Consider the case of Accuride. Accuride sold truck rims and 
wheels to a
concentrated number of original equipment manufacturer customers such as
Ford, Volvo, General Motors, MAC, and 
Freightliner. Within Firestone Tire
& Rubber Company, its previous 
owner, Accuride was an orphan. Its
business was not even remotely 
related to any of Firestone's core tire or
rubber businesses. Interestingly, it also competed against a number of other
companies, such 
as Goodyear and Budd, for which the steel rim-and-wheel
business 
was also secondary. Did the noncore nature of these businesses
provide a growth opportunity for a company that might choose to 
invest and
manage Accuride differently? Bain Capital thought so.
Upon acquisition by Bain Capital, Accuride's focus changed. 
The company
was cut loose from the budget constraints, management neglect, and low
status it had experienced at Firestone. As 
Mitt Romney, managing director of
Bain Capital at the time (and 
subsequently a 2008 U.S. presidential
candidate), observes, "It was 
now a case of grow or perish."2 Accuride's
executives studied the 
market and economics in a new way. They concluded
that if they 
could get close to 100 percent market share of several major
customers, they could tilt industry dynamics in their favor and capture 
the
majority of the industry's pool of profits for the long term. This, in turn, coulddiscourage Goodyear and Budd from investing heavily in what was by no
means their core business. And, of course, 
competitor disinvestment is a
desirable outcome for any strategy.
To achieve their goals, the Accuride executives added low-cost 
capacity and
preemptively offered lower prices and superior terms 
that competitors could
not quickly match. Romney continues, 
"Goodyear acted slowly and decided
not to match. Masco was 
stunned and stopped investing in plant capacity. I
can remember a 
winter day walking around its deserted, partially completed
site 
with snow-covered equipment. Budd did open a Mexican facility. 
But by
then it was over-game, set, and match."
Nowhere is the value of focus as clear as in a single-product company
fighting for its life against less-focused competitors embedded 
in large
conglomerates with many cross-cutting agendas and tradeoffs. Accuride saw
its market share relative to competitors go 
through the roof, its absolute share
double, and its profitability rise 
66 percent in less than two years. Bain
Capital, for its insight into an 
undermanaged core business competing against
other undermanaged core businesses, earned nearly twenty-five times return
on its 
investment.
The power of focusing on the core proved a decisive factor in 
this success
story. While there are few controlled experiments in 
business, because of the
number of economic factors at play, there 
are many cases, such as Accuride,
that demonstrate the power of 
reestablishing intense focus on a single core,
building strength by 
acquiring competitors or by driving the profitable core
through 
increased investment and a more aggressive strategy. Many of 
the
most successful investments in the annals of leveraged buyouts 
and private
equity firms stem from strategically undermanaged, 
noncore businesses (with
profitable cores at their centers) that are 
purchased and revived by a new
owner.
Evidence from Spin-offs
The experiences of companies that have split themselves up or 
spun off major
divisions or groups as separate public companies offer still more evidence of
the power of focus. David Sadder, Andrew 
Campbell, and Richard Koch's
examination of the aftermath of spinoffs found that they have led to anaverage 15 percent increase in the 
companies' relative competitive
performance in the stock market.' In 
another study of more than one hundred
companies that had undergone spin-offs, New York analyst Steven Bregman
found that the 
spin-offs generated an annual rate of return from 1991 through
1996 
of 37.2 percent, as compared to only a 17.5 percent increase in the
Standard & Poor's index over the same period.4
PepsiCo provides an example of this positive spin-off effect. 
Over the past
two decades, Coca-Cola has outperformed PepsiCo 
substantially, even
though PepsiCo has performed well and provided total return to shareholders
of 23 percent. Moreover, Pep- 
siCo's fast-food restaurant business was
lagging in its performance 
and falling behind that of another focused
competitor, McDonald's. 
In 1997, PepsiCo spun off its $14 billion restaurant
business, which 
consisted of Taco Bell, Kentucky Fried Chicken, and Pizza
Hut.
Many who followed the company argued that the restaurant 
business was a
drag on the beverage business and that the beverage 
businesses caused lack
of focus on the noncore restaurants. One 
Wall Street Journal article even
asserted that there was economic 
value destruction from the combination:
Some analysts argue that Pepsi is a distant second to Coke in 
the profitable
fountain business-selling syrup to restaurants 
for their soda fountains-
precisely because of its ownership 
of fast-food chains. Coke's sales force can
tell a restaurant that 
by offering Pepsi-Cola drinks it is putting money in the
pockets of competitors Taco Bell and Pizza Hut.'
Management acknowledged to the investors that the restaurant 
business was
diverting too much attention and time from its need 
to focus on the core.
Former CEO Roger Enrico admitted that "a 
whole lot more focus would be
very beneficial. 6
At the time, one article called the restaurant business "an anchor 
pulling
through the sand at the bottom of the ocean "' But since the 
spin-off, both the
original core and the new restaurant business, Yum! Brands, Inc. (the
erstwhile Tricon Global Restaurants) have 
done well, the latter outperforming
its reference group of restaurants by a factor of two.Evidence from Diversification Studies
Further evidence of the power of a strong, singular core comes 
from studies
of the impact of shareholder value on diversification 
(the opposite of focus on
the core). One extensive empirical study 
was done by Constantinos Markides,
who examined the extent and 
effects of corporate refocusing in the 1980s.
Defining refocusing as a 
company's decision to reduce the scope of its
activities in order to 
concentrate on the "core" business (that is, to reduce
diversification), Markides found that more companies were refocusing in the
1980s than had done so in the 1960s. In the 1960s, only 1 percent of 
the top
American companies were refocusing, while 25 percent were 
diversifying. In
the 1980s, more than 20 percent of these companies 
were refocusing, while 8
percent were diversifying. In addition, his 
research showed that companies
refocused by divesting unrelated 
businesses and acquiring related ones.
Among the top one hundred 
U.S. companies from 1981 through 1987, more
than 65 percent of 
acquisitions were related to the core business and nearly
58 percent 
of divestitures were unrelated to the core business. Markides also
found that reducing diversification created market value, showing 
that a
company's market value goes up nearly 2 percent on the day it 
announces its
refocusing.'
Michael Porter, in a study published in the Harvard Business 
Review in 1987,
also looked at the contribution of diversification to 
corporate performance.
Analyzing the diversification histories of 
thirty-three large U.S. companies
from 1950 through 1986, he 
found dismal track records. In fact, these
corporations, on average, 
had divested more than half of their acquisitions in
new industries 
and more than 60 percent of their acquisitions in entirely new
fields. The average divestment rate in unrelated acquisitions was 
even higher-
nearly 75 percent.9
A more recent Bain & Company study looked at 7,315 divestitures 
completed
by 742 companies over the twenty-year period from 1987 
through 2007. The
study found that a set of companies identified as 
being the "best divestors"
earned a return for shareholders that was 80 
percent higher than the average
company over that time. An example 
is the Swiss pharmaceutical company
Roche. In 2000, the company 
sold off its flavors and fragrances, vitamins,
and fine chemical businesses to focus investments more intensively onpharmaceuticals and 
related diagnostic products. Given that many of these
businesses had 
been in the Roche portfolio for more than 50 years, this was
not an 
easy decision. Yet, it was a necessary condition to make Roche the
bestperforming major pharmaceutical company in the world at the time.10
More recently, David Harding and Sam Rovit have shown in their 
book
Mastering the Merger that "scale deals" (acquisition of a company 
in the
same business) perform significantly better than "scope deals" 
(acquisition of
a company in a different business)." The average success rate (defined as
creating economic value reflected in the share 
price) of deals is only about 30
percent. The worst deals they found, 
and which we confirmed through
additional analysis, are "big bang" 
transforming mergers (such as AOL-Time
Warner, or DaimlerChrysler) whose success rate we judge to be a paltry 5 to
10 percent.
Evidence from Shrinking Value Creators
Our final validation of the power of focusing on the profitable 
core comes
from our analysis of the rare and transient group of 
shrinking value creators.
These are the few companies (only 3 percent to 4 percent of our sustained
value creators) whose real revenues shrank during the decade of our analysis
but whose rates of 
value creation remained positive. Eighty-five percent of
the shrinking value creators in our database followed the same formula: They
shrank their company down to a subset of businesses clustered 
around an
original core. One example is Sears, which decided to 
divest its financial
services businesses as it was working to revive its 
core retail business.
Another is General Dynamics, which undertook an extensive divestiture
program. A third is Royal Vopak, a Dutch 
company in the marine oil and
chemical storage business that 
shrunk its business in 2001 by more than 85
percent to its strongest 
core-and today is worth more than four times what it
was when the 
company was about seven times larger!
What is especially striking about shrinking value creators is the 
extent to
which the right answer for each involved shrinking in a 
way that restored the
core business to its original status at the center. Consider Guinness, the Irish
brewing business that stems back 
to 1759, when thirty-four-year-old Arthur
Guinness leased a small 
disused brewery at St. James Gate on the outskirts of
Dublin (at a 
rent of £45 per year for a nine-thousand-year term). In 1886,Guinness became the first brewery to be listed on the London Stock
Exchange, and soon after, it became the largest brewer in the world.
After World War II, the Guinness family launched a major diversification
program, entering no fewer than 250 other businesses. By 
the early 1980s,
Guinness's growth had ground to a halt, and its 
equity in Stout, the smooth
dark beer for which it is famous, was 
severely eroded. The company's only
hope was to retrace its steps 
back to the core. So it embarked on an
aggressive divestiture program and, during one eighteen-month period, sold
more than 150 
of its businesses. The liberated cash was reinvested in the beer
business to automate systems, develop new products, rebuild the Guinness
brand equity, and fuel international expansion. Over the next 
eight years, the
company's stock price increased nearly ten thousand 
times (!), and in 1997
the company merged with Grand Metropolitan to become Diageo.
Fortunately, Guinness returned to the profitable core before it was too late.
Exceptions to the Strong Core
This crystalline business form is a useful point of departure. Yet, 
while the
data shows that market share dominance in a well-defined core business
creates superior profitability, it does not address 
several more common
situations.
First, it does not explain the historic success of many strong follower
businesses such as American Express versus Visa in credit 
cards, Canon
versus Xerox in copiers, Toyota versus GM in automotive, or Southwest
versus United in airlines. Such an explanation 
requires a broader way of
thinking about what types of market 
power and influence can achieve
leadership economics without 
leading scale. Second, while the data
emphasizes the importance of 
relative market share in well-defined
businesses, it does not address 
the increasingly common situation of blurred
and fuzzy business 
boundaries that make it extremely difficult to determine
market 
share and relevant competitors. Just think of markets such as
communication lines into the home, in which cable competes with 
phone
lines competing with wireless competing with Ti lines, and 
so on. Or think of
the newspaper industry whose competition was 
once no more complex thanthe other newspaper in town. Today, 
with information "unbundled" and on
the Internet, there are 
new and separate competitors for virtually every
category-stock 
quotations (Yahoo!), headlines (CNN.com), classifieds
(Craigslist), 
weather (weather.com)-and the picture is further complicated by
new delivery vehicles like Amazon's electronic book, the Kindle. 
What now
is the right business definition and boundaries? No 
longer is it sufficient to
keep track of only one set of similar competitors in a well-defined historical
arena. No longer are you guaranteed a collegial industry association to collect
and array market 
data, as was the case in industries such as steel and machine
tools 
and typewriters. Today the equivalent industry association for each 
of
these product groups would have ambiguous boundaries-if it 
existed.
The remainder of this chapter summarizes the key requirements 
for building a
strong core as the foundation for growth strategy. For 
each, we provide some
tools and suggest the most common sources 
of failure in the cases we studied.
Define the Business
Having a clear sense of business boundaries and of the definition of 
your core
is a critical starting point for growth strategy. Are the 
boundaries stable or
shifting? Which areas must be defended at all 
costs, and which are not
strategic? From which areas will future 
profits likely spring, and from which
will current profits likely 
diminish? What is the true source of differentiation
and capability 
to win against competitors, and how might the shifting
business 
boundaries demand changes in your core capabilities in order to
compete in the future?
Perhaps the greatest danger in the companies we studied came 
from mistakes
in defining the "core" correctly and determining the 
right definition of the
appropriate boundaries in which it can reasonably compete. We have found
that failing to do that correctly 
can lead to premature departures from the core
and sometimes to 
disastrous misadventures in pursuit of businesses that
should not 
have been pursued, and, in fact, whose pursuit even imperiled the
original core itself.
Dell Computer, the top performer of the decade from 1990 
through 1999among large companies, departed from its core with a 
jolt and quickly
returned. Dell grew rapidly from its initial public 
offering in 1988. In 1993 it
decided to expand from its core of direct 
sales of computers by launching a
sales program targeted at discount 
retailers and wholesale clubs. Shortly
thereafter, the company began 
to lose money. It suffered a loss of $37 million
on sales of $600 million in the third quarter of 1993. Michael Dell and his
team quickly 
diagnosed the problem as the company's departure from its core
strategy and "direct sales model" and its attempt to sell just like its
competitors, through retailers. Although the retail program constituted only
10 percent of Dell's business at the time, it had a huge 
effect. The expansion
eroded the core itself because of, as Michael 
Dell says today, "the confusion
[it] injected into our strategy. Every 
major business decision in the core
business was set against the 
question of what it would do to the unprofitable
retail part of the business ... When we realized this, we withdrew
immediately. Even 
though it was painful and costly to do this, it was
probably one of the 
defining moments for the company and saved us from
disaster.""
The personal computer business in the early 1990s, the time of 
the Dell
example, was growing at well over 20 percent each year and 
changing
rapidly. It is no surprise that a small turn of the steering 
wheel could send the
speeding vehicle of Dell briefly onto the 
shoulder of the road, shocking the
driver into turning back onto the 
pavement. However, similar departures from
the core can occur 
even in businesses that exist in much slower growth
environments. 
No matter what your business or industry is, focusing on the
core 
requires continual diligence.
The case of Hilti International provides a great example of the 
sustained,
profitable growth that can emerge from refocusing on the 
core. Hilti was
founded in 1941 by the brothers Martin and Eugen 
Hilti to commercialize
their design of the DX nail gun for firing 
metal fasteners into concrete using a
proprietary power-activated 
system. The company has since grown to nearly
$1.8 billion as the 
leader in innovation in preformed drilling and fastening
products.
During the early 1990s, Hilti found itself in an extended period 
of stagnant
growth in an industry that has historically grown at less 
than 1 percent. Thecompany responded by moving swiftly into a 
range of new products at the
lower end of the market, including 
drill bits and fasteners, basic supplies,
screws, and chemicals. This 
move brought an increase in revenue growth to 4
percent but also 
the unintended consequence of driving down profits and
margins.
The Hilti family felt it was time for a more fundamental 
appraisal of its
growth strategy. Examining every customer segment 
and product line in
detail, management discovered that virtually all 
of the new lower-end
products intended to increase sales per customer were unprofitable. It
concluded that the company had moved 
prematurely away from its core
competence of innovation in solving 
complex and specialized customer
problems through new, highly 
engineered products and superior customer
support. Indeed, a 
study at the University of Aachen during this time
identified Hilti as being among the most innovative product companies in
Southern 
Europe. For instance, Hilti developed the first drill with a vacuum
surrounding its drill head to allow a mason to work without leaving 
a particle
of dust on the floor.
Through initiatives of its CEO at the time, Dr. Pius Baschera, 
Hilti refocused
on its core. Baschera called the company's new strategy Champion 3C (for
customer, competency, and concentration). 
The result was investment in
product innovation and even deeper 
specialized application of drilling and
fastening, such as diamond 
coring mining (strenuous applications with high-
risk and demanding technical specifications) as well as new ranges of
premium 
products, such as for woodworking. At the same time, Hilti
throttled back on the lower-end, marginal product lines. Its growth since 
the
mid-1990s has been 9 percent in revenues and 14 percent in 
profits through
increased geographic penetration and a burst of 
new technical products.
Today the company is examining new 
growth initiatives once again for its
core business in growing segments like the installation of solar panels. But
this time, these extensions will cluster around the core of technical, highly
engineered, 
premium products, leveraging the technical sales force and
protecting the high-quality brand.
Setting the Right Boundaries
Without a clear point of view about business boundaries, it is 
difficult todetermine competitive position, the relative importance 
of differently
positioned competitors, or the relative strategic 
importance of different
growth opportunities. To make the right 
decisions, it is critical to have a clear
definition of your core business, the relevant business adjacencies that
surround your core, and 
the competitive and economic landscape. The degree
to which these 
adjacent areas are related to your own core is key to
establishing 
your business offense and defense across the boundaries.
Mapping 
out the territory should be the starting point of any growth strategy
in business.
The profitable core is centered on your strongest position in 
terms of loyal
customers, competitive advantage, unique skills, and 
the ability to earn
profits. If you are not profitable in your core, 
except during the earliest
phases of market development and startup, something is probably wrong.
Surrounding the core are the 
most promising adjacencies for expansion,
where the skills of the 
core can be leveraged or where defensive moves are
critical to protect core customers. But these moves require a strong core to
build 
upon. The average "adjacency move" has a success rate, we find, of 
20
to 25 percent. Adjacency moves off a strong core have nearly 
twice the
success rate. And such moves, if "very close" to a welldefined core, can go
even higher. Growth in many industries comes 
down to the ability to spot the
right adjacency moves before your 
competitors, to execute them faster, and to
achieve higher odds of 
success. In some competitive battles, such as the U.S.
battle for athletic footwear between Nike and Reebok, a strong core with a
repeatable formula to leverage into new adjacencies can be the 
defining
reason why one company-Reebok-lapses into the background, while the
other-Nike-emerges as the undisputed leader.
But, you might ask, aren't we supposed to remove boundaries, 
not add them,
to come up with growth strategy? Aren't we supposed 
to think outside of the
box, not in and around a definition? No. 
Misdefining the business (whether
through poor judgment or plain 
sloppiness) commits you to invest in areas
unlikely to lead to profitable growth or to ignore areas you should reinforce.
Defining the 
business accurately is a way of creating a logical hierarchy of
territories in and around your core business that help you target wise
investments, stop investments that are out of bounds, and track 
market share,
making profit comparisons with competitors.Just think for a moment of playing tennis. If two competitors 
had different
definitions of the court but only one was right, the 
one with the wrong
definition would surely lose the game. He 
would either fire shots outside the
true boundaries or hit to a narrow space that was too small, making it easier
for his opponent to 
return the ball. If a pair of doubles players had different
concepts of the court boundaries, chaos would ensue, and the team would
quickly dissolve.
Consider the following actual growth strategy decisions that 
hinge on subtle
and difficult issues of business definition:
• Is Coca-Cola in the cola business, the soft drink business, the 
beverage
business, or some other business? Ample evidence 
suggests that Coke has
defined its business success as share of 
liquid consumed, not share of cola,
and that this definition 
has enlarged the company's sense of full potential and
emboldened its investment strategy ("I'd like to buy the 
world a Coke")
relative to competitors.
• Is the business definition of Google just the search engine and 
its logical
adjacencies? Or does its strength and ability to 
compete extend into all
searchlike arenas from maps to community networking? Will it one day
extend its business to the 
distribution of information products (it is already
digitally 
scanning all major books on the planet)? Or is it an advertising
services provider, with a business that involves licensing 
its unique software
to others (as it does with Yahoo! for 
searches)?
• Does a glass windshield manufacturer correctly define its 
business as
supplying windshields? Or should it consider 
creeping into subsystem
integration, adding to the tasks it 
performs on and around a windshield or
glass side panel? 
Consolidation is rampant in the automobile parts industry,
with more and more companies integrating and assembling 
systems of doors,
seats, or electrical subsystems and expanding along their value chain. Here,
business definition has a 
defensive application as well as offensive.
• Is Nokia in the business of providing ever more sophisticated 
handsets, or
can its hardware business shift to software and 
services embedded in the
phone as a distribution vehicle? For 
instance, in 2007 Nokia purchased
NAVTEQ, one of the two leading geopositional map and data companies.This move 
brings it into direct competition with other types of devices 
such
as TomTom's positioning product line. As Nokia's handset business starts to
slow, and traffic on wireless phones 
shifts from voice to data, Nokia must
redefine its business in a 
realistic and attainable way. How do moves like this
redraw 
business boundaries and redefine the core?
• What must CBS do to strengthen its once nearly dominant 
core? Should it
focus on content production; extend the core 
by creating and controlling the
largest number of cable channels; reinvigorate CBS News to compete more
vigorously 
with CNN, as NBC has tried to do through CNBC; or take 
some
other tack? In the last five years, market share numbers 
for top networks have
continued to slip to single-digit 
percentages of viewers who have a plethora
of options. Which 
direction to choose? And how will the business definition,
and the type of differentiation, shift in the future?
• On an even larger scale, how should AT&T define its business 
now that the
methods by which voice messages are transmitted change and the
transmission of data (a much bigger slice 
of the telecom infrastructure)
escalates and moves from 
traditional phone lines to wireless, cable, private
systems, 
and, most of all, the Internet? What, then, are the business 
definition
and the core of AT&T as the promise of technology 
convergence continues to
prove itself?
The need for a strong core business to support a growth strategy 
requires
defining both what that business is and what it is not-and 
where it can
compete versus where it cannot.
The Blurring of Business Boundaries
Without a clear and accurate point of view on the boundaries of 
your core
business and how they might be changing over time, it is 
possible to make
fatal growth-strategy mistakes. Throughout this book we caution that errors
in defining a business are among the 
most frequent and most dangerous
forms of strategic error. Yet 
today business boundaries are more difficult to
determine and are 
changing more often than ever before.13
Our experience is that the size and scope of most core businesses 
that might
establish significant competitive advantage are shrinking 
due to the use ofoutsourcing and customer segmentation specialists. At the same time, the
area around any core business, the 
adjacencies of relevance for strategy, is
growing substantially. Moreover, potential future competitors for your
current core and future 
sources of control over the profitability (the profit
pool) in your core 
business lie in these adjacencies.
Consider the following examples. For years, digital imagery was 
a document
management technology at the boundary of Xerox's 
core copier business. But
it took the advent of high-speed printers, 
combined with the power of new
word processing software, for digital imagery to become both a threat to and
a primary shaper of the 
future profit pool for Xerox. Or consider network TV
news, long a 
tight oligopoly of three participants, with cable TV at the
fringes. 
Today, the three networks have a minority share of news-related
programming viewed on television and an even smaller share of the 
margin
pool. Or think about the dynamics in the telephone business today. At what
point will wireless cellular services become the 
same business as land lines?
How will the continued evolution of 
Internet telephony affect the profit pools
of both in a significant 
way? And what will this mean for the long-term
definition of the 
telephone business and the sources of differentiation that
will allow 
companies of the future to compete profitably?
These are three examples of large and increasingly important 
adjacencies
around a once tightly defined core business. The blurring of boundaries and
creation of larger arenas of relevance strategically around a core are being
driven by a number of key trends 
that are likely to persist for the foreseeable
future:
• Outsourcing and the disintegration of traditional value 
chains
• Increased customer micro segmentation and new, more 
narrowly focused
competitors
• Increased competition among different business models 
rather than merely
among versions of the same one
• Digital convergence blurring the boundaries between all 
information
businesses• Forces of globalization blurring regional geographic boundaries and
increasing competitiveness
• Increasingly sophisticated supply chain strategies causing 
competition
between supply chains as much as between 
companies
Defining the Core
Your own core business is defined by that set of products, customer
segments, and technologies with which you can build the 
greatest competitive
advantage. Defining the boundaries is as much 
a matter of making sound
business judgments as of applying formulas or doing calculations.
A critical ingredient in formulating the right business definition 
is a clear
understanding of your core customers and products that 
are expected to yield
a majority of profit economics, or that have 
produced those economics
historically. We are surprised at how 
often we find that members of
management teams, when interviewed one on one, differ in their opinions of
the core customer set 
and products. Your understanding of and consensus
about the core 
can be sharpened by analyzing profit numbers and by mapping
out 
the profit pool for this core business across direct competitors and
customer segments.
Once you have an understanding of the right economics of the 
core customers
and products that you are currently serving, you can 
then examine successive
segments of the market radiating out from 
that core. In some complex
markets, there maybe as many as ten total 
segments. Each must be
understood and prioritized for resources. In general, we find that the key
strategic decisions are made in the inner 
core and in one or two other
segments emanating from it.
Taking the personal computer business as an example, think of 
the following
distinct areas of economic activity, all related to competition and growth in
companies such as Dell, Lenovo, and 
Hewlett-Packard. These segments are
listed from within the core 
PC business to the farthest out from the core, as
best as that sort of 
ordering is possible:
1. Segments within the core (PCs sold to elementary school 
students in theUnited States)
2. The inner core itself (the global PC market)
3. Indirect competitors for computing (such as dumb 
terminals attached to a
network)
4. Enhanced PC products (such as low-end servers and 
workstations)
5. Ancillary "computing" devices (appliances and handheld 
devices)
6. Complementary products but different businesses 
(software, software
loading, Internet service providers, 
peripherals)
7. Product line extensions (storage devices, enhanced services)
8. Upstream supply chain activities (components, "cloud" 
computing, remote
storage)
9. Downstream activities (retail, distribution)
10. Other businesses that could share costs with a PC business
Clearly, the majority of resources should be expended in defending and
expanding the inner core of the PC business, in staving off 
new competitors
at the boundaries, and in looking for complementary products and services to
deepen customer relationships and increase spending per customer. However,
it would be premature to 
define the business and develop strategy without
considering the full 
profit pool of the PC industry, including supplier power,
channel 
power, and the potential for new, disruptive technologies outside of
traditional boundaries. Specific competitors might define their own 
inner core
slightly differently, depending on their strengths. But the 
industry definition
would be the same for all, emanating farther out 
into the previous list (items 4
through 9).
Defining an area as noncore, at least for a while, can be as valuable as
defining an area as core. By taking a competitive arena off 
the agenda, you
focus the organization and liberate attention and 
resources for the most
important battles. Without such focus, organizations inherently tend to addsegments and priorities. This is an 
especially costly tendency in successful
businesses with a growing 
number of possible paths before them.
Defining the core obviously requires defining what is clearly 
irrelevant and
what falls into the gray area that needs to be carefully 
monitored or
anticipated. The key types of decisions that need to be 
anticipated in the gray
areas, or so-called blurring boundaries, are 
these:
• Do I need to expand my definition to include a new segment 
or technology?
If so, do I need to add it? If so, how?
• Are any of the competitive dynamics in the gray area likely to 
affect the
profit pool in my core business? If so, how, and how 
should I react?
• Are any of the competitors that are not currently threatening 
likely to make
incursions into my core customers? If so, what 
should I do?
• Are there capabilities or types of skills that I need to bring inhouse now to
be able to understand and, therefore, anticipate, 
some of the dynamics
adjacent to my current core?
• Are there partnerships or alliances I could forge to insulate 
and stabilize my
economic position surrounding my core?
Virtually every business has a core and an expanding and complex 
set of
adjacencies. Defining the core is critical, but being extremely 
self-conscious
and diligent about monitoring areas or competitors 
deemed temporarily to be
noncore can be just as important to longterm, sustainable growth. As the
examples and analyses in this book 
show, it is the balance between
maintaining a strong core and adjusting to threats and opportunities in
business adjacencies that is the 
central tension of growth strategy.
Differentiate for Unique Market Power and Influence
Successful differentiation creates lasting market power and influence over
customers or competitors. This section discusses the traditional metric,
relative market share, and then explores alternative 
sources of market powerand influence, which sustained value creators are using to their benefit. The
increasing potential for building 
substantial market power and influence in
the absence of scale gives 
strong followers and new entrants a greater
strategic edge than our 
data on stable industries might suggest, though they
face a set of 
strict conditions for strong followership.
Traditional Measures and Sources of Market Power
Our analysis over the past two decades shows consistently that 
most of the
sustained growth companies had achieved leadership in 
their core business,
as measured by their market share relative to 
their next largest competitor. In
spite of the recurrent talk about 
"new business models," and the many
situations where market 
power can be protected in a niche, or is resident in
new, small, and 
growing "challengers;" relative share is still the predominant
source 
of market power and the best single measure to start with. The original
source of market power is not usually scale. Scale is a result of 
other forms of
differentiation such as product development or channel control. In some
sense, scale is an output of more fundamental competitive advantage in the
core. Nonetheless, three-quarters of 
the most profitable companies in a
competitive arena have superior 
relative market share. This differential
drives, in most cases, superior 
cost and profits.
In an analysis of six hundred companies across more than eighty 
markets, we
determined the average rate of profitability over the 
cost of capital as
compared to relative market share. We found consistently that the average
returns for companies with weak relative 
market share (less than 30 percent
the size of the major competitor) 
was 16 points lower than for companies
with relative market shares 
that were at least 2.5 times as big as their major
competitors. 
Although relative market share has been criticized recently in
business writings for being used as the sole measure of market power 
and
influence, it nonetheless remains a significant measure in a 
large percentage
of industries.
Relative market share clearly drives market influence, cost position, and
resulting leadership economics in a wide range of businesses such as mass
retail (Wal-Mart), package delivery (UPS), 
grocery (Telco in the United
Kingdom or Publix in the United States, 
for instance), and telecom (AT&T).
We analyzed more systematically 
the core elements of the business models ofleaders and found that in 
60 percent of the cases, the most important source
of market power 
was relative cost leadership, driving both pricing and
reinvestment 
rate. In the other 40 percent, we also found that cost economics
and 
relative scale were important in half of those cases. However, there are
clearly many businesses in which market power and relative competitive
performance is driven heavily by the ability to create differentiated products
with consumer appeal at a superior rate (P&G, Apple, 
and BMW would be
examples here), and a few cases in which the key 
was to establish a
commanding position as a physical "control point" 
in a market (the classic
example would be the Microsoft operating 
system for PCs). And, of course,
sometimes a business begins and 
grows with a highly differentiated business
model that, with growth 
and development, begins to achieve economies of
scale and capture 
more traditional sources of leadership economics and cost
position (Amazon.com and Nike might be examples of such an evolution in
the source of leadership economics).
Developing Market Power and Influence
In examining the source of market power for the top one hundred small
companies as well as for a sample of our sustained value 
creators, we found
four basic ways that companies acquire market 
power and influence in a
competitive arena in a core business and 
thereby drive scale. These are
arrayed in figure 2-2. All of these 
methods are available to all businesses-
those that are followers 
and those that are leaders. A company considering its
growth strategy should ask itself which of these is the true underlying source
of 
power and influence.
Customer Loyalty. The most robust form of market power derives 
from
building a uniquely high and structurally stable level of loyalty 
in a well-
defined customer segment. A mere 5 percent increase in the 
retention of a
credit card company's best customers could lead to a 
value creation increase
of 75 percent. This increase comes from extending the lifetime value from
capturing a new customer and 
from realizing the permanent increase in
growth rate from a change 
in retention and loyalty. Because increases in
retention stop growth 
from "running out the bottom of the bucket," a growing
company 
can magnify its rate of growth by 5 to 10 percentage points by
effecting a permanent, one-time increase in retention. Few improvements 
in abusiness can have this impressive impact on sustained profitable 
growth.
2-2 Companies Acquire Market Power and Influence in Many WaysCustomer loyalty can be built as a competitive advantage in an 
existing
customer segment, as USAA has done in the case of insuring the needs of
current and former members of the military services. Today, USAA has more
than a 96 percent retention rate of this 
population, a 94 percent satisfaction
rating, and it sells an average of 
more than four separate products to each of
its customers, an 
almost unheard of share-of-wallet performance. USAA
systematically tracks each customer through twenty-three life stages,
carefully choreographing its marketing and sales programs around 
these
events of greatest propensity to purchase. 14 The achievement 
of market
power and influence through customer loyalty in these 
instances comes from
switching cost to the customer in tandem 
with offering superb customer
service and depth of knowledge.
The other way to build market power and influence through 
customer
segment focus and loyalty is by identifying or even creating a totally new
customer segment and dominating its experience 
of a product or service.
Starbucks coffee grew during the 1990s at a 
55 percent annual rate as
compared with a mere 1.3 percent growth 
in coffee consumption. Starbucks
serves eight million customers 
per week, who average an amazing eighteen
visits per month to its 
stores. Customers commonly drive five miles to buy
their cup of 
Starbucks coffee. On the surface, the pharmaceutical effect of the
strong, rich brew seems an easy explanation for this loyalty. However, other
companies' coffee is strong too. The lure comes from a 
carefully orchestrated
combination of product, ambience, and 
ubiquity. Certainly, many other
companies, such as Nestle, had the 
idea and the ability to develop a chain of
coffeehouses, but none used their leadership to do so. Starbucks' market
power and influence is made potent by scale but did not begin with scale. It is
interesting to see recent difficulties at Starbucks resulting in the return of 
the
founder to the helm of the company, commenting that he 
believed that the
essence of the company's core had been diluted 
and compromised over time-
and vowing a return to the original 
core values and customer practices that
drove its original success.
For instance, Fred Reichheld has, in a series of books over the 
past decade,
documented the many ways that the economics of customer loyalty work.
Central to a strong core are almost always a 
cadre of loyal core customers.
For instance, we have found strong 
supporting evidence in the fact that theone-in-ten businesses that 
we defined as sustained value creators (SVCs)
earlier in chapter 1 
not only tended to exploit leadership economics in their
core business, but also had customer advocacy scores that were, on average,
15 to 20 percentage points higher than the scores of non-SVC companies.
Reichheld, in his most recent book The Ultimate Question, 
provides
compelling data on the economic value of these strong 
core customers-he
refers to them as advocates. In industry after 
industry, the driving force
behind a strong core business is a farabove average percentage of these
customer advocates.15 Examples 
of companies with exceptionally high
percentages of "promoters" in 
their customer base would include Walgreens
(55 percent), USAA 
(94 percent), Costco (81 percent), and AFLAC in health
insurance 
(47 percent).
Channel Dominance. Establishing leadership in a new or existing 
channel of
product or service distribution is the second most common model of building
market power and influence, sometimes 
from a position of followership. This
is not a new discovery. It is 
how Venice transformed from a fishing village to
the wealthiest city 
in Europe in the 1400s through its control of the channel
by which 
spices and tea were then reaching the West.
Channel leadership is also how Dell Computer Company established its
market power in the 1990s (the "growth stock of the decade" according to the
Wall Street journal) and went from start-up 
to global leader in PCs and
workstations. Computer components, 
and even assembled computers, were
available by mail order well 
before Dell was formed. However, no one saw
the potential for the 
direct channel to gain share as clearly as Michael Dell
did. Selling 
direct, rather than through layers of distributors, value-added
resellers, and retail intermediaries (the way Compaq and IBM were 
selling
their computers at the time), had powerful economic advantages: lower cost
due to fewer layers and middleman markups, lower 
pipeline inventory and
fresher (higher-margin) components on 
average because of a six- versus
seventy-day inventory pipeline, and 
a distribution channel tailored in cost and
service to each customer 
segment. The brilliance of developing this channel
was not only its 
lower cost but also its potential for higher customer service
and, as 
luck would later have it, its ability to be turbocharged by the Internet.
The natural structural advantage that this direct channel conferred during this
growth phase of the PC industry was 10 percent 
to 15 percent over mostcompetitors at one-tenth the inventory and 
capital levels.
The Internet provided many companies with the potential in 
their industry to
enter and gain market power and influence in the 
new channel of online sales.
Charles Schwab has used the Web 
brilliantly to bootstrap itself from a
follower in the securities and 
financial management market to consumers to
the clear leader. We 
estimate that Schwab has three times relative market
share of online 
trading volume and captures a hefty 70 percent of the online
profit 
pool. Compare that with its share of profit in traditional channels,
which we estimate to be about 12 percent.
Product Development Differentiation. The power of differentiation 
through
superior product development is the rarest form of market 
power and
influence in our sample of sustained value creators. Our 
analysis of the
sustained value creators indicates that fewer than 5 
percent rely primarily on
this method. However, those companies 
that do build superior product
development engines often are able to enter new markets, dominated by
incumbents, and to gain market share profitably.
The entertainment industry-both recording artists and deviceshas long been
one where such differentiation is paramount. For 
instance, ten years ago, in
1999, Sony was a $63 billion company 
with revenues growing at a rate of
13.9 percent in 1996 through 
1999 and profits at an astounding rate of 48.9
percent. It had a long 
history, since its founding in 1946 as a consumer
electronics company, of growing by leveraging a stream of innovative
products. Its 
first challenge, from cofounder Masaru Ibuka, was to create
Japan's 
first pocket-sized radio. This deep and strong business core has
adapted throughout the ensuing half century. For example, Sony 
entered the
television business in 1968 and rapidly outgrew much 
larger competitors with
its Trinitron televisions, due to their superior clarity and color quality. Today,
the Sony TV is the standard 
of the industry. Another example: In 1995, Sony
took on Sega 
and Nintendo in the home video game station market and
emerged 
with leading market share-for a while. Ultimately, it lost position 
to
Nintendo when the latter came out with the Wii, offering a 
remarkable
advance in interactivity due to its unique user interface, 
a product feature
unrelated to historic scale, and one that swept 
leadership away in less than a
year from its launch. In a similar 
dramatic fashion, Sony lost its position toApple in small music 
players (where the Walkman was the early pioneer). By
early 2008, 
Apple had taken more than 71 percent of the market for portable
music players with its iPod; products from Sony no longer even 
made it onto
most market-share charts-great testimony to the 
power of product features
and user interfaces in a global manufacturing business.
Access to Capital. Though it does not focus on the topic, this book 
would be
incomplete if it did not at least mention the market power 
that occurs when
one competitor has access to capital (or very low 
cost capital) and others do
not. Over the past decade we have seen 
this play out in several distinct ways
for businesses whose "core" 
included a privileged access to capital. One way
that access to capital has been core to competitive advantage has been in
developing 
economies. Often, developing economies have higher risk
premiums and more challenging access to capital for large projects or
acquisitions. Those circumstances, over the years, have given rise to 
a wide
range of conglomerate forms such as the chaebol of Korea, 
where access to
capital was a key core advantage. The second way 
that access to capital has
conferred competitive advantage is in situations such as the global financial
crisis of 2008-2009 where liquidity dried up. Businesses in these situations
such as the large private 
equity firms, sovereign wealth funds, and companies
with strong 
leadership positions and cash flows will find that privileged
capital 
access is a core competitive advantage compared to rivals, permitting
moves that have enormous competitive implications in the 
longer term.
Seek the Full Potential Value of a Strong Core
Our argument so far can be summarized as follows: Few companies 
grow and
create value sustainably over periods even as short as ten 
years. Those that do
so tend to focus on one, or at most two, core 
businesses in which they are
clearly the leader or, in the rare cases of 
the strong followers, in which they
manage to simulate the economic conditions that accrue to market leadership.
These economic 
conditions and market power give companies higher
profitability, 
greater control over the extended industry profit pool, and
tighter 
control over investable capital in their competitive arenas. Typically,
as in the obvious cases of Coca-Cola, Intel, Cisco, Wal-Mart, UPS, 
Toyota,
Tesco, SAP, or Microsoft, the continued application of 
economic leadershipleads first to growth that outstrips that of others in the industry and then to
"traditional" scale leadership. For 
instance, two-thirds of our sustained value
creators grew more 
rapidly than their industry averages and were thereby
gaining share 
in their marketplaces. In fact, the average sustained value
creator 
in our database grew twice as rapidly as its industry in revenues 
and
more than three times as rapidly in total profits. The question naturally arises,
then, since most companies are followers, how can 
they gain market power
and simulate leadership economics?
Throughout the discussions of sustained value creation, we have 
indicated
our strong belief that many companies have, or once had, 
the right
ingredients but somehow failed to recognize the potential 
of their profitable
core. This failure has led companies to underin- 
vest in the core, to set
performance targets that are too low (leading 
to undermanagement), or to
abandon the core prematurely for 
seemingly greener pastures in new or hotter
industries. Companies 
consistently have a built-in bias, it seems, toward
underestimating 
three dimensions of the core:
1. Increasing returns to leadership, leading to higher profits
2. Influence over investable funds, leading to competitive 
advantage
3. Influence over the extended industry profit pool, leading to 
access to
superior profit growth opportunities in adjacent 
businesses
Increasing Returns to Market Leadership
How much should my business be earning? Where should I set 
profit and
return on investment targets and expectations for management? These are
critical questions that every CEO must answer 
every year. And many get the
answers wrong by failing to recognize 
both the full potential of their core
business and the potential for 
increasing returns on their investment in their
core business's market position. In doing so, managers set targets that are too
low, 
develop investment plans that are too modest, achieve growth that 
is too
low, watch market share trajectories flatten, and give competitors incentive to
invest more.
Just how strong are increasing returns in the core? The answer 
varies byindustry and competitive situation. However, the general 
pattern can be seen
by returning to our cross-sectional database. Our 
findings, plotted in figure 2-
3, indicate that companies near parity with their competitors earned an 11
percent return on capital. Market 
leaders, however, achieved a 14 percent
return on capital, and strong 
market leaders saw that percentage rise to an
impressive 18.
2-3 Market Leadership Drives Increasing Returns
Source: CapitallQ database; Bain case experience; Bain analysis.
Note: Return on Capital defined as EBIT*(1-tax rate)/(net working capital +
net property, plant and 
equipment + goodwill). Average of 600+ companies
in 80+ different markets. Leader/follower position 
determined based on size
relative to largest competitor.
Clearly, a leader can earn ten to fifteen points or more above its 
industryaverage and gain market share at the same time. Dell Computer has earned a
200 percent return on capital while growing at a 
rate three to four times the
industry average.
An example of a company that built an exceptionally strong 
leadership
position and failed, for a time, to recognize its full profit 
potential is the Dun
& Bradstreet Credit Services business. This 
business has roots in the early
1800s, when letters of reference from 
local bankers and prominent citizens
such as clergymen were used 
to encourage businesspeople to extend credit to
traders. The system 
worked well in small, local markets where community
members knew one another, but as the U.S. economy grew, the method no
longer sufficed. Moreover, the depression of 1837 saw more than 
six hundred
banks fail, further heightening the anxiety of lenders 
and highlighting the
need for a reliable method of establishing 
creditworthiness. Shortly
thereafter, two companies were founded, 
R.G. Dun & Company and the John
M. Bradstreet Company. For 
nearly a century these rivals skirmished, with
both growing in tandem 
and suppressing the other's profitability so that
neither gained a lasting competitive edge. In 1933, as the Great Depression
came to a close, 
they merged to reverse their increasingly tenuous profit
outlook.
Such was the core of the modern-day Dun & Bradstreet Corporation. The
merger of co-leaders quickly became profitable and prospered for the next
fifty years. By 1980, the company's revenues were 
$1.2 billion, of which the
credit business contributed about $500 million. This credit business, unlike
its component parts of the earlier 
century, had a relative market share of more
than six times that of its 
nearest commercial credit rival, had an 11.2 percent
operating margin, and generated $56 million in profits, placing it well within
the 
upper echelon of U.S. business performance. Yet, the following 
decade
would prove that the business was still underperforming.
Under a new CEO and COO, the company reevaluated its credit 
business and
concluded that this profitable core was operating 
below its full profit and
growth potential. Over the next few years, 
the business increased its
reinvestment rate, computerized its database, introduced new marketing
concepts into its data packaging, 
increased its data quality and pricing, and
added voice and online 
distribution services. By 1990, sales in the creditbusiness had doubled to nearly $1 billion, the operating margin had expanded
by 
nearly threefold to 28.2 percent, and profits had grown to $269 million.
Even in 2008, after waves of new information technologies 
affecting the
business, D&B's credit business remains the market 
leader with high margins,
leadership economics, and an ability and 
incentive to continually outinvest its
competitors.
What is important here is not the company's exact strategy but 
the amount of
gold available to be mined in its core business with origins predating the
Civil War. The Dun & Bradstreet case illustrates the hidden value of a strong
core business and our strong but 
counterintuitive finding that the better
performing your business, 
the more likely it is performing below its full
potential.
Influencing Industry Reinvestment
Drilling down into twenty competitive pairings, we analyzed the 
extent to
which our sustained value creators outinvest their competitors in their core
business. We estimated reinvestment rate as 
the sum of capital expenditures,
research and development, and 
advertising relative to sales. The sustained
value creators invested at 
a rate of 15.3 percent, nearly twice that of their
rivals, at 8.7 percent. 
Relative reinvestment is one reason that two-thirds of
our sustained 
value creators grew at a significantly higher rate than their
industry 
averages over the ten years we tracked. We find in our consulting
work for large corporations that relative reinvestment rate is poorly 
tracked
and analyzed, yet it embodies a great deal of information 
about an industry's
future and competitive dynamics. Planning a 
strategy without collecting and
interpreting competitor reinvestment rates is like forecasting the weather
without looking at wind 
speed or temperature.
Consider the well-known case of Intel from the perspective of 
its historic
focus on the core and relative reinvestment levels and 
rate. In 1980, Intel was
smaller in total market value than either 
Advanced Micro Devices or National
Semiconductor. Today, Intel's 
market value is more than twenty times that of
the combined total 
of AMD and National Semiconductor. Since 1984, AMD
and 
National Semiconductor have seen their stock prices rise and fall
precipitously.Part of the story is that in the 80s and 90s Intel narrowed its 
strategic focus
and simultaneously adopted a preemptive reinvestment strategy. Intel,
investing at the same rate as its rivals in 1984, 
narrowed its investment focus
(from memory, chip sets, and integrated logic circuits down to just logic
chips). It also turbocharged its rate of spending on new, low-cost
manufacturing capacity and 
new products (such as the 486 family of chips).
Its spending over 
that period ramped up from an average of $300 million per
year to 
$2 billion per year by 1992 to more than $7 billion in 2000. By
contrast, AMD and National Semiconductor's spending, as they fell 
farther
behind, hovered at $500 million to $1 billion per year.
Looking back, a former director of the Intel microprocessor 
business whom
we interviewed, reflected:
During the early 1980s, most semiconductor companies 
were trying to be all
things to all people. We decided to take a 
different course, exiting the
memory business and focusing 
all of our efforts on the development of digital
logic chips for 
the PC. Our core investment principle became "It had to 
serve
the mother ship," which was the microprocessor business, or it would not get
funded. For the next fifteen years, we 
steadily ramped up our level of
investment relative to competition while at the same time narrowing down,
avoiding all 
diversification except that which clearly reinforced the core.16
About this strategic reversal the online investment adviser Motley Fool
commented:
Watching Intel and AMD [Advanced Micro Devices] battle is 
almost like
watching the Harlem Globetrotters play the old 
Washington Generals. The
Globetrotters (Intel) needed the 
Generals (AMD) in order to play the game ...
but ... there was 
never much doubt who would end up winning the game.17
Influencing the Extended Industry Profit Pool
Every profitable core business can be thought of as situated at 
the center of a
complex network connecting direct suppliers, suppliers' suppliers, direct
customers, customers' customers, complementary products, substitute
products, competitors, and so on. 
Michael Porter has elegantly depicted these
interconnections in 
many of his writings on strategy and positioning." At theend of each of these economic connections is, usually, a pool of economic
surplus and profit. The extent to which a company possesses the 
power of
leadership in its core business influences the degree to 
which it can shape or
even share in these profit pools adjacent to its 
own core business.
This concept may sound abstract, yet it is anything but. The ripple effects that
Wal-Mart can project throughout its extended network of suppliers, and their
suppliers, and their suppliers, are of 
primary strategic concern to those
suppliers whose profits rise and 
fall with the moves and favor of a single
customer. The ability 
of Coca-Cola to enter and influence, with ease, other
soft drink 
categories-and even the bottled water business-shows how
leadership provides adjacent growth opportunities not as readily available to
followers. Thus, the third hidden value of market leadership 
is the ability to
shape the profit pool and to project its power and 
influence into attractive
adjacent businesses.
Take the case of W. W. Grainger, a company founded in 1927 
that has
become the nation's leading business-to-business distributor of small parts
and industrial supplies for maintenance and 
repair. Grainger offers more than
two hundred thousand products, 
from air circulators, engines, fans, and
generators to hand tools and 
test instruments, to serve the needs of diverse
markets, including 
commercial, industrial, contractor, and institutional
customers. All 
products are available through online ordering or local
branches. 
Grainger has 350 branches throughout the United States and 
Puerto
Rico. In fact, 70 percent of all U.S. businesses are within 
twenty minutes of a
Grainger branch.
Throughout the 1970s, Grainger grew profitably at 11 percent 
per year.
Suddenly, in 1980, the business slowed to a 2 percent 
growth rate, which
persisted to 1985. The attractive stock price 
growth of the company slumped,
and profits per product in stock 
began to decline. At issue was whether
Grainger-three to four 
times larger and more profitable than its nearest
competitors-had 
hit the expansion limits of its industry. In its traditional
markets, 
products, and geographies, its market share could be calculated to be
as high as 40 percent. Moreover, industrial distribution businesses are
notorious for being populated by mom-and-pop competitors that can operate
on thin margins for a long time. Was 
Grainger's core business expansionover?
The company embarked on a major project to determine its full 
growth
potential and barriers to achieving it. What it discovered 
was that it had
underassessed the full potential of its core business 
by a factor of ten! What it
had believed to be a $3 billion market 
for its core business was actually a $30
billion potential market. 
Grainger found that density of stores drove relative
market share 
and profitability and that it could add many more stores in its
traditional geographies. Adding stores lowered customers' travel time to 
the
branches and dramatically increased sales. Moreover, Grainger 
had
traditionally focused on specialized industrial buyers and specialized
products-particularly electronics and electrical parts. Yet, 
the Grainger branch
structure and customer name recognition of 
85 percent could be parlayed into
sales of a wider range of products 
to a wider range of customers, at a low
incremental cost. The company could now sell a complete product line to its
traditional core of 
customers. Together, the greater geographic density of
stores and 
higher share of wallet lowered costs, increased the ability to invest
in 
core customers, and improved service levels.
Grainger quickly identified and attacked its full-potential gaps 
with dramatic
results. The company's revenues grew consistently 
and with growing
profitability from $1.1 billion in 1985 to $4.8 billion in 1999 to $6.9 billion
by the end of 2008-a rate of 8 percent, 
nearly twice the underlying industrial
rate of growth for the basic 
supply products that Grainger sells. During this
period, Grainger 
doubled its reinvestment rate, increased its profit margin,
and 
increased by a factor of ten the potential market its strong core business
was going after. Grainger's example is yet another testament to 
the power of a
focused core with leadership economics in a market 
with a range of possible
adjacencies for growth.
Define the Profitable Core
In our experience, business definition is one of the most frustrating 
activities
for senior executives. Although business leaders know that 
they should have
a clear answer to the question, "What is our core 
business?" it is difficult to
arrive at a fully satisfying statement. Part 
of the problem arises from blurringseveral distinct but related topics that need to be considered one at a time and
then integrated in a 
consistent manner or within a single framework. In
working toward 
a useful business definition, executives need to ask
themselves the 
following questions:
1. What are the boundaries of the business in which I participate, and are
those boundaries "natural" economic boundaries defined by customer needs
and basic economics? What 
products, customers, channels, and competitors
do these 
boundaries encompass?
2. What are the core skills and assets needed to compete effectively within
that competitive arena?
3. What is my own core business as defined by those 
customers, products,
technologies, and channels through 
which I can earn a return today and can
compete effectively 
with my current resources?
4. What is the key differentiating factor that makes me unique 
to my core
customers?
5. What are the adjacent areas around my core, and are the 
definitions of my
business and my industry likely to shift, 
changing the competitive and
customer landscape?
To illustrate the distinctness of these questions, consider a wellknown
business and product like Enterprise Rent-A-Car. The business in which
Enterprise participates is the car rental market, 
including business, leisure,
small-fleet leasing, and auto replacement in the event of an accident. Over the
years, Avis and Hertz have also 
built up skills and assets in fleet
management, reservations, pricing 
yield management, branch networking,
and cost management that 
allow them to compete effectively in the rental car
business. The core 
business of Enterprise, however, is probably the insurance
replacement segment of the market, where it has more than 70 percent market
share and where its original business began and from which it is 
now
branching out. The differentiators for Enterprise are its lowcost business
system, its ability to work with insurance companies 
and body shops, and its
ability to move cars and customers to one 
another. The adjacent areas around
the core once included airport 
and leisure rentals and even leasing, but for avariety of structural 
reasons in the industry, these boundaries now seem to be
blurring.
A similar logic can be followed in any business. Just think of 
some
companies that you commonly encounter, such as McDonald's 
in fast foods
or Google in online search, and play out the questions 
for yourself. None of
them is easy to answer. All must be informed by 
answering the umbrella
question, "What is my core business?"
Companies whose cores map perfectly to the "natural boundaries" of the
business, that possess competitive advantage, and that 
are in an industry
where the boundaries are not poised to change 
discontinuously are in great
shape. Many of the companies in our 
list of sustained value creators fit this
pattern across several decades 
during which we have been performing this
analysis on our global 
database of more than eight thousand companies. A
more complex 
situation arises when the natural industry boundaries are quite
different from a company's core business, creating either an unstable
positioning or the need to develop a protected niche within a larger 
arena
where larger companies prowl around the periphery of your 
core. One
example is USAA in insurance, where the core is financial 
products for
former military personnel and where the business 
thrives between behemoths
such as Fidelity for investment and Allstate for insurance. Another is FootJoy
in golf shoes, with Nike on 
one side and shoe companies on the other.
Conclusion
Achieving sustained and profitable growth is extremely difficult 
without
having at least one strong and differentiated core business 
on which to build.
The most enduring growth pattern is that of the 
strong, or dominant, core
business that benefits from continual 
reinvestment, constant adaptation to
circumstances or business 
environment, and persistent leveraging into new
markets or geographies, applications, or channels.
The three crucial first steps for a management team developing, 
refining, or
reexamining its company's growth strategy are outlined 
in this chapter: (1)
Define the business boundaries and your own 
core business; (2) identify andverify the sources of differentiation 
that will continue to create market power
and influence over your 
customers, competitors, and industry profit pool; and
(3) comb 
through the core and assess whether it is operating at or near its full
economic potential. Recall that the first paradox of growth is that 
the
strongest core businesses are typically underperforming the 
most relative to
their full potential.
 The tension between focusing on the core and setting out for new 
territory is
universal and transcends business phenomena, spanning the affairs of nations
to how to live one's life. The resolution of 
this tension is also the trigger point
for many of the greatest blunders and most brilliant choices leaders have
made in the history of 
business-or for that matter, all history.
Alexander the Great ruled the largest area of the earth ever conquered by a
single individual, stretching from Mount Olympus 
to Mount Everest.
Although not everyone's idea of the model CEO, 
he amassed his kingdom in
less than four years, covering more 
than four thousand miles by foot, and
winning 100 percent of his 
battles-a remarkable record in such a short time.
But did he create 
lasting value? Just a few years after his death, his empire
had 
dissolved and the captured territory slipped away. Alexander's 
problem
was not inadequate initial resources or poor execution. It 
was the lack of a
long-term strategy and the inability to exploit and 
consolidate his
extraordinary short-term gains throughout the 
Near East to Nepal, which
stretched resources to govern too far 
beyond the Macedonian core.
His sticking point-the failure to anchor in the core business (in 
his case,
governance) and consolidate a rapid expansion-exemplifies the most common
problem across all growth strategy. Our analysis 
of the growth paths of
sustained value creators compared with 
those of their competitors indicates
that the selection of new business adjacencies around the core business is the
decision that most 
often triggers either a new burst of profitable growth or
distraction 
and stagnation.
Embodied in this decision is a fundamental tension between protecting and
investing in the core business, on the one hand, and 
expanding into
adjacencies, on the other. The way companies resolve 
the tension often
determines the sustainability of their growth.
This chapter focuses on the second element of our growth strategy, adjacency
expansion from the core. We examine three topics 
critical to improving theodds of profitable, sustainable growth:
1. Identifying adjacent business opportunities and recognizing 
the most
common patterns
2. Assessing and choosing the right adjacencies
3. Avoiding some common pitfalls of adjacency expansion
We also indicate how some typical views of adjacency expansion 
need to be
adapted to today's turbulent business environment, with 
its increasingly
blurred business boundaries.
Adjacency Expansion
Adjacency expansion is a company's continual moves into related 
segments
or businesses that utilize and, usually, reinforce the 
strength of the profitable
core. Over time, these sequenced moves 
can fundamentally redefine the core
business (by adding new capabilities) as well as provide growth in
themselves. Indeed, it is through 
adjacency expansion that a company in a
stable industry repositions 
itself to go after the most attractive new profit
pools or to respond to 
new environmental conditions.
Business adjacencies are growth opportunities that allow a 
company to
extend the boundaries of its core business. What distinguishes an adjacency
from another growth opportunity is the 
extent to which it draws on the
customer relationships, technologies, or skills in the core business to build
competitive advantage in 
a new, adjacent competitive arena. Examples of
companies seizing 
adjacency opportunities range from UPS's move from
package 
delivery into logistics, to Google's leap from the search engine
business into Google Maps, to InBev's aggressive expansion into the 
United
States by acquiring Anheuser-Busch.
Many of the most successful companies that we describe throughout this
book are in industries within which lie extremely rich 
adjacencies. Diagrams
of the step-by-step growth patterns of these 
companies often look like the
concentric rings on the cross section of 
a decades-old tree. Adjacency-driven
growth patterns are at the heart 
of the sustained, profitable growth ofcompanies such as Tesco, Tetra 
Pak, Grainger, Microsoft, Intel, Dell, and
Disney. Consider the following examples from American Express, Nike, and
Dell.
American Express has grown by expanding its core business for 
more than
150 years. At the core of the original American Express 
company was a
money order that could compete with the government's postal money order.
The difficulty of extending this service 
into Europe spawned American
Express's marquee product, the 
Travelers Cheque, in 1891. Travel-related
payment systems have 
been at the heart of the company's adjacency
expansion path 
through its launches of the American Express charge card in
1958 
and the Optima revolving charge card in 1987 to the acquisition of 
more
than 4,500 automated teller machines from Electronic Data 
Systems in 2000.
As with any 150-year growth record around a core business, not 
all has gone
smoothly. American Express moved beyond its range of 
natural business
adjacencies when it purchased Shearson Loeb 
Rhodes in 1981 and when it
added Lehman Brothers investment 
banking house to the mix in 1984. One
reporter said of this initiative, "After endless name changes and suffering the
financial agonies 
of the damned, American Express decided to cut its losses
and slink 
away ... American Express will have blown more than $1 billion,
not to mention endless hours of management time and years of lost
investment opportunities."'
Investors have supported the company's return to its core. 
Today, American
Express has applied a powerful, repeatable formula for adjacency expansion
in many areas, such as online with its 
Blue Card, where it is the leading
payment source online, or with 
small business owners with its new Plum
card, where it offers special terms to that customer segment. Under the
direction of CEO 
Ken Chenault, the company posted revenues of $22.4
billion, continued to grow earnings profitably and sustainably at a 16 percent
rate, and attained a 37 percent return on equity around its original 
core just
before the onset of the global financial crisis late in 2007.
Now consider the strategy that Nike has used to achieve an average 40
percent compound rate of growth since its founding as Blue 
Ribbon Sports in
1964. Nike has not relied solely on the core for 
growth but rather has
developed a strong core and then repeatedly 
reignited slowing growth byfinding the next logical, large-scale 
adjacency in which to leverage its
strengths.
Nike's growth pattern reflects successive and distinct waves of 
adjacency
expansion. From 1976 to 1983, Nike focused on its running shoe core to
grow sales at an annual rate of 80 percent. But the 
running shoe business
slowed to zero growth, on average, from 
1983 to 1987. In the next era, 1987
to 1991, Nike surged powerfully 
by extending its running franchise into new
product segments, 
including clothing, and rekindled growth to 36 percent per
year, 
only to slow to 8 percent in 1991 to 1994. From 1994 to 1997, the
company refocused on its athletic shoe business with emphasis 
on celebrity
endorsements, especially the Air Jordan line, which 
exceeded $1 billion in
sales in June 2009. Its growth has been fueled 
again by Nike's expansion into
adjacencies such as golf and soccer. 
Nike's entrance into golf is epitomized
by Tiger Woods's switch 
to the Nike golf ball for the 2000 U.S. Open at
Pebble Beach, California, which he won by a record fifteen strokes.
Nike's up-and-down pattern is more extreme than the norm 
among our
sustained value creators. Take soccer. When the United 
States hosted the
World Cup in 1994, Nike's soccer revenues were only $45 million. Today,
using its strong core and powerful repeatable formula, it has passed rival
Adidas in some key product categories in the latter's home turf, Europe;
grown to more than $5.6 
billion in revenues; and acquired Umbro, an iconic
U.K. company 
with a deep soccer heritage and relationships. Nike offers a
striking 
example of how growth from the core can flag, creating the need 
to
reignite new growth by shifting resources into nearby adjacencies. These
adjacencies in turn build off a strong core-and the 
repeatable formula defines
the way that the company takes its core 
strengths and applies them to new
adjacent market opportunities.
Dell Computer's detailed growth path illustrates simultaneous 
expansion
along multiple vectors: geography, products, customer 
segments, and
ancillary services. The company began with direct 
phone sales of personal
computers to medium-sized businesses in 
the United States. Since the early
1990s, it has expanded geographically to its present position as a fully global
company with standard 
global products. It has expanded its products to
increasingly highly 
engineered offerings, from PCs to laptops to workstationsto servers 
to storage. It has also expanded into adjacent customer segments,
from business to education to local government to multinationals, 
each
segment served by a tailored and distinct selling protocol, cost 
structure,
profit-and-loss profile, management team, and business 
model. It has
expanded its ancillary services that ride along with the 
basic "boxes," from
software loading to asset tagging to Internet services to consulting. Not all
industries allow this logical, crystalline 
structure of adjacency expansion; the
world is usually not so linear 
and geometric. However, in the case of Dell it
was, propelling Dell 
to one of the best performance records of the 1990s.
Expansion into logical adjacencies around a core business is an 
offensive
strategy, but it also has defensive implications. Building a 
profitable cushion
around your core business can help to keep new 
invaders away or to block a
sequence of a competitor's moves that 
lead into your core. Microsoft's entry
into the game console business against Sony and Sega was heralded by the
popular press at the 
time as "a radical departure from its core business."' If
the consoles 
were perceived as hardware products with game cartridges, this
observation would certainly have been true. However, the Sony 
strategy in
home networking included positioning its PlayStation 
product as a potential
computing hub for the home. Wired called 
PlayStation 2 "a platform so
robust it may be all the computer some 
garners and their families will ever
need," describing it as a potential 
part of an array of home devices that "all
talk to one another in a 
no-PC-required home network"3 The challenges to
realizing this 
potential primarily involve software, not hardware. And for that
reason, not entering the home game console business would potentially have
left one of Microsoft's software flanks exposed to a new 
competitor.
Alexander Revisited
The tension between expanding the boundaries of a business, in 
the presence
of success and seeming invincibility, and maintaining 
the original core is at
the center of our earlier-described "Alexander 
problem." Alexander's string of
victories, won by thinly stretched 
and tired troops traveling from Athens to
India, is extraordinary. At 
each stage, his forces faced the choice to stop and
consolidate or to 
press on into more and more distant and unfamiliar territory.
They 
consistently chose the latter and appeared to have won. Yet did they
really win?Consider these examples of companies that pursued unfamiliar 
adjacencies
and failed to turn back to their core business in time to 
avoid serious damage:
• In 1994, Quaker Oats attempted to build on its Gatorade 
drinks business by
purchasing the sparkling fruit juice 
company Snapple for $1.7 billion. The
result was major 
internal disruption for several years and the eventual resale
of 
Snapple at a $1 billion loss. In reality, there was less synergy 
between
Gatorade and Snapple than management had 
believed. The sparkling juice
company constituted not an 
adjacency but a diversification.
• For a decade, the United Kingdom's National Westminster 
Bank expanded
aggressively into the United States. But the 
bank encountered tougher U.S.
competition than its 
executives had forecast. In the end, NatWest decided to
sell its 
U.S. business to Fleet at a loss, not only having lost money in 
the
United States but also having slowed progress in its core 
British market.
• In the 1980s, Saatchi & Saatchi embarked on a major 
program of buying
professional service firms, consultancies, a 
public relations firm, and other
supporting businesses in an 
attempt to create a "one-stop shopping"
experience for its 
customers. But customers did not value Saatchi's bundling,
and the company incurred seven years of losses. The 
expansion strategy
constituted diversification, which 
destroyed value by causing a loss of focus
on the core.
• Under new management and with a new growth strategy, 
Gucci drove
aggressively into apparent product adjacencies in 
lower-priced canvas goods
sold through mass channels such 
as department stores and duty-free shops.
The company also 
licensed its name for products ranging from watches to
perfumes. Sales grew, but profits collapsed. The Gucci brand 
eroded. The
company had expanded into shallow profit pools 
and diluted its core
franchise. Gucci finally returned to its 
core and pruned the new, unprofitable
growth.
• In the 1980s, Anheuser-Busch bought Eagle Snacks in an 
apparently logical
adjacency expansion. People eat snacks 
with beer. Some snacks are sold
where beer is sold, and the 
same trucks could sometimes carry both. Yet
these potential 
synergies never materialized. Frito-Lay controlled the profit
pool in the salty-snacks business and, implicitly, in Eagle's 
profits. In 1997,having seen $120 million in cash flow out 
during a time that its core beer
business was slowing too, 
Anheuser-Busch ended its adjacency misadventure
by divesting Eagle to Frito-Lay. Of course, in 2008 AnheuserBusch was
acquired by InBev, now the largest beer company 
in the world.
Even the best companies continue to expand into unknown 
territory, despite
mounting evidence of strategic and execution 
risks in so doing. And even
great companies can lose their way in 
the midst of a hailstorm of possible
adjacencies that pummel them 
with greater speed and power as the firms
grow larger and more 
successful.
Mattel, for instance, decided to enter the software business in 
1999, buying
The Learning Company for $3.8 billion. At the time, 
The Learning Company
was a strong, growing business that was the 
clear leader in educational
software. Yet the investment community 
was skeptical. The Learning
Company exhibited slowing growth, 
and its cash flow from operations had
declined to negative $43 million. Mattel pressed ahead, saying, "We are truly
excited about the 
benefits to be realized through the combination of our two
great 
companies. 4 But software is in many ways a difficult business, and 
a
true departure from the toy business. After the acquisition, The 
Learning
Company's performance eroded to a quarterly after-tax 
loss of $100 million.
Reporting on the aftermath, the New York 
Times said:
Mattel's woes illustrate the obvious but often overlooked fact 
that not all
corporate marriages are created equal. Some are 
wise; others are
breathtakingly foolish.... With more mergers taking place-the dollar amount
of combinations worldwide is up 24 percent from last year, according to
Thomas 
Financial Securities Data-investors need to be on the lookout for
disasters.'
Mattel announced its exit from the software business one year 
after entering
it, selling it for a price of zero.
Another company with a mixed adjacency-expansion record is 
Gillette.
Gillette is one of the great global brand names, having built a 70 percent
market share and brand dominance in men's shaving 
products over the past
century. The company began in 1895 with 
the concept of a disposable razor
blade developed by a salesman 
named King Gillette, who lived in Brookline,Massachusetts. After 
six frustrating years of seeking funding for his venture,
he combined forces with an MIT engineer and redesigned the product into
what became the safety razor, which took off like a rocket around 
the
revolutionary concept of safe self-shaving. The appearance in 
every World
War II soldier's kit of the Gillette razor further propelled this product as the
global standard.
Over the next fifty years, Gillette stayed relatively close to its 
core, adding
new forms of shavers, shaving creams, and women's 
products. The past few
decades, however, have seen the company 
reach out in many directions for
new adjacencies, as its core shaving 
franchise captured such high market
share that much of its growth 
had to come from the introduction of more
elaborate systems 
like the Sensor, rather than from unit growth. Over time,
Gillette 
added Braun electrical appliances (1967), Oral-B toothbrushes
(1984), Parker Pen writing instruments (1992), and Duracell batteries (1996).
Some were justified by their impact on noncore businesses, 
where the
acquisition was perceived to generate leadership in a new 
core area (adding
Parker Pens to Waterman). Some were justified 
by the hope of leveraging the
customer acceptance and infrastructure of the core toiletry franchise (Right
Guard for men, Toni for 
women). Still others were justified more
traditionally by their 
impact on the core business of shaving. For instance, in
1967 
Gillette acquired Braun's small appliance business to help Gillette
distribute its products better in international markets and to add 
Braun's
electric "dry-shaver" technology to the Gillette product 
line. Braun was a
successful acquisition that strengthened the core 
shaving franchise. Under
Gillette's ownership, Braun grew from $70 
million of sales to more than $1.7
billion and is now the second 
largest profit contributor, next to wet-shaving
products. Interestingly, the core wet-shaving business plus the direct
defensive and offensive acquisitions strongly related to the core account for
virtually all of Gillette's corporate profit and new growth today.
From 1994 until 2005, when P&G acquired Gillette for $57 billion, blades
and razors were the company's primary source of revenues and profits-nearly
a century after Gillette was founded. By 
contrast, during the time before the
merger with P&G, Gillette 
divested many other products (including
cosmetics and stationery) 
because they were underperforming or were notone of the company's core businesses. In August 2000 Gillette sold its
"struggling stationery division" to Newell Rubbermaid Inc., saying, "Our
resources 
will now be devoted to the three core businesses."'
Hewlett-Packard's Imaging and Printing business unit is, on its 
own, a
sustained growth company that has leveraged a strong original 
core, built in
the 1980s, into a profitable $29 billion business in 2008. 
Between 1984 and
2000, the real take-off period of the market for 
small printers, the business
grew at an average annual rate of more 
than 32 percent. The past growth
pattern and the future strategic 
road map of the business demonstrate the
power of a strategy that 
leverages and continually strengthens its core to yield
ever larger and 
more attractive adjacencies. Moreover, they show how a
business with 
high market share can continue to grow by finding adjacencies.
The printing and imaging business had humble beginnings on 
some farmland
in Boise, Idaho, when a manager in the computer 
peripherals business was
given permission to develop a line of small, 
low-cost desktop printers using
the Canon laser printing engine for 
one line (LaserJet) and the HP-developed
new inkjet technology for 
the other (ThinkJet). With its combination of high
resolution and 
low cost, this business took off during the 1980s, creating a
strong 
core that persists today. (Its U.S. market share is 55 percent in inkjet
technology, with the equivalent numbers for Europe not far behind. 
As a
result, HP's market position is approximately three times the 
size of its
nearest competitor's-a huge advantage in cost, logistics, 
coverage, and brand
awareness.)
Hewlett-Packard has driven its growth through four types of 
adjacency
expansion. The first, through the continual search for increasingly refined
customer segments around which to tailor and 
focus its core product, is into
new customer segments. One example 
is the large-format plotting business
for architects. Leveraging its 72 
percent market share in large-format
printing, HP developed innovative inkjet technology that offered high
resolution, high color 
fidelity, and color registration to graphic artists and
quickly captured that market. Another customer segment is the home digital
photographer, a segment growing more than 300 percent annually, 
for which
the company has developed a printer with embedded 
software that allows
smart media cards to be inserted directly into 
the printer, rather than requiringdecoding by a personal computer 
attached to the printer.
The second type of adjacency expansion, driven by technology 
adjacency and
well-defined key customer needs, is into related 
product categories. A series
of such moves has expanded HewlettPackard's business definition from
printing to digital imaging. For 
example, as the graphic arts processes became
increasingly digital, the 
company successfully entered the scanner market to
better serve the 
needs of the graphic artist segment. It is now the number one
supplier for all scanner segments. HP later combined the scanning technology
with printing to create all-in-one products (printer/scanner/ 
fax) for the small
office and multifunction printers (printer/copiers) 
for the office environment.
These two new product categories have 
provided high relative growth in the
past few years. Still another 
example is the entry into the digital camera
business, an effort to 
provide customers with a completely integrated digital
photography 
solution.
The third type of expansion, through the search for more and 
more
consumables and follow-on products for the core product 
lines, is into a
broader range of printer supplies. For instance, HP 
entered the branded paper
market and attained a surprisingly high 
market share. One specific example is
the company's line of specially treated glossy paper for use with home digital
photography, 
which holds the number two market position and is growing
rapidly with high margins. This "razor-blade" model has been central to the
growth and profitability of all of the HP printers, 
especially the inkjet.
Finally, the fourth type of expansion, through reconceptualizing 
the printing
and imaging marketplace in terms of the creating, 
printing, and publishing of
all documents, is into other copying and 
print processes. This move broadens
the company's market from a 
$30 billion universe to a potential $130 billion
one that includes 
newspapers, books, corporate central copying, and a variety
of services for the home. One example is Hewlett-Packard's initiative to 
place
printers throughout the home, either connected directly to 
the Internet or in
devices such as set-top boxes, allowing everything 
from tickets ordered
online to stamps to maps to advertising 
brochures to print from a TV console.
Another example is a venture 
with NewspaperDirect to enable the remote
printing of newspapers 
at hotels, eliminating costly transportation and
allowing visitors to 
get their local papers even when traveling on distantcontinents. 
While the "inner core" of this business will remain the small,
lowcost printers in direct lineage from the original product launch in 
the
1980s, the outer bounds of the industry are being expanded and 
pursued in a
classic way: obtaining growth and profits from the core 
creatively but without
overreaching and weakening the core.
We have catalogued case studies of hundreds of seemingly 
promising
adjacency expansions that did not work out as forecast in 
financial plans.
Indeed, almost every business executive has experienced adjacency
expansion gone wrong. Venturing from the core is 
inherently risky. Yet if
you are not venturing, and occasionally failing, you probably are not
sufficiently pushing the boundaries. As 
Collins and Porras observe in Built to
Last, "In examining the history 
of the visionary companies we were struck by
how often they made 
some of their best moves not by detailed strategic
planning, but 
rather by experimentation, trial and error, opportunism, and-
quite 
literally-accident ... Opportunistic experimentation and purposeful
accidents."' The authors go on to describe the expansions of 
Johnson &
Johnson into baby powder, Marriott into airport services, 
and American
Express into travel services, all unscripted successes. The company that does
not have an organized way to experiment 
(General Electric refers to its
experiments as setting up "popcorn 
stands") cannot reap the benefits of such
"purposeful accidents."
Our intent in this chapter is not to pretend that we can offer a 
one-size-fits-all
solution for deciding where to expand. What we 
can do, however, is suggest
some methods for examining adjacencies that will improve the odds of
making better decisions as well as 
raise warning flags on the most dangerous
shoals that historically 
have shipwrecked the most growth strategies.
Defining and Mapping Adjacencies
It seems obvious that the stronger and more dynamic a company's core
business, the broader its range of add-on expansion 
opportunities. It follows
less obviously, however, that those companies with the strongest cores, and
hence the most to sacrifice in losing focus, also suffer the greatest temptation
to become distracted; 
they're confronted by the second paradox of growth.
Therefore, 
companies trying to spring new growth out of a slowdown or to
select new growth initiatives without jeopardizing a strong core can 
benefitfrom methodically inventorying and mapping out their 
adjacent opportunities.
The content for an adjacency map should come first from the 
opinions of the
management team and then from employees in 
direct contact with customers,
from outside observers of the company and its markets, and from a study of
the list of new businesses 
being funded by venture capitalists in related areas.
Once at an executive conference, John Chambers of Cisco said that he carries
around a card with the names of the twenty-five small company 
start-ups
most relevant to his core businesses.
There are three basic types of adjacency expansion:
1. A direct move into an immediate opportunity. This is by 
far the largest
category of adjacencies. One example is 
Enterprise Rent-A-Car (the leader in
"replacement" rentals 
at body shops) acquiring Alamo Rent A Car and
National Car Rental in order to move aggressively into the airport 
rental car
segment. Another is Starbuck's decision to expand 
its chain of stores into a
new geography such as China. A 
third is eBay's extension of its online
auction franchise from 
consumer products to business products, a customer
segment adjacency. And everywhere we see local restaurants 
offering a
home-delivery service or a takeout dinner menu, 
or setting up a small area in
the restaurant for their 
signature foods-a simple product adjacency.
2. An "option" purchased in a business related to the core; 
a hedge against
future uncertainties. Many of Intel's 
and Microsoft's venture investments and
technology acquisitions could be considered hedges against or windows into
future technology shifts.
3. A series of sequential moves that expand the boundaries 
and capabilities of
the core business. A classic example of 
this would be the movement of some
of the leading telecom 
companies with a legacy in wireline telephony-like
KPN in 
the Netherlands or Telstra in Australia-into a range of 
services from
fixed telecom to mobile telecom to ADSL 
(broadband) to VoIP/video
calls/IPTV. This is consistent 
with technology convergence and customer
interest in an 
integrated "single bill" offering in that industry. Another
example would be Cisco's acquisition of Pure Digital 
Technologies in 2009
for $590 million in stock. Pure Digital 
gives Cisco additional technologies
and know-how to enable 
it to move a step closer to visual networking andprovide a 
broader offering to consumers for their "media-enabled" 
home.
Adjacency maps can reveal complexity of choice and trade-offs, 
as
demonstrated by the map shown in figure 3-1. The choices are 
depicted as
spokes leading out of the core business. One set of spokes 
and the branches
off it might represent customer segments where expansion possibilities
reside. A second might represent new channels, a third new geographic areas,
a fourth changes to the value 
chain, a fifth new businesses, and a sixth new
products.
3-1 Adjacencies Radiate from the CoreAs another example, figure 3-2 shows a differently configured 
adjacency
map, this one specifically for a company in the alcoholic 
beverages business.
Along each spoke, opportunities radiate outward from the most- to the least-
immediate extensions of the core 
business. It is possible, for a given strategy,
to rank on the spokes 
those opportunities that are highest priority and those
that are 
marginal.
There are obviously many possible processes for mapping out 
and
characterizing the full range of business adjacencies. Here is one that we have
used productively. Begin by defining the core and 
gaining consensus about
the most potent source of competitive 
differentiation and advantage. Having
done that, identify and 
describe adjacencies step by step in the following
order:1. Identify the adjacencies you are in and array the data on 
how you are doing
in each (market share, profitability, 
investment).
2. Identify the adjacencies your organization is considering or 
has rejected.3. Identify other known adjacencies, including those that 
might require two or
three strategic moves to reach.
4. Identify adjacencies suggested by your competitors' 
investment actions.
5. Identify adjacencies suggested by potential new competitors, 
often small
companies.
6. Identify future adjacencies that may be created by 
technology or other
developments.
7. Put all of these adjacencies onto a single grid or map (such 
as the maps
shown in figures 3-1, 3-2, and 3-3), and push 
your thinking about what
additional adjacencies might still 
be missing.
Having developed an inventory of adjacencies and growth 
opportunities
surrounding the core, do a quick ranking and rating 
of each. Such a ranking
might be based on the following types of 
qualitative and quantitative
measures: potential size, strength of 
advantage due to uniqueness of the core,
strength of probable competition, offensive and defensive importance to the
core (warding 
off invaders), a long-term perspective on multistep moves, and
ability to implement. Forcing a ranking almost always stimulates a 
highly
productive management discussion of core strategic issues 
grounded in data.
Finally, develop clusters of moves, or strategic scenarios, and do 
the tough
financial and analytic work of developing your growth 
strategy. None of
these activities is easy, but all are essential (in some 
form) for most
businesses to engage in periodically.
As mentioned earlier, we are often struck by how many companies-from
complex divisions of large corporations to small, early 
stage companies-do
not look at their growth opportunities at the 
same time, in a strategic context,
with a fact base to help support the 
priorities. The Bain annual survey of tools
and techniques, conducted across a sample of 475 companies, provides
corroborating 
evidence. In 2000, this survey found that "growth strategies"
were 
the sixth-most-used tool, along with other standards like "pay-
forperformance" systems and "customer satisfaction assessments," 
among the
best-performing companies. By contrast, growth strategies didn't appear inthe top ten techniques of the worst-performing 
companies. In a way, these
companies are like people who are lost 
and neither have maps with them nor
value carrying maps at all. By 
2006, the survey showed that the percentage of
companies using 
tools of growth strategies had increased from 55 percent to
65 percent. In the 2009 survey, as the world economic crisis loomed, this
dropped to 38 percent, showing a preoccupation with cost reduction even
though, in the same survey, 53 percent of executives said 
that they felt that
their companies were overemphasizing cost 
reduction initiatives relative to
the promise of revenue and growth.
The process of mapping does more than just help organize opinions and
inventory ideas. It reveals the extent to which the organization has a
multiplicity of choices for growth and makes it easier to 
understand the trade-
offs that may need to be made in choosing 
which to fund. In the absence of
such a process, organizations often 
lack an agreed-on big-picture context for
making decisions, fund an 
excessive number of initiatives to an insufficient
extent, and take 
too seriously the "idea of the day."
Our experience and our review of sustained value creators show 
that a
handful of most frequent adjacency expansion directions 
constitutes about 90
percent of the growth initiatives that are adja cent to a core business. The
most common adjacencies to a core 
business are the following:
• Interlocking customer and product adjacencies
• Share-of-wallet adjacencies
• Capability adjacencies
• Network adjacencies
• New-to-the-world adjacencies
Interlocking Customer and Product Adjacencies
Perhaps the most common adjacency expansion is moving into new 
customer
and product segments, using each move to reinforce the 
next. For somebusinesses, this approach to reinvesting has proven 
sufficient for decades of
growth. It involves constantly adapting a 
product to enter a new customer
segment and drawing on the 
knowledge gained about that customer segment
to develop new 
product ideas that can then be applied in still other segments.
ServiceMaster has used this approach with great success. The company's
origins trace to a 1930s mothproofing business run by Marion 
Wade, a
former minor league baseball player who still dreamed of the 
big leagues.
From there, it moved into carpet cleaning, riding the wave 
of postwar
installation of wall-to-wall carpets throughout America. 
The company was
named "ServiceMaster" in 1958 by Wade, a devout 
Christian who wanted to
emphasize the importance of constantly 
serving the Master. The company's
mission statement includes four 
commandments: (1) to honor God in all we
do, (2) to help people 
develop, (3) to pursue excellence, and (4) to grow
profitably.
Over the forty years between the late 1950s and late 1990s, ServiceMaster
executed on these objectives to grow by a compound 
annual rate of 21
percent and consistently earned a return on equity 
of more than 20 percent. In
the 1990s, it provided its investors an 
average annual return of more than 34
percent.
ServiceMaster's growth strategy has followed a consistent formula for over
half a century, moving from one product segment 
into an adjacent product,
then into a closely related customer segment, and so on. This growth is
shown in figure 3-3 as a series of 
concentric rings representing growth into
adjacent areas over successive periods of time. You can see the business
expanding out 
from carpet cleaning to cleaning in general for residential and
commercial businesses. General cleaning led the company in the 1960s 
to
start cleaning hospitals (a suggestion made by a nun to the religious founder),
where it also developed a grounds-management 
business. This new service
then was sold to ServiceMaster's original 
segments of residential and
commercial customers. Cleaning naturally led to laundry services. Grounds
management led to pest control. This set of services led to a strategy to serve
educational 
institutions. And so on, step by step, decade after decade.
ServiceMaster's growth has been more than 75 percent organic. 
However, the
company has used acquisitions strategically to bring 
in new products andcapabilities that are fully "plug compatible" 
with its core customers and that
serve as catalysts for new growth. 
For example, in 1986, it acquired
Terminix, the second-largest pest 
control agency in the United States, and
leveraged its core customer 
base to achieve leadership in the new sector. In
1989, ServiceMaster 
acquired Merry Maids, a franchiser of professional maid
services, 
which is now the leader in its business. In the 1990s, it purchased
two lawn care operations, TruGreen and ChemLawn, which it consolidated
and grew to create the leading lawn care business. Growth 
through pursuing
close adjacencies, segment by segment, has 
proven a long-term formula for
success for ServiceMaster.
A 1985 article about the company noted:
A big numeral 2 rests on a cabinet in Pollard's [the president 
and CEO in
1985] office, under a wall full of co-workers' 
photos. It represents a goal of
$2 billion in sales by 1990. 
Reminded that ServiceMaster hadn't reached $1
billion yet, 
and that its largest market recently got a lot tougher, Pollard
replied with a grin, "Well, I like to make goals and beat'em.'$In 2007, ServiceMaster was purchased by the private equity firm 
Clayton
Dubilier & Rice, the year after it was named as one of 
"America's Most
Admired Companies" by Fortune magazine.
De Beers is an example of a company that created growth for 
itself byhelping its direct customers, jewelers, find new adjacencies 
to penetrate
around their core business. One way was by using its 
marketing prowess to
inextricably link its products with important 
occasions. De Beers's marketing
efforts almost single-handedly 
turned wearing a diamond engagement ring
into a cultural imperative in Japan, for instance. De Beers began its campaign
in 1966, 
when the diamond engagement ring acquisition rate for all brides 
in
Japan was 6 percent. By 1998, that rate had grown to 65 percent.
After the diamond engagement ring market was firmly established
worldwide, De Beers reached out to a slightly older segment 
of women in a
different geographic area with its promotion of the 
diamond anniversary
band. From 1988 to 1999, the diamond 
anniversary band acquisition rate in
the United States for all women 
on their tenth anniversary soared from 3
percent to 16 percent.
De Beers used the millennium to its advantage. The company 
invested
heavily in advertising, suggesting that the ultimate gift for 
the new
millennium is a diamond. Sales in the first half of 2000 
were up by 44
percent over the same period in 1999 due, in large 
part, to this initiative. In
addition, De Beers shifted its focus to the 
diamond solitaire necklace in the
United States, increasing sales 
from around $375 million in 1996 to $750
million in 1998. It also 
heavily promoted diamond ear studs in Japan, with
equally dramatic results.
But it is interesting to see how things change and how adjacent 
moves from
the core often take on larger significance than simply 
providing new sources
of growth. In 2000, De Beers encountered a 
true crisis in its original supply-
driven core. The company that had 
mined more than 90 percent of the
diamonds in the world for more 
than a century saw its competitive advantage
erode as the global 
market for diamonds turned to negative rates of growth
and De 
Beers' market share slipped to around 45 percent. However, the
company had hidden assets to rebuild its strategy: its customer relationships,
the power of its brand, and its experience with customer 
desires and buying
patterns. De Beers recovered rapidly because of 
these assets and this
adjacency experience. As Gareth Penny, the 
group managing director,
explained:
It was clear when the senior team got together in 1999 that 
we had to makemajor changes. You have to start with the 
big questions: What is your DNA?
What is it you are really 
good at? I think most people are not very good at
understanding their core ... We have been more successful than 
we expected.
Driving demand, we have gone from negative 
growth in diamond jewelry
worldwide to more than 3 percent growth per annum and, more recently, to
more than 5 
percent growth. This is a significant accomplishment in a 
$60
billion global industry. By 2001, we valued the diamond part of the business
at $9.3 billion, quite a change 
from its estimated value of only $1 billion just
two years 
earlier."9
Share-of-Wallet Adjacencies
A second strategy for growing beyond the initial boundaries of a 
core
business is through moving into "share-of-wallet" adjacencies. 
By capturing
most of the purchases your core customers make and 
then expanding their
menu for purchases, it is possible to create a 
bond with your customers that
substantially increases their loyalty. 
Such loyalty in the core customer base
has several self-reinforcing 
economic consequences for strategy. First, it
allows the cost of serving a customer to be spread across more purchases.
Second, it 
increases both the retention rate and the life-cycle value of a
customer. Third, it provides an opportunity to establish a deeper 
relationship
with a customer, a by-product of which is more intimate knowledge of each
other's businesses. Finally, it serves as a 
competitive deterrent, dramatically
increasing switching costs. In some situations, doubling share of wallet can
create a three- to fourtimes increase in profitability.
One of the clearest proofs of the lasting success of a share-ofwallet strategy is
the Walt Disney Company's track record in 
expanding adjacencies from its
core business with its deep roots in 
animated cartoons. The company began in
1923 as a partnership to 
develop animated cartoons. Its first product was a
series of 
Steamboat Willie cartoons. In even this formative period of the
company, the core of imaginative characters and application of the 
newest
technical effect or innovation is apparent. Steamboat Willie, 
set to the music
of "Turkey in the Straw," was the first cartoon to 
include synchronized sound.
The most successful Disney products 
more than seventy years later, such as
Fantasia 2000, remained strikingly similar. Toy Story, Toy Story 2, andDinosaur, for example, were 
the first box-office hits to use computer
animation throughout. 
Innovation punctuates the history of the Disney core,
from the first 
full-color production to the first full-length animation, Snow
White 
and the Seven Dwarfs, to the first integrated film and animation
product, Who Killed Roger Rabbit?
In the early years, Disney's promotional skills and ability to find 
product
adjacencies surrounding the core also became evident with 
the introduction
of Mickey Mouse school writing tablets in 1929:
These writing tablets were the beginning of the crosspromotion of Disney's
cartoon characters that eventually 
made Walt Disney Productions a model of
what business 
schools would later call "synergy" ... Within three years,
Ingersoll-Waterbury Co. was selling more than a million 
Mickey Mouse
watches annually. Within a decade, ten percent of the company's revenues
came from the royalties 
derived from the licensing of cartoon characters."
Expanding these core assets, Disney marched into the construction of
Disneyland in 1955 and into television with the companion 
Disneyland and
Mickey Mouse Club shows. Each adjacency begot more related adjacencies.
Disneyland sired Walt Disney World and 
Epcot Center. The early licensing
efforts parented a series of generations of now-familiar Disney products such
as books, records, plush 
characters, and magazines. These, in turn, spawned
the chain of Disney Stores in 1987 and the hugely successful Disney Home
Video 
business that same year. Not all of Disney's expansions worked. One
restaurant initiative called Mickey's Kitchen was tried and abandoned. But
the company was quick to experiment, and quick to stop 
the losers and fund
every aspect of the winners. Over time, the boxoffice attendance of Lion
King, for example, accounted for less than 20 
percent of total profits from the
film, with most of the profit pool 
shifting into new adjacencies from videos to
retail products to Broadway adaptations. Though this strategy was executed a
number of 
years ago, it remains one of the most vivid examples of
rejuvenating a 
core through a repeatable formula of adjacency expansion.
Certainly, all has not been easy in the magic kingdom. Along the 
way there
have been major crises of leadership and family succession, 
problems of cost
overruns on projects such as Epcot, and problems of 
being slow to adapt to
the changing tastes of an increasingly sophisticated child and teenagemarketplace. Disney began to yield to the 
dangerous temptation to invest in
departures from the core. Desperately seeking a way to find the next large
wave of growth, Disney 
acquired sports teams (Anaheim Angels and Mighty
Ducks), media 
companies (Capital Cities/ABC), real estate ventures (time-
sharing 
businesses), and magazine properties (Fairchild Publications). During
this acquisition period, Disney stock languished and investors, as 
is so often
the case after the fact, called for a return to core growth.
More recently, the company has pursued joint ventures that 
leverage the
original core, such as its agreement with NTT DoCoMo 
to make the rich
content of Disney available over the Internet in 
Japan in a variety of wireless
environments, and related acquisitions 
such as the computer animation
specialist Pixar. Today, these coredriven initiatives look promising, and
Disney has divested a range of 
noncore assets, stating, "We are not a
conglomerate. If there are things that are maybe just off the core that we
could monetize in a 
very strong economy, we may do that""
The lessons from Disney are these. First, the original core can 
remain a
source of adjacency growth for decades, if not longer, if 
managed properly
and with adjacencies constantly monitored and 
assessed. Second, even the
strongest core needs to be adapted in 
keeping with changes in its customer
needs and technologies. 
Finally, even the most focused, excellent companies
can choose 
adjacent moves that they later regret, only to return to the core.
Consider yet another share-of-wallet example. The Boots Company is one of
the United Kingdom's largest retail chains, with a 
brand name more trusted
than the Royal Family, according to one 
source. Founded as an herbal
remedy shop for the poor in 1849, it 
has lived a history of growth almost
continually for more than 150 
years, expanding into adjacencies of its
original core medicinal dispensary. In 1989, in an aggressive move to obtain
a higher share of its 
customers' wallets, it acquired Payless DIY and WH
Smith's Do It All, 
merging these businesses to access the home do-it-yourself
business.
As readers of this book might now expect, nine painful years and 
more than
$600 million of investments later, Boots sold its DIY 
chain at a large loss and
returned to its core. A Boots spokesman 
commented, "Our strategy has to be
to differentiate the brand-we 
are not a health and beauty supermarket, we area health and beauty 
expert."" Developing closer-in adjacencies in niche,
health-related, 
higher-margin products and customer segments is now the
more 
modest, and more profitable, goal. In 2006 Boots combined with
Alliance Unichem and rebranded the nine hundred Alliance stores 
as Boots in
a merger executed by the private equity firm KKR. 
Today, it enters a new
phase with supermarket competitors like 
Asda (owned by Wal-Mart) and
Tesco, the leading grocery chain in 
the United Kingdom (with successful
prescription services in many 
of its large, low-cost stores). Boots is
responding by moving into 
higher-growth and potentially higher-value
adjacencies including 
health and wellness, product innovation, and
investments in customer loyalty. But virtually all observers of the company
agree that "the nation's chemist" lost considerable momentum and squandered
resources by its misconceived adjacency move years earlier.
With the amount of recent business analysis on the drivers of 
customer
profitability and loyalty, the term share of wallet has 
moved into the common
business lexicon. American Express has 
built the foundation of its card-
member strategy on adding services 
and increasing card flexibility to increase
the share of wallet of its 
most profitable customer segments. Dell tracks its
share of wallet 
for computer-related purchases of key segments and
customers. 
The celebrated USAA business model is built on tracking a
customer through his or her life cycle, aiming at maximizing the company's
share of wallet at each stage. Industrial companies such as 
PPG Industries
have developed programs around the full life-cycle 
use of their automotive
coating products from priming to painting 
to cleanup to color-matching
technologies for repairs of scratches. 
It bundles and sells products and
services as integrated systems. The 
idea that new market share in the best
customers is the most valuable of all is probably as old as business itself.
What is new are our 
deeper understanding of the economic magnitude of
share of wallet 
and our more sophisticated techniques for tracking and
driving 
growth through share of wallet.
Capability Adjacencies
Capability adjacencies are moves outward from the core that are 
based on
deep organizational know-how. In our sustained value 
creator companies, wehave identified three forms of capabilitybased expansions. The first is
grounded in technology or technical 
know-how. The second comes from
business process know-how 
and the management model for running
businesses. The third is 
founded on knowledge about how to store, manage,
and obtain 
value from information, and the peculiar economics of doing so.
Motorola is one of the pioneers of wireless communications and 
technology
and a great business-growth story of the end of the twentieth century. Though
the company is currently addressing a 
slowdown in its growth rate, its longer-
term record is exceptional. 
In 1979, Motorola was a $2.7 billion company
with earnings of $154 
million and market value of $1.6 billion. By 1995, the
company had 
grown revenues ten times, earnings twelve times, and market
value 
twenty-three times. Motorola's growth, which illustrates the first 
type
of capability adjacency, derives from its deep skills in engineering wireless
systems. Deep knowledge of wireless engineering, constantly refined, formed
the backbone of Motorola for more than 
seventy years. Businesses where
wireless system capability was not 
key to competitive advantage (such as
automobile heaters) or where 
this capability conveyed declining competitive
advantage (such as 
consumer televisions) were also those businesses where
profitable 
growth was difficult to achieve or altogether nonexistent.
Motorola began in 1928 when the Galvin brothers, Paul and 
Joseph,
purchased a battery eliminator business out of bankruptcy. 
Battery
eliminators are devices that allowed early battery-powered 
radios to run on
household current. This business quickly led the 
company into radios for
consumer automobiles and police cruisers, 
a market that it dominated. During
World War II, Motorola developed and produced the field radios, "walkie-
talkies," that virtually 
became a symbol of the war and led to the firm's first
public stock 
offering in 1943. During its growth, the company experimented
with business adjacencies ranging from eight-track tape players to 
push-
button gasoline car heaters, both of which failed. At the withdrawal of the
heater product Paul Galvin announced: "We will now 
stick to electronics."
Not a bad choice.
The adjacency expansion path of Motorola started in 1928 from 
the first
battery eliminator. Since then, the company has built on its 
core wireless-
engineering knowledge in essentially all of its successful adjacencyexpansions, including its forays into home radios, 
pagers, cellular phones,
and the infrastructure for cellular phone 
systems. The success predictors of its
expansions were the extent to 
which the core wireless technology was critical
to the business and 
the extent to which market power and influence could be
built on that technology. In 1969, Neil Armstrong's first communication 
from
the moon was sent via a Motorola transponder-a symbol of 
the "core of the
core" of the ultimate engineering company.
Sadly, the leadership position in wireless handsets that Motorola 
had built has
now eroded significantly. Strategic focus, or its 
absence, is at the center of
this in a variety of ways. During the 
crucial investment period when many
players jockeyed for a competitive position in the handset market, Motorola
made its major 
corporate investment initiative in a project called Iridium.
Iridium 
was a massive adjacency expansion for Motorola. Costing more 
than
$6 billion, it consisted of a constellation of sixty-six low-Earthorbiting
satellites that would create a global cellular network. Not 
only was the project
a failure, ending in bankruptcy, but it was a distraction of talent, attention,
and capital. At the same time, Nokia 
got more focused, developing the
elements of its repeatable formula 
in the handset market. By 2009, Nokia had
captured an amazing 40 
percent of all global mobile handsets, while
Motorola stood behind 
Samsung in fourth position with a 6 percent market
share. It probably did not have to be this way. Perhaps Iridium was a logical
adjacency for Motorola to pursue, but to allow it to consume the 
amount of
capital and attention that it did (versus other structures 
to gain an "option
value" but insulate the core better) proved to be a 
costly decision."
In their seminal article on core competence, C. K. Prahalad and 
Gary Hamel
assert that many companies' growth strategies will "be 
judged on their ability
to identify, cultivate, and exploit the core 
competencies that make growth
possible-indeed, they'll have to 
rethink the concept of the corporation itself.""
Prahalad and 
Hamel elaborate particularly on the examples of NEC and 3M,
explaining that these companies have a strategic architecture that 
makes their
competencies transparent and relevant in many settings. The case of
Motorola, described above, illustrates an extreme 
example of a company
whose profitable growth is a function of how 
it manages a relatively tightly
defined set of capabilities into new 
business opportunities that surround the
core. The tension lies between protecting the core (while not creating a staticstate) on the 
one hand and expanding into the right adjacencies (without
abandoning the core) on the other.
Network Adjacencies
Robert Metcalfe, the developer of Ethernet technology and a student 
of
networks, has observed that the power of an interconnected network rises
geometrically with the number of users. The economics 
of networks in which
the addition of a user increases the value of the 
network to all other users
gives rise to increasing returns to scale and 
therefore to large rewards for
network-dependent businesses that 
expand. Increasing returns create
situations where incremental scale 
can be worth more to the leader than to
other participants. This is 
why many software and communications
businesses have characteristics of natural monopolies. Growth through
incremental network 
expansion is valuable indeed for such companies.
Economists have 
studied the competitive dynamics of networks extensively."
For our purposes, many types of network adjacencies provide 
attractive
growth opportunities for companies whose economics 
hinge on network
effects. Perhaps the most obvious type is adding 
adjacent networks to a
distribution or communications network. 
Consolidation of the railroads and,
more recently, consolidation of 
cellular networks demonstrate this type of
adjacency expansion, as 
does Vodafone's takeover of AirTouch in the United
States and of 
Mannesmann in Germany.
Another type is accumulating groups of customers who can be 
put on a
common information platform or service. Becoming 
the accepted standard for
a consumer or business application software is of immense value. The growth
strategies of Microsoft 
Office in desktop software, eBay in online auctions,
SAP in business system software, Google in online search, and even
Facebook 
in social networking all build on the power of becoming the
standard in their "core of the core" combined with the network 
economics
that are attendant on this position in many software 
and online businesses.
New-to-the-World Adjacencies
Just as volcanic disturbance can send new, and therefore uninhabited, land up
from the ocean, so, too, can industry turbulence create 
new, uninhabited
business territory. Often this territory comprises 
new-to-the-world businesses,
and it can represent an important, 
opportunistic form of adjacency expansion.
We have found two 
main ways that such adjacencies emerge, become
recognized, and 
are pursued successfully.
The first is where a leading-edge business in a relatively dynamic 
market
determines that it has built world-class capabilities in an 
area where others-
not necessarily competitors-wish to purchase 
that know-how for their own
business purposes. For example, 
Cisco, one of our sustained value creators,
found that many of its 
customers were asking whether it would be willing and
able to 
transfer some of its business practices, especially those related to the
use of the Internet and information technology, to help them transform their
internal processes and become more efficient. Cisco has 
discovered that this
consulting capability is not only valuable in 
itself as a business, but it can
strengthen the company's core hardware business. Amazon, the online
retailer, developed sophisticated 
algorithms to customize its webpage to each
user using his or her 
underlying behavioral data from purchases and click-
through. This 
capability has become an enormous competitive advantage in
selling information products, but is now also a separate business where
Amazon will assist with, or take over, online retailing for noncompetitive
partners. Similarly, Google has made a business out of its 
knowledge of
tailoring its search software to specific applications 
called Google Search
Solutions for Business.
The second primary way that such new-to-world adjacencies 
emerge is
through a major change in consumer behavior-either 
the emergence of a new
subsegment of consumers or new behaviors 
from an existing segment-often
enabled by new technology. For 
instance, the Geek Squad (a service
adjacency of more than 24,000 
employees that helps consumers install and
use digital productslike Internet networks, PC security software, and home
entertainment systems) filled an enormous consumer need in dealing with 
an
ever more sophisticated array of equipment and software. Perhaps some of
the iPod adjacencies by Apple such as the AppStore 
(for downloading
applications) or iTunes (for downloading music 
and songs) were clearly
"white space adjacencies" enabled by new 
consumer behavior and newtechnology.
Evaluating Adjacency Expansion Opportunities
Management teams that develop a full inventory of growth 
opportunities and
adjacency expansions around their core busi- 
ness(es) quickly recognize that
they are awash in interesting and 
potentially attractive options for investment.
Before they undertake 
a major data collection effort, they should step back
and apply their 
strategic judgment and operating knowledge of the business
to rate 
the opportunities along five key dimensions:
1. How much does this strengthen, protect, and reinforce the 
core?
2. What are the chances of our becoming a leader in the new 
segment or
business?
3. Could this move have a defensive benefit, preempting or 
interdicting our
present or future competitors?
4. Does this investment position our core business strategically 
for an even
stronger future set of adjacency moves, such as 
hedging against a major
uncertainty or constituting one 
step in a well-defined sequence of strategic
moves?
5. Can we be certain of superbly executing implementation?
We find that these questions provoke a rich and active discussion of priorities
and lead to a second phase of prioritization of 
the activities that rate best. In
general, if an opportunity fails on 
two dimensions, substantial questions
should be raised about its 
attractiveness.
This second phase of prioritization can be more traditional and 
analytic,
building a fact base on the following criteria:
• The size of the opportunity; that is, the current and future 
profit pool
• The strength of competitive activity
• Evidence about customer value and demand• The magnitude and timing of investment
• The magnitude and timing of potential revenues and costs
• Uncertainties that could magnify or shrink the opportunity
• Difficulty rating of implementation
The final phase of ranking and selecting involves clustering the 
investment
initiatives into distinct strategic scenarios. In one industrial company typical
of many we have seen, the alternatives clustered into two scenarios. One
option was built around a long list of 
initiatives for rejuvenating growth in a
profitable but static core 
business. The initiatives included expanding
internationally, forming smaller units for small customers, creating value-
added services, 
providing information products, and developing new
technology 
products. A second option entailed building mass and focus
around 
several emerging customer segments. What began as an adjacency
mapping exercise with more than ninety different ideas evolved into 
a highly
productive strategic discussion about the future course of 
the business and
where to deploy key financial, scientific, and management resources.
The logic for choosing a direction for growth is also changing. 
Industry
turbulence is both increasing the amount of uncertainty 
surrounding many
choices and shortening the time frame for reaction. In addition, growth
choices that were once primarily clustered in concentric circles around a core
business (product choices, 
customer segment choices, geographic sequencing
decisions) now 
include a much more vexing and fundamental set of adjacent
opportunities (totally new businesses, hedging).
Furthermore, the cycle time of strategy development is becoming shorter and
shorter in many industries. As a result, the evaluation exercise described,
which once might have been conducted 
annually (or less frequently) over a
several-day period, now needs 
to be accelerated to quarterly, monthly, or
weekly and compressed 
to a day.
Multiple-Move Adjacencies and Options
We argue throughout this book that industry structures are becoming less
stable, leadership is becoming more fleeting, and the life 
span of a typical
strategy is growing shorter. Risk and uncertainty 
loom increasingly larger in
business life. In an environment like 
this, adjacency expansions are critical
for staking your claim on 
future market positions as a hedge against
uncertainty. The case for 
making these investments can sometimes be
enhanced by going 
beyond basic net present value calculations and gut
instinct to call 
on frameworks from options theory.16
Many examples exist of adjacency moves that hedged against an 
uncertain
future successfully. The investment that Roche made in 
the biotech company
Genentech put it out ahead of its "big 
pharma" rivals in this emerging area of
science and led to subsequent adjacency moves such as Roche's acquisition of
Cetus and of 
Boehringer Mannheim (a diagnostics company). These
investments, in turn, put Roche in a position to become the leader in the 
new
area of pharmacogenomics (genetic testing and molecular 
diagnostics).
The lesson from this, and from a proliferating number of similar 
examples, is
that adjacency expansions can and should hedge against future uncertainties
and foster learning, as well as attack 
existing pools of nearby profit. Both
moves are critical building 
blocks for a sustainable growth strategy.
Adjacencies and Choice of Core
The combination of a rich set of adjacencies and a strong or dominant core
business can be a powerful breeder reactor for creating sustained, profitable
growth if accompanied by appropriately aggressive 
reinvestment. Businesses
with rich adjacencies around a weak core 
must first identify or create a strong
core around which to build. Businesses with strong leadership but few logical
adjacencies may need to 
redefine parts of their core (as discussed in chapter
4). More common 
are companies with multiple businesses, all funded in
similar ways 
through the budgeting process yet all with different underlying
positions and adjacency potential. In this situation, the richness of
adjacencies around competing cores can be the deciding factor 
in determining
how and where to focus a company and drive higher 
levels of growth.Common Pitfalls of Adjacency Expansion
Investment in adjacencies is eventually necessary for any company 
to
continue creating value. It is also one of the riskiest activities a 
firm can
undertake. In examining more than one hundred cases of 
business adjacency
expansion, we have found seven primary pitfalls, or risk factors.
Pitfall 1: Expanding toward an Entrenched Position
Strategy, Liddell Hart's history of military strategy, examines the 
successes
and failures of military campaigns to take over territory 
going back to the
Peloponnesian Wars. Hart finds that armies that make a frontal assault on an
entrenched position lose virtually 100 
percent of the time, even with superior
forces. He argues that an 
indirect approach is essential to increasing the odds
of victory. For 
instance, Alexander's most decisive battle against the Persians,
at 
Guagarela, was a masterful use of an indirect attack. In this battle,
Alexander took a small fraction of his troops eighteen miles away 
from the
front, attacking at an unexpected time from an unexpected direction while the
majority of his troops were visible and 
immobile in the opposite direction.
Alexander achieved an enormous psychological victory in addition to his
military triumph. 
John Keegan writes that Alexander was "both outnumbered
and 
irremediably overlapped, he had to devise a more subtle means to 
win
victory." The indirect tactics he used "anticipated by 2,000 years 
the tactics
that would make Frederick the Great the most celebrated 
soldier of his time."
When the battle was over, Alexander had won 
decisively and "had
established his authority over the whole of the 
empire and was poised to
march `to the end of the earth. 17 An 
analogous situation can be seen in
business adjacency expansion. 
Launching a direct assault on entrenched
positions, without a 
major new angle of attack or differentiation, seldom wins
the war. 
Yet many companies try to move into adjacencies that are, in fact,
the well-defended, entrenched positions of others.
One of Bain Capital's most successful investments was in 
Wesley-Jessen.
Bain Capital acquired the contact lens manufacturer 
for $6.4 million and took
it public four years later to the tune of 
$290 million in equity, nearly a fifty-
times return. Bain saw a strong 
core (specialty lenses) underexploitedbecause of a mistaken pattern of adjacency expansion. "W-J decided that it
was going to move 
into the mass market for disposable contact lenses against
Johnson 
& Johnson and Bausch & Lomb," explains Mitt Romney. "It built a
$100 million factory to compete in this high-volume, low-cost segment and
lost money every day doing that. In our opinion, W-J 
simply did not have the
scale of the brand name to compete at the 
low end. This was a bad expansion
strategy, too far from the core 
specialty segment where it was excellent. We
saw this right away during due diligence. Our first action after the acquisition
was to 
close the disposable plant and refocus on specialty."
Romney goes on: "The second phase was adopting a strategy 
that went back
to the core. This had two elements. The first was 
what we called `the
forgotten doctor strategy," to refocus on the most 
sophisticated fitters of
lenses in segments like toric lenses for astigmatism. The second element was
to take W-J's strong position in 
tinted and colored lenses and really drive this
as a style product, 
with purple lenses targeted at U.S. teenagers, other colors
targeted 
at the Japanese market, ultraviolet protection targeted at sports, and
so on. This segmentation strategy building on the original core has 
been
hugely successful in driving profitable growth "18
Pursuing areas of the market in which a company has relatively 
low odds of
leadership or of building market power and influence 
can sap resources from
the core and actually retard growth in the 
rest of the business.
Pitfall 2: Overestimating the Profit Pool
The odds of achieving success are much greater when growth 
goes after an
expanding and deep industry profit pool rather than a 
shallow one. In their
analysis of the Gucci example described earlier, Jim Gilbert and Orit Gadiesh
write:
Gucci's misstep highlights the problem with growth: the 
strategies businesses
use to expand their top line often have 
the unintended consequence of
eroding their bottom line. 
Gucci attempted to extend its brand to gain sales-a
common growth strategy-but ended up alienating its most 
profitable customer
segments and attracting new segments 
that were less profitable. It was left
with a larger set of customers, but a much less attractive customer mix.19Mapping out the current and future profit pool is essential in 
developing a
growth strategy. The profit pool is a function of potential market size and
customer value from undertaking an activity. It is also a function of industry
structure: The pool in a segment in 
which one participant can gain market
power and influence is much 
larger than the pool in a segment that has
multiple equal players.
Pitfall 3: False Bundling
If you flip through a pile of annual reports, you are sure to 
encounter at least
a couple of phrases like the following: "Our aim is 
to serve all of the needs of
our key customers" "We want to be the 
one-stop shop for all of our
customers' needs" In a few situations, 
this all-things-to-all-people approach
might be appropriate. However, in general, phrases like these are warning
signs of business 
boundaries that are too broad to be practical and that can
lead to a 
dangerous overextension of resources.
One such example is the case of U.K.-based bookseller WH 
Smith. This
highly recognizable book business, which caters to travelers, began in 1792
as a single new store near London and quickly 
expanded into newspaper
distribution around London. Its bookstall expansion was fueled by the train
traveler who needed not only 
newspapers but other goods for long trips on
cold trains, including 
games, foot warmers, and even rugs. Today, WH Smith
has more 
than $3.5 billion in sales, a large distribution business, and well
over 
one thousand stores of different types, still heavily catering to 
travelers.
With its core under attack from competitors like Dillon's and 
Waterstone's,
WH Smith concluded that its problem was narrow 
participation in a broad
retail space. The company began to fill that 
space by adding new retail
product lines such as toys, typewriters, 
music, do-it-yourself tools, and gifts
through its bookstores. The 
result was lower sales per square foot; higher
costs in the form of 
inventory, infrastructure, and systems; and a management
team distracted from defending the imperiled core of selling printed matter.
After losing £195 million ($310 million) in 1996, the board 
brought in new
management with a new strategy: Return to the 
original view of WH Smith's
marketplace and business definition. Over the next two years, management
dropped noncore products 
that had been added to the line and divestednoncore acquisitions 
such as The Wall (a U.S. music retailer) and a majority
stake in the 
Virgin Our Price megastore chain. It then used the money from
these sales to reinforce and expand the core within the original 
business
boundaries. In 1998, WH Smith purchased 230 U.K. newsstands from rival
distributor John Menzies and began distributing 
its core products via the
Internet. WH Smith still faces battles in a 
tough industry, but its gun sights
are at least trained on the right 
battleground. It has posted positive revenue
and profit performance 
in recent years, especially in its airport and train
station locationsa modern version of its original train-oriented newspaper
distribution core of the 1800s.
Some of the most well-documented examples of failed adjacency expansion
are traceable to invalid assumptions about the economics of bundling.
Allegis, the combination of United Airlines, 
Sheraton Hotels and Resorts, and
Hertz predicated on offering the 
consumer a total travel package with a "one-
stop shop," certainly 
illustrates a gigantic investment based on false
expectations about 
consumer behavior. Similarly, Sears, in purchasing
Coldwell 
Banker, Allstate Insurance Group, and Dean Witter Financial
Services Group in order to offer its customers an integrated bundle of
financial products, failed to realize that its department store customers simply
weren't interested in the offering.
Pitfall 4: Invaders from Unexpected Fronts
The discovery of new, uninhabited market territory frequently 
brings
invaders from unexpected directions. Consider the following:
• Kodak's pursuit of the digital camera market encounters 
unfamiliar
competitors Hewlett-Packard and Canon.
• Quaker Oats' attempt to expand Snapple beverages runs 
directly into new
drink initiatives of Coca-Cola, with its 
unassailable distribution
infrastructure.
• Anheuser-Busch moves into salty snacks through the acquisition of Eagle
Snacks, leading to the quick discovery that 
Frito-Lay is a more powerful
competitor in its core than had 
been initially contemplated.• Xerox's entry into low-end copiers gets a surprise attack 
from Canon, an
unconventional competitor the giant had 
underestimated.
Lacking familiarity with new competitors, companies tend to 
underestimate
their strength, nature, and angle of attack. Instead, they 
need to x-ray every
new competitor thoroughly to understand the 
world from that adversary's
point of view, economics, and customers.
The exercise of mapping adjacencies requires not just taking an 
inside-out
look at the market, but also taking an outside-in look at 
which companies
might be amassing forces at your back. In an 
increasingly fast-moving and
interdependent world, competitive 
blindsiding is becoming more common.
Pitfall 5: Failing to Consider All Adjacencies
The Massachusetts-based Polaroid Corporation was arguably 
one of
America's first successful technology companies. Edwin 
Land retired from
Polaroid second only to Thomas Edison in total 
lifetime scientific patents
granted, a remarkable achievement. Yet, as 
the nature of film and imaging
changed repeatedly, right up to 
today's digital imaging, the company
remained fixed on instant 
(chemistry-based) photography. Polaroid failed to
redraw its 
boundaries to account for the new, much broader, customer- and
competitor-driven definition of imaging. Polaroid's business definition,
instant photography, was driven by an internal point of view 
too narrow to
lead to sustained, profitable growth. Its strategy based 
on this definition (and
associated set of assets) was certainly not 
successful and, in 2001, the
company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. After coming out of bankruptcy
and undergoing further 
travails, the company again filed for Chapter 11 in
2008.
Companies like Polaroid, with a single, extremely strong product, historical
technology, or long heritage of success in a protected 
niche, are the most
vulnerable to drawing their business boundaries 
and list of options too
narrowly. In these environments there are 
especially strong organizational
and budgetary forces that can 
restrict business definitions. Narrow boundaries
keep "apparent" 
market shares high, a crowd-pleaser to employees and
analysts 
alike. Narrow boundaries provide psychological comfort and
anaesthetize budget reviews. And, most important of all, narrow boundarieswall out the hard choices that may loom ahead.
Pitfall 6: Missing a New Segment
Failing to trace or pursue a newly emerging customer segment 
near your core
can have lasting consequences. Consider, for example the case of rental cars.
Founded in the 1950s, the leading rental car companies, Avis, 
Hertz, and
National Car Rental, focused on serving the business 
traveler in the top one
hundred airports in the United States. But 
the strategy issue for the rental car
companies became more blurry 
as new segments sprung up and began to
grow and take on a life of 
their own. The first new car rental segment to
sprout was leisure 
travel. The second was the replacement rentals, serving
drivers 
whose cars were in the shop for repair.
Alamo Rent A Car was founded by Florida entrepreneur Mike 
Eagan in 1974,
serving four locations with a fleet of one thousand 
cars. Alamo's formula was
different because it was targeting a different population, the leisure market,
paying for cars out of its own 
pocket. Eagan's model included lower-cost
locations outside the 
airport, advertising focused at leisure destination and
origin sites, 
and a dedicated sales force directed at travel agents and key
influencers. Off-airport rentals are anathema to many time-sensitive 
business
travelers on day trips, but they are perfect for the priceconscious family on
vacation. Within fifteen years, Alamo had captured a leading share in the
leisure segment and had grown its fleet to more than 150,000 cars, nearly 75
percent the size of the Hertz, 
Avis, and National fleets, on average.
As Alamo developed the leisure market, another company, 
Enterprise,
developed the replacement market. In the 1960s, Enterprise's founders, the
Taylor family, saw an opportunity to provide 
rental vehicles for motorists
whose personal cars were unavailable 
due to accidents or repairs. Just as
Alamo built a sales force presence 
in travel agents, so Enterprise invested to
build a sales force presence 
at key body shops, insurance adjuster centers,
and automobile dealers. These longer-term, even lower-cost rental needs
required a different business model from Alamo's and a different business
model 
from Hertz's or Avis's in terms of the condition of the cars, the size
and quality of the locations, and staffing. In 1980, Enterprise had 
just ten
thousand cars. Today, it has more than seven hundred thousand vehicles andhas captured more than 70 percent of the replacement market, which it
defined, created, and then dominated. It is 
now the most profitable major
rental car company in terms of margin and return on capital.
Should the traditional rental car companies have pursued the 
leisure market
more broadly during its early years of development, or 
the replacement
market, or both? Would that have weakened their 
core airport business and
allowed traditional competitors to make 
inroads? Or would early entry into
leisure and replacement have been 
the winning strategy? Would the diversion
of capital to develop these 
new businesses have sapped resources from more
productive uses? 
Or would it have allowed them to strengthen their core by
building a 
leading position in a new coalescing segment? Interestingly,
Enterprise's focus and singular success in the replacement business paid off 
in
ways perhaps never envisioned by the company. In 2007, the company
purchased the erstwhile Vanguard Car Rental, formed by the 
merger of
Alamo (leader in leisure) and National (number three in 
the airport rentals
market). Strategically, Enterprise is now doubly 
formidable, with a strong
position in the replacement market funding an assault on the airport market-
using its own Enterprise brand 
as well as the two more established acquired
brands.
Pitfall 7: Single-mindedly Pursuing High-end Adjacencies
As Clayton Christensen has documented in The Innovator's 
Dilemma, in their
pursuit of adjacency expansion, the strongest core 
businesses gravitate to the
higher and higher ends of their markets, 
targeting more sophisticated
products with higher margins that can 
support greater overhead. In the
computer industry, for example, virtually every manufacturer of components
and PCs has a growth plan 
skewed toward more sophisticated new
applications or toward selling 
a larger and larger percentage of new products
to the large corporate 
data centers.
The danger is that this approach may expose a flank at the low 
end to attack
from new breeds of low-cost competitors. Examples of 
successful attacks in
such situations abound, in industries from 
steel (Nucor) to brokerage
(Schwab online) to PCs (Dell) to rental 
cars (Enterprise) to airlines (Jet Blue)
to investment funds (Vanguard). In selecting any growth strategy that
expands into adjacencies, a company should ask itself whether it has avoidedor 
inadequately defended against new competitors entering through 
the low-
cost end of the market, and if so, why.
Containing the Risk of Dangerous Adjacencies: 
Diagnostic Questions
Clearly, the wrong choice or treatment of an adjacency expansion 
can do
more than just lose money on that initiative; it can also distract core strategy,
preoccupy management, and confuse investors 
with a multiplier effect to the
detriment of all. There is no single formula for eliminating this risk. Indeed,
bounded experimentation is 
at the head of the growth strategies of many of
the companies that 
seem to expand rapidly from adjacency to adjacency.
In evaluating growth adjacencies, we have found a series of 
questions most
useful in raising the right issues and, sometimes, 
clarifying the right answer.
We recognize that many adjacencies fall 
into the close call area, especially
where the future course of the 
marketplace is uncertain. However, even for
those adjacencies, these questions can help to illuminate the nature of the risk
and increase 
the possibility of lower-cost or lower-risk options.
To evaluate an adjacency investment, ask:
1. Does this adjacency strengthen or reinforce the core (or a 
core, if multiple
cores exist)?
2. Does this adjacency add value for our core customers?
3. Does this adjacency serve as insulation against potential 
competitors' intent
on attacking the core?
4. Is this adjacency positioned in the direction that the industry profit pool
(and the core) is likely to shift over time 
(growing segments, channels,
needed capabilities)?
5. Do we have a chance of achieving leadership economics in 
this adjacency
through outright leadership, a protected customer position, or shared
economics with the original core?
6. Does this adjacency hedge against a major strategic 
uncertainty?7. Does this adjacency lead to other successive moves that, in 
total, are
essential to build or protect the core?
8. Does this adjacency move into the backyard of a new 
competitor? What
might the competitor's response be, and 
how does that play out?
9. Does failure to move into this adjacency turn out to render 
the core
vulnerable several moves down the road? To what 
degree?
10. Have we fully mapped out all the competing adjacencies, or 
are we acting
opportunistically, without fully calibrating the 
options?
Few adjacencies will win uniform endorsement from the answers 
to all ten
questions. If you have an answer to or a point of view about 
each question
and their sum total encourages you to move ahead, then you should probably
pursue that adjacency. However, if you 
have developed no answer to or point
of view about some of 
these questions, then you need to probe more deeply.
The riskier the 
decision, the greater the need to consider alternative strategies,
such 
as participating in minority positions or alliances in order to hedge 
the
risk.
To evaluate the method chosen, ask:
1. If achieving leadership would be difficult, does it make sense 
to enter this
adjacency by ownership rather than outsourcing 
or partnership?
2. If uncertainty is massive, do the adjacencies that most hedge 
against the
future require majority ownership, or is it possible to have several minority
vehicles with options to buy 
later?
3. If the new territory is unfamiliar, what experiments or pilots 
could be run?
Do those signal competitive intent and 
provoke response?
4. Who is the current leader in the adjacency? Does it make 
more sense to
combine forces in some fashion than to add a 
new competitor to the arena?
Conclusion
The most successful sustained growth companies almost always follow the
pattern of expanding in a regular and organized way into a 
series of
adjacencies around one or two strong cores. The pattern 
resembles the growth
rings of a tree, emanating out from the center, 
expanding and reinforcing the
core.
Determining which adjacencies to pursue and how much to 
invest in them
relative to the core ranks at the top of difficult and 
seminal decisions for any
company in its quest for sustained growth. 
We have examined case after case
of how management teams have overreached, undervaluing their core in
pursuit of far-reaching adjacencies (Bausch & Lomb). We have seen
examples of companies that 
have tentatively moved into important
adjacencies, only to provide 
them too little management talent and too few
financial resources. 
Often, these companies further endangered the core while
pursuing 
less relevant business initiatives at the same time (Polaroid). We
have 
also looked at examples of companies that have been able to trigger
wave after wave of new growth through an organized approach to 
resolving
the tension between investing in the core and moving 
aggressively into
adjacencies (the Hewlett-Packard printer business). 
Finally, we have seen
cases of businesses that briefly departed from 
the core but that rushed back to
reformulate the adjacency strategy 
in line with their true differentiation and
turbocharged growth 
(Hilti).
Sophisticated management teams at the helms of all of these 
companies
grappled mightily with the tension inherent in deciding 
whether to reinvest in
the core, invest in adjacencies around the core, 
or consider hot new ideas that
are distinct but that can build on 
strengths in the core. As their stories show,
no one can bat one thousand. However, we hope that the examples, methods
for mapping 
adjacencies, and diagnostic questions in this book will provide a
useful framework for thinking about how to expand into the right adjacencies
in the right way to gain full profit potential from the core.
The most successful companies have the largest number of new 
adjacencies
raining down upon them every day. Success multiplies 
opportunities.
Proliferating opportunities complicate decision 
making and prioritization (a
good problem to have) and therefore 
risk. Paradoxically, the better your
performance, the greater the risk 
in your decisions to select and invest inadjacencies around the core.
Of course, sometimes, the core itself encounters turbulence as 
technology
changes or customer needs shift or a new business 
model appears on the
horizon, gobbling up share in a surprising 
way. These situations are
becoming increasingly common. Hence, 
we turn to our third element of
growth strategy, redefining the core.
 When naturalist Charles Darwin wrote of life on the Galapagos 
Islands in
1842, he noted an unusual strain of finch that had 
adapted to its environment
to survive, and now looked and acted 
very differently from its continental
cousins. These birds had elongated beaks that enabled them to eat local foods
(insects, nuts, nectar from tropical fruits) that European finches didn't
encounter. 
The evidence that a species had essentially redefined itself to
successfully compete in a new environment became the cornerstone of
Darwin's theory of evolution.' In the world of business, a similar 
evolution is
taking place. Out of the turbulence in today's world, 
new environmental
conditions are emerging, forcing companies to 
redefine themselves faster and
more often than before in order to 
survive.'
To understand the magnitude and implications of industry turbulence, we did
a simple comparison of more than forty major 
industry categories (airlines
would be one, for example). For each, 
we defined turbulence in terms of
major structural changes that 
would require companies to change the way in
which they compete, 
and the way in which the profit pool is distributed. We
did this comparison between the 1970s and the decade starting in 2000. We
concluded that the rate of fundamental, structural turbulence is three times
higher than it was a few decades ago-and that's not including the financial
crisis of 2008-2009. In the 1970s only 15 percent to 
25 percent of industries
could be deemed turbulent by our definition; now the percentage ranges from
65 percent to 75 percent. Furthermore, in a subsequent analysis, we found
that more than half 
of the profitability in the world (the world profit pool)
was concentrated in six major industries-media, energy, airlines, financial
services, telecommunications, and automotives-all of which could 
be
classified as turbulent.
Our analysis identified five main types of forces that drive 
industry
turbulence-allowing, in effect, for the creation of a scorecard for different
levels of discontinuity. The first of these forces is a 
major change in
regulation such as the deregulation of the airline 
industry decades ago, or the
2009 re-regulation of the banking 
sector. A second force of turbulence is theemergence of a "disruptive technology" that fundamentally changes industry
economics 
and the rules of the game. A classic example is the effect of the
emergence of digital photography on companies like Kodak and 
Polaroid-
shifting the profit pool and redefining the winners. A 
third force, sometimes
enabled by new technology, is the appearance of a fundamentally new-to-
world business model with superior performance and economics to that of the
past. The way that 
Dell took over the PC industry during the 1990s with its
direct 
model is such an example. Before Dell, the concept of selling
computers by phone or online direct to customers was unheard of, as 
was the
lean inventory pipeline that supported the low-cost fulfillment of those
orders. The emergence of low-cost carriers in the airline industry such as Jet
Blue is another. The fourth force that can 
destabilize winners and losers and
drain the profit pools is a radical 
change in consumer behavior patterns,
sometimes accelerated by 
technology. So, for example, the demise of
traditional newspapers, 
or the erosion of retail bookstores is driven by a
dramatic shift 
in how younger people obtain information. Finally, there's the
effect 
of developing economies-especially China and India-which have
impacted manufacturing industry cost structures, as well as commodity
prices, so profoundly. Many industries such as newspapers, or financial
services, or media are feeling several of these forces at 
the same time.
The power of industry turbulence in determining winners and 
losers is
apparent from an analysis we did of the sustained value creators during the
1990s with the companies creating market value at 
the fastest rate in the last
three years of that decade (not sustained 
value, necessarily, but created
value). To examine this, we categorized the sustained value creators
according to whether their 
primary growth engine was the historic core
performance and adjacency expansion (such as UPS or Wal-Mart), a new-to-
the-world 
business model or market (such as eBay or Dell), or a true
transformation of a historic core (such as Schwab or Nokia). Then we 
applied
the same categories to the best-performing large companies. The comparison
is shown in figure 4-1. Companies during 
that decade grew and prospered
primarily through core growth and 
adjacency expansion. In fact, 84 percent
followed this traditional pattern. By contrast, companies that achieved the
highest levels of 
performance from 1997 to 2000 were those that took
advantage of 
turbulence to drive into a major new-to-the-world market,
develop 
a totally new business model, or radically transform their core morerapidly than adjacency expansion would allow. More than half of 
the best
performers in that latter group were focused on new markets or forged from
core redefinitions.
4-1 Turbulence Is Changing the Sources of Growth
a. Based on sample of U.S. sustained value creators; n = 67.
b. Large companies with highest three-year rate of value creation (through
12/31/99) as reported in the 
Wall Street Journal; n = 35.These studies were performed a decade ago, but recent analyses 
confirm that
their conclusions are still valid today. For instance, a 
study of the thirty-three
fastest-growing companies in eight countries from 1987 to 2007 revealed that
a staggering two-thirds of them 
were new companies with a new-to-world
business model. Moreover, 36 percent of these new companies created a
previously nonexistent profit pool.
The Rarity of Successful Transformation
The need to redefine a core business fundamentally is becoming 
more critical
and will become more common given the increasing 
frequency of industry
turbulence. Yet history shows successful 
transformation to be quite rare. In
examining our 240 sustained 
value creating companies' histories over a
decade, we found fewer 
than thirty companies that arguably underwent a
major redefinition of their core business. We then conducted a search of other
studies of successful business transformation of major companies 
in the pastdecade, scanned the business press, and reexamined 
our own archives. Even
expanding the universe in this way to some 
two thousand companies, we
found fewer than one hundred that 
transformed their cores fundamentally
(with scale more than $500 
million). Indeed, in our literature search, about
fifteen common 
examples constituted most of the mentions of transformation.
The 
most frequently cited of these companies include Corning, Charles
Schwab, PerkinElmer Instruments, Nokia, Monsanto, Apple, GE 
(owing
mostly to GE Capital), Roche, and Samsung. Although we have not done an
exhaustive population cohort study, it would 
seem that only about 5 percent
to 10 percent of profitable and 
growing companies transform or redefine their
core business fundamentally in the course of a decade. Sometimes, also, the
"transformations" of the day that are most well reported in the press turn 
out
to be false-examples abound from Enron to Vivendi to AOLTime Warner. At
the same time, we also see evidence that the need 
and frequency to redefine
the core is increasing over time due to 
higher levels of turbulence in most
industries. Given the deep roots 
that a company's historic core has, it is no
wonder that change of 
this magnitude is seldom attempted or successful.
Because redefinitions come in all shapes and sizes, we needed a 
working
definition. We decided that a company had redefined, or 
transformed, its core
effectively if it was experiencing profitable 
growth and if it had changed its
business model or its business definition fundamentally. To get a sense of the
range of transformations, consider the following three examples.
Marvel Entertainment: Shift to a New Business Model
Marvel Entertainment was once the leading publisher of comic 
books,
featuring an astounding array of iconic superheroes from 
Spider-Man and the
Incredible Hulk to Wolverine. Yet, in 1996, 
Marvel was in trouble, and even
Spider-Man and his amazing powers could not avert the company's decline to
bankruptcy. However, 
just as if life were imitating art, the company that
created and controlled a stable of more than five thousand characters
appearing in 
more than thirty thousand stories underwent a renewal.
The new leadership-director Isaac Perlmutter (who became 
CEO in 2005) and
creative leader Avi Arad-saw the potential to shift 
this comic book publisher
into a more broadly based entertainment 
business built around these proven
and beloved superheroes. They 
discovered that the characters, their deep fanbase, and the astonishing library of stories could be repurposed to modern
times and 
modern media. Initially, they worked with film studios, promoting
Spider-Man, which proved to be a blockbuster success. Eventually, 
they
worked through more and more characters-X-Men, the Fantastic Four, Silver
Surfer, and so on-as well as continuing the SpiderMan movie sequels. The
success of the movies spurred the sale of 
game products, books, and created
an active online community of 
devoted fans. Today, Marvel has begun to
produce its own moviesa new adjacency to its core-with good early success.
Its first selfproduced movie, Iron Man, pulled in $582 million at the
worldwide 
box office, further fueling other revenue streams from toy
licensing. 
Even the original comic book core experienced a renewal.
Recently, 
the company announced a 2010 opening date for a Spider-Man
show 
on Broadway called Turn Off the Dark.
The result has been nothing less than spectacular-a rescue befitting Marvel's
superheroes. In 2008, Marvel attained revenues of $676 
million and EBIT of
$355 million. In the five years following December 2003, the company's
stock grew by more than 58 percent while 
the NYSE went down 11 percent
over the same period. The company 
has changed its business model, moved
into new adjacencies, and 
rescued its original core in a way even Spider-Man
would admire. 
The ultimate validation of Marvel's strategy came in August
2009, 
when Disney made a bid for the company and its stable of superheroes
in a deal valued at $4 billion at the time.
General Dynamics: Shrink to Grow
General Dynamics was formed in 1952 through the combination of the
Electric Boat Company, a builder of submarines and 
ships, and Convair, a
maker of aircraft. The company grew rapidly 
during the defense buildup of
the 1960s, growing its aerospace business and developing the controversial F-
111 fighter. In 1976, General Dynamics purchased the Chrysler Defense
business, and in 
1986, it purchased Cessna Aircraft to become a far-flung
defense 
systems conglomerate.
In the early 1990s, General Dynamics saw the impending 
defense cutbacks
and recognized the danger of its participation across many businesses in
which it was not the leader. Although 
the company had grown to more than
$10 billion in sales in 1990, 
it was about to lose money for the next threeyears. This crisis 
spurred new management to decide to re-form around its
strongest 
core business-marine systems-and to strengthen and broaden 
this
core.
Over the next two years, General Dynamics shrunk by 70 percent, to $3.1
billion in sales in 1995, and returned to profitability in 
the process. With the
proceeds from the sales in missile defense and 
aerospace, it acquired firms
that reinforced and broadened the core, 
such as shipbuilder Bath Iron Works.
These actions propelled the 
revenue of General Dynamics back to $9 billion,
with profits of 
$880 million. Investors responded well to the transformation
of the 
company portfolio, pushing its market value from $1 billion at the 
start
of the decade to nearly $12 billion at the end.
The casual observer of the General Dynamics story might see it 
as an
example of a restructuring followed by renewed growth from 
a stronger core.
And it certainly was that. However, it was much 
more. General Dynamics
was among the first in the late 1980s 
to perceive the changing business model
in military procurement. 
The fall of the Soviet Union and the dismantling of
the Berlin Wall 
increased the pressure on defense spending. One consequence
of 
this softening in military appropriations was the shift from costplus
contracts, which had fueled the defense-oriented industrial 
establishment for
decades, toward fixed-price contracts. These new 
contracts would put greater
pressure on costs and profits. No longer 
would the government bear financial
risk and fund growing capacity; now money would be made only by tight
management of 
the backlog-a very different business model. The
management at 
General Dynamics felt that many of the company's businesses
had 
therefore reached maximum value and that potential buyers (other
defense companies) were enjoying the highest cash flow they would
experience for some time to come. A Bain estimate of shareholder 
value
created by General Dynamics five years after its restructuring 
suggests that
one-third to one-half of the $9 billion value increase came from recognizing
how the new rules of the game were going 
to shift value and acting
accordingly, with swift divestitures and 
restructuring. Since that time,
General Dynamics has been, by many 
measures, among the best-performing
major defense companies in 
the world.
Apple: Shift the Core to Drive into New AdjacenciesPerhaps the most spectacular corporate rejuvenation of the past 
five years is
Apple. Apple redefined itself by developing a new "core" 
around the iPod
and iTunes, driving it to leadership economics and 
creating a repeatable
formula to expand into a range of adjacencies. 
However, not too long ago,
Apple's original computing core was in 
a bad strategic situation. By the end
of 2003, Apple's stock had 
languished for fifteen years at virtually the same
level, creating no 
economic value. Its global market share in personal
computers 
tumbled to 2 percent in 2004. Even during the period from 1993
through 2003, a time of intense penetration in the global use of 
personal
computers, Apple's total return to shareholders was only 
4 percent and its
return on equity just 2 percent.
Yet, starting in 2003 with the launch of the iTunes Music Store, 
iPod sales
took off. In just two years, Apple attained 70 percent of 
the market for
portable MP3 players, and iTunes captured 85 percent of the market for
music downloads. From June 2003 to May 
2009, Apple's market value
exploded from $7 billion to more than 
$100 billion. Interestingly, Apple's
renewal depended on preexisting 
capabilities in design, technology, its young
core customer base, and 
its superiority in developing software user interfaces.
Certainly 
iTunes and the iPod are models of user simplicity.
Apple's adjacency expansion machine is now operating in high 
gear along
many dimensions-new products added to iTunes 
such as movies and TV
shows (almost unlimited in possibilities), 
form factors for the iPod, retail
store expansion, and all the possibilities that the iPhone offers, such as the
AppStore for software 
downloads.
These thumbnail sketches show how transformations vary along 
the
following key dimensions:
• Method (organic versus discontinuous through acquisition)
• End result (shift versus redefine versus replace the original 
business model)
• Organizational structure of new core (integrated versus 
separate)
• Role of technology (limited versus decisive)• Rationale (turnaround versus defensive versus offensive)
In a recent analysis of more than forty transformations, a Bain & 
Company
team found that, beyond the obvious ingredients such 
as the "right strategy"
or capability or resources, several controllable 
variables drove success. These
variables had strong statistical correlation with outcome and ultimate
economic returns. In order of 
average importance, they were:
1. Short time frame and sense of immediacy
2. Clear motivating rationale for the "point of arrival"
3. Strong, committed, and visible CEO leadership
4. Strong economic stake in the result for management
5. Willingness to change or replace management as necessary
Some of these findings, such as emphasis on a short time frame 
and
willingness to destabilize the team, contradict perceived 
wisdom-yet they are
echoed in the practices of the best private 
equity firms.
The Actuarial Tables of Corporate Mortality
Most biological species, including humans, achieve longer life spans 
with
each successive generation. The opposite appears to be true for companies:
Corporate mortality and morbidity tables would show 
that companies' life
spans are shortening and their health is more 
frequently imperiled, due
largely to failure to adapt to rapidly changing environments.
In his work on the "living company," Arie de Geus assembled 
corporate
population statistics suggesting that the average life 
expectancy of
corporations in the Northern Hemisphere is well 
under twenty years. Only the
large corporations he studied, which 
had started to expand after they survived
high-risk infancy, continued to live on average another twenty to thirty years.'
These findings are consistent with those of other studies of corporate life
expectancy. For instance, the Economist cites statistics suggesting 
that theaverage European and Japanese company now survives less 
than thirteen
years.'
De Geus also studied closely twenty-seven companies that survived more
than one hundred years, led by Stora, the Swedish paper 
and chemical
company that is more than seven hundred years old. In 
all cases, he found
that longevity hinged on the companies' ability to 
transform their core
business at a few critical times. In fact, de Geus 
found that all twenty-seven
companies turned over their complete 
business portfolio, on average, at least
once in their lifetime. Their 
ability to shift and migrate their core business, to
adapt to their environment, ultimately determined their survival.' As Charles
Darwin 
said of species, "It is not the strongest species that survive, nor the
most intelligent, but the ones most adaptive to change." The same 
appears
true of companies.
The Increasing Odds of Corporate Morbidity
Every insurance actuary keeps not only mortality tables showing 
average life
spans, but also morbidity tables showing rates of crippling injury and ill
health. Much of our analysis revealed the large 
proportion of companies
whose rate of return went through long 
periods at less than their cost of
capital. Many of them, such as National Semiconductor, Westinghouse,
Sears, U.S. Steel, Xerox, or 
General Motors, are companies that once
possessed the lion's share 
of value in their industry. Now they are seeing that
pool of profits 
shift to new competitors and more adaptive historic rivals.
One predictor of corporate morbidity might be the rate at which 
the profit
pool in any given industry is shifting. Whereas even a couple of decades ago
company value moved like molasses, today it 
flows like quicksilver-as recent
experiences in financial services, 
newspapers, and telecommunications, for
instance, have shown. 
Even apart from the volatile shifts in value, there is
evidence that 
economic value vested in a leading company has grown more
tenuous. Take, for example, the jockeying for position among the top 
three
companies during the last two decades in a sample of industries. Seventy-five
percent of the industries we studied had increased 
rates of churn, which
threatened or displaced the leader. The conclusion: Leaders can lose positionmore easily than ever, and they do.
We also looked at the distribution of economic value across 
companies in
these industries from the mid-1980s to 2000. Here, 
more than 70 percent of
the total industry value (measured by share 
of total value) had changed hands
or shifted across a wide range of 
industries, including health care providers,
steel, computers, mobile 
phones, and mass retailing.
Most large companies are finding it increasingly difficult to 
maintain value.
During the twenty-five years between 1958 and 
1983, fully 70 percent of the
twenty most valuable companies in the 
United States remained on the list. By
contrast, over the next 
twenty-five years, from 1983 to 2008, only 30 percent
managed to 
stay on the list.
The Chances of Succeeding at Redefinition
The statistics on company life span and the rate at which leaders 
lose their
place in times of turbulence provide stark evidence that 
redefining a strong
core business is tricky. To gain greater insight into the odds of success and
failure in business redefinition, we 
selected twenty companies that were
leaders or strong performers 
in their core business and were profitable at the
start of a period of 
turbulence in their particular industries. All twenty failed
to seize 
the initiative to adapt and, as a result, performed worse after the
turbulent period than before. Either new competitors emerged or 
strong
followers took advantage of the leaders' inability to change 
fast enough.
This analysis included companies such as Digital Equipment 
Corporation and
IBM (encountering the PC revolution), Tandy 
(encountering the information
systems changes facilitating big-box 
retailers), McDonnell Douglas
(encountering the rationalization of 
its core Defense Department customers),
Xerox (encountering 
the radical shifts to digital information and networking),
Kodak 
(encountering the entrance of a foreign competitor combined with 
the
advent of digital imaging), and Delta Air Lines and United Airlines
(encountering airline deregulation). Virtually none of our 
leaders improved
their performance after the turbulence, despite an 
upswing in the
macroeconomy worldwide. Rather, the financial 
returns to shareholders ofthese companies eroded by an average of 
more than ten points per year and
moved from above to below the 
cost of capital. We found that companies
often expanded aggressively into adjacencies when the more overwhelming
imperative for 
them would have been to continue to focus on exploiting,
reinforcing, and strengthening their core. Our previously cited examples of
Bausch & Lomb, Sears, and WH Smith illustrate this danger.
The most devastating mismatch of strategy and growth cycle is 
found in the
company that needs to redefine some fundamental 
aspects of its core business
but instead, aware or unaware of the 
threat, continues to attempt expansion
with its old model. Consider 
the following examples:
• Sears watched The Home Depot, with its low-cost and 
superior-service
business model, sell hardware (the core of the Sears retail store) as it grew
from one to ten to fifty to 
two hundred stores. Only when The Home Depot
had 
become a $10 billion company did Sears began aggressively
experimenting with alternative retail formats. But by then it 
was too late to
stem the competition, which today is led by 
Lowe's.
• Kodak had somewhat accurate forecasts of the rate at which 
digital camera
usage would penetrate into film technologies 
across its major business areas,
yet was not able to define its 
plan, mobilize its organization, and wean itself
off the 
lucrative cash flow from film rapidly enough. By early 2009, 
despite
herculean efforts, the company that once dominated 
its industry is worth only
$700 million, significantly less than 
what it was worth at its peak, despite the
fact that the total 
world photography industry profit pool is several times
larger.
Redefinition Is About Speed
If speed were not an issue, core businesses could be continually 
repositioned
through adjacency expansion as described in the previous chapter. However,
when turbulence hits, typical organizational and strategic responses may not
be fast enough for three 
reasons:
1. Major change programs that take too long to complete have 
a poor trackrecord of results.
2. The capital markets penalize slow response to turbulence.
3. Slow response to turbulence can erode competitive position.
Lengthy change programs do not command organizational focus 
and
attention. To understand this better, we examined twenty major
transformation programs-both turnaround and new-growth 
strategies. The
programs that were substantially completed in fewer than fifteen months
yielded returns three times higher than the programs that took three years.
During the 1980s, reengineering caught corporate attention as a 
panacea to
reverse slowing growth and fill emerging gaps in profit. 
Entire consulting
firms rose and fell on the back of these major 
reengineering programs
intended to transform corporations, eliminate layers, speed decision-making
processes, and take advantage 
of new information technologies.
Reengineering attempted to make major change in core business 
processes
done from the inside, rewiring the engine while it was 
functioning. Today the
record shows that more than 70 percent of 
these programs were worthless or
destroyed value, and that many of 
the rest fell far short of their targets.'
Indeed, even one of the early 
architects of the reengineering wave, Michael
Hammer, did research 
at the Center for Corporate Change that documents
failure rates of 
this sort. John Kotter, at the Harvard Business School, also
studied 
more than 280 change programs and found a failure rate of more 
than
90 percent. The primary reasons for failure are a lack of 
urgency and of
sustained energy and commitment to the required 
level of change once the
difficulty and cost become apparent. This, 
of course, relates to time involved.
In any organization, it is simply 
impossible to maintain a state of crisis and
intensity over a period 
of two to three years. Yet the inherent complexity of
reengineering 
made it difficult to implement large-scale programs in less
time. 
The failure rate of reengineering was almost preordained by the 
basics
of human behavior.
The rest of this chapter explores this phenomenon of redefinition and
addresses three key questions:1. How do I know when it may be time to redefine my core 
business?
2. What are the best organizational methods for tackling this 
difficult task?
3. What are the lessons learned from past successes and 
failures at redefining
a core business?
When to Redefine the Core
Imagine senior executives' response to the following developments:
• A large long-distance carrier, constantly claiming to its shareholders that
Internet telephony was far in the future, discovers that quality is improving
faster than expected and the 
usage of "free" long-distance phone calls is
increasing faster 
than anticipated. What will create the profit streams of the
future, you wonder?
• A large insurance company that knows all of its profits come 
from price
variations and market imperfections in consumer 
knowledge sees a growing
share of its customers pricing 
insurance on the Internet, exposing the
company's price inefficiency to public view, and perhaps exposing its lack of
real 
marketplace differentiation. What can you do to create a 
more viable
source of future profitability?
• A newspaper hovering near breakeven analyzes its declining 
classified
advertising revenues and readership only to find 
that the shift to online
sources by younger readers has 
accelerated and that advertising is moving
away from the 
print newspaper faster than had been forecast. These changes
are draining the paper's coffers of revenue, and there are 
fewer funds to invest
in the future. What do you do now?
• A regional retail chain selling pet products discovers that 
Wal-Mart stores
are moving into its market and that WalMart is investing to expand its pet
section. Early evidence 
indicates that Wal-Mart is gaining market share, but
competing just on price is to play their game. How can you change 
the core
to be differentiated in the future against Wal-Mart's 
form of retail mechanizedwarfare?
• A major bricks-and-mortar book retailer realizes that the 
20 percent to 30
percent discount offered online is not a temporary phenomenon and that new
consumer devices 
like the Kindle, which allow readers to download books,
are improving and gaining consumer acceptance. What do 
you do?
These and thousands of other scenarios are illustrations of 
once-strong,
focused core businesses recognizing the probable need 
to redefine their core
in a fundamental way and grappling with how 
and when to do so.
Consider core redefinition in the case of Xerox. Xerox traces the 
roots of its
core business back to electrophotography patents filed by 
Chester Carlson in
the late 1930s. Trying to get his ideas funded, 
Carlson approached a long list
of companies, including RCA, 
Remington Rand, General Electric, Kodak,
and IBM. They all turned 
him down, content to stick with carbon paper.
Subsequent decades 
would see the creation of Xerox and the gradual
development of 
xerography up to the launch of the revolutionary 914 copier
in 1959. 
This product transformed the copying industry, driving out of
business more than thirty companies that primarily used mimeography,
carbon paper, and diazo printing. The 914 truly detonated major 
industry
turbulence-and growth. In the 1950s, offices in the United 
States made
approximately 20 million copies, in tedious and slow 
ways. With Xerox
machines, the number of copies exploded to 14 
billion in 1966 and more than
700 billion by 1985.
For a time, Xerox held a virtual monopoly. But attacks from the 
bottom of
the market by Japanese manufacturer Canon, followed 
by Minolta, Ricoh,
and Sharp, triggered a decade of attack and 
counterattack by Xerox. From
1976 to 1982, Xerox saw its worldwide share of copier revenues decline from
82 percent to 40 percent.' Xerox's return to shareholders dropped to near
breakeven. 
The company fought in the traditional manner of an awakened
leader combating relatively traditional forms of competition in a 
well-defined
business.
Today, Xerox machines compete for share of document reproduction with
more powerful faxes, high-speed printers connected to computers, scanners
connected to printers, and e-mail. A clearly 
defined business has becomemuch more complex and the boundaries increasingly fuzzy. The convergence
of technologies means 
that Xerox's key competitor may now be Hewlett-
Packard in the 
broad arena of digital document management, a much
expanded 
business definition.
Warning Signs of Industry Transformation
More passengers are killed or injured from turbulence in the air 
than from
any other aviation hazard. With the exception of sudden 
wind shear, most
turbulence can be seen and predicted with sophisticated Doppler radar
detectors. Even wind shear instrumentation 
is developing rapidly. What are
the warning signs for business of 
pending turbulence and the need to change
course?
There are several telltale signs of looming turbulence that should 
be tracked
by the radar of companies that want to maintain profitable growth of a core
business. In fact, our examination of twentyfive instances of turbulence
(excluding Internet-related ones) that 
have played out until the period of the
financial crisis of 2008 indicates that the storm clouds on the horizon throw
distinct, observable 
shadows at our feet. Advance warning of turbulence in
each case was 
one of the following conditions.
Erosion of Low-end Product Segments. This turbulence starts, seemingly
innocuously, with the washing away of market share of a lowend customer
segment that was deemed unprofitable and difficult 
to serve. This is the
"innovator's dilemma" written about by Clayton 
Christensen, where a new,
disruptive technology with new, low-cost 
economics appears on the scene
that makes the least profitable and 
desirable customers of the leader suddenly
profitable and interesting to the new follower. By successively ceding low-
end market segments, incumbents can back themselves into a corner. An
example 
is the penetration of electronic trading in securities, a channel
initially scorned by leading brokerage houses such as Bear Stearns and
Merrill Lynch.
In the steel industry, these dynamics played out twice in rapid 
succession. In
the 1980s came the entrance of low-cost Japanese steel 
manufactured by
continuous casting. The Japanese, too, worked 
their way up the value chain in
steel, starting with low-end commodity slabs and coils and moving to higher-margin product. Five 
years later, new competitors entered the industry, such
as Nucor 
Corporation and Worthington Steel, both of which achieved lower
costs in very small-scale production through minimill technology.
Core Customer Defection. This form of turbulence first becomes 
apparent in
increased customer defections. For example, consumers 
in the automobile
industry indicate a 70 percent to 80 percent satisfaction rate with their cars.
Yet more than half of car buyers switch 
brands at their next purchase.
Satisfaction measures simply reflect 
customers' rationalizations of their past
decisions. Defection or loyalty measures reflect consumers' actual behavior
and reveal their 
true satisfaction. Loyalty data on consumers' reactions to
small 
Japanese cars in the 1980s stands in stark contrast to the data from
satisfaction surveys that anaesthetized leaders during this period, 
such as
General Motors, to their untenable status quo strategy. Sudden changes in
core defection rates of once loyal customers spell 
trouble.
Erosion of Microsegments. One of the most corrosive dangers for a 
company
is the emergence of a new competitor that can attack 
underserved
microsegments of a customer base with a targeted and 
superior model. This
danger is hard to detect and can signal a fundamental shift in the nature of
competition. The Internet is sometimes 
credited primarily with
revolutionizing commoditization and direct 
selling. In fact, the opposite is
true. The Internet has laid slick tracks 
for microsegmentation and the
emergence of true and more subtle 
product differentiation and customization.
This means Internet 
innovations often glide to market with a stealth that
ambushes traditional competitors.
In the 1970s, ABC, CBS, and NBC accounted for 94 percent of 
the television
viewing audience in the United States. Today, the 
combined network share of
viewers is much less. The difference is 
made up by hundreds of
"narrowcasters," such as a golf station, 
CNN, ethnic stations, religious
stations, science stations, sports stations, shopping stations, kids' stations, and
so on. The great audience erosion from CBS News to CNN constitutes a
microcosm of 
too-long-ignored opportunities unearthed by micro
segmentation.
Erosion of Traditional Business Boundaries. Perhaps the most obvious, 
but
also the most often denied, sign of change is the sudden erosion 
of traditionalbusiness boundaries, in effect doubling (or more) the 
number of competitors
vying for a space. The advent of digital 
imagery, for instance, is a
transformational threat to Xerox in the 
market for reproduction and to
traditional film and camera manufacturers in the market for photography.
New Intermediaries and New Control Points. Some of the most profitable
businesses over time have been those that were able to control 
a position in a
larger system that others needed to pass through, pass 
over, or use in some
manner. Physical control points ranging from 
the Port of Venice, which
controlled the ocean-borne spice trade to 
Europe in the 1400s, to the Panama
Canal are physical examples. 
Electronic examples range from Microsoft's
stranglehold over the 
personal computer industry by virtue of its proprietary
DOS operating system to Ticketmaster's dominance in selling tickets to
certain 
events online.
Internet-Induced Turbulence
The Internet is driving quick and dramatic change because it 
facilitates lower
transactions costs, distributes ubiquitous information, and enables the
creation of networks. Even though it's been a 
decade since the burst of the
dot-com bubble, the Internet continues to drive new forms of real and
profound structural change in businesses with high information costs relative
to total costs throughout 
the value chain, and with high potential for reducing
transactions 
costs or obliterating unneeded steps. The impact of the Internet
on 
company structure can be especially profound where there are many
buyers and sellers, bringing communications and network effects 
into play. A
portfolio of businesses can be identified and categorized 
according to its
areas for greatest Internet-induced change.
In one situation, the primary impact of change comes from new 
productivity
sources. An example might be Cisco, the leading supplier of Internet
equipment. Recognizing the business power of the 
Internet, Cisco quickly
moved to transact 85 percent of its revenue 
over the Web. More important,
the wide range of Internet-enabled 
productivity improvements has allowed
the company to become a 
cost leader. In software, Oracle is the leader in Web
enablement and 
has reduced its costs by $1 billion.
Most companies can profit from a second situation, where the 
Internetenables new growth from the core assets. U.S. West's yellow 
page advertising
business benefited from such improvements. The 
company transformed its
large field sales force from one solely 
focused on printed advertisements to
one that also sells ads on the 
Internet and provides a substantial array of
services and home-page 
assistance to small businesses. Already, this
initiative has boosted 
the bottom line.
In the third situation, opportunities occur in business models 
where
information costs are especially high. Examples include the 
distribution of
books or electronic parts, in which search costs are 
large relative to the prices
of the item and the customer and supplier 
bases are diffuse.
Litmus Tests for Redefinition
How do you know when it is time to decide whether a major 
redefinition of
the core is in order? Our research shows that management teams often see the
change coming and forecast its course quite precisely, but ultimately have
difficulty deciding how to change and 
how to mobilize the organization. For
instance, Kodak had relatively 
clear forecasts of the future course of digital
technology in its major 
businesses. But, given the complexity and magnitude
of the required 
change, the company had difficulty mobilizing fast-and it
struggled to wean itself off a robust cash stream from film. It failed to
determine early the shape of the new Kodak. Meanwhile, more nimble
competitors and new competitors moved ahead at a faster rate. 
The same is
true in newspapers, music, or telecoms. The difficulty of 
these dilemmas of
redefinition is also seen in the auto industry over 
a period of decades,
culminating only now in a rash of bankruptcies 
and near bankruptcies of
major car companies in America. Yet, the 
seeds of this failure were sown
decades ago-and still the industry 
changed too little and too slowly by most
standards. No single formula can be applied to these complex situations, but
we have used 
the following litmus tests for determining when serious
consideration of redefinition maybe in order:
• Are top-tier venture capitalists funding businesses with the 
avowed intent of
attacking a segment of your core business? 
If yes, drill down further.
• Are sophisticated recruits in interview discussions elsewhere 
in the industry
asking tougher and tougher questions about 
your fundamental businessmodel? If yes, assume they know 
something from their discussions.
• Is a new competitor beginning to gain surprisingly rapid 
market share in a
marginal segment of your business that you 
once controlled? If yes,
remember that many of the most disruptive technologies began to develop
and spread in this way.
• Are steps in the value chain that you once considered core 
now being
unbundled and controlled by specialists? If yes, 
then market power may shift
to a player that captures and 
locks up a critical step, achieving a gatekeeper
status to the 
rest of the industry.
• Are there fast-growing adjacent customer segments that you 
might once
have been able to serve but that you could not 
now compete for without
adding a new capability? If yes, 
then immediately study these customers and
understand 
what is going on.
• Are there potential legal or regulatory changes that could 
eviscerate your
competitive position in the core or your ability to compete for the next set of
logical business adjacencies 
in your growth plan? If yes, then immediately
formulate contingency plans to hedge against this uncertainty-
If the answer to two or more of the above questions is yes, the 
odds are that
you should seriously consider realigning your core.
Preparing the Organization to Redefine the Core
Redefining a core business while still running it profitably poses 
several
immediate and nontrivial dilemmas that are especially acute 
with many
Internet-driven redefinitions:
- Pricing. To make the new model fully competitive requires 
developing
different pricing strategies. But what does that do 
to the core business?
• Staffing. The new model of the core requires excellent managers to execute
a difficult start-up and ensure that the company competes effectively. But the
best managers are needed 
to run the original core, where all the profits comefrom historically.
• Rewards. The reward structure may need to be different in 
the newly
redefined model. But how can all employees be 
motivated equitably?
• Channels. Selling a product in a way that competes with historic channel
relationships is disorienting and difficult for the 
original core. But that core
frequently holds the power.
• Success. Suppose that the new model is successful and begins 
to gain
market share. What tensions does this cause during 
the transition phase, and
can they be managed internally?
More than ever before, companies are grappling with the tension between
redefining the core internally, to retain the value of 
one integrated business
and set of customers, and redefining it 
externally, to allow independent
strategies and attract the right kind 
of talent. Before launching into
redefinition (assuming a concept of 
the new model and strategy), you must
confront this choice and 
carefully work through its implications.
Waking Up to Core Redefinition
One day you wake up to discover that your core business will be at a 
severe
disadvantage in the future because of changes in technology 
or customer
needs or new competitive forces. Moreover, you find 
that these changes are
occurring so rapidly that merely repositioning the core through either a series
of adjacency moves or a limited 
acquisition is too slow a proposition. What is
the best way, you ask 
yourself, to begin to reshape, or redefine, the core
quickly while still 
making money in the original business in its original form?
First, identify which of three basic situations your company is in, 
as depicted
in figure 4-2. The first is where a core business, serving a 
core set of known
customers, is confronted with a radically improved 
business model for
serving its current core customers' needs. Examples of such "frontal assaults"
on companies' cores abound. The 
emergence of Staples, with a cost model for
delivering office products 
15 percent lower than that of traditional stationers,
was one. The rise 
of Dell Computer, with its direct model superiority overtraditional 
suppliers in the 1990s was another. Hewlett-Packard's use of
lowcost, distributed printing of digitized documents, bypassing xerography,
was a third. Still another was the emergence of Charles Schwab 
using online
trading to displace competitors by doing trades at a fraction of the cost of a
traditional transaction. Google's assault on the 
search business with a superior
technology is another. The emergence of low-cost airlines is a case of such a
frontal assault: They create 
havoc for bookings and pricing of traditional
carriers.
4-2 Companies Must Redefine Their Cores
The second situation is where the original boundaries and structure of the
core business are changing in complicated ways. An 
example of shifting
boundaries is in the newspaper business. Once 
the local newspaper (like the
Rocky Mountain News, Denver's oldest 
newspaper, with roots back to 1859,
which was shuttered in 2009) 
competed almost entirely against its cross-town
rival. Today, the 
game has changed. Information is unbundled on the Internet
and 
delivered instantly at low cost to almost any location. A recent survey
conducted of the youngest people at Bain & Company showed 
that in mostgeographies, virtually no one went first to the newspaper for many categories
of information (current headlines, sports 
scores, movie listings, weather,
stock quotes, classifieds, and so on) 
that used to be the bread and butter of the
newspaper. Competitors 
now range from local community websites to
Yahoo.com to ESPN 
and CNN.com, and, increasingly, Google. The Kindle
user can now 
download an increasingly large number of global newspapers,
turning the local newspaper competition even more global. Once traditional
and quite simple boundaries are now fuzzy and covered by a proliferation of
new competitors. These complex and confusing situations are especially
difficult to mobilize against, since the new 
competitors are less well known
and the path forward is often 
unclear and confused by a wide range of
nonobvious choices.
The third situation is where turbulence could remove the need 
for the core,
thereby emasculating it over time. For instance, video 
rental stores, in the
long term, face such a threat from on-demand 
electronic delivery of movies.
In the last two years, major chains 
have been shrinking, and one entered and
emerged from bankruptcy. The leader, Blockbuster, has an increasingly
fragile financial 
base.
The methods for fundamentally redefining a core business range 
broadly and
are expanding all the time as the business community 
experiments with new
ways to accomplish what was once a seldomrequired initiative. Common
methods include restructuring through 
divestiture, acquisition, or reverse
merger as well as the more organic 
methods arrayed in figure 4-3, which
spans the spectrum from 
changing the core processes from within to spinning
off a new core 
into a separate company with professional outside investors.
Figure 
4-4 summarizes the trade-offs between integration and separation.
We have been involved with numerous clients wrestling with 
these trade-offs
and have seen situations where each has been 
judged to be on the right or the
wrong path to redefinition, given 
their specific time pressures and
competitive threats.
Situation 1: Frontal Assault on the Core Business Model
The primary considerations in mobilizing to a direct assault on 
your core by a
"new to world" business model are reaction speed, 
how you choose to dealwith cannibalization of the original (perhaps very profitable) core, and the
linkage between the original core 
business and the model for the future.
There is no single best 
answer for all cases. For instance, one study that
focused on the telecom, photonics, and computer-hardware industries found
that 
willingness to set up structures that cannibalize the core business in an
orderly manner was the differentiator between companies that 
successfully
navigated through turbulence and those that didn't.' 
Redefinitions that change
a highly strategic, core process and require 
integration into the core business
are often best done internally. One 
example is Kodak's initiatives to shift to
digital processing capabilities in its labs, with a range of new Internet
services for processing 
digital images. Another example is ING Direct, the
first and most 
successful implementation of an online banking business. The
venture was originally set up as quite separate from the ING banking 
core,
with even a separate advisory board, treasury, and launch plan to 
manage
cannibalization. However, as ING Direct gained momentum, 
it increasingly
integrated with the core bank, and in some geographies 
is now shaping the
nature of new, more automated branches-a 
hybrid of pure online and
traditional retail.4-4 Redefining the Core Involves Making Trade-offs
When the new business is strongly related to the core, but will 
never replace
the original business, the best decision will rest on tactical trade-offs inherent
in answers to the following:
• Is the new business better able to attract the talent it needs as 
an integrated
entity or as an autonomous unit?
• Would the new business model receive a high valuation from 
the external
stock market, and is such currency required to 
buy talent and invest in the
business?
• Would separating the new business from the old foster the 
competition
necessary to define customer boundaries where 
one model is superior to the
other?
Based on its answers to these questions, Staples.com, the online 
version of
the office superstore Staples, chose to design and launch 
itself initially as a
separate Internet business. Staples, one of the 
great business success stories
of the past two decades, is now the 
market leader in the sale of office supplies
and was one of the fastest 
companies to grow to $10 billion. In order to stake
out this territory 
ahead of a variety of nascent online competitors, Staples setup Staples.com as a separate company in a physical location adjacent to 
the
corporate headquarters. The start-up had about one hundred 
employees,
whose mission was to sell an expanded version of the 
Staples product line
over the Internet, with deliveries arranged from 
Staples's core distribution
system. Staples.com was to be issued to 
the public as a tracking stock whose
value was established in an initial round of funding by a 5 percent sale of the
business to several 
venture capitalists. Founder Tom Sternberg and the
Staples management team believed that this approach would attract talent and
develop a separate Internet culture, thereby getting the company off 
to a
quick start.
The Staples management team took several additional steps to 
balance the
core with the need for independence. First, it established transfer prices for
corporate services and products consistent 
with the costs to the retail stores
and the wholesale channels. Second, it distributed stock options not only to
the employees of the 
start-up, but to the employees in the parent company, all
the way 
through to the retail store staff. Finally, it encouraged competition 
for
the total customer base, discovering that the best accounts are 
those that buy
through all channels and modes.
Situation 2: Shifting Resources to a New Business Definition
Sometimes redefining the core entails making a change in the 
boundaries that
define the business, requiring the establishment of a new entity that draws on
skills and assets from the core but does 
not anticipate cannibalizing it
extensively. There are three types of 
boundary changes: (1) the development
of new intermediaries, 
such as online auctions and exchanges, enabled by
information 
technology; (2) the unbundling of the traditional value chain into
its constituent activities (the outsourcing wave of the past decade 
and the rise
of major Indian companies like Infosys testifies to the 
power of this form of
redefinition); and (3) the radical and rapid 
broadening of customer product
and service offerings enabled by a 
new technology (an example is the
sequence of product launch 
announcements by Apple surrounding iTunes and
new content, 
iPod and new form factors, and iPhone with its new
applications).
New businesses that draw heavily on the core, but will not cannibalize the
core to a great degree, are often best set up in separate 
units. Whether theseunits should be outside of the corporate structure and with outside ownership
is primarily a function of three 
trade-offs:
1. Can the right talent be attracted inside, and is the existence 
or prospect of
an initial public offering required to attract 
this talent?
2. Is separation required for strategic reasons, which generally 
stem from the
need for neutrality or the need to avoid creating conflict with customers in the
core business (such as 
competing with customers or with the channel)?
3. Would separation provide a source of public financing, 
because of high
stock valuations, for making critical strategic acquisitions or investments?
Situation 3: Structural Redefinition of the Core
Economist Joseph Schumpeter, writing during the 1940s, argued 
that the
earnings ability of any industrial concern diminishes over 
time. We would
extend this observation to say that today, any core 
business that does not
change fundamentally from time to time is bound to see its earnings capacity
and its competitive position 
decline.
Sometimes redefining the core requires a rapid and massive redeployment of
resources from the historic business to a promising 
adjacency. Earlier in the
book, we noted that only about 3 percent of 
our sustained value creating
companies were "shrinking value creators" Several of these companies made
major structural changes to 
sell and replace their original core business,
effectively reforming the 
company around a new core. PerkinElmer
Instruments provides an 
example of a dramatic companywide redefinition of
a core business 
from basic laboratory analytical instruments to instruments
that 
analyze the sequencing of genes for biotechnology.
When Tony White took over Perkin-Elmer Corporation in 1995, 
the company
was valued at $1.5 billion, and it consisted primarily of 
a wide range of
niche-focused analytical instruments accumulated 
in the portfolio since its
founding in 1932 by Richard Perkin and 
Charles Elmer. The original
business, built on optical instrumentation, eventually extended from
bombsights to satellite reconnaissance devices. The loose collection of
businesses prompted some 
investors to suggest the company liquidate itsproduct lines one by 
one to the highest bidder.
In the array of Perkin-Elmer's businesses, White noticed a small 
business that
sold instruments that could perform high-speed genetic 
mapping and
sequencing and was the apparent leader in its small but 
promising niche.
Over the next few years, the Perkin-Elmer team 
streamlined the original core
businesses for sale to EG&G, a provider 
of management and technical
services to governmental agencies, and 
shifted its investment resources to the
gene-sequencing business, 
catching a research wave that carried biosystems
revenues from $320 
million to $1.2 billion in three years. White then split the
company 
into PE Biosystems, the equipment manufacturer, and Celera
Genomics, a sequencing business that buys and runs the sequencing
equipment.
By 2006, PE Biosystems (then called Applied Biosystems, or 
ABS) and
Celera were worth more than $6 billion in total market capitalization,
multiples of the value of the original Perkin-Elmer 
that White inherited. But
that was not the end of the transformation. In November 2008, Applied
Biosystems merged with Invitro- 
gen in a deal valued at $6.7 billion. The
result is Life Technologies, 
the largest "pure play" company by an order of
magnitude in the 
field of genomics and genetic detection with market
leadership 
both in the sequencing analysis equipment and in the consumable
supplies needed for genetic analysis.
The seminal insight of the ABS management team was in seeing 
the full
potential of the genetic-mapping business and in brilliantly 
redeploying and
executing a complex strategy to shift the whole 
company's center of gravity.
Beginning with a gem buried deep in 
the portfolio, they took advantage of a
rapidly transforming market 
for biotechnology equipment and a powerful
hidden asset in their 
core business.
Sometimes redefinition by structural change takes longer, involving a much
more extensive sequence of exits and capability acquisitions. Such a strategy
comes with a high level of difficulty-and high 
failure rate. Still, there are
some striking examples of success, few 
more so than Nokia.
Nokia began in 1865 as a mill for the manufacture of pulp and 
paper on the
Nokia River in Finland. During the next 130 years, the 
company accumulateda range of regional industrial companies, 
creating a small conglomerate with
businesses ranging from paper 
to electronics to rubber. In fact, rubber boots
in Finland are still 
referred to as nokia. Nokia's transformation came from an
inseparable combination of opportunism, smart decisions, and good fortune.
In 1982, the company's leadership decided to work with the 
Finnish
telecommunications industry to implement the first countrywide mobile
phone system using the GSM standard. The first 
wireless phone call ever
made was placed on this GSM system by the 
Finnish prime minister in 1991.
From then on, Nokia's leadership, especially its new CEO Jorma 
Ollila, saw
the confluence of wireless technology and digital information as the place to
begin betting the company. For the next few years, Ollila invested
aggressively in plants to produce handsets and 
acquisitions to support the
emerging telecommunications strategy. 
Nokia financed these investments by
divesting many of its other 
businesses in rubber, cable, color TV, and energy.
The cell phone 
story is still playing out technologically and competitively,
but it 
fueled Nokia's growth from just $2 billion of revenues in 1993 to 
$66
billion in 2008, with margins that increased steadily. From 
almost nowhere,
Nokia has captured 37 percent of the world cellular phone handset market,
making it the clear leader. Granted, the 
company enjoyed good fortune in
several respects: For instance, it 
invested in a cellular start-up at the right
time, and GSM was a 
robust European standard in contrast to the balkanized
North 
American systems. Nonetheless, Nokia remains a remarkable story 
of
using acquisition to transform, indeed replace, an original core.
Other companies, such as Monsanto and Cisco, also have relied 
on buying
and selling to create a strong core. But more, including 
Xerox, Sears, General
Motors, Westinghouse, Zenith, and Olivetti, 
have fallen short. The approach
takes time-and who is to say you 
will guess right? In all of these cases, the
transformation of the core 
resulted in new companies with a highly focused,
new core business 
targeting leadership in a market with new definition and
boundaries. Structural redefinitions of the core are not options that 
always, or
even frequently, make sense. They require the confluence 
of several
preconditions: the ideal core to migrate toward, a market 
growth environment
where investors reward preemptive moves, a 
management team with a clear
vision of a new future, and above all, 
the team's ability to execute highly
difficult strategy.Conclusion
Industry turbulence is hitting more rapidly and powerfully than 
ever. Our
data shows that decision times are shortening, uncertainty is increasing, and
the range of fundamental strategic choices 
is widening. Many of the changes
faced by executives require partial 
or complete rethinking of the
fundamentals of their core business. In some cases, the required actions call
for rapidly redefining part 
of the core, as the leaders of Marvel Entertainment
did, or shifting 
resources to an entirely new core, as the leaders of
PerkinElmer did. 
We have attempted to identify a wide range of successful
cases of 
companies redefining their core business. Yet, we found many more
instances of companies falling short. Redefinition is hard: Most 
managers
have never done it before, and it entails high risk.
The success cases cited suggest a few instructive caveats:
1. Do not redefine the core without a clear vision and set of 
strategic
principles on which the management team agrees.
2. Do not redefine the core without first establishing a 
common point of view
on how turbulence might play out 
and what positioning in the marketplace
provides the greatest competitive advantage.
3. Explore the full range of structural options to balance the 
need for
integration with the original core and the need for 
speed, which can be
achieved with a separate entity.
4. Overinvest in management capacity and management 
processes at the start
of a redefinition program.
5. Recognize the inherent uncertainty that has triggered the 
need to consider
redefining a core business, which may 
require hedging strategies and
diagnostics for constantly 
measuring the "strategic dashboard" and making
midcourse 
corrections.
Most managers have quarterly earnings to deliver, core business 
cash flows
to protect, employees in the original core who demand 
fair treatment,management team members with different points of 
view on the future,
doubts of their own about the success of redefinition, and concerns about the
complexity of execution. The low 
success rate of redefinition to date is rarely,
in our experience, due 
to unskilled management; it is inherent in the
complexity of the 
task. Even to attempt to redefine business fundamentals in
a world 
where all systems act to protect and cling to the status quo calls for
extraordinary leadership. It is here that we see most acutely our 
third paradox
of growth: It is the management teams for which the 
cost of inaction is the
greatest that often have the most difficulty 
embarking on a path to redefine
their core. The true heroes of the 
corporate world are those who successfully
take on the challenges of 
long-term change in the face of enormous short-
term pressures to 
cling to the status quo for yet one more quarter.
 The research underlying this book on how companies grow shows 
clearly just
how difficult it is to build, to maintain, and especially to 
transform a strong
core business over a period of more than a few 
years. Some of the
contributors to the thinking in this book are 
among the most talented and
hardworking people we know. They 
have gathered around them
extraordinary teams. Yet all have 
encountered downturns in the growth
cycles of businesses in which 
they have been involved. So too, the greatest
pilots have encountered turbulence, and the greatest coaches have had losing
seasons. 
It is with this perspective that we regard our effort in this book. We
do not suggest a formula for success-for there is none-but rather 
provide
some strategic principles and self-diagnostic tools as references for even the
most excellent managers of the strongest core 
businesses who must
reconsider or reformulate their strategies. We 
believe that the principles
described in this book can improve the 
odds of success but that no single set
of ideas can guarantee it.
The research for this book has been conducted over a period of 
time that
spans the height of private equity investing, the dawn of 
and early returns
from the Internet economy, and one of the deepest recessions the world has
ever experienced. Under all of these 
conditions, we have asked ourselves
repeatedly whether the new ordering of leaders and followers might embody
lessons that fundamentally change our thesis. The conclusion: Although we
repeatedly 
witness a fundamental change in the way capital flows, valuations
are made, and business is conducted, our central themes remain 
rock solid:
• Very few companies actually grow profitably and sustainably, 
though all
plan to do so.
• Building unique strength in a core business, no matter how 
small or
narrowly focused, is the key to subsequent growth. 
Many companies that
neglect this principal retrench and 
return to the core. In fact, sometimes the
right strategy is 
even to "shrink to grow," going back to the core of the core.• Most management teams underestimate the growth potential 
of their core
and fail to mine all of its hidden value growth. 
In fact, the best core
businesses are often the greatest 
underperformers relative to their true
potential-a 
phenomenon that we have called the paradox of leadership.
• Most successful companies achieve most of their growth by 
expanding into
logical adjacencies that have shared economics and reinforce the core
business, not from unrelated diversifications or moves into "hot" markets.
• The best route to sustained and profitable growth is 
expansion into a series
of adjacencies using a repeatable 
formula, built from the most differentiating
elements of a 
strong core.
• Many of the most damaging mistakes in strategy derive from 
lack of self-
awareness in the core, not from external events or 
competitive moves.
• Industry turbulence often demands that the leader redefine 
his or her
company's core business at a time when it appears 
at the height of its power.
This "crisis of the core" is one of the most difficult problems in business; few
companies have navigated through it well.
• As simple as it sounds, achieving growth is hard because most 
organizations
protect the status quo, and growth requires 
change.
These principles come as no surprise, but it is shocking to realize 
how often
they are violated and how often they constitute the fulcrum of the most
important issues of growth strategy.
Although these principles have not changed, their specific action 
implications
in some sectors of the economy have. Throughout our 
book, we have
described contemporary adaptations of these principles, some of which are
only now emerging or being debated. An 
example is the discussion about
when to separate or integrate a new, 
possibly competitive business model.
Trigger Point for Shifting Emphasis
When is it appropriate to shift financial and management 
resources from the
core business to surrounding adjacencies? Even 
more difficult, what are thewarning signs that signal the need to 
shift a fundamental element in the core
business? The constant tension between mining the core and breaking out
into something new 
exists in every business. The way the management team
deals with 
this tension is a key determinant of the prospects for future
sustained, profitable growth.
Figure 5-1 is based on our data on more than five thousand 
companies used
throughout this book to study the incidence of 
profitable growth worldwide.
The figure shows the total ten-year 
return to shareholders from various
combinations of growth in 
earnings and growth in revenue. Companies that
grow neither 
earnings nor revenue at more than 10 percent earn modest
returns, 
averaging 7 percent. Companies that achieve growth of more than 
10
percent in earnings and revenue benefit from a multiplier effect, 
earning ten-
year shareholder returns of 17.7 percent.
5-1 Sustained Value Creators Achieve Much Higher Returns
Source: Worldscope database; Bain analysis, 2009
Note: All growth rates are real. Number of companies = 853. Annual total
shareholder return is calculated as 
compound annual total shareholder return
over the ten-year period 1997-2007.
But particularly interesting, from the point of view of our discussion oftension between core focus and adjacency growth, are 
the companies
represented by the two other cells in the figure. 
Companies with earnings of
more than 10 percent, but revenues 
below that rate, usually expand their
margin by mining the core for 
cost reductions. These companies receive
relatively low rewards 
from the stock market, only 2.5 percentage points
above the companies that grow neither earnings nor revenues above 10
percent. 
Indeed, a ten-year record of 10 percent or more earnings growth in 
a
company with low revenue growth will yield a shareholder return 
of only 9.5
percent on average. This is the challenge many large core 
businesses face in
setting budgets and earnings targets; it is usually 
easier year after year to
mine the core for twelve more months. Yet, 
at some point, margin expansion
potential ends. Then what?
Finally, consider companies that expand into adjacencies 
aggressively-
possibly too aggressively-diluting the quality of 
their earnings and creating
larger but less profitable companies. 
These companies grew revenues over
ten years by more than 10 percent but achieved earnings growth of less than
10 percent, seeing 
their margins steadily decline due to their movement into
new business areas in which they had less expertise and that offered less prof
itability. Literally thousands of companies follow this pattern. The 
stories of
some, such as Anheuser-Busch, Mattell, Citibank, Vivendi, 
Bausch & Lomb,
and Saatchi & Saatchi, are cited in this book. 
Again, an unbalanced approach
to growth leads to investor skepticism about the future and low valuations.
Our multiyear growth study leads us to several questions managers should
ask as they reflect on their own strategies:
• Where is our current business in its growth cycle (optimizing 
the core,
adjacencies, redefinition)? Many managers, we find, 
are not sure.
• How many of our resources are focused on areas that have 
the potential to
build market power and influence and drive 
for leadership economics in the
core? How many are focused 
on inevitable follower positions?
• What really is the full potential of my core, and where does 
that potential
reside?
• Share gain in the core• Shift in the business mix to growing segments and channels
• Pricing
• New core products
• Cost reduction
• New customers or share gain in existing customers
• Adjacencies involving new customers or new products
• Is there a repeatable formula driving my share gain, or 
success in adjacency
expansion? What is it? Have I taken full 
advantage of the power of
repeatability?
• What, realistically, is the "state of the core"? Where is it under 
threat?
Where is it eroding? Where is it strengthening? How 
does the core need to
change in the future? How will I do that?
• Are unconventional competitors making incursions at the 
fringe of our
business? Does that signal the need to adapt the 
core faster? How?
Armed with this data, and ideas and examples like those in this 
book,
managers should be constantly vigilant in tracking the three 
most dangerous
long-term patterns we have identified. The first is 
premature abandonment of
the core in favor of far-flung new adjacencies. Signs of erosion in the core or
diffusion across too many 
initiatives will reveal this problem. The second is
excessive mining 
of a core business, failing to put in place large enough new
growth 
vehicles soon enough. If more earnings growth is consistently coming
from these operating and cost-based initiatives than from core 
growth, there
is clear danger. The third pattern is failure to anticipate the need for core
redefinition. By the time competitors with 
new business models are taking
your customers, you have probably 
waited too long to react.
Is It an Organizational Problem or a Strategy Problem?
A key issue for senior executives wrestling with growth problems 
or
frustrations is determining whether the company's strategy is 
wrong orwhether the organization is not able to execute it. Sometimes these problems
can coexist and are difficult to separate. A 
strategy built for an organization
that cannot execute it is not a good 
strategy, by definition. Conversely, a
superb organization can shape 
and adapt even a mediocre strategy into a
winner.
In high-growth markets, the most common organizationversus-strategy
problem is inadequate management capacity for 
growth and rapid decision
making combined with a lack of central 
direction, allowing many marginal
and defocusing growth initiatives to sap resources. Jim Vincent, former CEO
of Biogen, a classic 
"profit from the core" success story across the sweep of
its history, 
has argued convincingly in interviews that this capacity issue is
the 
number one CEO growth constraint, in his experience. The solution
involves focusing more tightly around a strategy and, frequently, introducing
management capabilities to deal with a larger, 
more complex, faster-moving
company. The history of management in both the computer industry and
Internet start-ups shows 
this pattern over and over.
In lower-growth markets, the most common problem is excessive mining of
the core combined with a failure to see the emerging 
new landscape and
possibilities. Often the historic management 
team has done a superb job of
building and tending the core but 
along the way has acquired biases and
habits that make it difficult to 
see the need for and commit serious resources
to a strategic shift. 
The solution often requires the injection of new
management talent 
along with a strategic redirection.
Ten Key Questions for Management
We close with ten questions that we believe management teams 
should
periodically ask themselves about their companies and 
should include at the
start of every review of their basic growth strategy. Certainly, companies find
themselves in an almost infinite variety of strategic situations. However, we
believe that these questions 
have universal applicability for companies,
ranging from dominant 
product businesses trying to decide how to deal with
the Internet to 
distribution companies wrestling with the sudden unbundling
of 
their value chain to online companies trying to look beyond the 
"profitless
prosperity" dream of today toward the requirements for 
sustained, profitable
growth.1. What is the most tightly defined profitable core of our 
business, and is it
gaining or losing strength?
2. What defines the boundaries of the business that we are 
competing for, and
where are those boundaries going to 
shift in the future?
3. Are there new competitors currently at the fringe of our 
business that pose
potential longer-term threats to the core?
4. Are we certain that we are achieving the full strategic and 
operating
potential of our core business, the "hidden value" 
of the core?
5. What is the full set of potential adjacencies to our core business and
possible adjacency moves (single or multiple moves)? Are we looking at
these in a planned, logical 
sequence or piecemeal?
6. What is our point of view on the future of the industry? As a 
team, do we
have consensus? How is this point of view shaping our adjacency strategy
and point of arrival?
7. Should major new growth initiatives be pursued inside, next 
to, or outside
the core? How should we decide?
8. Is industry turbulence changing the fundamental source of 
future
competitive advantage? How? Through new models? 
New segments? New
competitors? And what are we 
monitoring on a regular basis?
9. Are organizational enablers and inhibitors to growth in the 
right balance
for the needed change?
10. What are the guiding strategic principles that should apply 
consistently to
all of our major strategic and operating 
decisions?
Although military analogies to strategy are currently out of 
favor, we remain
struck by the contemporary relevance of this 
observation from Sun-Tzu's Art
of War: "The more opportunities 
that I seize, the more opportunities that
multiply before me "i This 
phenomenon is at the heart of growth strategy and
embodies the 
fundamental tension between protecting the core and drivinginto 
more and more adjacencies, propelled by greater and greater success.
The Alexander problem described earlier will always be with 
us. However,
we hope that the guiding principles and lessons 
learned from success and
failure can help improve the odds for 
business managers battling in a world
of greater uncertainty, more 
options, less time, bigger rewards and penalties,
and higher complexity than ever before.
 Preface
1. Chris Zook, Unstoppable: Finding Hidden Assets to Renew the Core and
Fuel Profitable Growth (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2007).
Chapter 1: Desperately Seeking Growth
1. Mary Stuart, "A White Knight for Bausch & Lomb," In Vivo, June 2007.
2. Thomas A. Stewart and Julia Kirby, "The Institutional Yes: An Interview
with Jeff Bezos," Harvard Business Review, October 2008.
3. Charles Goldsmith, "A Dying Lens Maker Zooms Back," Wall Street
Journal, 23 March 2000.
4. John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge, "Oxford Dons vs.
Management Gurus," Wall Street Journal, 8 November 1996.
5. In a sense, our definition is a long-term version of the definitions used by
G. Bennett Stewart III in The Quest for Value (New York: HarperBusiness,
1991), 
which drive off of economic returns relative to the long-term cost of
capital.
6. Bernard Wysocki, Jr., "Corporate America Confronts the Meaning of a
`Core' Business," Wall Street Journal, 9 November 1999.
7. Clayton M. Christensen, The Innovator's Dilemma: When New
Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 1997).
8. Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian, Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to
the Network Economy (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
Chapter 2: The Profitable Core1. Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman, In Search of Excellence:
Lessons 
from America's Best-Run Companies (New York: HarperBusiness
Essentials, 2004); C. K. Prahalad and Gary Hamel, "Core Competence of the
Corporation," 
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1990; James C. Collins
and Jerry I. Porras, 
Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies
(New York: HarperBusiness, 
1994).
2. Mitt Romney, interview by Chris Zook, Boston, 12 June 1998.
3. David Sadder, Andrew Campbell, and Richard Koch, Break Up! (Oxford:
Capstone Publishing, 1997), 33.
4. Andrew Bary, "Why Catch a Knife?" Barron's, 6 October 1997, 17.
5. Steven Lipin and Nikhil Deogun, "Pepsi Announces Spinoff of Eateries,
and Stock Soars," Wall Street journal, 24 January 1997.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. Constantinos C. Markides, Diversification, Refocusing, and Economic
Performance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), 9.
9. Michael E. Porter, "From Competitive Advantage to Corporate Strategy"
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1987.
10. Michael C. Mankins, David Harding, and Rolf-Magnus Weddigen, 
"How
the Best Divest," Harvard Business Review, October 2008.
11. David Harding and Sam Rovit, with Katie Smith Milway and Catherine
Lemire, Mastering the Merger: Four Critical Decisions That Make or Break
the 
Deal (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004).
12. Michael Dell, interview by Chris Zook, Dell headquarters, Austin, TX,
March 26,1999. See also Michael Dell with Catherine Fredman, Direct from
Dell: 
Strategies That Revolutionized an Industry (New York:
HarperBusiness, 1999).13. Philip Evans and Thomas S. Wurster, Blown to Bits: How the New
Economics of Information Transforms Strategy (Boston: Harvard Business
School 
Press, 1999); and "Getting Real About Virtual Commerce," Harvard
Business 
Review, November-December 1999. By far the best integrated and
most original 
view on this topic is Carl Shapiro and Hal R. Varian,
Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 
1999). For additional readings on topics that
bear on the increased blurring of 
business definition and the management
challenges in the Internet economy, see 
Joan Magretta, ed., Managing in the
New Economy (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1999).
Until the late 1970s, most business definition was put in terms of products
and traditional market boundaries. In the 1980s, writers and theorists such as
Derek Abell began looking more fundamentally at boundaries created by
basic 
customer need (e.g., transportation versus railroad) and technology as
potential ways to define a business. The next wave of thinking (Prahalad and
Hamel) 
introduced the idea of the core competence as a source of ultimate
competitive advantage in a core business and as a way of defining the
boundaries of a 
business. For instance, recognizing ServiceMaster's expertise
at managing large 
numbers of employees performing basic services leads to a
clearer understanding of its business definition than looking just at cleaning
services for 
businesses.
14. Bain & Company, "The Value of Online Customer Loyalty and How You
Can Capture It," monograph, Bain & Company, Boston, 2000.
15. Fred Reichheld, The Ultimate Question: Driving Good Profits And True
Growth (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2006).
16. Carl Everett, interview by Chris Zook, Austin, TX, February 1999.
17. Paul Larson, "Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.: How Did It Find Trouble?"
5 March 1999, www.fool.com, (accessed 15 November 1999).
18. For the best statement of this general point of view, see Michael Porter,
"What Is Strategy?" Harvard Business Review, November-December 1996.
Chapter 3: The Alexander Problem1. Allan Sloan, "80's Deals Showed American Express Could Use a Dose of
Street Smarts," Washington Post, 16 March 1993.
2. Alex Pham, "Microsoft Targets America's Garners," Boston Globe, 11
March 2000.
3. David Sheff, "Sony's Plan for World Recreation," Wired, November 1999,
3.
4. Gretchen Morgenson, "On the Acquisitions Road, Stay Alert to the
Hazards," New York Times, 10 October 1999, sec. 3.
5. Ibid.
6. Chris Reidyo, "Gillette Sells Its Stationery Line," Boston Globe, 23 August
2000.
7. James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras, Built to Last: Successful Habits of
Visionary Companies (New York: HarperBusiness, 1994), 141.
8. Jay McCormack, "Amazing Grace: ServiceMaster Industries, Inc.," Forbes,
17 June 1985, 83.
9. Chris Zook, Unstoppable: Finding Hidden Assets to Renew the Core and
Fuel Profitable Growth (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2007).
10. Ron Grover, The Disney Touch: Disney, ABC & the Quest for the
World's 
Greatest Media Empire (Chicago: Irwin Professional Publishing), 3.
11. Bruce Orwall and Matthew Rose, "Disney Held Talks with Conde Nast,
Hearst to Sell Fairchild Magazine Unit," Wall Street Journal, 16 August
1999.
12. Phil Buxton, "New Medicine," Marketing Week, 26 October 1999, 28.
13. Sydney Finkelstein and Shade H. Sanford, "Learning from Corporate
Mistakes: The Rise and Fall of Iridium," Organizational Dynamics 29, no. 2
(2000): 138-148.14. C. K. Prahalad and Gary Hamel, "Core Competence of the Corporation,"
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1990, 79.
15. Perhaps the best survey of this topic is provided by Carl Shapiro and Hal
R. Varian in Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy
(Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
16. We do not address this topic in this book; however, see Martha Amram
and Nalin Kulatilaka, Real Options: Managing Strategic Investment in an
Uncertain World (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
17. John Keegan, The Mask of Command (New York: Viking-Elisabeth
Sifton Books, 1987), 83-84.
18. Mitt Romney, interview by Chris Zook, Boston, 12 June 1998.
19. Orit Gadiesh and James L. Gilbert, "Profit Pools: A Fresh Look at
Strategy" Harvard Business Review, May-June 1998, 141.
Chapter 4: The Redefinition Dilemma
1. Throughout this book, we have used analogies from biology. More than
any other source, we have drawn our understanding, as well as this example,
from Edward O. Wilson, The Diversity of Life (Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press of 
Harvard University Press, 1992).
2. In the future, sustained growth companies will be those that have been 
able
to respond to today's turbulence in their industry and use it as a catalyst for
change. A recent Bain survey of senior executives suggested that 91 percent
of 
them believed that industry turbulence makes having a clear strategy more
important than ever. More than 61 percent of them stated that they were
worried 
about turbulence, and 73 percent said that they felt that their
organizations 
suffered a false sense of security. (Darrell Rigby, "Winning in
Turbulence," Bain & 
Company, Boston, 1999.) Those companies whose core
businesses may need fundamental redefinition will face the difficult choice of
transforming internally or 
developing a separate business into which skills
and assets from the original core 
business are infused.3. Arie de Geus, "The Living Company" Harvard Business Review, 
March-
April 1997, 23.
4. "How to Live Long and Prosper," Economist, 10 May 1997.
5. de Geus, "The Living Company."
6. There is a massive body of literature about the remarkably poor record of
results that came from the reengineering fad. See the following: John P.
Kotter, 
"Leading Change: Why Transformational Efforts Fail," Harvard
Business Review, 
March-April 1995; Fran Simons, "Transforming Change,"
Australian Financial 
Review, 26 March 1999; Constant D. Beugre,
"Implementing Business Process 
Reengineering," Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science 34, no. 3 (1998); Thomas A. Stewart, "Reengineering:
The Hot New Managing Tool," Fortune, 23 August 
1993; and Brian
Harrison, "How to Fail at Reengineering," Directors & Boards 
(Fall 1994).
7. Gary Jacobson and John Hillkirk, Xerox: American Samurai (New York:
Collier Books, 1986).
8. Rajesh K. Chandy and Gerald J. Tellis, "Organizing for Radical Product
Innovation: The Overlooked Role of Willingness to Cannibalize," Journal of
Marketing Research (November 1998).
Chapter 5: Growing from the Core
1. Sun-Tzu, The Art of War (London: Oxford University Press, 1984).
 Books
Abell, Derek. Defining the Business: The Starting Point of Strategic
Planning. 
NewYork: Prentice-Hall, 1980.
Amram, Martha, and Nalin Kulatilaka. Real Options: Managing Strategic
Investment in an Uncertain World. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1999.
Burrough, Bryan. Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of RJR Nabisco. New
York: 
HarperCollins, 1991.
Carroll, Glenn R., and Michael T. Hannon. The Demography of Corporations
and 
Industries. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial
Capitalism. 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
1990.
Chesbrough, Henry. Open Innovation. Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 
2003.
Christensen, Clayton M. The Innovator's Dilemma: When New Technologies
Cause Great Firms to Fail. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997.
Cody, Thomas G. Innovating for Health: The Story of Baxter International.
Deerfield, IL: Baxter International Inc., 1994.
Collins, Douglas. America's Favorite Food: The Story of Campbell Soup
Company. 
New York: Harry N. Adams, 1994.
Collins, James C., and Jerry I. Porras. Built to Last: Successful Habits of
Visionary 
Companies. New York: HarperBusiness, 1997.Collins, Jim. Good to Great. New York: HarperBusiness, 2001.
Davies, S., et al. The Dynamics of Market Leadership in the U.K.
Manufacturing 
Industry 1979-1986. London: Centre for Business Strategy,
1991.
Day, George S., and David J. Reibstein. Wharton on Dynamic Competitive
Strategy. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
de Geus, Arie. The Living Company. Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 
1997.
Dell, Michael, with Catherine Fredman. Direct from Dell: Strategies That
Revolutionized an Industry. New York: HarperBusiness, 1999.
Evans, Philip, and Thomas S. Wurster. Blown to Bits: How the New
Economics of 
Information Transforms Strategy. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press, 
1999.
Farkas, Charles M., Philippe De Backer, and Allen Sheppard. Maximum
Leadership: The World's Top Leaders Discuss How They Add Value to
Companies. 
London: Orion, 1995.
Goold, Michael, Andrew Campbell, and Marcus Alexander. Corporate-Level
Strategy: Creating Value in the Multibusiness Company. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1994.
Grove, Andrew S. Only the Paranoid Survive: How to Exploit the Crisis
Points 
That Challenge Every Company. New York: Bantam Books, 1999.
Grover, Ron. The Disney Touch: Disney, ABC & the Quest for the World's
Greatest 
Media Empire. Chicago: Irwin Professional Publishing, 1991.
Hamel, Gary. Leading the Revolution. Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 2000.
Hamel, Gary, and C. K. Prahalad. Competing for the Future. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 1994.Hannan, Michael T., and John Freeman. Organizational Ecology. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1989.
Harding, David, and Sam Rovit. Mastering the Merger: Four Critical
Decisions 
that Make or Break the Deal. Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 2004.
Harvard Business Review on Strategies for Growth. Boston: Harvard
Business 
School Press, 1998.
Imparato, Nicholas, and Oren Harari. Jumping the Curve. San Francisco:
JosseyBass Publishers, 1994.
Jackson, Tim. Inside Intel. New York: Penguin Books, 1997.
Jacobson, Gary, and John Hillkirk. Xerox: American Samurai. New York:
Collier 
Books, Macmillan Publishing, 1986.
Janus, Irving. Groupthink. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1982.
Jonash, Ronald S., and Tom Sommerlatte. The Innovation Premium. New
York: 
Perseus Books, 1999.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David P. Norton. The Balanced Scorecard:
Translating 
Strategy into Action. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1996.
Katz, Donald. Just Do It. Holbrook, MA: Adams Media Corp., 1997.
Keegan, John. The Mask of Command. NewYork: Viking-Elisabeth Sifton
Books, 
1987.
Keynes, John Maynard. A Treatise on Probability. London: Macmillan, 1921.
Kim, W. Chan, and Renee Mauborgne. Blue Ocean Strategy. Boston:
Harvard 
Business School Press, 2005.
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy. Wellsprings of Knowledge. Cambridge: Harvard
Business School Press, 1995.Lorsch, Jay W., and Thomas J. Tierney. Aligning the Stars: How to Succeed
When 
Professionals Drive Results. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2002.
Magretta, Joan, ed. Managing in the New Economy. Boston: Harvard
Business 
School Press, 1999.
Markides, Constantinos C. Diversification, Refocusing, and Economic
Performance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Markides, Constantinos C., and Paul A. Geroski. Fast Second: How Smart
Companies Bypass Radical Innovation to Enter and Dominate New Markets.
San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2004.
Mintzberg, Henry The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning. New York:
PrenticeHall, 1994.
Montgomery, Cynthia A., and Michael E. Porter, eds. Strategy: Seeking and
Securing Competitive Advantage. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1991.
Moore, Geoffrey A. Inside the Tornado: Marketing Strategies from Silicon
Valley's 
Cutting Edge. New York: HarperBusiness, 1995.
-. Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling High-Tech Products to
Mainstream Consumers. New York: HarperBusiness, 1999.
Olson, Matthew S., and Derek van Bever. Stall Points: Most Companies Stop
Growing-Yours Doesn't Have To. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
2008.
Peters, Thomas J., and Robert H. Waterman, Jr. In Search of Excellence:
Lessons 
from America's Best-Run Companies. New York: Harper & Row
Publishers, 
1982.
Porter, Michael E. Competitive Strategy. New York: Free Press, 1980.
Competitive Advantage. New York: Free Press, 1985.Pottruck, David S., and Terry Pearce. Clicks and Mortar: Passion-Driven
Growth 
in an Internet-Driven World. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers,
2000.
Quinn, James Brian, Jordan J. Baruch, and Karen Anne Zien. Innovation
Explosion: Using Intellect and Software to Revolutionize Growth Strategies.
New York: Free Press, 1997.
Ravenscroft, David J., Robert D. Buzzell, and Bradley T. Gale. The PIMS
Principles: Linking Strategy to Performance. New York: Free Press, 1987.
Read, Donald. The Power of News: The History of Reuters, 2d ed. Oxford:
Oxford 
University Press, 1999.
Reichheld, Frederick F. The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden Force Behind
Growth, 
Profits, and Lasting Value. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1996.
. Loyalty Rules! Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2001.
The Ultimate Question: Driving Good Profits and True Growth. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 2006.
Rothschild, Michael. Bionomics: Economy as Ecosystem. New York: Henry
Holt, 
1990.
Rumelt, Richard P., Dan E. Schendel, and David J. Teece, eds. Fundamental
Issues 
in Strategy: A Research Agenda. Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 
1994.
Sadder, David, Andrew Campbell, and Richard Koch. Break Up! Oxford:
Capstone Publishing, 1997.
Schrage, Michael. Serious Play: How the World's Best Companies Simulate
to 
Innovate. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Schumpeter, Joseph. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York:
Harper, 
1942.Shapiro, Carl, and Hal R. Varian. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the
Network Economy. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999.
Shiller, Robert. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2000.
Sirower, Mark L. The Synergy Trap: How Companies Lose the Acquisition
Game. 
New York: Free Press, 1997.
Slater, Robert. Jack Welch and the GE Way. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Slywotzky, Adrian J. Value Migration: How to Think Several Moves Ahead
of the 
Competition. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1995.
Slywotsky, Adrian, and Richard Wise. How to Grow When Markets Don't.
New York: Warner Business Books, 2003.
Stalk, George Jr., and Thomas M. Hout. Competing Against Time: How
Time-Based Competition Is Reshaping Global Markets. New York: Free
Press, 
1990.
Sternberg, Thomas S. Staples for Success. Santa Monica, CA: Knowledge
Exchange, 1996.
Stewart, G. Bennett III. The Quest for Value. New York: Stern/Stewart,
1993.
Sun-Tzu. The Art of War. London: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Swisher, Kara. aol.com. New York: Random House, 1998.
Tichy, Noel M., and Stratford Sherman. Control Your Destiny or Someone
Else 
Will. London: HarperCollins, 1995.
Utterback, James M. Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 1994.
Viguerie, Patrick, Sven Smit, and Mehrdad Baghai. The Granularity of
Growth: 
How to Identify the Sources of Growth and Drive EnduringCompany Performance. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2008.
Wilson, Edward O. The Diversity of Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University 
Press, 1992.
Zook, Chris. Beyond the Core: Expand Your Market Without Abandoning
Your 
Roots. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004.
Zook, Chris. Unstoppable: Finding Hidden Assets To Renew the Core and
Fuel 
Profitable Growth. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2007.
Articles
Abell, Derek F. "Competing Today While Preparing for Tomorrow." Sloan
Management Review, Spring 1999.
Anslinger, and Thomas E. Copeland. "Growth Through Acquisitions: A
Fresh 
Look." Harvard Business Review, January-February 1996.
Avila, Joe, Nat Mass, and Mark Turchan. "Keys to Profitable Growth." The
McKinsey Quarterly, no. 1 (1996).
Baden-Fuller, Charles and Henk W. Volberda. "Strategic Renewal: How
Large 
Complex Organizations Prepare for the Future." International Studies
of 
Management & Organization, 22 June 1997.
Bain & Company. "The Value of Online Customer Loyalty and How You
Can 
Capture It." Monograph, Bain & Company, Boston, 2000.
Bart' Andrew. "Why Catch a Knife?" Barron's, 6 October 1997.
Bechek, Bob, and Chris Zook. "The Jenga Phenomenon." White paper, Bain
& 
Company, Boston, 1999.
Beinhocker, Eric D. "Robust Adaptive Strategies." Sloan Management
Review, 
Spring 1999.
Berger, Philip, and Eli Ofek. "Diversification's Effect on Firm Value."
Journal of 
Financial Economics, 37 (1995).Beugre, Constant D. "Implementing Business Process Reengineering."
Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 34, no. 3 (1998).
Bower, Joseph L., and Clayton M. Christensen. "Disruptive Technologies:
Catching the Wave." Harvard Business Review, January-February 1995.
Brian, W. Arthur. "Increasing Returns and the New World of Business."
Harvard 
Business Review, July August 1996.
Brooks, Rick. "UPS's New eVentures Unit Plans to Expand Logistics
Business." 
Wall Street Journal, 7 February 2000.
Buxton, Phil. "New Medicine." Marketing Week, 26 October 1999.
Campbell, Andrew, Michael Goold, and Marcus Alexander. "Corporate
Strategy: 
The Quest for Parenting Advantage." Harvard Business Review,
March-April 
1995.
Caves, Richard E., B. T. Gale, and Michael E. Porter. "Interfirm Profitability
Differences." Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1977.
Chandy, Rajesh K., and Gerald J. Tellis. "Organizing for Radical Product
Innovation: The Overlooked Role of Willingness to Cannibalize." Journal of
Marketing Research, November 1998.
Charan, Ram, and Geoffrey Colvin. "Why CEOs Fail." Fortune, 21 June
1999.
Collis, David J., and Cynthia A. Montgomery. "Competing on Resources:
Strategy in the 1990s." Harvard Business Review, July-August 1995.
Comment, Robert, and Gregg A. Jarrell. "Corporate Focus and Stock
Returns." 
Journal of Financial Economics, 37 (1995).
Corporate Strategy Board. "Stall Points: Barriers to Growth for the Large
Corporate Enterprise." Monograph, The Advisory Board Company,
Washington, 
DC, 1997.
Courtney, Hugh, Jane Kirkland, and Patrick Viguerie. "Strategy UnderUncertainty." Harvard Business Review, November-December 1997.
D'Aveni, Richard A. "Strategic Supremacy Through Disruption and
Dominance." Sloan Management Review, Spring 1999.
Day, George S. "Creating a Market Driven Organization." Sloan
Management 
Review, Fall 1999.
de Geus, Arie. "The Living Company." Harvard Business Review, March-
April 1997.
DeLlosa, Patty. "How Coke Is Kicking Pepsi's Can." Fortune, 28 October
1996.
Dolan, Kerry A. "Judo Attack." Forbes, 9 March 1998.
Drucker, Peter F. "The Information Executives Truly Need." Harvard
Business 
Review, January-February 1995.
Eisenhardt, Kathleen M., and Shona L. Brown. "The Art of Continuous
Change: 
Linking Complexity Theory and Time-Paced Evolution in
Relentlessly 
Shifting Organizations." Administrative Science Quarterly,
March 1997.
. "Time Pacing: Competing in Markets That Won't Stand Still." Harvard
Business Review, March-April 1998.
"Patching: Restitching Business Portfolios in Dynamic Markets." 
Harvard
Business Review, May-June 1999.
Evans, Philip B. and Thomas S. Wurster. "Strategy and the New Economics
of 
Information." Harvard Business Review, September-October 1997.
"Getting Real About Virtual Commerce." Harvard Business Review,
November-December 1999.
Farkas, Charles M., and Bob Bechek. "Rebuilding Banking Piecemeal, On
Web." 
American Banker, 28 May 1999.Farkas, Charles M., and Suzy Wetlaufer. "The Ways Chief Executive
Officers 
Lead." Harvard Business Review, May June 1996.
"Fear of the Unknown." Economist, 4 December 1999.
Finkelstein, Sydney, and Shade H. Sanford. "Learning from Corporate
Mistakes: 
The Rise and Fall of Iridium." Organizational Dynamics,
November 2000, 
138-148.
Finnie, William C. "A Four-Cycle Approach to Strategy Development and
Implementation." Strategy & Leadership, January February 1997.
Fisher, Anne B. "Making Change Stick." Fortune, 17 April 1995.
"Fortune 500." Fortune, 26 April 1999.
Gadiesh, Orit, and James L. Gilbert. "How to Map Your Industry's Profit
Pool." 
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1998.
. "Profit Pools: A Fresh Look at Strategy." Harvard Business Review, 
May-
June 1998.
Geroski, Paul A. "Early Warning of New Rivals." Sloan Management
Review, 
Spring 1999.
Goldsmith, Charles. "A Dying Lens Maker Zooms Back." Wall Street
Journal, 23 
March 2000.
Goold, Michael and Andrew Campbell. "Many Best Ways to Make Strategy."
Harvard Business Review, November-December 1987.
--. "Desperately Seeking Synergy." Harvard Business Review,
SeptemberOctober 1998.
Hamel, Gary. "Strategy as Revolution." Harvard Business Review, July-
August 
1996.
. "Killer Strategies That Make Shareholders Rich." Fortune, 23 June 1997.-."Opinion: Strategy Innovation and the Quest for Value." Sloan Management
Review, Winter 1998.
Hamel, Gary, and C. K. Prahalad. "Competing for the Future." Harvard
Business 
Review, July-August 1994.
Hannan, Michael T., and John Freeman. "Structural Inertia and
Organizational 
Change." American Sociological Review, April 1984.
Harrison, Brian. "How to Fail at Re engineering." Directors & Boards, Fall
1994.
Hart, Stuart L., and Mark B. Milstein. "Global Sustainability and the Creative
Destruction of Industries." Sloan Management Review, Fall 1999.
Henderson, Bruce D. "The Origins of Strategy." Harvard Business Review,
November-December 1989.
Holstein, William J. "The Dot Com within Ford." U.S. News & World
Report, 7 
February 2000.
"How to Live Long and Prosper." Economist, 10 May 1997.
Kaplan, Robert S., and David P. Norton. "The Balanced Scorecard: Measures
That Drive Performance." Harvard Business Review, January February 1992.
Kim, W. Chan, and Renee Mauborgne. "Value Innovation: The Strategic
Logic of 
High Growth." Harvard Business Review, January-February 1997.
When Competitive Advantage Is Neither." Wall Street Journal, Manager's
Journal, 21 April 1997.
-. "Strategy, Value Innovation and the Knowledge Economy." Sloan
Management Review, Spring 1999.
Knight, Charles F. "Emerson Electric: Consistent Profits, Consistently."
Harvard 
Business Review, January-February 1992.
Kotter, John P. "Leading Change: Why Transformational Efforts Fail."Harvard 
Business Review, March-April 1995.
Larson, Paul. "Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.: How Did It Find Trouble?" 5
March 1999. www.fool.com (accessed November 15, 1999).
Leonard, Russell L., Jr. "Reengineering: The Missing Links" Human
Resource 
Planning, 19, no. 4 (1996).
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy. "Core Capabilities and Core Rigidities: A Paradox
in 
Managing New Product Development." Strategic Management Journal, 13
(1992).
Lipin, Steven, and Nikhil Deogun. "Pepsi Announces Spinoff of Eateries, and
Stock Soars." Wall Street journal, 24 January 1997.
"Pepsi Shares Leap on Report of Spinoff of Restaurant Unit." Wall Street
Journal Europe, 24 January 1997.
Mankins, Michael C., David Harding, and Rolf-Magnus Weddigen, "How the
Best Divest." Harvard Business Review, October 2008.
Markides, Constantinos C. "Strategic Innovation." Sloan Management
Review, 
Spring 1997.
To Diversify or Not To Diversify" Harvard Business Review, November-
December 1997.
"Strategic Innovation in Established Companies." Sloan Management
Review, Spring 1998.
"A Dynamic View of Strategy." Sloan Management Review, Spring 1999.
Marshall, Cheri T., and Robert D. Buzzell. "PIMS and the FTC Line-Of-
Business 
Data: A Comparison." Strategic Management Journal, 11 (1990).
McCormack, Jay. "Amazing Grace: ServiceMaster Industries, Inc." Forbes,
17 
June 1985.
Micklethwait, John, and Adrian Wooldridge. "Oxford Dons vs. ManagementGurus." Wall Street Journal, 8 November 1996.
Mintzberg, Henry and Joseph Lampel. "Reflecting on the Strategy Process."
Sloan Management Review, Spring 1999.
Monk, Nina. "Title Fight." Fortune, 21 June 1999.
Morgenson, Gretchen. "On the Acquisitions Road, Stay Alert to the
Hazards." 
New York Times, 10 October 1999.
O'Reilly, Brian. "They've Got Mail: UPS vs. FedEx." Fortune, 7 February
2000.
Orwall, Bruce, and Matthew Rose. "Disney Held Talks with Conde Nast,
Hearst 
to Sell Fairchild Magazine Unit." Wall Street journal, 16 August 1999.
Pham, Alex. "Microsoft Targets America's Garners" Boston Globe, 11 March
2000.
Porter, Michael E. "From Competitive Advantage to Corporate Strategy"
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1987.
. "What Is Strategy?" Harvard Business Review, November-December 
1996.
Prahalad, C. K., and Gary Hamel. "Core Competence of the Corporation."
Harvard Business Review, May-June 1990.
Prahalad, C. K., and Venkatram Ramaswamy. "Co-opting Customer
Competence." Harvard Business Review, January-February 2000.
Quinn, Sue. "Nokia Share Price Stays Upwardly Mobile." Sun Herald, 23
January 
2000.
Raynovich, R. Scott. "Intel's Got Internet Inside." Redherring.com, 11 August
1999.
Reidyo, Chris. "Gillette Sells Its Stationery Line." Boston Globe, 23 August
2000.Reingold, Jennifer. "Doesn't Work, Doesn't Matter." Business Week, 31 May
1999.
Rigby, Darrell K. "What's Today's Special At the Consultants' Cafe?"
Fortune, 7 
September 1998.
. "Management Tools & Techniques 1999: An Executive's Guide." Bain &
Company, Boston, 1999.
. "Winning in Turbulence: Strategies for Success in Tumultuous Times." 
Bain
& Company, Boston, 1999.
Rigby Darrell, and Chris Zook. "Open-Market Innovation." Harvard Business
Review, October 2002, 80-89.
Rumelt, Richard P. "Diversification Strategy and Profitability." Strategic
Management Review, 3 (1982).
. "How Much Does Industry Matter?" Strategic Management Review, 12
(1991).
Schmalensee, Richard. "Do Markets Differ Much?"American Economic
Review, 
June 1985.
"Shareholder Scoreboard." Wall Street journal, 24 February 2000.
Sheff, David. "Sony's Plan for World Recreation." Wired, November 1999.
Silberman, Steve. "Just Say Nokia." Wired, September 1999.
Simison, Robert L., Fara Warner, and Gregory L. White. "Big Three Car
Makers 
Plan Net Exchange-GM, Ford, DaimlerChrysler to Create a Single
Firm to 
Supply Auto Parts." Wall Street journal, 28 February 2000.
Simons, Fran. "Transforming Change." Australian Financial Review, 26
March 
1999.
Sirower, Mark. "What Acquiring Minds Need to Know." Wall Street Journal,
22 
February 1999.Sloan, Allan. "80's Deals Showed American Express Could Use a Dose of
Street 
Smarts." Washington Post, 16 March 1993.
Sohr, Steve. "Again, It's Microsoft vs. the World." New York Times, 13
February 
2000.
"Spinning It Out at Thermo Electron," Economist, 12 April 1997.
Stalk, George Jr., David K. Pecaut, and Benjamin Burnett. "Breaking
Compromises, Breakaway Growth." Harvard Business Review, September-
October 
1996.
Stewart, Thomas A. "Reengineering: The Hot New Managing Tool." Fortune,
23 
August 1993.
Stewart, Thomas A., and Julia Kirby. "The Institutional Yes: An Interview
with 
Jeff Bezos." Harvard Business Review, October 2007.
Stuart, Mary. "A White Knight for Bausch & Lomb." In Vivo, June 2007.
Teece, David J., Gary Pisano, and Amy Shuen. "Dynamic Capabilities and
Strategic Management." Strategic Management Journal, 18 (1997).
Useem, Jerry. "Internet Defense Strategy: Cannibalize Yourself." Fortune, 6
September 1999.
Vishwanath, Vijay, and Jonathan Mark. "Your Brand's Best Strategy."
Harvard 
Business Review, May-June 1997.
Wensley, Robin. "Explaining Success: The Rule of Ten Percent and the
Example 
of Market Share." Business Strategy Review, 8, No.1 (1997).
WorldScope database provided by Disclosure First Contact. One of the most
comprehensive data sources on public companies worldwide, containing
financial information on more than 8,800 companies.
Wysocki, Bernard Jr. "Corporate America Confronts the Meaning of a `Core
Business."' Wall Street Journal, 9 November 1999.Yoffie, David B., and Michael A. Cusumano. "Judo Strategy: The
Competitive 
Dynamics of Internet Time." Harvard Business Review,
January-February 
1999.
Zook, Chris. "Finding Your Next Core Business." Harvard Business Review,
April 
2007.
Zook, Chris, and James Allen. "Growth Outside the Core." Harvard Business
Review, December 2003.
  CHRIS ZOOK is a director of Bain & Company, a global business 
strategy
consulting firm, and co-head of Bain's Global Strategy 
practice. His client
work has concentrated on how companies find 
their next wave of profitable
growth, and he is the author of an 
extensive series of articles and books on
that topic. He is a frequent 
speaker at global forums, such as the World
Economic Forum at 
Davos, and was named by The Times of London as one
of the fifty 
most influential global business thinkers. Zook currently splits his
time between homes in Boston and Amsterdam.
JAMES ALLEN is a senior partner of Bain & Company and co-head 
of
Bain's Global Strategy practice. He serves on Bain's board of directors and
has served on its Management Committee and Nominating 
Committee. He
founded Bain's Customer Strategy practice and has 
given numerous speeches
on "The Consumer of 2020" He is also a 
frequent speaker at the World
Economic Forum in Davos. With more 
than twenty years of consulting
experience, Allen has worked extensively for multinationals in consumer
products, oil and gas, technology, telecommunications, health care and other
industries. Allen has 
advised clients on developing global growth strategies,
emergingmarket entry strategies, turnaround strategies and strategies for
sustained innovation, and he has written about these and other topics for
leading business publications, including Harvard Business Review.