www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Anatomy of 
Engagement Guidelines 
PART ONE: Social Media Policy
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6Where to Begin?
You have heard all the buzz about why a social media policy is important; especially, 
after an online crisis situation. There are numerous resources available telling you 
what elements to include in your policy and other supporting documents, but no one 
tells you why you are including those elements. Or the significance of those elements. Or how all the policy and other supporting documents fit into your social media 
strategy. Or how to integrate them throughout your organization. What you need is 
purpose and context.
The purpose begins with knowing what you want from participating in social media 
and developing strategies to engage in the space. Write down your desirables, and align them with your organization’s overall business goals. Think in terms of both 
qualitative and quantitative results that will build your brand over time (vs. having a 
short term, transactional effect).
Once your organization decides there is a need for a social media policy, it is time 
for you to delve into best practices and scour the web for examples of social media policies. Is your brain full? Overwhelmed and need to know where to start? Let 
us walk you through the anatomy of a social media policy and other supporting 
documents you will need to have on hand as you embark your journey into the social media frontier.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6Where to Begin?
Some questions to consider before we get started:
1.  What is your scope? Online interaction is 24/7. Your policy will need to address how 
the workforce is engaging online during work hours and when they are not at work. Your 
workforce is representing the organization every time they interact online, even if you have a 
single  “official” voice or limited number of official online spokespeople.
2.  Will your organization encourage social media use in the workplace? Trying to prevent or block social networking in the workplace is largely ineffective. Instead, you will be forcing interactions through their mobile devices versus encouraging proper use of tools and 
engagement. Another item of consideration, if your organization chooses to prohibit social 
media, how will you monitor?
3.  Do you want the workforce to identify themselves with your organization when engaging online? You must make it clear to the workforce that if they engage on behalf of the company, anonymity is not an option. Provide clear guidelines for engagement 
and disclosure, so that all employees can represent themselves and the company clearly 
and professionally. By allowing your workforce do what they do best and act as your representative, your organization can gain valuable social capital, credibility, and opportunity.  www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6Where to Begin?
Some questions continued:
4.  How does your organization define appropriate business conduct? Online interaction 
does not come equipped with a giant eraser. so your employees need to know what’s expected of them, and what constitutes positive and professional online behavior.  
Interactions online can be a permanent reflection of individuals and the organization. Team 
members should understand that corporate policies are not exclusive of online activity and that their behavior online must coincide with the organization’s broader harassment and 
confidentiality policies.
5.  How will your social media policy align with company culture and values? It is easy to pick and choose the elements you want to include in your social media policy based on 
what you see in published examples, but beware. The elements and way in which this policy is written and distributed should echo who you are as an organization and authentically 
demonstrate the values and value promise that guides all business decisions.www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6What’s the diff?
Before we begin getting our hands messy 
with the anatomy of a social media policy, 
it is important you get a handle on the lingo 
and differences of the policy and other supporting documents your organization 
may find necessary.
It would be best to include a seat at the 
planning table for your legal and human 
resources team as you slice and dice the following elements. You will need their 
guidance in this stage to prevent tears 
and major headaches in the long run. Trust their expertise, and understand their 
role is to protect the workforce and the 
company. Don’t limit the planning to a silo group because you’ll the skill sets of 
all departments within the organization 
to carry out this burgeoning social media plan.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6What’s the diff?
•  What’s the difference between a social media policy and rules of engagement? An 
organization blocking access, by itself, is not a policy, and likely an unrealistic reflection of how 
employees will use and access social networks. The workforce needs to understand there are 
certain rules that they will be held responsible to follow, no matter if it occurs online or offline. Rules of Engagement are more guidelines of how to go engage in online interaction and are 
meant as positive and directional versus exclusionary and enforceable.
•  What is a disclaimer? A disclaimer is a statement that basically holds you, and all who act as 
voice on another social media outpost, harmless from prosecution. Check out these examples 
of disclaimers. Format a disclaimer for the organization’s outposts and also for the workforce to 
place on their own personal sites. 
•  What is a moderation policy? These guidelines should clearly communicate what is 
permissible on your site or owned web properties, including comments, posts, and content 
contributions. Setting clear expectations fosters open dialog.
•  What is a privacy policy? Consumer notification of information policies is a basic element of 
a marketer’s information practices. If you already have an online presence with an organization 
website, you should already have a privacy policy publicly posted explaining how you safeguard privacy while collecting certain types of information. Simply have a link to your privacy policy 
available on social media outposts.
We address Rules of Engagement and other supporting elements in The Anatomy of Engagement Guidelines Part Two.www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Body
Your body is comprised of millions of cells. Just like your body, your organization is a 
living, breathing organism comprised of a large number of individuals who collectively 
make your workforce. Similar to the different groupings of cells in your body like 
lung, brain and muscle cells, there are several groupings of individuals within your organization with varying responsibilities and functions. Yet, all factions are governed by 
a certain set of processes both stated and implied.
Your organization is bound together by the totality of socially transmitted behavior patterns, beliefs, attitudes, and all other products of human work and thought. Corporate culture is just 
as big an influence as the policies that govern the body. When drafting a social media policy, it is essential the policy reflect the culture of the organization and existing codes of conduct. The 
policy will be better received and external engagement more in tune if crafted in the authentic 
image and voice of your organization.
Existing codes of conduct or policies regarding ethics, technology, harassment and confidentiality 
are not limited to offline activity. The online presence of your workforce, depending on what they are posting, may violate any number of corporate policies. Establishing a social media policy is a 
brilliant opportunity to revisit, update, and fine-tune other organization policies and procedures.
Social media policies and guidelines can provide education and structure for how to engage 
online, and empower your workforce to operate within accepted and encouraged boundaries with 
the freedom to be themselves.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Brain
Your brain is always 
working  – even when you are 
sleeping, your brain controls your 
heartbeat, breathing and other body 
functions. Your brain never lies down on the job. This is the duty of your social 
media policy. Social media is 24/7, too, 
and so your social media policy should account for that. There is no down time. 
Interaction takes place at all times of the 
day and night and your workforce has the potential to be at the center of the 
conversation despite the fact your chief 
executives, human resources and legal departments may be snug in their beds.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Brain
Your brain consists of three major divisions; each responsible for certain body functions. Similar to 
your brain, ensure your social media policy covers the following areas:
•     Cerebral cortex: Similar to your brain, this portion guides thinking, moving and your five senses.
  - Address personal responsibility and judgment.
  -  Discourage anonymity and provide proper examples of how to identify self and clearly communicate when engaging on behalf of the organization.
  - Instruct not to cite or reference clients, partners or suppliers without their approval.
•  Cerebellum: Similar to your brain, this portion helps your organization keep balance and promotes groups working together.
  - Cite and link to relevant existing codes of conduct.
  - Discuss use of disclaimers.
  -  Provide education about copyright, fair use, privacy, confidentiality and other financial 
disclosure laws and proprietary information.
•  Brain stem: Similar to your brain, this portion maintains routine organization functions like 
heartbeat and breathing.
  - Promote online etiquette.
  -  Define expectations of off hours engagement and activity conducted during the work day.
  - Discuss self-correction.www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Spinal Cord
The spinal cord connects the brain with the nerves that go to the body. Small bundles of 
nerves branch out from each side of the spinal cord. Billions of busy nerve cells are constantly 
sending and receiving messages from the eyes, ears, muscles and other parts of the body. 
These nerves represent the many hubs of your organization, and the entirety of your workforce in constant engagement, online and off.
Organizations are being pulled into many dynamic conversations requiring the research and 
response of more than one department. Tools are only part of the solution. The enterprise 
must socialize by working together and discussing how online activity provides opportunity for 
research, business intelligence, and conversation with customers and prospects. Social media belongs to the entire organization because success depends on the combined skill sets of every 
department.
Buy-in of the social media policy does not just come from the 
executive management, but also from those throughout the 
organization who will be the on the front lines of social media interaction. Allow your stakeholders a seat at the table, too, and 
allow them to weigh on on how the social media policy will affect 
their work. Take a cue from IBM. In 2005, IBM established a wiki to form a working list of guidelines for IBMers who wanted to blog. 
The idea has broadened in scope and the collaborated effort has 
evolved into the IBM Social Computing Guidelines.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6Movement
If you want to move a muscle, the motor area of your brain 
sends out a message to move. The message then travels 
down the spinal cord and through the nerves that control the 
muscles. This collaborative effort allows functional movement. Your organization requires this same fluid affinity between the social 
media policy and those on the social media frontlines representing 
your organization.
Social media does not change the fundamental behaviors of 
communication, but how we communicate. Rather than focus your guidelines on dominion and control, shift the paradigm 
and encourage the workforce towards what they can do versus 
what they cannot. It is important to remember the social media policy should not supplant existing codes of conduct, but work in 
conjunction to promote a safe and healthy business environment.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Kidneys
Every body needs a good waste management 
system. Your social media policy is a living, breathing 
document. Social media is nothing new, but the tools we 
use to interact online are new and constantly evolving. Your policy needs to change and grow with the times 
too. Just like the IBM example, the collaborative wiki 
began as a forum to discuss blogging guidelines, but grew in scope as the engagement tools increased.
Build in feedback mechanisms to your social media 
policy, allow for flexibility and growth and rid your 
organization of outdated thought and materials. Allow 
constructive criticism from inside and outside your organization to assist in molding this living policy. Open 
dialog will pave the way for a suc cess ful roll out of a 
social media program.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Liver
The liver stores vitamins, helps with digestion, and 
destroys poisons. Feedback mechanisms for your social 
media policy are much more than an avenue for criticism. 
Just like your liver storing vitamins, mine your feedback on an ongoing basis for golden nuggets of inspiration and 
store them for later use.
For any feedback program to gain adoption, it’s critical to 
demonstrate actions or changes that happen as a result 
of that feedback. Team members want to see that their ideas are being implemented, or that their constructive 
criticism has been heard. The feedback must be a two-
way dialog or those gems will trickle in less frequently, if at all. While your organization may not be able to act on 
every submission, let your workforce know the idea has 
been received and is being kept to help digest or tackle future issues.
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  info@radian6.com Copyright © 2009 - Radian6The Anatomy of Engagement Guidelines Part Two
Your social media policy is drafted. You have the buy-in of your organization. Now it is time to 
get to work and start engaging on the social media frontlines. Put the policies into play. Continue 
reading The Anatomy of Engagement Guidelines Part Two for a detailed guide of external 
engagement.
Need Help? That’s what we’re here for.
Stepping into social media is an exciting but very important step for your business. Bridging brands between their offline and online existence is more important than ever before. Hopefully 
this guide will get you started and give you practical food for thought about how social media can 
work for you.
Your time is limited, but relationships are always a good investment. Radian6 can help you lay 
a strong foundation for social media strategy with a comprehensive listening, monitoring and engagement platform, and the expertise to deploy it well. Questions, comments, or feedback for 
us? Just let us know.
Find us on the web: http://www.radian6.com
Follow us on Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/radian6
Read the Blog: http://www.radian6.com/blog
Click here to request a live web demo of Radian6.