FEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Community eBook
Building & Sustaining 
Brand CommunitiesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.com Copyright © 2010 - Radian6Community eBook
Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Index   [ all chapter titles are hyperlinked ]
Chapter 1  The DNA of Community
Chapter 2  Making a Case for Community
Chapter 3  Resource Commitments
Chapter 4  Community-Focused Roles
Chapter 5  Community Building Best Practices
Chapter 6  Measuring Community Impact
Chapter 7  A Look Toward the Future: Community Maturity
Chapter 8  Wrapping UpFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comCHAPTER 1: 
7KH'1$RI&RPPXQLW\
Community is a word that’s being bantered about with increasing 
frequency in social media, but what exactly does it mean? What 
characterizes a community rather than just a collection of people 
hanging around together? Does a Facebook or blog following 
equate with a community? Are there levels of interaction and 
depths of relationships necessary in order to distinguish between a 
community and just a group? 
Let’s look at some of the key elements that make up communities in today’s online sense of the word:
1. Shared Purpose
Members of a community gather around points of common interest, afﬁnity, or experience. Whether 
that be for the love of a particular product, a shared hobby, or a common difﬁcult experience such 
as an illness or hardship, community members are ﬁrst and foremost united by common threads. 
Their individual interpretation, commitment, or perspective on those threads can vary widely, but 
there will be some common denominator that initially brings a group together.
2. Networked Interactions
The strength in community, especially online, isn’t just the relationship that the community members 
have with the cause, brand, or organization that assembles the community. Instead, the relationships 
that forge between and among the members themselves are what weave the fabric of the community 
tightly together, and ultimately become the framework that allows the community to grow and thrive 
for the long term. Activity among and throughout the network is one of the characteristics that can 
distinguish a successful community from a stagnant one.
3. Hosts As Contributors
Communities gather around shared interests, but a company can serve as the catalyst or the 
hub around which those gatherings happen. Passionate fans of a brand can form a community. 
Advocates for a cause can form another. Often, organizations believe that they can will a community 
into existence, or merely collect their customers or fans in a single place and have an instant one. But 
in today’s online environment, one deﬁning measure of an engaged community is often the degree to 
which the host - the company or individual building the community - is an active, engaged participant 
in it. Not as a marketer, not as a promoter, but as a contributor, conversationalist, and listener.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 1  The DNA of Community
FEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.com4. Continuous and Evolving
Online communities are rarely ﬁnite, nor are they static. The best and most successful communities 
ebb and ﬂow. The proﬁle of membership changes, people move through phases of observation, 
participation, and back again. Some leave and never come back, others stay for the long haul and 
adopt different roles along the way. The only consistent factor of the makeup of a community is that 
it’s not consistent, but rather an organic thing in itself that changes along with the needs, interests, 
and proﬁle of its members.
Want some more discussion and discourse on what makes up a community? Have a read through 
these posts:
Audience or Community: Chris Brogan 
Social Media Is Not Community : Rachel Happe
Deﬁning the Term Community: Jeremiah Owyang 
What Is Community?: Jake McKee 
What Is Community: Chris Pirillo 
CHAPTER 2: 
0DNLQJD&DVHIRU&RPPXQLW\
Community building is not quite as easy as the Field of Dreams. If you build it, there is no guarantee 
the community you seek will come and participate. More often than not, the communities already 
exist, or are ready to come together around their common interest. They might just be awaiting your 
participation.  
Listen at the Point of Need
To ﬁnd these communities or social hubs, start by listening. 
Myriad conversations about your organization, brand, and 
industry are happening with or without your participation. Listen 
to what’s being talked about across the social web about your 
brand. Get a feel for the sentiment of existing conversations, 
understand what your potential community is interested in, 
and give yourself some solid context before making the leap 
into community building.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 2  Making a Case for Community
FEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comBegin listening by setting up simple keyword searches for your company name, your industry 
terms, and the names of your competitors. There are several free tools to get you started like 
Google Alerts , Twitter Search  and Social Mention  to help aggregate the buzz. When you have a 
social media strategy in place, then you may want to consider graduating to a paid monitoring tool 
like Radian6 to assist in monitoring as well build in deeper analysis, workﬂow, and social media 
engagement around your community efforts. 
The conversations that start emerging in the online world as a whole can help guide you toward a 
community strategy of your own. Are your customers looking for ways to connect with each other 
and share their interests? Perhaps your clients would like a forum in which to share best practices? 
Maybe your customers could beneﬁt from more streamlined online help, support, and peer sharing 
forums? You’ll be able to hear what they’re asking for by putting your ear to the ground in social 
media.
Also, don’t forget to pay attention to how your workforce is engaging in social media. Whether 
they’re using it personally or professionally, you can learn a great deal about your internal evangelists 
and how they view the social media landscape. As you discover your fans among the community 
and ﬁgure out ways to engage your critics in dialogue, your team members will be a great asset. 
Listening carefully and educating your internal crew about what you learn can help prepare them to 
participate, engage, and connect with your community in a meaningful way.
Deﬁne Your Goals & Strategies
Your listening efforts pay off here:  illustrating why you want 
to build community, based on what you’ve learned about 
the expressed needs and interests of your customers, 
prospects, and industry connections. You’ll have to 
communicate that vision internally, and clearly spell out the 
goals and objectives you have for community, as well as 
how they’ll beneﬁt the business overall. Begin by asking 
yourself questions like this to outline your attitude, intent, 
and mindset around community building:
1. Why do you want to build an online community?
2.  Does the community have to be built and hosted by us, or can/should we participate in 
existing communities across the web?
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 2  Making a Case for CommunityFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.com3.  What are you hoping to achieve by building this online community? Do you have speciﬁc 
goals in mind that you can measure against?
4.  What will make your online community unique?
5.  What will your community experience with you that they can’t experience by just being 
your customer?
6.  What internal resources do you have to support an online community? Do you have a staff 
and budget to allocate toward this initiative?
7.  Why will people join your online community?
8.   What other areas of your business can a community strategy support, like customer 
service or product and service development?
9.   How will you measure success, and are you committed to adapting your strategy based 
on what you learn?
10.  What tools, technology, and infrastructure might you need to support and deploy all of the 
above?
If you can answer these questions without hesitation, you’re probably in a great place to start 
building out a community strategy of your own. Doing so will take a bit of planning and effort, and 
communication inside your company walls to illustrate the vision and goals. 
Communicate Across Borders
Making the case for community in your company involves being a translator and a business person 
all wrapped into one. You may understand the intrinsic beneﬁts of gathering a community together 
and fostering the ones you have, but you’ll need to put that need and investment in business terms 
in order to make sure management is on board.
That means staying away from ﬂuffy, nebulous language that talks about the “Conversation” as a 
reason to invest in community, and instead mapping out very clearly what your research has shown 
to build the case, how you’ve built your strategy, the goals you have, what resources you’ll ask for 
in order to execute on your strategy, and how you’ll report on success and results ongoing.
When you begin discussing a community strategy, don’t do it in a vacuum, either. If you’re starting 
it from the marketing or communications department, bring together folks from across your 
organization like product management, human resources, customer service, legal, ﬁnance, sales. 
Talk to them about what you’re planning and solicit their feedback. A community strategy can have 
an impact on many areas of an organization - both positive and potentially challenging - so it’s Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 2  Making a Case for CommunityFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comimportant to get buy-in from the people that might feel the trickle-down effect from your initiatives. 
You might even form some strong internal alliances and ﬁnd folks interested in supporting your 
strategy in other ways from their respective disciplines.
Once you’re on the road to strategic community building, you may need to consider the human 
resources to support that strategy. Whether those roles are integrated into your existing team 
structure or standalone jobs, it’s time to start looking at who is going to be responsible for executing 
on your vision.
CHAPTER 3: 
5HVRXUFH&RPPLWPHQWV
People
At the start, many companies will 
begin their community efforts by 
asking people in existing roles 
with the interest or expertise 
to investigate options. Whether 
that’s a marketing manager 
or a customer service pro, the 
initial forays into community 
participation are often wrapped 
into responsibilities that already 
exist.
As your community participation 
grows, however, you’ll need to 
consider how you want to allocate human resources to help you engage and build community 
moving forward. If your primary engagement is going to be in external communities, like forums, 
blogs, or Twitter or LinkedIn, you should consider who has the interest, awareness, and ability to 
participate regularly and actively in those networks to build trust and relationships. Depending on 
the focus of your outreach and the goals you’ve set, even participation in external social networks 
can represent a signiﬁcant time commitment of several hours a day to listen, engage, respond, and 
then report on results.
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 3  Resource CommitmentsFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comIf community will become a cornerstone of your customer relationship efforts, you’ll probably need to 
think seriously about whether you need a full-time, dedicated resource (or several) to build and manage 
these strategies. Between listening, engagement, planning and measurement, robust community-
driven organizations can easily keep several full-time people busy, across several departments and 
disciplines, in order to make a community ecosystem work as an integral part of the business.
Time
Community building is a gradual and sustained effort, and requires a 
dedication of time to make happen. There’s no one-size-ﬁts all answer 
for how many hours a day it takes to manage a community strategy, but 
here are some guides to keep in mind:
Listening and Monitoring  is the cornerstone of any community and social media initiative. 
Depending on the size of your industry and how much conversation already exists around your 
brand and the conversations that interest you, listening actively will take you anywhere from 2 hours 
per day to a full-time commitment. Some larger organizations that have a deep online network 
employ several full time resources on the front lines to help them listen for relevant conversations, 
and route them to members of different teams for engagement and response.
Engaging and Participating  is the most obvious and probably time-consuming part of community 
development. Most companies start with a couple of hours per day simply responding to the posts 
and conversations that mention them in external social networks. As an organization matures with its 
social media and community strategy, the volume of conversation will increase, and more resources 
will be needed to not only respond but initiate and build relevant conversations too. And, of course, 
with a dedicated online community for your business you’ll likely need several people who are “on 
call” at least in part to respond to the members and discussions happening there.
Measuring  is an important factor to consider as well, and it can take dedicated time on a regular 
basis. Measuring and reporting on community success manually - with spreadsheets and basic 
tracking mechanisms - can be done, but can quickly become overwhelming and hard to maintain. 
More sophisticated monitoring and measurement platforms can help streamline the process and 
the time it takes to gather data, but it’s still important to have humans doing the data evaluation 
and extracting the appropriate insights in relation to business goals. That can be anywhere from a 
couple of hours per week to full-time analyst roles, depending on the depth and complexity of the 
community efforts.
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 3  Resource CommitmentsFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comCapital
Social media tools are often touted as free, 
but that’s not entirely true. Not only are there 
human and time investments that have real 
costs associated with them, but tools and 
platforms that can serve a more strategic social 
media plan often require monetary investment.
Monitoring and measurement platforms are 
one area to look at investing in, as they can 
represent a signiﬁcant savings in time and help 
provide deeper analysis than manual tracking 
can. As an example, Radian6 starts at around 
$600/month.
If you’re considering building out a community hosted by your company, you’ll likely want to look at 
a community platform provider or web developers that can help you build community-like features 
into your website with tools like BuddyPress. Some out-of-the-box community software solutions like 
Ning are free, but costs can also range into the tens of thousands for custom platforms depending 
on features, functionality, and the complexity of your needs. 
Training & Education
Like any area of business, deploying a community strategy of any kind will take planning and 
consideration. As part of that, you’ll need to ﬁgure out how you’ll train and educate the people you 
want to be involved in the community, both internally and externally.
Your internal folks especially will need some guidance. As part of your plan, take into 
consideration how you’ll educate the relevant stakeholders about:
• Costs and budgets involved
• Technical needs and training, like software or platform administration
• Guidelines for participation and engagement in the communities themselves
•  Information Flow: who needs to know what related to the community, and when and how 
that information will be shared
• Goals, strategies, and results ongoing
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 3  Resource CommitmentsFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comIf you’re building a community of your own, you’ll want to have some guidelines for your participants, 
too. What’s your policy on comment moderation? What kind of resources can they tap ofﬂine related 
to your company? How will you share updates, changes, and other information with them ongoing?
New strategies always require lots of groundwork, and community is no different. Keep the lines of 
communication open, and plan for the fact that you’ll be spending some time and energy educating 
and guiding folks about what you’re up to.
Infrastructure
Now is the time to start talking to your technical folks 
to make sure you have all the pieces in place to make 
a community strategy happen. That means pulling the 
IT folks and your management teams in a room to 
discuss:
•  Firewalls and access points to external 
networks, and how that will impact your 
community or outreach strategy
•  Email groups you need to set up to 
communicate with the right folks
•  Deployment of other internal communication 
tools or collaboration tools in order to share information seamlessly
•  The existing nature of your website and how your community plans might impact its use, 
structure, or navigation and information gathering
•  Support and budget for web-based or software-as-a-service platforms you may require
•  Installation or integration of other software, including community platforms (especially 
internal components)
• What team members need what access and permissions for all or any of the above
Depending on the culture of your company and your established processes and procedures, these 
conversations can be complicated, but they can’t be overlooked. The social web may exist largely in 
the cloud, but there are real implications for the internal technical infrastructure of your organization, 
and it’s important to discuss those with all of the appropriate people involved early and throughout 
the initiatives.
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 3  Resource CommitmentsFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comCHAPTER 4: 
&RPPXQLW\)RFXVHG5ROHV
Companies are increasingly evaluating whether or not they 
need people on their teams to be responsible for building and 
sustaining community initiatives, and yours might be among 
them. Sometimes those roles are based on communication 
or customer service roles, other times they’re considered as 
a standalone. We’ll focus our discussion on what exclusive 
community roles might look like, and what you might consider 
when hiring someone to ﬁll those needs.
Do You Need a Community Manager?
The answer to that question is dependent upon several factors, 
including the goals you’ve outlined for your community strategy 
overall. Here are a few questions to ask yourself while considering 
a community team member or several:
•  Are we committed to community and social media strategies as a long-term, integrated 
part of our business?
•  What are our goals for the community to start with, and how do we envision it evolving 
over the next 6 months, year, 2 years?
•  Do we have infrastructure and resources to support positions focused on social media? 
Growth?
•  What experience level does our budget support? Who will manage this person, and what 
is their level of expertise in social media and community? Do we need this person to come 
in as the expert in these strategies, or do we have knowledgeable staff with which they can 
collaborate?
•  Are we doing anything resembling community management now? If so, how much time 
does it take, and what’s the breakdown of tasks and responsibilities?
•  Are we prepared to empower the community person to create and implement new ideas 
and test them? 
•  Do we have an idea of what “successful” community management looks like to us, and 
can we articulate it?
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 4  Community-Focused RolesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comThe goal to have a community or social media role is a good one, but keep in mind that these roles 
are designed to help wire community strategy into other areas of the organization. Eventually and 
ideally, these kinds of jobs will evolve when a community mindset becomes part of each and every 
role, perhaps with specialists that have particular experience in application of the tools within their 
disciplines. (Think of it this way: we don’t have email managers that do nothing but. The use of email 
and digital stuff touches every role, whether it’s inward or outward facing.) That person will need to 
be part educator, too, to continually communicate the community vision inside the company and 
help show others how it might apply in their department. 
What To Look For
When hiring for someone who “gets” social media, it’s easy to get distracted by all of the talk 
about who knows which tool better, who’s popular on social networks, or who landed on the latest 
list. But most importantly, seek out a professional that balances business skills with social media 
knowhow, strategy with execution, and can demonstrate interest and interpersonal skills with the 
people both inside and outside your company.
You’ll need a balance of both personality characteristics and professional skills, perhaps like these.
Attributes
Some of the most consistently successful social media and community practitioners in a business 
context possess a broad array of inherent characteristics that don’t always ﬁt neatly on a resume. 
When you’re exploring these positions, consider attributes like:
Curiosity:  The desire to explore new ideas, in detail, and without speciﬁc 
direction to do so. Curiosity about the intersection of human interactions 
and technology is a speciﬁc aspect that’s helpful, and a passion for the 
potential of the work and the organization’s purpose is key to instilling that 
in others, both internally and externally.
Innovation:  Ignore the buzzy nature of this word for a moment and 
concentrate on what it really means: the introduction of something new. 
Community strategy often requires new approaches to existing processes, 
both internally and externally, including communication, strategy, execution, measurement, 
reporting, and training. (This needs to be carefully balanced with realism and pragmatism, too, but 
it’s usually better to rein someone in than have to prod them forward.)
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 4  Community-Focused RolesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comMotivation:  Folks thriving in community jobs are self-starters, often capable of creating clarity 
from a bit of chaos, and devising their own marching orders without constant direction or speciﬁc 
instructions. If they can instill and nurture this in others, too, so much the better.
Collaboration:  “That’s not my job” and “get out of my sandbox” don’t play well in these kinds of 
roles. They’re far too new to be that rigid, and players in this role need to be cooperation-oriented 
to work with others across the organization.
Translation:  In many companies right now, we need people that have the patience and clarity 
of explanation to teach others about the impact of the social web, and who work well across 
departments within a corporate culture. These roles, most critically, need to know how to work and 
educate across silos, in the terms that make sense to the relevant colleagues.
Humility:  The goal here is to elevate the entire company and your colleagues as contributing, 
valuable members of the community and leaders in the industry. Not the individual and their 
“personal brand”.
Diplomacy:  Community roles are today’s change agents. And change inside a company requires 
a lot of legwork, communication, negotiation, discussion, education, and trial and error. And the 
outside community will present challenges that require patience and tact. It’s a balance of emotional 
intelligence here.
Connectivity and Awareness:  This is a people job, inside and out. You need folks that can 
talk to people, work with them, socialize with them, connect with them in multiple places. They 
need to interpret how the network and the people in it need them (and don’t), and how all of 
those interactions work together to encourage more, deeper, and better connections that ultimately 
elevate the quality of your work and company.
Expertise
Business Process/ Planning and Analysis:  From mid-level on up, you want someone who 
understands ﬁnancial frameworks for proﬁt and loss, strategic and long-range planning (including 
how to write goals and objectives), and how to map out execution at a tactical level. The key here 
is the ability to think at a global company level, not within a silo, and not in a linear fashion.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 4  Community-Focused RolesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comSocial Media Anthropology & Participation:  If you have someone spearheading social media 
or community they need to have experience using it themselves in order to fully understand its 
implications and unique culture. Yes, that means familiarity with the most widely known tools and 
technologies, and some of the most consistent and popular applications (for better and for worse) 
of same, and interest and observation of what’s new on the scene (without the tendency to chase 
everything new because it is). Academic knowledge is good, applied is even better.
Hedgehog Management:  Community programs that are well thought out have lots of moving 
parts to manage and drive. People who excel at community jobs can tackle projects that span 
multiple networks or areas, and keep all the pieces moving toward a bigger, crystal clear goal (or in 
Jim Collins’ terms, Hedgehog Concept ).
Customer or Client Service:  Whether it’s a formal title or not, you really want someone who has 
experience communicating with customers directly, and fostering those relationships in order to 
meet their business goals. The most powerful bit of social media is in mobilizing those relationships.
Written Communication Skills:   So much communication and engagement online is in the form 
of written communication. If you can’t write coherently and professionally, you’re going to struggle. 
On this note, many community and social media positions will and should include elements of 
content marketing, which means that the ability to create and contribute solid content is key.
What To Avoid:
Along with what you should  look for in a community person, it’s probably worthwhile to discuss 
what to avoid. Here are a few things to steer clear of when you’re writing the job description and 
ideal candidate proﬁle for someone to join your team:
•  Too heavy an emphasis on use of tools. Tools can be learned much more easily than 
mindset or strategy.
•  Don’t hire just “anyone”, or assume that community management can and should be 
an intern’s job. Anyone doing this job needs some big picture thinking, and a deep 
understanding of the business and your goals overall. Whether they’re junior or senior, be 
sure you’re prepared to empower, train, and educate them accordingly.
•  Overlooking the importance of engagement, and not allowing that person to be on the 
front lines. Building trafﬁc, eyeballs, and links is just one aspect of community; you need to 
know what you’re hoping to do with those eyeballs when you get them - something that Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 4  Community-Focused RolesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.combeneﬁts them, not just you. “Monetizing” is not what you build community for. Sales is an 
ancillary beneﬁt, but not the direct purpose. Intent to build community has to come ﬁrst, 
and your community manager needs to be allowed to pursue that without an immediate 
and direct tie to the bottom line.
•  Content creation in a vacuum. Content isn’t valuable out of the gate. The community 
manager, if they’re going to be a content creator as well, needs to be able to observe, 
read, share, and consume other people’s content and participate in external communities 
in order to get a sense of what might be valuable to your members. 
Next, let’s take a look at how you might put together a job description for a community role.
What A Community Job Might Look Like
Job descriptions can take all sorts of shapes and forms, and many of the tried-and-true formats 
could probably use a bit of an update. It’s a great idea to include some of the attributes and more 
generalized business skills above as part of the groundwork of any job description you draft, and 
especially one for a community role at any level. But the meat in them is where you outline the roles 
and responsibilities of the position you’re hiring for. Here are some examples of what that section of 
the job description might look like, compiled from real life examples and experience (including ours 
at Radian6, and those of friends and folks we work with):
•  Establish and use listening platforms to gauge the health of the brand online, and potential 
for participating in new communities.
•  Build outreach initiatives outside of sales or marketing goals to give our brand a personality 
and voice within the industry and the communities we care about
•  Engage the community actively and responsively, both in relevant outpost communities 
and existing resident channels (like brand communities), and teach and empower team 
members to do the same, with consistency and clarity
•  Create and manage a workﬂow and process for community engagement and response 
activities as needed
•  Serve as a point person for inquiries or issues that emerge in social media channels, 
including media requests, customer support issues, or other related questions (and, if 
applicable, route accordingly to internal contacts)
•  Build training programs to help other areas of the company learn and tap the potential of 
social media for their rolesCommunity eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 4  Community-Focused RolesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.com•  Collaborate on internal communication programs to inform and educate around social 
media initiatives and their broader implications
•  Help create necessary training materials, participation guidelines, or other social media 
materials for internal and external education.
•  Create and facilitate content in multiple media to further engagement goals, both internally 
and externally, and contribute resources and expertise to prospective and existing 
community members
•  Curate, manage, and build out dedicated online community platforms, if applicable, 
including coaching for other participants from the company
•  Consume, curate, and share relevant, interesting industry information and content with 
internal and external communities
•  Understand and observe the parallels and implications of other online activities, including 
web analytics, email, and search, and work with appropriate team members
•  Communicate and collaborate on how social media activities impact other business 
operations, including customer support, human resources, product development, sales 
and business development, and translate online community and social learnings into 
business insights
•  Establish relevant metrics (new or existing) to map the impact of social media activities in 
both a qualitative and quantitative fashion, and amend strategies based on learnings and 
patterns
Reporting wise, community positions should report to whoever is chieﬂy responsible for driving 
customer experience and a sustainable, positive company presence through online channels , and 
whatever business function is being most heavily supported by these initiatives. That might be 
someone in PR, marketing, customer service, client or donor relations, even product management. 
It needs, in whatever case, to report to someone who gets the importance and potential of this, 
even if they don’t necessarily understand the “how” at the early stages. 
Salary ranges for community management positions tend to range across the board, depending 
on the level of responsibility and overall experience of the individual in the position. Most often, they 
run commensurate with similar experience and responsibility levels in marketing, communications, 
or customer service positions inside the same company. Check out some salary ranges here on 
GlassDoor.com , and you’ll see that they run the gamut from more junior level salaries all the way up 
to senior level compensation.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 4  Community-Focused RolesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comCHAPTER 5: 
&RPPXQLW\%XLOGLQJ%HVW3UDFWLFHV
Have Clear Goals
Much like we talked about earlier, having clear 
goals and objectives for your community is 
key to its long term success. Whether it’s a 
better, more complete support experience for 
your customers, idea generation and product 
innovation, peer sharing, or educational 
and helpful content, the most successful 
companies keep their goals top of mind so 
they can shape the experience and approach 
around them.
If you’re open enough, post your community 
goals and objectives right inside the 
communities themselves. Share them with your members and prospective members, and let 
them weigh in about whether your goals and their needs are lining up neatly. They’ll appreciate 
your sharing what your hopes and expectations are for the community, and they’ll welcome the 
chance to share their thoughts and opinions with you about what can make a richer, more engaging 
experience for them.
Assemble An Invested Team
There’s no question that a committed community strategy will require dedicated people to make 
sure it works for the long term. Active communities require active management: from moderation, 
guidance, and interaction to stewarding information from the community to the organization and 
back again. Healthy communities also beneﬁt from community managers that not only care for 
the existing community, but who actively seek out new members that can contribute in a positive, 
valuable way. They can help curate the best content, encourage new ideas, and highlight some of 
the outstanding efforts by community members to make them feel valued and rewarded for their 
participation. 
And it’s a mistake to just hand off the community to anyone who happens to be interested in the 
internet; your community will likely be made up of a mix of customers, prospective customers, and 
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 5  Community Building Best PracticesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comeven people who have an interest in your market or industry but who aren’t necessarily potential 
customers. The varied personality types and potential relationships for your organization means 
putting them in the hands of professionals with people skills, patience, and positive, enthusiastic 
representation of your brand and company.
Make an Early Investment
Starting a community is undoubtedly an investment, and it’s going to be a more substantial one 
at the start. As the community builder , you’ll need to do the legwork to seed the community with 
valuable content, opportunities for members to come in and explore, and ways for individuals 
to chat, connect, and interact with both you and other members. At the start, your participation 
ratio might be as high as 80% company-driven participation to tend to the budding 20% of the 
community you’re starting to foster.
The bulk of your commitment will be in terms of time, expertise, and people, from setting up the 
infrastructure of the community (if you’re hosting one) to spending time making people aware of 
the community and interacting with them once they get there. Your community team will spend 
signiﬁcant time in the early stages of community to listen and learn, too: absorbing the conversations 
about your company or industry in order to frame a relevant and compelling experience back at 
your home base. While your goal may be an engaged, self-sustaining and active community, that 
doesn’t happen without a sound initial foundation, crafted by you.
Build and Share Value (a.k.a Community First)
Community forms and endures based on a sense of belonging - the sense that you as a contributor 
are being heard, received, and welcomed among the collective. Respect your community by 
embracing the idea of collaboration, contribution, and sharing in all facets of your organization’s 
online presence. Community doesn’t function well as a sales channel or another promotional 
pipeline.
The purpose of building a community should be to help provide information, avenues for idea sharing 
and discussion, and the opportunity for members to interact and connect among themselves. 
Listen to your members. Talk to them actively, learn what makes them tick, and understand what 
makes them want to connect with your company and your community members. Their needs are 
the foundation of what you’re building community for, and the best way to understand those needs 
is to listen and encourage conversation.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 5  Community Building Best PracticesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comAs the host company of the community, you should also endeavor to be a contributing, dedicated 
member  of the community you build. Highlight community members and their stories, and share 
things of value (hint: not marketing brochures) that can be helpful. Show members you take 
interest in their passions as much as you want them to take an interest in your own. Enhance your 
understanding of their perspectives as they, in turn, learn the values you hold and try to express 
through your participation. Inspire your community with content and contributions that put them at 
the center. Community members need to feel valued, and always beneﬁt from consistent nurturing 
through respect, recognition, and empowerment.
By investing in the community you hope to build, not only will you earn a stronger relationship with 
individual members, but you’ll encourage the engagement, participation, and contributions from 
other community members and increase the overall impact of your efforts. 
Learn to Let Go
At the very center of a successful community is dialogue: true two-way conversations that foster open 
and honest communication. Many companies make the mistake of trying to steer the conversation 
in the community where they want it to go by forcing “messages” or promotional conversations into 
the mix, or worse, actively controlling and policing what’s being said and when. Unfortunately, from 
the community’s perspective, that approach tends to engender distrust, frustration, and a sense 
that individual contributions aren’t welcome or valued.
Community leaders gain trust and afﬁnity by sharing stories, fostering constructive conversation 
and feedback, and hosting dialogue rather than commandeering it. Avoid the “us” against “them” 
mentality by inviting representatives from the community to share insights that will help you better 
understand their needs, activities, and issues. Embrace the brilliant give-and-take that forms a 
healthy community, and the shared, collaborative contributions that make them so very unique.
Bring the continuous input back to your company so you can act where it makes sense, and let your 
community know where they’ve helped inform, educate, or guide your efforts. Allow community 
members to be themselves, acting as a guide and connector along the way to make it comfortable 
for members to engage and discuss what’s on their mind. Resist the urge to force your presence 
into a “corporate” one, and instead let the individual personalities and creativity of your participants 
shine through to connect with individual community members. And always invoke the Golden Rule 
through your community engagement: “Treat others as you want them to treat you.”Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 5  Community Building Best PracticesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comEstablish Guidelines from the Start
To help illustrate the type of experience you’re hoping to build, create some community guidelines 
as a foundation for participation and interaction. Ensure your community guidelines are visible and 
accessible, and empower your team to answer questions or concerns from your members and 
guests. Help outline your ideas about constructive participation, how you’ll handle comments and 
posts from the participants (especially anything that could be considered nasty or defamatory), 
what your company is hoping to achieve through the community, and any other disclosures or 
disclaimers you may need to make up front. Members will gladly read your guidelines if they are 
simple, positive, and devoid of corporate lingo. 
Guidelines should be developed with the culture, needs, and motivation of your community in mind. 
Check out these examples  of some community guidelines to help get your ideas ﬂowing.
And of course, guidelines are only a starting point. According to Angela Conner, author of 18 Rules 
of Community Engagement , interpretation of your guidelines for each situation is a key to effective 
community management. A community is built on human interaction, and the nuances of personality 
and culture that can’t be distilled into black and white answers. Knowing who your community 
is and interacting with empathy, encouragement, and understanding will allow for smooth and 
approachable interactions.
Connect the Organization and the Community
Continually keep in mind how your 
community impacts areas of your 
functioning organization, and do what 
you can to bridge that knowledge, 
information, and experience back. Not 
all of your community members are 
going to want to be directly connected 
with your corporate “brand”, but they 
can ﬁnd value in connecting with people 
in the areas of the business that affect 
their experience with your company.
For example, communities can beneﬁt 
from having engaged, connected 
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 5  Community Building Best PracticesFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.commembers from the organization side across multiple disciplines (vs. just marketing or communication 
or support). You might just ﬁnd that you have product, account, or even HR folks that have a keen 
interest in creating an awesome customer experience and would make outstanding community 
representatives in addition to your dedicated team. And if your community feels a broad-based 
company investment in the community, they’re more likely to return to what feels like a vibrant, 
active online space.
Be Patient
Community isn’t instant, nor do you want it to be. Much like a vibrant, diverse garden, community 
takes time to take root, and requires nurturing over time in order to thrive. 
Understand that your community will evolve and change over time, including the fabric of the 
people, content, and areas of interest. If you approach building your community from the mindset 
of guiding it for the long term instead of forcibly deﬁning it for the short term, you’ll reap greater 
rewards and ﬁnd that your community members will help shape the future of the community among 
themselves. The results will be a richer, more engaged, and more active community that feels 
invested in the outcomes and the health of the community as a whole.
CHAPTER 6: 
0HDVXULQJ&RPPXQLW\,PSDFW
As part of a sound community building strategy, most organizations want to know how they’re 
going to deﬁne success and measure the impact of their community efforts. Goals again form the 
foundation for a sound measurement discipline, and creating SMART goals - ones that are speciﬁc, 
measurable, actionable, realistic, and timed - will help clarify what metrics make the most sense 
to indicate progress toward those goals. There’s no universally applicable set of metrics for every 
business, so it’s important to spend the time doing sound goal planning in order to determine which 
ones are most helpful to you. 
Benchmarking is also critically important; once you’ve determined where you want community to 
positively impact your business, you need to determine your baseline for those success factors. 
If you want to improve customer retention, you’ll need to at least estimate where it is now. And if 
you’re starting with something brand new like content creation, your baseline might be “zero”, but 
you’ll need to look at the factors that point to success in that arena in order to build a measurement 
structure that works for you.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 6  Measuring Community ImpactFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comTools and platforms can deﬁnitely be a positive investment on the measurment front. It’s absolutely 
possible to measure your activity and success manually, using things as simple as spreadsheets 
and calculators. However, the more sophisticated your community involvement gets, the more 
touchpoints and moving parts you’ll want to track, and the more time consuming it will become. 
Beyond just counting members and hits to your website, you’ll want to be looking at engagement 
trends and activity over time, more robust looks at brand health via sentiment and key conversation 
topics, content interaction and consumption, and impact of community building on things like lead 
generation or CRM.
As you build your strategy, consider evaluating measurement tools and platforms that can help 
you track the speciﬁc metrics and measurements that apply to your unique goals and objectives. 
The entire purpose of measurement is to give you intelligence about what’s working, what needs 
adjustment, and what’s not working at all. Don’t get caught in the trap of trying to measure 
everything; rather, look carefully at the two or three indicators toward each of your goals that can 
help you understand whether you’re reaching them.
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 6  Measuring Community ImpactFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comWant some ideas for what to track and measure? Here are a few ideas that might get you thinking 
about which align with your goals:
Conversations and Engagement
• Proactive blog posts, comments, or conversation threads initiated by you
• Blog post/comment ratio
• Tweet/retweet ratio
• Length of comment strings per company-initiated post
• % of engaged on-topic posts per week/month
• # of total monthly conversations
• Presence by media type
• Types of conversations and their ratios: support, topical, good-will
Community Health
• Growth rates for different properties
• Member satisfaction
• Member renewals/retention/attrition
• Average member engagement level
• Internal community connections per member - actual (friends) and implied (conversations)
• Ratio of company to community posts/conversations
Buzz and Competition
• # of posts vs. competitors
• % positive posts vs. competitors
• Recommendations and referrals vs. competitors
• Share of Conversation
• Reviews of your product or service (and sentiment of same)
Sentiment Trends
• Positive/negative/neutral ratios over monthly, quarterly, annual periods
• Same ratios as compared to competition
• Recovery time for sentiment ratios after a crisis
• Emergence of evangelists: % of positive posts from single source
• Emergence of detractors: % of negative posts from a single sourceCommunity eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 6  Measuring Community ImpactFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comIssue Resolution Time & Costs
• Posts/issues resolved in social media channels
• Resolution on ﬁrst contact
• Average resolution time
• Issues initiated online and resolved ofﬂine
• Cost per issue (as compared to ofﬂine mechanisms like phone)
• Peer-resolved issues (support)
• Supportive comments/defending gestures by community members
Lead Generation & Sales
• Community membership overlap with sales database
• Referrals via online channels
• Referrals by media type/channel
• % leads originating through online channels (vs. ofﬂine)
• % leads closed through online channels
• Conversions and conversion rates by media type/channel
• Direct response sales
• Cost per Dollar Raised
Website Analytics
• Referral trafﬁc volume from community sites 
• Time on site from online referrals
• Conversions from online/community referrals
• Conversion/click through percentages for various referral channels
• Inbound links
Content Performance
• Downloads
• Uploads of UGC
• Revenue from paid content
• Shares (ShareThis, retweets, inbound links), Bookmarks, Votes (Digg, Stumble, Likes)
• Unique conversions for company-created content
• Unique conversions for external contentCommunity eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 6  Measuring Community ImpactFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comCHAPTER 7: 
$/RRN7RZDUGWKH)XWXUH&RPPXQLW\0DWXULW\
An important discussion point in organizations embracing the idea of community is that successful 
long-term community development is much more dependent on a mindset and business intent than 
community as a “thing to have”. The desire to build and foster community has to pervade each area 
of the business, from customer service to communication to product and service development. It’s 
a re-emerging sense of putting people at the center of the business, but beyond just customers, 
to include:
• Customers
• Potential customers
• Vendors, suppliers, and advisers
• Industry leaders
• Internal teams and employees
The friends and smart folks over at the Community Roundtable  have begun building out a framework 
to illustrate a maturity model for community, including eight core strengths and elements that they 
believe are necessary in order to foster a community-driven organization, as well as four phases 
or steps that demonstrate progress toward an integrated community mindset. Have a look at their 
matrix here: 
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 7  A Look Toward the Future: Community MaturityFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comMost organizations today are probably somewhere between a “strong hierarchy” and an “emergent 
community”, with a few of the more mature socially-equipped organizations making strides in the 
“community” classiﬁcation toward being fully “networked”, as The CR folks call it. Let’s look at this 
last level - the ideal picture of a mature community organization - and talk a bit about what we think 
these characteristics mean for companies who have goals to get here.
Strategy: Networked
In a socially constructed organization, community strategy isn’t something that operates distinctly, 
but is rather the underpinning of all areas of the business. Strategies and goals for everything 
from communication to customer service to HR and internal education take into consideration the 
impact and implications of community, both internal and external. The focus is on how to engineer 
strategies that support the humans that drive the business, both inside and out, and consider them 
as an integral part of operations. 
Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 7  A Look Toward the Future: Community MaturityFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comLeadership: Distributed
Traditional corporate hierarchies can stiﬂe communication, interaction, and collaboration. In the 
mature community organization, leadership for the community mindset is distributed among 
departments and disciplines, and those leaders work together actively and often to guide the 
strategy as a group rather than behind walls and silos. Some organizations might even work well in 
a team-led structure, building a collective of different roles in the organization and building strategy 
and making decisions as a group.
Culture: Activist
Action matters more than talk, and waiting for things to happen or change isn’t always conducive 
to progress. Organizations that are wiring in community are taking an active approach to developing 
relationships, creating valuable content, understanding what their customer’s ongoing needs are, 
and ﬁnding ways to form a continuous information and feedback loop to stimulate progress. Rather 
than reacting to things as they happen, they’re listening carefully and planning for the evolution of 
their business. And activist cultures aren’t always changing something; they can be maintaining 
something that works well and continuing to champion for less process over more when it beneﬁts 
the community ecosystem.
Community Management: Integrated Roles
While there may be an ongoing need for centralized community leadership, organizations that are 
immersing their organization in community-driven culture will see the need for these practices to 
be integrated into existing roles and responsibilities. That means infusing community interaction 
and customer experience into front-line roles like customer service, sales, and communication, and 
even in backstage roles like research, analysis, legal, compliance, or ﬁnance. There’s a wealth of 
insight to be had through not just direct community interaction, but from the anthropology of the 
community itself.
Content and Programming: Integrated Formal and UGC
User-generated content is a mainstay of the social web, but most companies are not yet comingling 
their content with the content that’s created by their community members, nor necessarily leveraging it 
well. Future built organizations will look to not only highlight the work of their community members and 
what they’ve created, but meld it with company-created content and even tap the content creators 
themselves to collaborate on other things. In the spirit of the customers of a company knowing its 
product and culture best, mature community organizations will understand and harness the potential 
of customers and community members as their most powerful spokespeople and advocates.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 7  A Look Toward the Future: Community MaturityFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comPolicies and Governance: Comprehensive Guidelines
It’s undeniable that the more immersed community becomes in an organization’s structure and 
behavior, the more they’ll need guidelines to steer that strategy. For mature organizations, those 
guidelines will include everything from culture, philosophy, and value statements to operational 
procedures and information ﬂow, code of conduct expectations, content creation guidelines, 
regulatory or compliance issues, and more. And rather than being called out as distinct to “web 
2.0” or online activities, they’ll be integrated into both the online and ofﬂine activities of the company 
overall.
Tools: Integrated Social Functionality
Today, it’s community platforms or discrete social networks that are often separate and distinct 
from other online properties or business software and function as same. As community and the 
social web become more of an integrated part of business operation, software providers will 
continue to mold offerings that fuse social technologies with enterprise processes like analysis 
and measurement, CRM, marketing and communication technologies, research, even predictive 
or progressive ﬁnancial modeling. Existing technologies likewise will become more “socialized”, 
opening up more collaborative ways to share and iterate on information and processes, and the 
ability to count community insight among key information sets and decision-making criteria.
Metrics & Measurement: Integrated With Core Business Metrics
Not unlike tools, metrics and measurement for community and social media related efforts are 
still being looked at through a distinct, singular lens. Most often aligned with traditional marketing 
or advertising metrics, web analytics, and increasingly customer satisfaction measurements, 
community measurement will continue to evolve and illustrate impact on other measurable business 
functions. Rather than demonstrating community success or failure in its own right, businesses will 
seek to merge measurements of engagement, content interaction and value, customer afﬁnity, and 
online activity with correlations to ﬁnancial performance and concrete ROI, stock movement and 
shareholder value, sales and lead generation numbers, product innovation momentum, recruitment 
and retention of talent, training and education, and other established measurements for overall 
business performance. In fact, for forward-thinking organizations, social measurements can form 
the cornerstone for a measurement ecosystem that wraps together multiple impact points in the 
company to create global, integrated growth indicators.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 7  A Look Toward the Future: Community MaturityFEBRUARY 2010 ISSUE
Copyright © 2010 - Radian6 www.radian6.com  |  1-888-6RADIAN (1-888-672-3426)  |  community@radian6.comCHAPTER 8: 
:UDSSLQJ8S
Community is more than a thing, more than a collection of people. It’s a mindset and an approach 
to doing business that reﬂects a focus on customer experience, the role of a company within 
the industry it serves, and the intersection of corporate presence with personal touch. As the 
emergence of the social web continues to help businesses see the impact of the online space on 
the way they’ve always done business, a community strategy will grow in value and importance 
along side other business strategy.
Need Help? 
That’s what we’re here for.
Stepping into social media is an exciting but very important step for your business. Bridging brands 
between their of ﬂine and online existence is more important than ever before. Hopefully this guide 
will get you started and give you practical food for thought about how social media can work for 
you.
Your time is limited, but relationships are always a good investment. Radian6 can help you lay 
a strong foundation for social media strategy with a comprehensive listening, monitoring and 
engagement platform, and the expertise to deploy it well. Questions, comments, or feedback for 
us? Just let us know.
Find us on the web: http://www.radian6.com
Follow us on Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/radian6
Read the Blog: http://www.radian6.com/blog
Click here to request a live web demo of Radian6.Community eBook  | Building & Sustaining Brand Communities
Chapter 8  Wrapping Up