 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Revitalizing Intranets Reduces Support Costs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report has been designed to provide practical advice for revitalizing 
and re -launching your corporate Intranet.  
 
 
Read this brief 8-page report to learn:  
 
 What is an Intranet?  
 What are the Business Benefits?  
 Common Content by Department  
 Intranet Revitalization Best Practices  
 
 
Read this report to learn how to audit the usage of your Intranet, assess 
content & assign ownership, and re -launch your Intranet to save money 
on support & administrative costs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What is an Intranet?        3  
 
What are the Business Benefits?       3  
 
Common Content by Department      4  
 
Intranet Revitalization Best Practices      6 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What is an Intranet?  
What are the Busines s Benefits?    
 
 
 
 
An Intranet, or ‘portal’, is similar to an Internet website except that it is 
restricted to users within an organization. (Intranets that extend outside 
the company to partners or customers are called Extranets). Intranets 
use web servers to distribute inf ormation, and users view content with 
their Internet browser or by downloading documents.  
  
Many organizations select Intranets to share information among 
employees since they can be built and maintained more cost -effectively 
than other types of private networks or enterprise content management 
& collaboration systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Although many organizations have implemented an Intranet, most 
corporate Intranets in mid -sized companies are not well organized, user -
friendly, or contain relevant content that is current and being 
maintained by a designated content owner.  
  
 
These challenges aside, Intranets can provide many business benefits 
including, but not limited to, the following five areas:  
   
1. Reduced Support Costs  - providing employees with a ‘self -
service’  resource to find answers to their questions can 
drastically reduce inter -office support calls, provided that 
employees actually use the Intranet and know its contents.  
 
2. Minimized Administrative Costs  - posting standardized 
business processes, checklists, templates, and other materials 
such as proposals, contracts,  or other commonly used 
documents, will increase the efficiency of your operation and 
provide a mechanism for version -control.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Common Content by Department  3. Brand Consistency  - by maintaining documents at the Intranet 
level, rather than having staff save them to their desktop, 
Marketers have more control over their corporate brand & image, 
reducing the risk of out -of-date materials being used in the field. 
Monitoring download activity is a sound method to ensure that 
your employees are in the habit of using the Intranet instead of a 
desktop folder.  
 
4. Improved Remote Access  - many employees would do work 
outside the office if they had access to the information and tools 
they need to be productive. As many intranets are internally 
hosted they can be unreliable or slow to load, especia lly if remote 
workers do not have a fast Internet connection. Adopting a 
hosted solution can be very cost -effective, increase availability, 
and provide usage analytics.  
 
5. Employee Self -Service  - not only do successful Intranets 
reduce helpdesk & support ca lls, but they also provide a faster 
method for employees to get answers to their questions. This can 
mitigate process bottlenecks for busy helpdesks, and provide a 
better experience for an end -user, provided the Intranet is easy 
to navigate.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
All corporate departments have information that needs to be provided to 
employees. Following is a list of common Intranet contents made 
available by departments. This list is not exhaustive but was generated 
to stimulate further  thinking about what content your organization would 
like to provide.    
  
 
Finance & Accounting  
  
 Payroll & Compensation Information  
 Accounts Receivable/Payable & Budget Reports  
 Expense Reimbursement Policies & Procedures  
 Cost/Benefit, Business Case, or ROI templates  
 Approval Processes for Capital Expenditures  
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Human Resources  
  
 401K and Employee Benefits Information  
 Corporate Policies, Procedures, & Manuals  
 Performance Reviews & Development Plans   
 New Employee Orientation & Handbooks  
 Training & Corporate Development Materials  
  
  
Marketing  
  
 Corporate Logos & Marketing Collateral   
 Sales Presentations, Proposals, & Scripts  
 Tradeshow Checklists & ROI Calculators  
 Press Releases & Investor Relation s Info  
 Sponsorship Policies & Sustainability Reports  
  
  
Sales & Customer Service  
  
 Service Level Agreements  
 Standard Contracts & Agreements  
 Customer Service & Sales Process Diagrams  
 Funnel Reports & Sales Forecasts  
 Client Lists, Testimonials, and Sales Tools  
  
  
Information Technology  
  
 Helpdesk Frequently Asked Questions  
 I/T Policies & Procedures  
 Disaster Recovery Plans  
 I/T Project Request Forms  
 Strategic Information Technology Plans  
  
  
Operations  
  
 Administration Processes   
 Support for Creating New Processes   
 Lean Manufacturing, ISO or Six Sigma info   
 Purchasing Policies & Supply Chain Management   
 Process Management Frameworks & Standards  
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
Intranet Revitalization Best Practices   
 
   
 
 
1. Conduct an Intranet Usage Survey  - use our Intranet Usage 
Survey  template to identify which employees are actually using 
the Intranet, how they using it, and to documen t areas for it to 
be improved by department. This survey can be used to 
benchmark your current situation and used again later to 
demonstrate a measurable improvement and return on 
investment for your revitalization project.  
 
2. Develop a Project Plan  - use our Project Charter  to 
document goals, objectives, timelines, and other pertinent 
Intranet Revitalization Project information for senior 
management to assess at a high level. Build a Business Case  if 
required to justify any expenditures.  
 
3. Evaluate Vendor Solutions  - if you are not already committed 
to an Intranet platform, assess 3 -5 vendors to learn more about 
your options. Intranet vendors generally fall into three 
categories: Wiki providers (open -source and free), hosted portal 
solutions such as iCentera (starti ng at ~$500/month), or 
Enterprise Content Management & Collaboration solutions such 
as Microsoft Sharepoint (up to $500,000+).  
 
4. Engage the I/T Department  - discuss requirements with your 
I/T Director and determine if your current solution will meet your 
needs. If you require a new system, schedule the selection 
process and customization project according to your project 
timelines and availability of I/T resources.  
 
5. Audit Content Ownership  - analyze your current intranet 
content to determine who the conten t owners are, or if there is a 
lack of ownership for any materials. Determine who should own 
each type of content, and create a content publishing & approval 
process. Many portal systems have inherent content publishing 
functionality built -in to control wo rkflows and approvals, so 
ensure this requirement is on your list.  
 
6. Identify User Needs  - interview each department leader to 
understand their Top 5 most common support call questions. Use 
our Intranet FAQ Worksheet  to document these questions, 
and determine the overall Top 10 most frequently asked 
quest ions (FAQ).   
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
 
List the Top 10 FAQ’ s on the Intranet homepage to direct users 
quickly to their area of i nterest, and l ist the Top 5 FAQ’ s on the 
main page for each department to facilitate navigation.  
 
7. Assess Intranet Content  - determine if your content is up -to-
date, accurate, relevant, or missing. Document what needs to be 
updated, created, refined, or removed from the  Intranet and 
assign th ese tasks to the content owner.  
 
8. Organize Intranet Content  - create a hierarchy, which is a 
table of contents or site map, to organize your intranet content. 
Speak to your web developer about site maps as they have most 
likely built one for your corporate website and can provide 
guidance with this task. Make this hierarchy available on the 
homepage for quick and easy navigation to the pages that users 
require. Task each content owner with updating their section of 
the Intranet to prep are for the re -launch.  
 
9. Design the Homepage  - be sure to include a ‘Search’ function, 
Top FAQs, site map, and links to each department’s  section of 
the Intranet. You may wish to include a section containing 
company news, highlight project status reports, or provide other 
content that will keep users coming back to the Intranet. Be sure 
to change elements of your homepage to keep it fresh a nd 
interesting.  
 
10. Re-Launch the Intranet  - send out an email communication 
regarding the re -launch of your Intranet to all employees. Attach 
a Project Request Form  and indicate who the content owners 
are for each department to ensure your employees know where 
to turn when they need a new resource developed.  
 
11. Conduct User Training  - once your content is uploaded and you 
are ready to re -launch your Intranet, schedule  a meeting with 
each department to provide user training. To ensure adoption, it 
is critical that your users are fully aware of the contents on the 
Intranet and that they are comfortable using the system.  
 
12. Send Monthly Reminders  - deliver a monthly email to all 
employees highlighting new content, common uses, or tips & 
tricks to reinforce adoption rates and increase ROI. You need to 
maintain mindshare for at least the first 3 months to ensure 
project success. If you have analytics, monitor download activit y 
and target users who have never logged in, or login very rarely.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 8 
13. Re-Survey Intranet Usage  - use our Intranet Usage Survey  
again three months after the re -launch to measure 
improvements to usage and stimulate thinking for new content 
requests.  
 
14. Conduct a Post -Mortem  - use our Post-Project Evaluation  
template to determine project  success and document any lessons 
learned for future initiatives.  
 
 
 