SELLING THE INTANGIBLE
TURN YOUR KNOWLEDGE INTO
INCOME.
GENERATE PREDICTABLE PROFITS.
BUILD A WILDLY SUCCESSFUL
DIGITAL PRODUCT BUSINESS.SELLING THE INTANGIBLE
Turn Your Knowledge into Income.
Generate Predictable Profits.
Build a Wildly Successful Digital Product Business.
MEERA KOTHAND
WWW.MEERAKOTHAND.COM
COPYRIGHT 
© 2021
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other
electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the author, except by
reviewers who may quote brief passages in a review.
For permission requests, please email 
meera@meerakothand.comCONTENTS PAGE
INTRODUCTION — THE BIG, BOLD PROMISE
ASSUMPTIONS THAT PARALYZE YOUR FORAY INTO DIGITAL
PRODUCTS
SECTION I — UNCOVERING YOUR STRATEGY – PREPARING
FOR EXPLOSIVE GROWTH
CHAPTER 1 — OFFER & SUCCESS STACKING
CHAPTER 2 — STAGE IDENTIFICATION
CHAPTER 3 — JOURNEY MAPPING
SECTION II — THE ESSENTIAL DIGITAL PRODUCT KIT –
ORGANIZING & BUILDING YOUR PRODUCT FOR SUCCESS
CHAPTER 4 — WHY PEOPLE DON’T BUY YOUR STUFF
CHAPTER 5 — FROM SKELETON TO FLESH
CHAPTER 6 — OUTSTANDING SALES PAGES
CHAPTER 7 — PERFECT PRICING
CHAPTER 8 — LAUNCHING YOUR OFFER IN TODAY’S ONLINE
SPACE
CHAPTER 9 — SECRETS TO SCALING YOUR OFFER
CHAPTER 10 — TOOLS
SECTION III — BUILDING YOUR DIGITAL PRODUCT BUSINESS
– HOW TO 10× PRODUCTIVITY & PROFITSCHAPTER 11 — YOUR FIRST OR NEXT DIGITAL PRODUCT
CAMPAIGN
CHAPTER 12 — SYSTEMS TO RUN IT LIKE A WELL-OILED
MACHINE
CHAPTER 13 — PRINCIPLES OF EXTRAORDINARY DIGITAL
PRODUCT CREATORS
CONCLUSIONINTRODUCTION
THE BIG, BOLD PROMISE
____________________
How in the world are they making $30,000 a month selling e-books and
courses?
That was the question that started it all for me.
I didn’t know much about digital marketing, but I was fascinated by the idea
of cultivating an audience and creating digital customers by turning my
knowledge into income.
I’ve since gone on to build a business primarily from digital products—from
simple templates to courses to self-published e-books to memberships.
But nothing about it was easy.
I made mistakes. 
A lot
 of mistakes
.
I never did get my 
$1,000 in 30 days
 or 
5 figures in 6 months,
 which made
me believe for the longest time that I was the biggest loser around.
I’ve been irked, disturbed, and frustrated by the assumptions, false yardsticks,
and misinformation being spread over and over again about digital products.
Heck, I’ve even at some point believed some of them myself!
Maybe you’re still deciding if digital products are for you. You just want to
scratch that itch—can I really make money from digital products—but you’re
completely new and overwhelmed.
Where do you begin? What are the right actions to take? In what order?Maybe you already have one or more digital products and are wondering
what your next step should be.
Maybe you’ve hustled and failed. You’ve read the books and taken the
courses but find yourself back at square one every single time
.
No matter what your situation, I want you to know that 
I see you
.
I know what it’s like to wonder if you’re the only one not getting it or not
doing the right things.
To feel like you’re not moving at all no matter how hard you’re trying.
I know how it feels to be plagued with doubts.
Creating and launching something as intangible as a digital product can give
rise to its own unique set of complexities.
It can also be overwhelming and exhausting when you don't know what to
focus on.
Yet, here I am championing digital products.
Why?
Because the beauty of digital products is that you’re not just selling your
knowledge for income. You’re not just teaching people about fitness,
Facebook ads, homeschooling, or whatever you teach in your niche
.
You’re teaching an 
entire
 way of doing things.
A creator whose work I adored several years back when I was finding
resources for my then one-year-old daughter reached out to me recently to tell
me that she had bought my course and that it had transformed the way she
thought about her business. That was a full-circle moment for me. It was a
reminder of the impact and transformation that digital products can provide.
Finding a digital product that solves a nagging pain point can create an
enormous sense of satisfaction and change to the way you do things. Thisfeeling isn’t limited to just purchases like gadgets or cars, but it can arise
from purchases like digital products as well.
THE CASE FOR DIGITAL PRODUCTS & THIS BOOK
The stats from the e-learning market continue to blow expectations
completely out of the water.
The worldwide e-learning market is projected to be worth $325 billion in
2025. The US e-learning 
market could grow by $12.81 billion between 2020
and 2024.
1
Most books and courses on digital products and course creation sell you on
this and jump straight into how you can uncover the perfect niche and presell
your product.
Yes, you want to take a bite of this gold-dusted pie and you should! But a
critical element skipped in the process is strategy.
You’re not just building a product.
You’re building a brand asset.
Something that’s going to fuel your audience’s transformation and journey
with your brand.
So the conversation shouldn’t start with 
“What product (or course) should I
create?”
 It should start with “
What’s my vision for this business model?”
When you don’t set clear intentions at the start of your journey, you’ll veer
off course from where you intended to go in the first place
.
Before we dive into how you can chart your very own plan, let’s challenge
some of these false “truths” or yardsticks that you perhaps have been
believing about digital products
.
ASSUMPTIONS THAT PARALYZE YOUR FORAY INTO
DIGITAL PRODUCTSASSUMPTION 1: ONE DIGITAL PRODUCT WILL CHANGE YOUR
LIFE
I love digital products and am very grateful for being able to build the
business that I have on them.
But if you’re planning on replacing your full-time income solely with digital
products in the first three to six months that you’re in business, you’ll be
disappointed.
There are a lot of people who’ll tell you that a single course or one main offer
is what you’ll need to change your life.
You may have heard stories of so-and-so replacing their full-time income
with a single product launch
.
You’re led to believe that everyone has huge six-figure launches every time
they create and launch a digital product. Or that you can easily enroll three
hundred members in the beta round of your membership launch. Or that one
digital product will create a defining moment in your business.
That’s simply not true!
I can assure you that these stories are an anomaly, not the norm.
When I started out in 2016, the rule of thumb was 
“you just need to sell ten
spots in a $97 program.”
About four years later, the rhetoric was “s
ell ten spots of a $1,000 program.”
I’m not saying it’s impossible. But it’s not as easy as putting together a bunch
of emails, sending them out to your list, and raking in cash. The online
environment is terribly different today.
2
If you need to make money NOW and you’re new to the online space, the last
thing I’d recommend is creating a course or a membership
.
Surprised, considering this is a book about digital products?Courses and memberships are incredible revenue streams. I have both of
these revenue streams in my own business model, but they do take time.
They’re not magic bullets.
This doesn’t mean you should forget about digital products or that they’re
only within the realms of those with massive email lists. But you do need to
be prepared to be at it for longer before you replace your full-time income or
make six figures.
If you have a much shorter timeline to work with, offering services will serve
you better.
ASSUMPTION 2: COURSES ARE DIGITAL PRODUCT HOLY
GRAILS
One of the biggest assumptions in the online space is that the only digital
products you can create that are of value are premium courses
.
You’re nudged in this direction regardless of whether you have an audience
or are just starting out in the online space.
Creating a course can certainly make you money, but there’s 
a lot
 that goes
into creating a course that sells.
Firstly, courses take a lot of time to create.
Especially if it’s your first product, you may come out of it feeling frustrated
and like you never ever want to create another course or digital product again.
I’ve been there. Releasing my first course was and 
still
 
is
 a painful memory.
Secondly, creating a catchall solution with a huge course is a dangerous
proposition for a first-time creator because you’re forcing your new audience
into a “take it or leave it” situation when they’re still getting acquainted with
your brand.
There is a time and place for your signature or premium course. But your first
product does not, and dare I say 
should not
, be a signature course or
premium product, especially if you’re new to 
digital products, you’re new toonline business, and you’re still growing your audience.
ASSUMPTION 3: IF NO ONE BOUGHT IT THE FIRST TIME, THE
PRODUCT IS A FAILURE
I've seen people shelving perfectly good products because they were
disappointed with sales or it didn’t match up to this illusive idea of what they
think
 a launch should be bringing in.
You will feel tempted to trash your digital product and create new ones,
especially if it didn’t get you the results you wanted.
But the last thing you should do is trash it.
What about the offer isn’t working?
The lack of sales is always a symptom of some other problem.
Is the message of your product confusing? Are you not understanding your
audience’s pain points? Are your expectations even logical considering the
size of your audience
?
All products need a few iterations to test things out.
That's something that people don’t really speak about.
ASSUMPTION 4: YOU’RE NOT “EXPERT ENOUGH” TO CREATE
A DIGITAL PRODUCT
There’s always going to be someone who knows more than you do on a topic.
Someone who has more experience or who has coached more people.
But that someone does not have your unique perspective or background.
The online world is a noisy place. 
It’s easy to get comfortable and take others’ views as your own. 
But when you take the time to formulate your
 own
 response—your 
own 
takeon something that’s deemed as tried, tested, and true—you'll start to attract an
audience who is genuinely interested in you, your brand, and your product
.
Maybe you’re saying, “I don’t think this audience needs another offer with
everything that’s already out there!”
A crowded market is an opportunity when you know how to make your offer
stand out. Offers differ in terms of price, the customers they serve, their
promise, their style, or their mode of delivery.
If you map each competing offer against these elements, you’ll realize that
they all say something a little bit different. What you need to work on is
finding the opportunity or empty “parking space” in the market for your
digital product.
ASSUMPTION 5: THERE’S ONE MAGIC FORMULA
Everyone’s business model is different and 
should 
be.
Your business model is a description of how your business makes money. It’s
how you deliver value to your customers.
My business model and why I do certain things look very different from
someone else in the same 
niche as me. That's because it's modeled after my
strengths and vision. 
It's good to have a look at what others in the online space are doing. But just
because a strategy, formula, or methodology worked for them, doesn't mean
that it will make sense for you too.
So don’t jump on that course or membership or [insert new and shiny thing]
bandwagon just because it seems to be flashy and the next “in” thing.
The right questions to ask are
Why
 did it work for them?
Would it work for 
you 
considering your strengths, zone of genius, and what
you want out of your business?Can it be replicated?
Make your formula or methodology unique to 
you
. 
THE PLAN & HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
This book is not the business equivalent of a “get-rich-quick” scheme
.
This is not a book of stories and vague philosophies either. It’s a practical
guide with insights and strategies you can deploy to create a thriving digital
product business.
If you’ve been winging it with the way you’ve been organizing and creating
your digital products, the strategies outlined in this book will change how you
approach digital products.
In 
section I
, I’ll walk you through how to stack your products and gradually
escalate the experience that members of your audience have with you and
your brand so that they keep coming back to buy more.
In 
section II
, I’ll walk you through the core areas of creating winning offers.
You’ll see firsthand through case studies how the strategies taught in the
book can be applied across three different niches—Pinterest marketing,
fashion design, and visibility & PR.
In 
section III,
 you’ll learn how to take everything you’ve learned and put
together a digital product campaign. I’ll also share with you the seven
principles of becoming an extraordinary digital product creator.
If you’ve read my books 
The One Hour Content Plan
3
 and 
The Profitable
Content System,
4
 you should be familiar with the system of categories and
buckets I recommend using to organize and structure how you create content
for your business. I’ll briefly reference that organization system in this book
as well because it’s a part of your foundation and it all ties together.
A quick note
: This book will not help you uncover your niche. It assumes
that you have your niche figured out. If you haven’t as yet, start with mybook 
The Blog Startup.
5
As with all my other books, 
Selling the Intangible
 aims to give you the tools
you need to decide what will be best for you in your unique circumstance and
niche. 
You
 decide how you want to utilize the strategies in this book.
If you dream of having a slew of digital products that your audience can add
to their wish list and come back to buy from you repeatedly
…
If you desperately desire a strategy and workflow for building a solid digital
product-based business rather than constantly creating digital products,
shelving them, and then going on to create new ones, only to have the cycle
repeat itself…
If you want to tap into the gold- or diamond-dusted e-learning market, then
this book will be right up your alley.
If you’re ready, let’s go!
You can download 
The Intangible Playbook
 and bonus resources at
https://meera.tips/intangible
.
What’s included in the bonus pack:
• Product Launch Sketch Template – The 10 blocks you need to be
aware of before you even think about getting ready to put your
product out there
• Digital Product Creator Tool Kit – Carefully curated tools and vendors
to make executing your digital product effortless
• Proven steps to create, promote, and profit from digital productsSECTION I
UNCOVERING YOUR STRATEGY –
PREPARING FOR EXPLOSIVE
GROWTHCHAPTER 1
OFFER & SUCCESS STACKING
My take on digital products revolves around two main points:
1. Always make the first sale easy—something low risk so that a potential
buyer can dig into your paid content quickly, with the least resistance
possible.
2. Structure your products such that your audience can come back and buy
from you repeatedly.
You want to cultivate loyal customers, not buyers. When you focus on
customers, you’re focused on nurturing relationships and not just a single
transaction. And it’s important to note that the first sale is the hardest to
make. It gets easier to sell to someone who has purchased from you before.
Someone new in your audience hasn’t tasted your paid content as yet. They
start by consuming 
your free content via your podcasts, YouTube videos, or
blog posts. This free, ungated content may convince them to subscribe to
your email list.But how can you 
decrease
 the time taken from when someone becomes a
subscriber to then going on to making their first purchase from you? How can
you help 
ease
 that jump from subscriber to buyer to eventually a customer?
Would that jump or transition be easier with a $39 or $2,000 product
?
It’s definitely easier with a lower-priced product!
Signature courses and memberships are a lot harder to sell than people will
have you believe. When you are new to the online space or are just starting to
build your audience, a course creates a huge paywall and makes it harder for
your audience to say 
yes
 to your offer.
Why?Because they’re new to your brand. They’re still learning to associate you
with the topic of your offer. You’re still building credibility and authority. As
much as they may want to support you, a huge monstrous offer doesn’t make
it easy to say yes.
Likewise, a membership is a recurring fee. It’s not a one-and-done
transaction. People might be more hesitant to say 
yes
 to a recurring payment
when they haven’t gotten a taste of your paid content as yet.
We are so hardwired to think only about catchall courses, memberships, and
premium products 
that we don’t consider the potential of smaller products.
Remember that a signature or premium course or membership is but just one
type of digital product. Here are examples of several other types of digital
products:
6Smaller or bite-sized digital products are easier to create and launch. And
when you’re still not used 
to creating digital products, you want something
you can get out into the world fast, with the least resistance possible for you
and your audience.
Is this a blanket statement for all businesses?
Of course not! And nothing is!
If you’re selling consulting packages that cost thousands of dollars, havingbite-sized products can be extremely jarring to your brand. But most of us
don’t sell packages or offers that cost thousands, making this a very viable
option.
This is where a product ecosystem comes in.
A PRODUCT ECOSYSTEM OR OFFER STACK
A product ecosystem is a stack of offers that builds on one another and serves
the different needs of your audience.
Your audience starts with a bite-sized product, often referred to as a tripwire
or a loss leader. You can then go on to offer them a minicourse or signature
course that dives deeper into the topic and their needs. For people in your
audience who 
would love ongoing support from you, you can then offer them
a membership.
Your audience progresses along their journey experiencing different
outcomes and greater transformations with each product they consume. They
interact with you at different stages of their journey and in different ways.
Have a look at the table below.Most of my clients and students who venture into digital products by creating
a membership or course as their first product get stuck in creation mode. All
that initial excitement quickly gets overtaken by overwhelm with 
everything
they need to do and learn.
And naturally so!
Courses and memberships are hefty products spanning several videos and
supporting material such as worksheets and workbooks. You’re learning how
to deal with the tech stack, how to create slides and film your videos, and
how much to say and what to leave out.But the struggles don’t stop there!
If you do finally manage to crawl out of product creation mode, you may face
a situation of 
crickets
 when you launch the offer. No one buys or very few
people do because of reasons we’ll explore later on in the book. But the entire
fiasco makes you think that all that effort was for nothing.
I’ve been in that very same spot of overwhelm, defeat, and dread
.
This is where a product ecosystem comes in.
It stacks your successes and builds your confidence as you grow your
audience.
Smaller products give subscribers more reasons to buy from you rather than
close all doors with a huge single sale like a $2,000 premium course. A client
can stay with you for years and years because they are getting one solution
after another that satisfies different needs and helps them achieve different
outcomes. This is a piece of advice I wish I had when I started.
Let’s take a look at different products at different tiers of solutions. I’ve also
included revenue streams that are not digital products because it will give you
an idea of where they are in the offer stack.
TIER 1
If you’re still growing your audience and want to start monetizing your email
list, create a front-end, low-risk offer such as a tripwire. Tripwires or bite-
sized offers are Tier 1 digital products.What’s a tripwire?
It’s a low-risk product you sell on your one-time offer page or thank-you
page, usually as soon as a person signs up so that you can convert a new
subscriber into a buyer quickly. Tripwires (often referred to as loss leaders)
can be extremely 
profitable when done well. The main goal is not profit but
to get that first sale.These products give your new subscriber a taste of your paid content, who
you are, and how you can serve them. It piques their curiosity, helps to
establish trust, and associates you and your brand with the topic of the offer.
TIERS 2 & 3
If you already have a buying audience and a low-risk offer, you can consider
a starter course or a specialist or signature course.
A starter course is a foundational course or a 101. A signature course is a
course that gives a complete transformation from A to Z. It has your
signature framework, methodology, or formula of doing something. A
specialist course is one main topic that you cover in detail. These are courses
on topics that you are “known for” as the expert.
7TIER 4
If you already have a buying audience who resonate with your teachings or
frameworks or methodologies and who identify you as a mentor, you can add
a membership. A membership works when your audience see you as a
regular, normal expense that is essential to their growth and success
.
There are different membership models ranging from solely training-based
memberships to those that are purely coaching and support-based. How you
structure your membership, as I mentioned, is dependent on your goals, who
your audience is, and how you want to serve your audience.Here’s what each of the digital product tiers looks like.FAQ 1: Do I need to create products at every level?
No, you don’t.
This very much depends on the revenue streams you want in your business
and the audience you want to serve.
I have clients who are interested only in serving a 101 audience. Naturally,
when you have helped this audience get past their startup or beginner phase,
they will look to others to help them continue on in their journey to the
intermediate and advanced stages.
While some see this as a 
no-no
 and a loss of opportunity, 
you
 decide who you
want to serve. People 
will naturally outgrow how you can serve and help
them, and this is a 
good thing
! Why? Because…
1. You’ve helped them through that promised initial stages of transformation.
Look at this as them graduating from your course or teachings.
2. If you speak to all audiences at different stages, you can end up speaking to
no one.The takeaway isn’t that you should have an offer at every single tier or level.
The takeaway is that catchall single solutions like huge courses or
memberships are not the only options out there and to consider leading
deeper transformation one product at a time.
FAQ 2: What if someone is an ardent fan and has bought all of your
products? Do you still continue to create offers for them beyond your
core and follow-up offers? What if there isn’t anything more to offer?
You may likely encounter this situation somewhere down the road
.
These are students and clients like I mentioned earlier who may have
graduated or achieved that transformation that you have set out for your
audience. There does come a time when someone may not need your business
anymore. And that is what we all should aspire to—for clients and readers
who have bought our products, taken action, experienced results, and who
don’t need us anymore. This doesn’t have to be goodbye. You can invite
them on as brand ambassadors into support groups for existing customers at
the beginning of their journey. So it’s OK to not create extra offers just to fill
the pipeline.
FAQ 3:
 
How soon is too soon to add a product?
I bought into the myth that “you need to give valuable content for six months
before you’ve earned the right to monetize.” But think about it…
If you have a solution to your audience’s burning pain point, they’re not
going to count how many days or months you’ve been giving value before
buying.
Yes, they may not know you as well
…
Yes, you still need to build trust…
But if your free content is able to build just enough trust and you then go on
to give them a low-risk, low-cost offer, then you’ve got a winner.
A tripwire is a great product to add especially if you’ve just started buildingyour list.
But the type of tripwire you add matters. Create something too complicated
and you lose the sale.
FAQ 4:
 
How do I know if my first product is too big?
What’s small or big? Look at the transformation of that product. That’s an
indicator of the size of your product.
The bigger the transformation, the higher the price point, and the bigger the
product.
FAQ 5: How do I know what products to create in the ecosystem?
This depends on the specific pain points that you want to tackle or help your
audience solve. We’ll cover this in the next chapter.CHAPTER 2
STAGE IDENTIFICATION
If you’re familiar with my work and are on my email list, you may have seen
this Stage Identification Sheet before. This is a framework that I, as well as
several people in my audience, have followed. If you’re looking for more
clarity on when you should be attempting specific offers within the respective
tiers, this sheet will serve as a guide.
It’s not a hard-and-fast rule, and it’s not meant to box you in. Its purpose is to
serve as a guideline to help you make progress and avoid overwhelm and
frustration.
CHAPTER 3
JOURNEY MAPPING
People at different stages in the customer journey have different questions
and different pain points.
A pain point is a specific problem that prospective customers at that
particular stage are experiencing. Understanding the problem you are solving
for your customers is undoubtedly the biggest challenge you’ll face when
you’re creating a digital product.
If you’re familiar with my content and you’ve read my books 
The One Hour
Content Plan
 and 
The Profitable Content System
, you know that I’m a huge
fan of the five states of awareness created by copywriting legend Eugene
Schwartz.
8
This states that a prospective buyer, reader, or subscriber starts by being
problem unaware, then 
becomes problem aware, solution unaware, solution
aware, and finally, most aware.
Have a look at the diagram below.This is one way of thinking about buyer awareness.
Other concepts drop the reader (listener or viewer) into broader phases such
as Awareness – Consideration – Decision, or into broad descriptions of
Beginner – Intermediate – Advanced.
These frameworks can also be used as a guide to chart customer pain points.
It’s these pain points that will feed your product ecosystem and what digital
product to create at each stage.
Here’s a look at how pain points at different stages map onto the productecosystem.
TIER 1 – These are top-level pain points. Imagine these as the pack of gum
or chocolates they sell near the checkout counter at the grocery store. They
never made it to your grocery list. You likely don’t need them, but you have
this impulse to purchase them either way! They offer temporary relief of the
pain point but never really resolve the underlying problem. Some of your
readers may have identified a symptom of a potential problem. They may not
have identified the real problem but rather are looking for ways to soothe or
get rid of their symptoms.
TIER 2 – They may be embarrassed by the questions they have due to their
lack of knowledge about the topic in question. They’re trying to read up on as
much material as they can, and the topic 
is on their radar. Their pain points
are centered around getting started and the “how.”
How do I do [ONE ASPECT OF THE TOPIC]?
What tools should I use for [ONE ELEMENT OF THE TOPIC]?
How can I implement [TOPIC] to do [ONE ASPECT OF THE PROCESS]?
TIER 3 – They are hustling and trying out different strategies, but they are
unhappy with the progress they are making or their results. 
Why isn’t this
working for me? Why am I not getting these results? What can I do to get
these results?
 Their pain points are geared around specific solutions.
TIER 4 – They’ve tried to implement DIY solutions but have not had the
progress or success they’d hoped they would have at this stage. Their pain
points are centered around seeking connection, support, and access.
Here’s an example of pain point progression of a client for my email
marketing category.Depending on your niche and audience, there may be overlapping pain points
between different levels. But how do you know what people want or what
they will pay to get rid of their pain point?
The best (and worst) advice I’ve ever heard?
Ask your audience.
Do your audience really know what they want?
No, they don’t.
This is why I don’t recommend running surveys to your entire list to ask
them what they want. 
One of Henry Ford’s famous quotes goes as follows: 
If I had asked people
what they wanted, they would have said faster horses
.
Instead of forcing your audience to discuss solutions that they don’t yet
appreciate or fully recognize, get them to discuss problems or symptoms they
have.
If you're thinking of running a survey, send it out to your customers or
fans. These are people who have bought from you and most likely will buy
again. Remember, it’s easier to get a repeat purchase than it is to get a brand-
new sale. 
But what if you can’t ask your audience what they want, or you don’t haveaccess to an audience because you’re just starting out?
How can you test the viability of a product then?
How do you know if this is something people will pay for?
There are lots of signs that can give you an indication of whether you’ve hit
product gold.
Here are some places that are teeming with insights you can get about your
ideal buyer.
• Amazon book categories (look for categories in your topic and the top 1–20
books
)
• Udemy (look for the number of registrations and ratings)
• Other people with similar products in your niche
• BuzzSumo (articles trending for your keywords)
• Pinterest
You also want to look out for the following:
• What questions do people keep asking?
• What questions are always coming up in your niche?
These questions show you that there’s a need—that people are looking for
ways to solve this problem.
So have your ears to the ground and try to tap into what your audience is
seeking out.
9
To keep the content in this book updated, I’ve listed a few tools I use to do
audience research in the bonus kit instead. You can access it here >
https://meera.tips/intangible
.
While it’s important to consider (a) what your audience will pay to get rid of
their problem, and (b) the presence of similar products in the marketplace,
you don’t want to neglect another important component—
YOU
.• What you are excited to teach
• Your skill set
• How you are two steps ahead of your ideal buyer
You want to work on a product that excites you.
You want to be committed to a product idea. Because, as you will find out
further into the book, just because an offer doesn’t sell as well the first or
second time around doesn’t mean the idea is moot
.
You need to see a product through the launch process a couple of times even
if you are tempted to scratch it and start over. It takes a few iterations to
know how to hit the right pain points and how to position your offer well.
This takes a certain degree of commitment to the outcome of your offer and
how it can help your audience. We’ll talk about how to craft the right offer in
the next chapter.Now, let’s apply the product ecosystem to our case studies.
For each case study, I’ve given several options depending on the different
pain points that can be tackled. In some case studies, I’ve also shown how
you might integrate a done-for-you option with digital products.
I’d like to reiterate that there are no rules. Do what’s best for your zone of
genius, who you want to serve, and the vision you have for your business.
You can also choose to target and serve certain pain points and not others.
You can choose to have offers at some levels and not others.
CASE STUDY – PINTEREST SPECIALIST
Cath teaches entrepreneurs how to get started with Pinterest.
AUDIENCE PAIN POINTS SHE CAN TACKLE:
o How do I create click-worthy images when I have no time?
o How do I design click-worthy images without any design
background?
o How can I increase traffic from Pinterest?
o How can I increase traffic from Pinterest and convert that traffic to
sales?
OPTION
1
She can start with a Tier 2 Pinterest 101 course that shows her
audience how to get started with the platform—show them how
to set up their boards and profile and walk them through the
basics of Pinterest descriptions and keywords.
She can then go on to offer a Tier 3 signature course that
showcases her Pinterest framework or secret source to getting
traffic and turning that traffic into profit.OPTION
2
Alternatively, she can offer a Tier 1 tripwire to people
struggling to make Pinterest images. She can then offer her 101
and signature courses followed by a membership that offers
click-worthy Pinterest image templates every single month.
OPTION
3
She could also offer a Tier 3 specialist course just for people
who want to be Pinterest virtual assistants (a subset of her
audience) and help them get the skills needed to manage their
clients’ accounts.
CASE STUDY – FASHION DESIGN
Lena serves people who want to become fashion designers but don’t have
any formal education. Most of them are working a 9–5 with the dream ofstarting a fashion boutique in the future.
AUDIENCE PAIN POINTS SHE CAN TACKLE:
o How do I do create easy sketches that can be turned into clothes?
o How do I design clothes for myself?
o How do I design profitable clothes people want to buy?
o How do I start a fashion boutique?
OPTION
1
She can start with a Tier 1 Fashion Sketch Template Pack,
which can be offered as a tripwire. This can teach her audience
how to start sketching designs that people will love. This is an
extremely searched-for topic and will grab her audience’s
attention.
She can then offer a Tier 2 101 course on how to get started
with designing their first or next fashion collection. She can
then offer a Tier 3 signature course that provides an A–Z
transformation and takes someone from idea to launching their
own boutique.
OPTION
2
Alternatively, she can offer a Tier 1 Fashion Sketch Template
tripwire to people struggling to make sketches. She can choose
to offer a Tier 2 101 course to help people start on their journey
to becoming a fashion designer.
She can then offer a specialist course on how to design their
first or next fashion collection. Finally, she can offer a Tier 4
membership that gives resources and monthly trainings that
take someone from the idea phase of starting a fashion boutiqueto launching it to keeping it profitable from month to month.
Note:
 If you notice, the same product “START YOUR OWN
BOUTIQUE” is positioned as a membership in Option 2 but
was positioned as a signature course in the earlier option.
CASE STUDY – VISIBILITY & PR
Joan helps female entrepreneurs grow their businesses through strategic
public relations.
AUDIENCE PAIN POINTS SHE CAN TACKLE:
o How to pitch hosts and journalists so that you get noticed
o How to find the best places to pitch that will give the best ROI
o How to implement PR without much time
OPTION
1
She can offer PR Pitch Templates for TV, radio, online
magazines & podcasts complete with spreadsheets to track
pitches and a short video training on the dos and don’ts of
getting started with PR.
She can then go on to offer an in-depth DIY course for small
business owners who want to start getting noticed through
strategic PR. This will be a starter solution and will take
someone from nothing to crafting a strategic PR plan for their
business even if they don’t have a lot of time, are starting from
scratch, or have failed at PR before.She can then provide a monthly subscription of curated targeted
journalist and podcast host requests that fit students’ areas of
expertise.
OPTION
2
Alternatively, she can start by offering her Tier 1 PR Pitch
Templates. She can then choose to offer a hybrid signature
course for small business owners who want to start getting
noticed through strategic PR. This hybrid solution will give
students a one-to-one coaching option and the opportunity to
have their PR plans reviewed and personally vetted.
She can offer a premium done-for-you service where a tailor-
made PR plan is crafted based on a strategy call and reviewing
the goals of the business owner.
ACTION
Can you chart your own offer stack or product ecosystem? Or if you have
existing digital products, how do they stack with each other
?
If you’ve read my books 
The One Hour Content Plan
 and 
The ProfitableContent System
, you know that I recommend using a system of categories and
buckets to organize and structure how you create content for your business.
Each content category can have its own product ecosystem or offer stack.SECTION II
THE ESSENTIAL DIGITAL PRODUCT
KIT – ORGANIZING & BUILDING
YOUR PRODUCT FOR SUCCESS
Have you put your heart and soul into creating a digital product only to have
it launch to crickets?
You thought it would work and then it just didn’t.
I’ve been there.
I’ve sold only three spots of a $97 program.
Sure, it was still three sales, but I was devastated.
I thought I had the sales page right. I thought I was being clear. I thought I
was giving people what they asked for
.
But I stuck with the offer.
I worked through the messaging. The marketing. The sales page.
Now?
It’s an offer that brings me a full-time income each month.
Looking back, I see all the mistakes. The pieces that were not done in the
right order. The focus on the completely wrong components.
Haphazard wouldn’t even 
begin
 to explain how I worked on that digital
product.Creating a digital product has so many moving pieces. How do you put
everything together in a way that doesn’t leave you overwhelmed 
and
 gets
your audience excited to buy from you?
This is exactly what we’re going to delve into in the next few chapters.CHAPTER 4
WHY PEOPLE DON’T BUY YOUR
STUFF
Most of the time when you want to create a digital product, you jump right
into thinking about the format of the product.
How many videos it is going to have…
What you’ll be charging…
The tools you need, and so on.
All of these are logistics that should come later on.
Instead of thinking about your product and jumping the gun in the process,
begin thinking about your offer or solution.
You can have a great product but a terrible offer
.
Offer versus product. These are two different entities.
Your 
product
 in simple terms is the nuts and bolts of what they get. These
are the features.
PRODUCT
Number of videos
Number of worksheets
Number of chaptersFacebook support group
Slack support channel
The 
offer
 or 
solution
 is how you package your product.
OFFER
Outcome/Promise
– How can you frame your product so that it’s most attractive to your ideal
buyer?
Note:
 You don’t sell your offer to everybody. You only need to spend your
time and resources attracting your ideal customer. If you had a “poster boy
or girl” for your brand, this would be them.
Your offer vs. other similar offers in the market
– What can you tap into that the rest haven’t? What’s the real reason
someone will be motivated to spend money on
 your
 offer instead of other
people’s offers?
Look at your offer through your ideal customer’s eyes.
• Who would benefit the most from what you offer?
• What promise or product outcome will be the most attractive to 
your
 ideal
customer?
• What result can they expect if they buy and implement what you’re selling?
• If you’re adding bonuses, what will push them to say “YES” to your offer?
• Do they immediately understand how your offer makes their lives easier?
• How are you going to package your product and position it relative to
others in your niche or market
?• What’s that unique
 X
 that a customer can get from your product that they
can’t get elsewhere?
• What’s the real reason someone will be motivated to spend money on
 your
offer and not other people’s offers?
The answers to these questions will form your offer or your package.
These are elements that you tend to ignore till 
after
 you create your product.
Packaging your offer should be as, if not more, important than creating your
product.This isn’t something that you can whip up 
after
 you create your
product.
You can only do this at the 
start 
of the product creation process. Because if
you do, you’ll know exactly how much needs to go into your product and
what you need to do to convince your ideal customer.
People don’t spend money on the information in a digital product because it
looks pretty or helpful. They spend it because they have a goal, and they
believe this information will help them achieve that goal.
Having a promise, outcome, or goal gives your digital product some
tangibility. It’s easier for a reader to grasp what your digital product hopes to
deliver. It makes selling the intangible easier. No pun intended
.
Product = What you do
Why anyone cares = The outcomes you deliver
Harvard marketing professor Theodore Levitt put it brilliantly: “People do
not buy drill bits, they buy holes.”
People don’t buy products. They buy outcomes.
So how do you decide how to package your offer?
STEP 1
 – 
DETERMINE
 
WHERE IN YOUR PRODUCT ECOSYSTEM
THIS PRODUCT GOING TO BE
What exactly are the characteristics of this product? Is this a tripwire, a starter
101, or a specialist or signature course?
Identifying where in the product ecosystem this product will take its place
will help you define its package further.
STEP 2
 – 
CONSIDER THE COMPETITION AND THEIR OFFERSMost people cringe at the word competition or competitors
.
If you’re uncomfortable with this, think of these as players or people or
influencers operating in the same space as you.
The presence of other products in the market is a good sign—a sign that
there’s demand for that product in the market.
But that doesn’t give you a right to cough up what everyone else is offering.
To give your product the best possible chance of success, you want to create
a well-defined package that’s different from what’s out there. To do this, you
first need to identify who your competitors are.
How you do this could differ based on how far along you are in business.
Some of you may already have offers. Some of you might just be starting out
and growing an audience.
Let’s tackle both of these situations.
YOU HAVE AN EXISTING OFFER
1. Who does your audience compare your offers or content against
?
How different is your offer from Person A’s Offer X?
I was considering your offer or Influencer B’s offer.
Have you received comments like these?
These comments are gold because they highlight who your audience would
approach if you didn’t exist. You may not see these people as competitors.
You may even think they engage in a conversation that is completely
different from the conversation you’re having.
But what you think doesn’t matter.
You want to be the obvious choice for your audience, and to do this, you
need to identify the options they are choosing from.2. If you didn’t exist, where would your audience go?
Who would 
you
 refer your audience to if your product didn’t exist?
YOU DON’T HAVE AN EXISTING OFFER
1. Who are the others with similar offers in the same category
?
Start by defining your offer in its simplest form.
Heard of the duck test?
10
“If it looks like a duck, swims like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it
probably is a duck.”
Is this a course on 
email marketing
?
Is this an e-book on 
stitching
?
Is this a workshop on 
dating
?
That category is the conversation you are a part of.
Who are the others with similar offers in the same category?
What other products deliver on the benefits or value of products in the
category of your offer? These are your direct competitors.
2. Who are the others with 
adjacent
 offers in the same category?
You don’t just consider those offering a digital product, but also those who
offer services or coaching in the same category
.
Often, we tend to only look at people who have similar business models. For
instance, when you only consider people who are course creators, you may
neglect the voices who are in the same niche but in different business models
such as coaching or done-for-you services. These are your indirect
competitors.When you look at adjacent alternatives or substitutes, you’ll then be able to
identify all relevant players in the marketplace.
STEP 3 – DO AN AUDIT
Based on who you have identified, do a content audit of your competitors’
products.
• What promises are they making?
• What bonuses are they giving?
• What headlines are they using?
• Who do you think is their ideal customer?
• What are the core messages being shared
?
STEP 4 – PICK A FIGHT
• 
Central idea being shared about each of these offers
What’s your gripe with the central idea?
Here are some central ideas I always pick a fight with:
- Everyone should create a course/membership
- Teaching email sequences by saying that you only need seven emails
11
• 
Methodology/How-to
What don’t you like about their methodology or way of teaching?
“How-to” or methods I always pick a fight with have to do with choosing a
lead magnet based on the pain points of your audience. I propose an
alternative method of choosing a lead magnet.
1
2
• 
Why should a buyer choose you over every other available option?
Are you serving a specialized subset of an existing audience?
Do you have a unique framework/methodology?
There are so many ways you can be different.Having the answers to these questions will help you know how to package
your offer and present it to your audience.
The earlier you think about it, the more successful your product will be.
You may not always nail your offer the first time. That doesn’t necessarily
mean that people don’t want your product or don’t like it. It takes a few
iterations to know how to package your offer the right way.
 What if you feel like you don’t have any competitors?
This isn’t really a good thing. It means
a. It’s likely that there isn’t a demand for products or services in this
market.
b. Others have failed to effectively monetize this niche.
c. You’re not looking in the right place. The keywords or terms you use
to define your niche aren’t those that your target audience is using or
what other businesses use.
ACTION
If you already have a digital product, how well defined is your offer? Is there
a clear point of difference between your offer and what’s out there? Have you
“picked a fight” using at least one of the three points mentioned in Step 4?CHAPTER 5
FROM SKELETON TO FLESH
Spend at least 30% of your product creation time on outlining the product.
When you don’t have a solid outline, you create more or less content than
you actually need.
Worse, you create content that doesn’t align with the desired outcome or
promise of your offer.
What transformation do you intend to achieve for this digital product? Have a
look at some examples below.
Depending on the type of digital product you’re creating, you would
1. List out the steps required to take someone from Point A to Point B
2. List out the mini-milestones or goals someone requires to go from Point A
to Point B
For instance, 101 or starter type products likely have steps or lessons to reach
a specific transformation.
Specialist or signature offers, likely those in Tier 3, are modular in nature.
Each module has a specific goal that nudges your audience toward the
transformation. Asking yourself the question “What do you need to know to
achieve that specific goal or milestone?” breaks down the module further into
individual lessons.Asking yourself the question “What will make it easy to implement?” will
break it down further into supporting materials such as worksheets, swipe
files, or templates.
This tells you exactly what you need to cover so that the goal is
accomplished.
Anything else that doesn’t directly relate to the transformation or goal can be
used for your bonus content. When you do it in this way, you provide just
what is necessary.
Because one of the mistakes that creators make is to include too much in their
product. And I've made that mistake as well
.
ACTION
If you already have a digital product, think about the structure explained
above. Have you included more or less content than is necessary? If you’re
thinking of creating a new digital product, can you use the model above to
flesh out your content?CHAPTER 6
OUTSTANDING SALES PAGES
Heard of the saying “Eat that frog”?
Get your sales page written and out of the way as soon as your product
outline is done.
Since I started doing this, I always have a clear direction as to what I’ll
include in my products.
It also takes a big stress point away because you can use content from your
sales page in your prelaunch and sales phases, which we’ll talk about in the
next few chapters.
This way you know you will always be consistent with your messaging.
A sales page has several sections.
Long form or short form, every single section on the sales page has to
convince your ideal customers that your offer is for them
.
Have you heard people bragging about five- and six-figure sales pages?
Can a sales page account for the entire success of your launch? No, it can’t.
A sales page is important. But a sales page on its own cannot deliver radical
success for your digital product.
It’s just one component in the entire process.
The supporting content that leads to your sales page, how you establish
credibility, the follow-up process and the email content you send after you’ve
sent someone to a sales page 
all
 matter as well.When you have a failed launch, it’s not just your sales page that has to be
analyzed but other elements of the process too.
How do you write your sales pages and blog posts faster?
The answer: prework and structure!
A sales page is a hefty piece of copy
.
I use what I call the Copy Triage or Grid Mapping System that highlights
nine key elements from start to end.
Take a look at any of my sales pages and you’ll see these nine elements
reflected.
WHO
Who will benefit the most from this offer? Are they
1. Problem Aware
2. Solution Aware
3. Problem Unaware
HOOK
• Encapsulate the primary benefit, why they should care about solving the
problem, and what they are looking for
PAIN POINTS
• What problems are you solving?
• What symptoms do your target audience experience in their own words
?
CHANGE
• List out the change or transformation you’re promising.
• What does the “rainbow” on the other side look like for them in this
situation?PRODUCT INVENTORY
• List out the bullet points of what you’re offering.
The lifeblood of your sales page is the bullet point.
Surprised?
Have a look at your favorite sales pages. The bullet points tease and build
anticipation.
They give you just a tiny peek into the offer and get you excited to buy. Your
bullet points need to do that.
MYTH
• List out commonly held myths holding people back from making this
change or from taking the actions you need them to take
.
OBJECTIONS
List out all the objections people have when it comes to the offer. These
could be objections related to money, their own limiting beliefs, the time they
have to work on the offer, or even the offer itself.
FAQ
• What questions do people have before they say yes to this offer?
ACTION
Is your digital product sales page missing any of these elements? Take note
of which elements you can incorporate or improve on.
 Your product should have its own branding.
This doesn’t mean it has to be drastically different from your own brand.
Pick cues from your existing brand.This could be the look and feel, an accent color, or a font. It can have its
own branding but still be complementary to your current brand.
But a word of caution.
As with anything branding, it can be a huge time suck.
It can be a reason to procrastinate.
NAME
Always choose clear over clever.
It’s a lot easier to come up with a name after you’ve defined the value
proposition or promise of your product.
Your name should capture the essence of what your product will do for
your readers…if it can give them a glimpse of the after.
Clever and creative names leave a potential buyer confused and do more
harm than good.
LOOK & FEEL
You don’t need to have an ultra-fancy product logo, images, or slide
templates. You don’t need to get these done by a designer either.
These are bells and whistles that can be added later and revamped as
you grow.
I’m all for investing in tools, but tools shouldn’t become a reason to
delay the launch of your product. We all have to start somewhere, and as
long as your product collaterals and materials are neat and organized,
you’re good to go!CHAPTER 7
PERFECT PRICING
In every sale there’s a gap.
Your customer ———> Their future state
The larger the gap, the higher the price point.How you price your digital products depends on
1. The value of the outcome you are helping your customers achieve
2. How much the outcome is 
worth
 to your customer
In the majority of cases, price isn’t what stops a customer from buying;
it’s the 
perceived value of your offer
.
The perceived value increases the more your solution fixes their problem.
People buy when they’re in pain and in need of a solution to a problem.
Every digital product has to be an answer to a problem.
However, it's up to you to help potential customers understand this. It’s up to
you to demonstrate this value.
This does not mean listing out what they get—the features. It involves
focusing on outcomes and results. So always highlight the benefits and not
the features
.
We’ll talk about this in the next chapter as well.
Another way to determine your price is by plotting out a price spectrum.
1. Plot out the brands in your niche and where along the spectrum they fall.
List out their prices.
2. Circle the brands you want to be associated with.
3. Where do you fall on the spectrum? Or where along the spectrum do you
want your brand to be placed? Plot it out.
Here are some common scenarios when it comes to pricing:
1) 
How dare you make a profit from your work?
I’ve had subscribers and clients write to me in tears because of nasty
comments from people in their audience chiding them for making a profit
from their products or coaching just because they’re in the wellness, faith, or
budgeting niches.Never apologize
 for selling your work or wanting to make a living especially
when you’ve followed 
through on the steps above. People need to know
you’re in business too.
2.
 
Your price is too high.
Have you communicated the value of your product? How does your value
compare with your competitors?
Are you unknowingly attracting the wrong audience?
Think about where most of these leads or subscribers are coming in from.
Are they joining your list from a particular content upgrade or lead magnet?
Is that lead magnet attracting the right audience who will be keen on going on
to buy your products and services? Or is there an audience-offer mismatch?
While we can’t delve into email marketing in detail here, I talk more about
relevance in my book 
300 Email Marketing Tips.
13
 The higher the degree of
relevance between every single component in your 
marketing system, the
higher your engagement, sales, and overall subscriber satisfaction will be.
But no matter how well priced your products are or how much value you
give, there are some people in your audience who will have an issue with the
price point no matter what it is.
Leave these people out of the equation. If their claims are completely invalid,
do yourself and them a favor and click unsubscribe (for them).
For everyone else, some resistance is good. If no one has a problem with your
price, it’s a signal to raise it.
Have this in mind the next time you send a sales email and are afraid people
will unsubscribe.
A key point you need to remember is that value and price point must be
aligned.
If you’re selling a massive five-module course for $39, the value doesn’talign with the price point. This sends a mixed message about the true value of
your product. 
If it’s so cheap, it’s probably not good
.
This is why we determine where in the product ecosystem a product is as a
first step. It helps to set your expectations right.
ACTION
Does the value of your existing digital product align with your price point?CHAPTER 8
LAUNCHING YOUR PRODUCT IN
TODAY’S ONLINE SPACE
Have you ever been in a store and needed help with picking something out?
Or maybe you had a question about a product you were thinking about
purchasing?
In situations like these, a 
can I help you with something
 from a salesperson is
more than a welcome interruption.
The best buying experiences you’ve had are probably with salespeople who
made you feel happy and comfortable with your purchase.
There’s no pressure or hard selling involved.
That’s how it should be when you’re selling your products to your audience.
People overcomplicate 
selling. Selling, like anything, is best when it’s
simplified.
An old business saying goes “People love to buy. But they don't like to be
sold to.”
As an online business owner, you're increasingly engaging with a far more
aware and mature audience.
There used to be a time when a three-part video series was exciting. But now
your audience’s defenses go up when they hear you have a three-part video
series. They know they’re going to be sold to. 
You can't knock on the door once and expect a flood of salesimmediately. You can’t show up today with a “cart-open” email and get your
people to throw themselves at your sales page. Persistent nurturing and
knocks on the door win in today's online space. The internet has tipped the
scales of information and power from sellers to buyers.
So how can you convince someone to buy rather than force the solution on
them?
This is where education comes into play
.
Education is the new selling. As Zig Ziglar said, “You will get all you want
in life if you help enough other people get what they want.”
The job of a successful seller is to guide buyers and provide value at every
single step. Selling or launching a product, when done right, provides
immense value to everyone. It creates a win-win for you and your audience.
Everyone comes out of it educated and aware of your topic even if they don’t
end up buying. You get massive awareness for your offer. The ones who
don't buy are a step closer to buying the next time around or the one after
that.
People don’t mind the interruption. They only mind if the interruption
doesn’t make any sense to what they think they’re there for.
When in doubt, ask yourself the following question: if you remove your sales
pitch, does your content still add value?
This is why you need to prime your subscribers for the sale
.
When you have a strategy in place, you'll have more people who welcome
your interruption than those who don't. Before we dive into how you can
prime your audience, let’s get the definitions out of the way.
WHAT A LAUNCH IS NOT
Many clients I speak to think that all they need to do to launch their digital
product is to stick it at the end of an email sequence for people to find.Yes, people may discover your digital product as they go through your email
sequence, but that’s not the first thing you should do.
There’s a difference between live launching your offer and having it sell on
evergreen.
When you live launch your offer, you have fixed open- and close-cart dates.
There is a specific period of time within which someone can buy your offer.
People don’t see this offer again until your next launch.
But when you sell an offer on evergreen, it is always available for sale and is
not tied to launches or open and close carts
.
It ensures you have a steady source of income rather than the income highs
and lows associated with a business model built solely on live launches.
Launches bring in a huge portion of revenue and then clam shut the moment
you close cart.
Have a launch one month, and you’ll bring in loads of revenue.
Don’t have one the next month, and your revenue source has dried up.
Going evergreen on your offer is an excellent way to keep the sales
momentum going postlaunch. This is useful because people prefer to buy in
different ways. Some need the hype and energy of a live launch to buy. They
thrive on events held around a live launch and want to interact directly with
the digital product creator before making their decision.
Others want to buy an offer on demand when they 
need
 it and are perfectly
comfortable buying via an evergreen email sequence.
Both a live launch and an evergreen email sequence have a place in your
marketing calendar. 
For instance, I have my courses running on evergreen in
the background, but I also do occasional live launches as well.
We’ll discuss going evergreen in the next chapter, but for now, let’s take a
look at the different elements in a launch and the types of launches.
ELEMENTS OF A LAUNCHElement 1: Prelaunch Phase
The most underrated element in a launch is a prelaunch.
I still see entrepreneurs showing up on or just before cart-open date and
announcing that their offer is for sale. If your cart opens tomorrow, you
should have a prelaunch phase at least 3–4 weeks in advance. Because if you
don’t, then you’re not engaging your audience
.
You’re not preparing them to buy from you.
You’re not addressing questions or objections they may have, prior to the
sale.
This is one of the biggest reasons launches flop.
Most prelaunch campaigns aren’t really prelaunch campaigns at all. Most
have a message 
“I have a huge surprise in store for you” or “I have
something I’m really excited to share”
 under the guise of a prelaunch.
Now, you can of course be excited. But your prelaunch phase has to answer
three of the questions below:
Does your audience even know that this is something that needs to be
solved?
A prelaunch shouldn’t just get your audience excited by the impendinglaunch of your offer; it should prime them as well. You do that by creating
content around the topic of your offer. People can’t appreciate a solution to a
problem that they don’t know needs fixing
.
Your first step is to help your audience clearly understand their current pain
so they can see and feel how much these problems are costing them, holding
them back, and preventing them from experiencing what they want.
Make them aware of the topic. Get their attention.
Talk about mistakes they may be making around the topic. You’re building
anticipation before you even mention your offer as a solution to this problem
they’ve now become aware of. You’re getting them interested in the topic.
Note:
 Always use their own words to describe their pain and to describe their
ideal vision.
How can they solve these pain points or problems?
What content can you provide that points them in the direction of solving the
mistakes/pain points you pointed out earlier?
Do they know how things could change by solving that pain point
?
Get them to see the light at the other end of the tunnel.
What are the possibilities?
What’s in it for them?
How could this solution potentially change their lives?
Paint a picture of how their lives could be. What content can you provide that
increases their desire for wanting your solution?
This is when you soft sell your offer and mention that your offer is about to
be released.
Element 2: Sales PhaseDo they know what solutions are out there and how yours is different
?
Have you removed objections they have against your product?
Have you answered questions they have about your offer?
You want to brainstorm and jot down as many ideas as you can for these
questions based on your offer. Then start to outline content pieces
(emails/blog posts/videos/podcasts) that will feed your prelaunch and sales
phases.
This is exactly what I walk you through in my book 
The Profitable Content
System.
 If you want to know the exact types of content pieces that will prime
and nudge your audience, have a look at that book.
If your audience is not convinced they need your offer, and if they have
objections that your offer won't work for them, then sending those
subscribers to your sales page is a conversion killer even if it was written by a
star copywriter.
You want to send subscribers who are primed to buy your offer..
.
Subscribers who are convinced they have a problem that needs solving…
Subscribers who have had their objections countered...
As good as your sales page is, it can't work miracles, especially if people are
not primed or convinced.Element 3: Urgency and/or Scarcity
Let’s be honest.
You and I don’t take action unless we have a deadline. So if you think
imposing a deadline is manipulative, it's time to shift your mindset on
that. Urgency is a good sales tool
.
There are three ways in which you can introduce urgency when you sell your
digital products.
• Additional incentives
- Various fast-action bonuses
- Surprise bonuses
- Limited quantities• Access
- Access to creator’s time
- Lifetime access with free upgrades
• Time
- Limited tim
e
TYPES OF LAUNCHES
There are several types of launches.
You can do simple under-the-radar email-only launches. These are launches
that involve using purely email to communicate with your audience, and
these emails signify the open- and close-cart dates for your digital product.
You still need scarcity and urgency. You still need a fixed open- and close-
cart date and time. But email does the heavy lifting.
Some launches involve using a “vehicle” like a webinar, challenge,
workshop, or masterclass that helps to open cart to your offer.Regardless of whether you utilize an under-the-radar launch or a launch
vehicle, all launches need the three elements we discussed above
:
• Prelaunch Phase
• Sales Phase
• Urgency & ScarcityMost people find launches tiring.
I agree. Launches can be high-intensity periods and cause loads of
overwhelm.
As much as you may hate the emotional stress that comes with launching and
want nothing to do with that and as eager as you are to sell your offer
automatically to make some passive income, I can’t stress enough that you
need to live launch your offer first.
You want to have at least a 1–2% conversion rate comfortably before
switching it to evergreen.
Why?
Because live launches help to validate your offer.
What exactly is validation? Validation is proof that you know your offer
converts, that the webinar topic you’ve chosen taps into your audience’s pain
points, and that your emails are able to nudge your audience and convert to
sales.
Can’t you validate these through an evergreen sequence or evergreen
webinar?
You can. But it’s a lot easier to do it during a live launch.
Once you know you have a set of elements that work, you won’t be going in
blind with your evergreen funnel, which we’ll talk about in the next chapter.
FAQ 6
: If video scares you, does it mean you won’t be able to launch any
product successfully?
No, you’re not doomed just because you don’t use video. Video scared me
for the longest of times too. But under-the-radar (or email-only) launches
work equally as well!CHAPTER 9
SECRETS TO SCALING YOUR OFFER
How do you get consistent eyeballs on your offers?
Maybe you launched it to your email list and got ten sales that first week.
You emailed them again the week after and the numbers dwindled.
You’re getting anxious because you can’t seem to hold your audience’s
interest in your offer anymore. Sales drop to single digits and then ultimately
go to zero. You feel like the snake oil salesperson repeating your offer to
your email list week after week after week.
Is there an alternative?
Yes, there is
!
You let evergreen funnels do the job for you.
A funnel is the journey a subscriber takes toward the end goal you’ve set. It’s
a strategic, well-thought-out plan that inches the subscriber toward the
products and services you offer. You can have an automated webinar funnel
that pitches your course. You can also have an evergreen funnel that pitches
your e-book or a five-part video series funnel that pitches your membership
site.
Here’s an example of how an evergreen funnel could look.So even if a brand-new subscriber who’s potentially interested in your offer
only joins your email list after your live launch, he/she doesn’t have to wait
another four months till you have another launch to see that offer
.
You can still get eyeballs on your offer via your evergreen funnels.
When you have evergreen funnels—especially for your bigger offers—your
income doesn’t swing drastically from one month to the next.
Now, revenue fluctuations are normal in any business.
But what you 
DON'T
 want are huge swings that are often represented by
extreme peaks and troughs.
This usually happens when you have a launch or promotion one month and
don’t the next.
What you want is a system that will allow you to have a predictable source of
income rather than be at the mercy of a launch.
This is so that you can
• Keep getting sales from month to month.
• Get incoming payments from people who purchase via your payment plans
.
• Cater to people who are early adopters and readily buy via your evergreen
funnels rather than make them wait for your next live launch.
“Evergreening” your offer is the best way to keep the sales momentum going
postlaunch.
But when should you 
wait
 to go evergreen?• When you haven’t validated an offer as yet. Always live launch it first as I
mentioned in the earlier chapter.
• When it doesn’t deliver the same results or impact as it does live.
You can’t go evergreen on an offer that’s positioned as a high-level
mastermind, coaching program, or live workshop. Your audience will not
buy into the offer because the hands-on live nature of the offer is lost in an
evergreen funnel.
Here are the aspects behind an evergreen funnel strategy:
1. A hypertargeted lead magnet that keeps the freebie hoarders away and
attracts only people 
who resonate with the pain point of your offer. This
does not necessarily have to be your webinar or masterclass.
2. A sequence of emails that
a. doesn’t give away the farm,
b. is salesy or self-serving, and
c. doesn't have you afraid to ask for the sale.
3. An element of urgency
Always have urgency, even in your evergreen funnels. This could be
disappearing bonuses, price increases, close-cart time urgency, or even a
mixture of two or more of these elements.
4. A tool that helps you set an evergreen timer.
5. Video recording (for webinar funnels).
The average conversion rate is 1–2 %, and your evergreen funnels can have
these very same conversion rates. This means that you can expect to 
sell 1–2
copies for every 100–120 people who go through your funnel.
The more people you get into you funnel, the more you can expect to sell,
especially if you have a funnel that is validated.
FAQ 7
: Do you need webinars for all your funnels?Does a simple $17 or $39 e-book need to have a webinar in your funnel?
Not necessarily.
Webinar funnels do work well, but you don’t always need them. Email
funnels are absolutely viable as a standalone.
So it’s not about doing something because everyone is doing it. It’s about
whether it serves the goal of your funnel. 
And you can have various combinations of funnels with varied traffic sources
and different opt-ins as well as different end goals
.
You can have one funnel pitching a small $39 e-book and another pitching a
$397 product.
But the simplest funnels are all you need to start bringing in revenue.
If you do intend to create an evergreen webinar, don’t create one that leaves
your audience cringing, squirming, and gagging. You don’t need to (you
shouldn’t) fake the live element because it isn’t live. Your audience is OK
with it not being live.
The real secret to creating an evergreen funnel that generates sales doesn’t
rest on expensive technology or faking elements of a live launch.CHAPTER 10
TOOLS
How exactly do you go about selling your digital products?
For many people, this is the first thing they consider. But I’ve intentionally
placed this chapter toward the end of the book because this isn’t the most
important aspect.
Figuring out your strategy should be the most important consideration before
you even think about tools. Because what happens—and I’ve seen this
happen far too many times—is that you can end up going down a rabbit hole
of considering tool after tool after tool and losing sight of the bigger picture.
To avoid confusion (if tools get discontinued or drop in standard), I will
avoid mentioning specific names of tools in this chapter. To know the exact
rolodex of tools I use, you can check out my bonus tool kit here >
https://meera.tips/intangible
.
I always suggest looking at three things before picking any tool:
1. Price point
2. Whether it can grow with your business without you needing to upgrade or
switch to another one midway
3. How easy it is to use considering your comfort level with tech
Here are the main tools you need in your tool kit to start selling digital
products:
1. Any landing page tool that has templates or the ability to create sales pages
Note:
 Many email service providers come with landing page functionalities,
but these templates are often only for lead generation, and they can’t be
customized for sales pages unless you’re familiar with coding
.2. A shopping cart to collect payments
3. A platform to host your content securely
4. A countdown timer to create real urgency/scarcity
5. An email service provider to automate your email follow-up and sales
sequences
The easy “all-in-one” option
There are all-in-one tools that will host your content, provide a payment
gateway, collect payments, and also host sales pages.
Depending on the plan you choose, most all-in-one platforms charge a
monthly fee and may also take a percentage of each sale.
Other options provide only a checkout or shopping cart to collect payments,
but you still need to figure out how to host your content. For simple
downloads, Dropbox, Google Drive, or any secure cloud storage option is
also feasible. But if you plan on offering videos and multiple pieces of
content 
within your product, it’s best hosted on a content or course platform
for your students’ ease of use.
FAQ 8
: Should you sell on an external marketplace like Amazon, Udemy, or
Coursera vs. on your own site?
This very much depends on the goals you have for that offer. Many of these
marketplaces have their own rules. For your offer to be favorable in the eyes
of these marketplaces, you need to follow their system of writing descriptions
or keywords or structuring your offer. Selling on your own site gives you
more flexibility but may not get you as much reach as external platforms.
Pricing is an issue as well. A $2.99 book is common on Amazon and isn’t
seen as low quality. But the same e-book priced at $2.99 on your site might
be seen as low quality. Likewise, certain topics don’t do as well on certain
platforms and might do better on your site.
I could have sold my books 
The
 
One Hour Content Plan
 or 
The ProfitableContent System
 as courses 
but chose to sell them as e-books on Amazon
instead after weighing the pros and cons as well as my intent for both offers.
So consider your intent for your offer as well as the pros and cons of selling
on an external marketplace vs. on your own site.SECTION III
BUILDING YOUR DIGITAL PRODUCT
BUSINESS – HOW TO 10×
PRODUCTIVITY & PROFITS
Let’s take a step back and review everything we’ve covered.
You discovered how you can use the product ecosystem to plan out the
digital products that you can create. You also learned how pain points your
audience have at each stage of the customer journey can fuel your digital
product brainstorming.
You then went through various core components that you need to consider
while
 creating your digital product that contribute to the success of your
offer. One of those components is understanding that packaging and
marketing your product should 
be as important, if not more important, than
creating your product.
All of these elements form your meat. These ensure that you have an
organized system of creating digital products so that they’re not haphazardly
put together.
Think of this final section as the gravy that supports the meat dish and gives
it character.
In this final section, I’ll walk you through how it comes together in a digital
product campaign. Everything we have discussed up to this point in the book
are elements that will feed that product campaign.
I’ll also introduce you to seven potent principles I hold on dearly to. These
principles will help you create an audience that will keep coming back for
more.CHAPTER 11
YOUR FIRST OR NEXT DIGITAL
PRODUCT CAMPAIGN
Say you decide to create a digital product today.
What happens first? What happens next?
Let’s walk through the twelve steps that will take you from idea to launch.
Pay close attention to Step 6 so you set your expectations right!
STEP 1 — DETERMINE THE PRODUCT’S PLACE IN THE
PRODUCT ECOSYSTEM
STEP 2 — DEFINE YOUR OFFER & VALIDATE
Think about what they will walk away with after consuming your product orservice?
What goals or benefits will they achieve or attain?
How is this offer different from other offers out there?
Look at the market.
A market consists of a group of products with similar characteristics. Scan
the market for the existence of other similar offers.
STEP 3 — DETERMINE YOUR PRODUCT PARAMETERS
Outline your product based on the goals and benefits defined in Step 2.
What does your content need to cover so that the buyer gets the promised
outcome/result
?
What format will you be offering this in?
What bonuses and supplementary content will you be providing?
STEP 4 — BRAND YOUR PRODUCT
STEP 5 — OUTLINE YOUR SALES PAGE
Long form or short form, every single section on the sales page has to
convince the ideal buyer that your offer is for them.
STEP 6 — DETERMINE THE REVENUE GOAL AND SIZE OF
YOUR LAUNCH LIST
Often I would hear clients and students say that their launch was a flop
because they only sold X number of pieces but were intending to sell Y.
Before you determine that your launch is a flop, you need to determine the
possibility of those numbers.
I came across a quote in a book: As motivated as the cyclist is to reach 100km/h, a cycle isn’t 
designed to reach those numbers. Motivation is but one
tiny part of the puzzle.
You can be very motivated, but if your campaign isn’t designed to hit those
numbers, no amount of motivation or drive or planning will get you there.
You need to reverse engineer your revenue goal to see if it’s possible in the
first place.
How do you determine a revenue goal for a campaign?
You don’t just pluck this number from thin air. You can do this in the
following ways:
1. Based on past data
If you know from past experience that you can make $5K on this campaign,
that gives you a good gauge of what to expect.
2. Based on the size of your email list and estimated conversation rate
With an email list of one thousand at a 2% conversion rate, you can expect to
make twenty sales.
3. Based on your income goals for that campaig
n
I need Y number of people in my launch list so that at an estimated 2%
conversion rate, I will meet my sales target of ____.
A launch list or interest list is a group of people you have identified as being
interested in your offer. This could be a specific segment of your email list.
Or if you’re going to have a launch vehicle for your campaign, this will be
the number of people who sign up for your launch vehicle.
Take into consideration the following:
• Revenue goal
• Program price• Units to sell
• Conversion rate (1%–2%)
• Number of leads needed (your launch list or interest list)
Revenue goal: $5,000
Program price: $200
Units to sell: 2
5
Conversion rate: 2%
25/0.02 = 1,250 leads or subscribers
You need at least 1,250 people on your launch list to comfortably hit your
revenue goal.
If you want to include ads into the picture, here’s how it’ll work out:
Average cost per lead estimated at $2–$6
Organic leads: 500
Ad leads: 750
Budget: $1,500–$4,500
Profit: $500–$3,500
New leads: 750
STEP 7 — DECIDE/OUTLINE YOUR PRELAUNCH & LAUNCH
CONTENT
What launch vehicles (if any) will drive your campaign?
• Webinar
s
• Challenges
• Workshops
• Video series
• Email-only campaign
What type of prelaunch content will “speak” to your ideal customer?
Remember to address the following questions to support your offer’s
prelaunch phase:• Does your audience even know that this is a problem that needs to be
solved?
• How can they solve these pain points or problems?
• Do they know how things could change by solving that pain point?
Remember to address the following questions to support your sales phase
content (after cart open):
• Do they know what solutions are out there and how yours is different
?
• Have you removed objections they have against your product?
• Have you answered questions they have about your offer?
What urgency factors will you use?
• Additional incentives
• Access
• Time
STEP 8 — DECIDE HOW YOU WILL MARKET YOUR CAMPAIGN
How you market your campaign will be based on the type of launch you
planned for.
Are you doing an under-the-radar email-only launch or will you be using
launch vehicles?
You need to get people on your email list to run a successful campaign. How
are you going to attract and capture those people?
You can take a four-prong approach to marketing any campaign
:
• Your existing email list
• Organic marketing on traffic platforms
• Paid ads
• Influencer sharing
If you already have an email list, you could get people to sign up for yourlaunch vehicle or market your offer to them. At the same time, you also want
to attract new subscribers. This is where you want to promote your campaign
or the specific launch vehicle on the traffic platforms you use such as
Pinterest, LinkedIn, or YouTube.
STEP 9 — CREATE YOUR PRODUCT
STEP 10 — CREATE PRELAUNCH AND SALES CONTENT
STEP 11 — EXECUTE YOUR PRELAUNCH PHASE, CART OPEN &
SALES PHASE
STEP 12 — POSTLAUNCH
How much revenue did your campaign earn?
Did you meet your sales target
?
How did it compare to previous campaigns you ran?
If you didn’t meet your revenue target, try to pinpoint why this was so.
Is it because you didn’t have enough people going through your campaign to
meet the goal?
Or is it because your sales page didn’t convert, although you had a healthy
click-through rate?
Determine which content pieces and emails performed the best. Identify
which content pieces didn’t hit the mark as well.
The following will give you clues:
• High impressions, but low conversions
• High open rate, but low click-through rate
I recently had a subscriber write in to say that her launch was a flop because
she had only sold three of her $500 course.Was it really a failure
?
What do the numbers 
actually
 say?
Has she reached the right conclusion?
Sure, on the surface three is a small number. But how many people actually
clicked through to her sales page?
I bet if she looked at the right numbers, she would see that she probably
exceeded the typical 1–2% conversion rate we can expect from launches.
You don’t want to be blindsided by emotion. You could focus your time and
energy on how you can bring in more revenue rather than fixing something
that wasn’t broken in the first place.
So always go back to 
what do the numbers say?
FAQ 9:
 Something converted well before but doesn’t now. What do you do?
Consider the following factors:
• Is it the timing?
Is the timing right for your audience
?
Have you launched your product during summer or elections or any
important holiday?
You don’t have to avoid holidays or events when launching your product, but
keep in mind that your audience may not be able to focus on your launch
because of external factors.
• Has the conversation in the space shifted?
What resonated with your audience before may not do so now. If the
conversation in the space has shifted to other focus areas within your niche,
your content has to reflect that shift as well. It’s very important to know that
your message is resonating with your market. You want to make sure you andyour audience are on the same wavelength and that your message is striking a
chord.
 Have a guarantee or return policy for your product
There are people who will buy a product just to ask for a refund.
I’ve had a person ask for a refund two minutes after their order came
through citing the product lacked everything that it actually already
includes.
Having a guarantee shows people that you’re confident about your
work. It takes away that pressure of having all their hesitations solved
before getting the program. It provides a safety net for them to fall back
on especially if they are new to your brand.
Yes, there are a couple of people who do take advantage of the system.
They may call in your charge as fraudulently entered.
Is it painful? Sure, it is.
But realize that this is the reality. It’s not just you. Everyone in the
online space goes through this.
Be prepared for it and don’t let it ruin your day.
Does it have to be a 30-, 60-, or 90-day guarantee? No, it doesn’t.
You know your program best. If a shorter guarantee period makes sense
for your program because of the way it’s structured, go ahead and do
that.CHAPTER 12
SYSTEMS TO RUN IT LIKE A WELL-
OILED MACHINE
Systems are processes that you can set up once and then automate.
In this chapter, we’ll take a look at a few different systems you can set up
including your payment processor, offer hosting platform, and email service
provider.
EMAIL AUTOMATIONS
There are several features within email service providers that allow you to set
up different systems with varying benefits for your digital product business.
But a quick warning that this very much depends on the capabilities of your
email service provider. 
I’ve also used terms such as 
tag
, 
link trigger
, and
segment
, but these same features could go by a different term within your
email service provider. Let’s take a look at some situations where automation
and systems can play a key role in boosting your sales.
ONBOARDING SEQUENCE/POSTPURCHASE EMAIL
This is a touch point that many people miss out on. You don’t want to leave
your new customers in limbo after they purchase.
What should people do first or next? Even with a solid system in place people
can get overwhelmed and confused. It’s your job to help them get unstuck.
You want them to continue to feel confident in the choice they made.
If it’s a higher-priced offer that they’ve just purchased, you can also consider
scheduling a postsale or onboarding sequence.The goal of a postsale sequence is to guide your buyer through using your
product as well as negate buyer’s remorse
.
Some ideas for postsale sequences:
• A guided sequence through each of the modules or chapters, even if the
product is not dripped out
• A solid welcome email that highlights the transformation they can expect
to make in the next few days or weeks
• An email that allays their fears about falling behind or losing access, etc.
• An email with any surprise bonuses for those who finish or an unexpected
bonus
A SUBSCRIBER CHECKED OUT YOUR SALES PAGE
Identify anyone who’s clicked on your sales page link in your email with a
tag called “Prospect.” You can then send them tailored email content where
you call out that you’re aware they’ve seen the sales page and invite them to
ask further questions about your offer.
Clicked Sales Page > Tag subscriber as “Prospect” > Subscribe to Cart
Abandon Email Sequenc
e
YOUR SUBSCRIBER JUST PURCHASED YOUR PRODUCT
When someone purchases your product, tag them as “Purchased Product X”
and then send out an automatic welcome email sequence for that product or
connect them to a new email sequence that handholds them through your
course or product.
You can also exclude subscribers who have this tag from receiving any
further sales emails about this product.
Purchase product > Tag subscriber as “Purchased Product X” > Subscribe to
Thank you for purchasing email
Purchase product > Tag subscriber as “Purchased Product X” > Subscribe to
Onboarding SequenceA SUBSCRIBER HAS FINISHED GOING THROUGH YOUR
COURSE OR PRODUCT
Set up an automated email that goes out a set period of time (e.g., thirty days)
after someone purchases your product or completes your welcome 
sequence
and asks them for a testimonial. This way you’ll get your much-needed social
proof and do it on auto. You will wake up each morning to testimonials in
your inbox rather than have to actively look for them or remember to get in
touch with subscribers, customers, or clients.
Purchase product > Tag subscriber as “Purchased Product X” > Subscribe to
Onboarding Sequence > Completed Onboarding Sequence > Subscribe to
Testimonial Sequence
ACTION
What systems can you implement? If you already have digital products, what
ideas come to mind that you can implement?CHAPTER 13
PRINCIPLES OF EXTRAORDINARY
DIGITAL PRODUCT CREATORS
Having digital products in various formats and being the primary component
of my business model, there are some simple but profound truths that I rely
on to this day.
Call these my 
mantra
 if you will.
PRINCIPLE #1: CHOOSE STRATEGY OVER TACTICS
Tactics can change. But strategy rarely does.
Strategy is the plan—the map or the route to your destination. 
Without this plan or map, you won’t be able to figure out the tools or tactics
you need to bring along for your journey.
 
If you find yourself spending too much time mulling over what course
platform to choose or what design to use for your worksheets, you’re
focusing your energy in the wrong place.
You cannot use tactics unless you have a well-thought-out strategy. Strategy
should guide everything you do as a creator.
PRINCIPLE #2: DON’T GET SWAYED BY BIG NUMBERS
What’s the actual profit from a six- or seven-figure launch?
The numbers tell a one-sided story. 
Even if you do hit six or seven figures, are you keeping the money that
you’re generating? What many entrepreneurs don’t share is that they could bepaying the bulk of their revenue to copywriters, Facebook ads, and other
tools.
If you make $100K for a launch with overheads of 85% from hiring
copyrighters and ad managers or running the ads yourself, you take home
$15K
.
If you make $20K for a launch with overheads of 25%, you take home $15K
—the very same amount.
In both cases, the take-home profit is the same, but the effort is different.
Always weigh the effort vs. the impact vs. the profit. 
Is it worth it?
PRINCIPLE #3: COMPARE APPLES TO APPLES
It’s easy to look at someone else's numbers and be blown away.
But look at the numbers that matter and then compare them with yours. Yes,
you’re operating on a smaller scale, but are you getting the same (or better)
results than they are?
Look at the right numbers…
Look at their expenditure (ad spend, consultants, designers) for that launch.
Look at their conversion rate for the size of their launch list. Look at the
defaults and refunds. Note: You might not have 
access to your competitor’s
data unless they share income/expenditure/review reports and updates.
These are the numbers that give the correct picture.
How do your launches fare when compared to these?
Compare apples to apples. You can’t compare a 50,000 launch list to a
10,000 one. It’s about the ratios and percentages. Those don’t lie.
So when you're demotivated thinking about your numbers, pause and digdeep. Your reality might actually be better than you thought it was.
PRINCIPLE #4: WORK ON BEING TOP OF MIND
—
ALWAYS
I’ll be ready the next time. Please send me the launch emails when it’s out.
Keep selling this to me.
I’m not ready now. But I will be one day
.
These are some of the emails I’ve received from subscribers when I’ve
launched a digital product. And you honor that. You keep enriching them
with content. You sell to them because they gave you permission to do so.
I’m not talking about icky, sleazy hard selling.
But how do you be top of mind?
Through email and content.
Quit thinking of email as a magic bullet.
I’m a huge fan of email marketing. Yet, I don’t think it’s a magic bullet. You
can’t show up one fine day, write an email, and expect to rake in sales.
Maybe this was possible years ago, but not now. Likewise, you can’t depend
on magic launch formulas to mysteriously bring in thousands of dollars in
sales. They only work if you’ve been working at being top of mind.
But what if people don’t buy during a launch?
A launch, when done right, enriches your audience and educates and
empowers them even 
if they don’t buy from you. Even if your audience
doesn’t buy from you right away, you’re still serving them with content that
builds your authority and gets them to associate you as someone they can
trust with the topic of your offer. And who knows? They may become a
customer and brand advocate down the road!
You continue to show that you are there, even if they’re not ready to buy yet.
According to Brian Carroll, author of 
Lead Generation for the ComplexSale,
14
 almost 95% of your audience or subscribers are not ready to buy. But
70% of them will 
eventually
 buy from you or your competitors.
This is where content comes into play.
You score with your content marketing if that 70% think of you and come to
you when they’re ready. It’s beyond the scope of this book to cover content
in detail, but if you want to put in place a content marketing strategy that
aligns with your business, have a look at 
The Profitable Content System
.
PRINCIPLE #5: NEVER BE AFRAID TO MENTION YOUR OFFER
EARLY
If you’re running a five-day campaign for your digital product launch, your
launch list should hear about the offer at least 2–3 days before you open cart
to the offer.
You want to get them familiar with your offer. You want to build desire for
your offer before the cart even opens.
And that can’t happen if you don’t talk about and keep it top secret before
cart-open date. Anticipation and curiosity are good. But waiting too late to
introduce your offer can do more damage than good.
Everything I’ve walked you through in this book will help you build a strong
foundation to market your product. If marketing does its job, the selling or
launch process won’t feel salesy because you won’t have to convince your
audience of the pain point, the problem, your method, or your authority.
PRINCIPLE #6: DO THINGS THAT DON’T SCAL
E
You’re always told to outsource things that don’t scale.
But you need to remember that you build your brand one person and one
interaction at a time. In the early days, everything moves terribly slowly, and
it may feel like you’re not making progress at all. Subscribers trickle in
slowly. You’ll get one subscriber a day, or maybe two subscribers. It doesn’t
seem like much, but every single one of them signed up to hear more fromyou.
With the right mentality, you can nurture them to become customers. So
build relationships. Focus on the long term—on the things that won't impact
your bottom line immediately (e.g., strategy, systems). Focus even on the
things that don't scale and that people tell you to outsource like engaging with
your audience. 
These will set you up for
 BIG
 success in the coming months (and years).
Focusing on long-term, "slow and boring" growth is the fastest way to scale.
 
PRINCIPLE #7: SOLVE THE RIGHT PROBLEM
I’ve worked with lots of clients, and the three main problems I see are with
• Business model
• Audience
• Sales
Let’s tackle your business model.
Your business model is how you make money. This usually involves you
spending time to create and deliver programs. You need to expend effort to
research and package up your offers, and you need to spend money on
systems or tools that will allow you to be in business. These include your
course hosting platforms or payment processors, scheduling software, etc.
Problems occur when you choose your business model based on what you
could/should /would do. This is often based on seeing what others are doing
or on trends or on what’s “in.” When your business model is not in alignment
with your strengths 
and your stage of growth, you will expend more time,
energy, and effort than it should take. It can become almost torturous
working on your business because three steps forward will take you two steps
back.
Let’s tackle your audience.When it comes to audience, you expend time and effort in finding and
converting readers into subscribers. You have to build trust and nurture your
audience. You have to build content-expert association (so that you avoid
having a sales problem!).
Problems here are two-fold. Either (a) you don’t have systems in place to
nurture your audience, or (b) the brand and audience you’re trying to attract
are completely different.
Let’s tackle sales.
You have to master the sales process. You have to put in time and energy to
figure out which launch vehicles and messaging your audience responds to
best
.
The problem with sales is that it might not even be a sales problem in the first
place. You can throw more resources into solving what you think is a sales
problem, only to find out it is in reality an audience problem!
So don’t throw your resources at solving the wrong problems. You can’t
jump through a stage in business. Yes, you can do it faster, but you can’t
ignore the foundation.CONCLUSION
You now have more than a bare-bones framework to put in place a digital
product strategy for your business.
Remember that is all about the long game.
You aren’t running a sprint; you are focused on the marathon! You are
focused on improving and celebrating small wins 
DAILY
.
You don’t reach your goal in one jump; it takes every little step to help you
get there.
Whether it’s ads, tools, or live events, I’ve seen a lot of my subscribers bite
off more than they can chew when they are creating and launching their
digital products. They add too many variables into the picture when they
haven’t validated any one of them as yet
.
They think more work would, and should, equate to more cash flow and
higher revenue streams. This leads to more confusion and overwhelm.
Many of them don’t end up launching their product at all. I’m a huge fan of
under-the-radar launches because they allow you to test a bare-bones
framework. Once that works, then add one element after another into the
equation.
With every stage that I’ve crossed, I’ve found you do need a different set of
skills, but that’s the easy part. 
The mindset is what will trip you hard.
Just because you fail once, doesn’t mean your product sucks. It doesn’t mean
your content’s bad either.
Putting a digital product out there is a process. It takes several iterations to
get it right (as does your mindset).
This is NORMAL.And if you’ve spent thousands on coaching and classes and still feel like
you’re getting nowhere, 
I can assure you that it has nothing to do with you
not having the necessary marketing or business skills.
It has
 everything
 to do with your mindset.
If you’re desperate for the sale, that desperation sneaks into your copy.
If you think people shouldn’t be paying $X for a digital product, that doubt is
going to hinder you from having someone pay YOU that $X.
If you think you’re greedy to charge $Y for your course, you’re likely self-
sabotaging yourself with that very sale.
If you don’t think you could ever sell digital products or sell online, you’re
probably not going to be able to do so.
Achieving growth and success isn’t a linear upwards curve. It’s gradual.
On several days you may feel like you’re not making any progress. Like
you’re not moving the needle at all
.
Everything you’re doing is just “building on the foundation.”
But you may not realize that your daily actions build, grow, and stack.
There is a breaking point where the compound interest you’ve been
accumulating via your incremental, consistent actions starts to pay off.
I don’t know where you are in your online business journey.
Maybe you’re just getting started. Or perhaps you’re in the beginning stages
and thinking about your first digital product. Or maybe you already have
digital products, but they haven’t done much for your business…
Trust in the process. Do the work, and watch the profound effect it has on
your business.
That’s the secret to how businesses “magically” take off
.I want you to feel like you can do this, and I hope the next few months hold a
digital product launch for you.
Before you go, remember to download your bonuses at
https://meera.tips/intangible
.
Good luck and thank you for sharing your work with the world!THANK YOU FOR READIN
G
I hope you enjoyed reading this book.
I really appreciate your feedback, and I love hearing what you have to say.
Could you leave me a review on Amazon letting me know what you thought
of the book?
Thank you so much! If you want to get in touch, come find me here at my
slice of the internet: 
https://www.meerakothand.com
.
Meera
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Meera is an email marketing strategist and 3× Amazon best-selling author of
the books 
The One Hour Content Plan
, 
But I’m Not an Expert!
 &
 Your First
100
. She is also the publisher of MeeraKothand.Com, an award-winning site
listed as one of the 100 Best Sites for Solopreneurs in 2017, 2018, and 2020
and the popular CREATE Planners. Using her unique Profitable Email
System™ and ADDICTED™ Business Framework, she makes powerful
marketing strategies simple and relatable so that small business owners can
build a tribe that’s addicted to their zone of genius
.
Other Books on Amazon
RESOURCES
1.
 Bobby Chernev, “27 Astonishing E-learning Statistics for 2020,” TechJury, updated June 30, 2020,
https://techjury.net/blog/elearning-statistics/#gref
.
2.
 “Watch Out for These 3 Trends Disrupting Marketing! (+ How to Fail Proof Your Business),” 
Meera
Kothand
, 
https://www.meerakothand.com/top-digital-marketing-trends/
.
3.
 Meera Kothand, 
The One Hour Content Plan: The Solopreneur’s Guide to a Year’s Worth of Blog
Post Ideas in 60 Minutes and Creating Content That Hooks and Sells
 (self-pub., CreateSpace, 2017),
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B074T5ZHP7/
.
4.
 Meera Kothand, 
The Profitable Content System: The Entrepreneur's Guide to Creating Wildly
Profitable Content without Burnout
 (self-pub., 2019), 
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07Y3SVRF2/
.
5.
 Meera Kothand, 
The Blog Startup: Proven Strategies to Launch Smart and Exponentially Grow Your
Audience, Brand, and Income without Losing Your Sanity or Crying Bucketloads of Tears
 (self-pub.,
2020), 
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B083ZP3PKF
.
6.
 “You Don’t Need to Create a Course. Here Are 10 Other Digital Products That Make Bank,” 
Meera
Kothand
, 
https://www.meerakothand.com/digital-product-ideas/
.
7.
 Meera Kothand, “7 Step Online Course Creation Secret,” Meera Kothand, November 25, 2020,
YouTube video, 14:36, 
https://youtu.be/_pbZm_Rxi8Y
.
8.
 Eugene M. Schwartz, 
Breakthrough Advertising
 (Titans Marketing),
https://breakthroughadvertisingbook.com
.
9.
 Meera Kothand, “How to Create & Launch an Online Course That Sells (EVERY.SINGLE.
TIME),”
Meera Kothand, November 23, 2020, YouTube video, 14:47, 
https://youtu.be/WYBuDkH_r98
.
10.
 Robert French, "If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck... The Turing Test, Intelligence and
Consciousness,” ResearchGate, January 2009,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228825529_If_it_walks_like_a
_duck_and_quacks_like_a_duck_The_Turing_
Test_Intelligence_and_Consciousness
.
11.
 “How to Survive Your First Opt-in Freebie & Be Successful At It” 
Meera Kothand,
https://www.meerakothand.com/what-opt-in-freebie-to-create/
.
12.
 “How To Write Your First Email Sequence,” 
Meera Kothand
,
https://www.meerakothand.com/how-to-write-email-sequence/
.
13.
 Meera Kothand, 
300 Email Marketing Tips: Critical Advice and Strategy to Turn Subscribers into
Buyers & Grow a Six-Figure 
Business with Email
 (self-pub., 2019),
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07RXL7NQC
.
14.
 Brian Carroll, 
Lead Generation for the Complex Sale
 (New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2006),
https://www.amazon.com/Lead-Generation-Complex-Sale-Quantity/dp/0071458972
.