SEO 2024
Learn Search Engine Optimization
With Smart Internet Marketing Strategies
Expanded & Updated – 2024 Edition
Adam ClarkeSimple Effectiveness Publishing, Publisher.
Cover Design: Simple Effectiveness Publishing.
Production and Composition: Simple Effectiveness Publishing.
SEO 2024: Learn search engine optimization with smart internet marketing strategies. Copyright ©
Adam Clarke. All rights reserved.
This title, its contents, cover design, likeness, and associated marketing materials are the intellectual
property of its copyright holders; the author, and the publishing company. Copyright infringement,
reproductions, or translations of any part of this work without the permission of the copyright owner is
unlawful, per Sections 107 and 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act.
Adam Clarke completed a Digital Marketing certificate from Google’s Digital Garage accredited by the
Interactive Advertising Bureau Europe and The Open University and is a member of the Digital
Analytics Association.
SEO 2024: Learn search engine optimization with smart internet marketing strategies.
Adam Clarke
Kindle ASIN B00NH0XZR0Table of contents.
Table of contents.
Introduction to the updated edition.
Chapter 1: Introduction to how Google works.
Old-school methods no longer work.
Google updates and how to survive them.
Authority, expertise, trust, relevance & user experience. Five powerful SEO strategies explained.
How Google ranks sites right now—Google’s newest top 10 ranking factors revealed.
Google's Mobile-First Index.
Google’s use of machine learning technology to power the search results.
Google understands how humans speak.
Google speaks like a human.
How to stay ahead of Google’s updates.
Chapter 2: Keyword research. The most important step of SEO.
Why is keyword research so important?
What exactly is a keyword?
Mastering keyword intent.
Semantic keywords, entities, and ontologies: speaking Google's language.
How to generate a massive list of keywords.
How to find keywords that will send traffic to your site.
How to find keywords for easy rankings.
Chapter 3: On-page SEO. How to let Google know what your page is about.
How to structure your site for easy and automatic SEO.
How to get more people clicking on your rankings in Google.
Load speed—Google magic dust.
The usual suspects—sitemaps.xml and robots.txt.
Duplicate content—canonical tags and other fun.
Usability—the new SEO explained.
Mobile support—important SEO explained in simple language.
Google's Search Quality Guideline
s—
and how to use them to your advantage.
Readabilit
y—
SEO for the future.
How to accelerate traffic and rankings with content marketing.
HTTPS & SSL certificates.
User Behavior Optimization—how to use Google’s machine learning technology to your advantage.
Google's Core Web Vitals.
Voice search optimization: your how-to guide for voice search results.
Chapter 4: Link building. How to rank extremely high on Google.
Why is link-building so important?The dirty little secret no one wants to tell you about link building.
How to acquire links and what to avoid in link building.
Anchor text. What's all the fuss?
Simple to advanced link-building strategies.
Harnessing the power of digital PR for SEO.
Link outreach—scaling up high-quality link-building campaigns.
How to get links from major news outlets for free.
Additional link-building opportunities.
Chapter 5: Social media & SEO.
Is social media important for SEO?
Twitter & SEO: harnessing the tweet for search domination.
Facebook & SEO.
Other social networks.
Social media analytics.
Chapter 6: Web analytics in a nutshell. How to measure your success.
Tracking your search rankings.
Why use Google Analytics?
How to use Google Analytics.
Acquisition.
Organic Search.
Segments.
Common web analytics terms explained.
Leveraging AI and machine learning for powerful insights.
Navigating web analytics in the era of user privacy.
Other web analytics tools.
Chapter 7: Troubleshooting common SEO problems & how to fix them.
What to do when your site is not listed in Google at all.
What to do when your business is not ranking for your own business name.
What to do when your rankings have dropped off.
How to seek professional help for free.
Chapter 8: Local SEO. SEO for local businesses.
Why use local SEO?
How to rank high with local SEO.
Getting started with local SEO.
Building citations.
Encouraging reviews.
Supercharging local SEO with photos and videos.
Local SEO ranking checklist & essential resources.
Chapter 9: How to dominate search with rich results.
What are rich results?
Why you need to focus on rich results.
Why use structured data and JSON-LD?
How to get started with JSON-LD.
How to target featured result rankings in Google’s search results.How to target “People also ask” and question-based rich results.
Facebook Open Graph.
Chapter 10: Technical SEO. Turbocharge Your Performance.
Crawling, indexing, and accessibility.
Site structure and URL optimization.
SSL, meta tags, HTML optimization, and internal linking.
Content and quality control.
Mobile responsiveness and speed optimization.
Enhancing crawlability: sitemaps, robots, and errors.
Essential SEO tools for navigating technical audits.
Bonus chapter 1: Google's algorithm updates.
Google's Helpful Content Update (a.k.a. Google's secret new ranking factor).
Google's October 2022 Spam Update.
Google's February 2023 Product Reviews Update.
Google's Bard versus Chat GPT - the vicious battle of the AI chatbots.
Google’s Cookieless Tracking Update.
Google's August 2023 core update: Riding the SEO roller coaster.
Google's November 2023 Core Update: the curious case of the November core update
Google's 2024 bulk email sender guidelines: the new rules of email engagement.
Keeping up-to-date with Google's updates.
Google’s 2024 updates—what’s on the horizon?
Bonus chapter 2: The quick and dirty guide to pay-per-click advertising with Google Ads.
Why bother with pay-per-click advertising?
Which is the best PPC provider to start with?
Ensuring success with research and a plan.
How to choose the right kind of keywords.
Structuring your campaign with ad groups.
How to crush the competition with killer text ads.
How much to pay for keywords?
Google Ads settings for getting started.
Optimization tips for tweaking your campaign for better profit.
Further Google Ads resources.
Bonus: Free SEO for beginners video course.
Get the free SEO checklist, link-building resources, and more...
Final thoughts & tips.Free SEO for beginners video course, checklist and
resources at the end of this book.
The free SEO for beginners video course and SEO checklist are available for
readers at the end of this book.
I've also uploaded the following resources to my website (free for readers of
this book), including...
- SEO for beginners video course (worth $99).- SEO checklist (worth $99).
- SSL upgrade checklist to hand to your developer.
- Google review request card for local businesses.
- List of business directories for local businesses.
- Guest post opportunities for building links.
and much more!...
I recommend reading the book first, and accessing the resources when you
finish reading. Don’t forget to download your resources when you finish
reading the book.Introduction to the updated edition.
So, you've picked up SEO 2024 and decided to learn search engine
optimization. Congratulations! SEO marketing has changed my life and it
will change yours too.
Over 20 years ago, I achieved my first number-one ranking in Google for my
family's home business. The phone started ringing with new customers every
day and I was hooked.
Since then, I have used search engine optimization to grow hotel chains, large
international fashion brands, and small family-owned businesses. One thing
never ceases to amaze me—the power of SEO for growing any business. I
have grown small businesses into giant companies in just one or two years,
simply by working the site up to the top position in Google.
Unfortunately, learning SEO and Internet marketing is difficult for many
business owners, Internet marketers, and tech heads.
I have a theory on why this is so...
Sifting through the information flooding the Internet about SEO is
overwhelming. In many cases, advice online is outdated or misleading. And
the constant updates by Google make it hard for SEO beginners and gurus
alike to keep up with what works.
SEO can be simple and used by anyone to rank at the top of Google, grow
their business, and make money online. It's a matter of having up-to-date
information on how Google works, using effective techniques, and taking
action.
This book has been expanded and updated to cover how SEO works now and
likely in the future. All of the resources and tools have been updated and
made relevant for 2024. It includes broader coverage of the basics and is
filled with more techniques for advanced users. And due to requests by
readers, it has been loaded with more tools and resources to save time and getbigger results.
If you are a beginner, there is a small amount of technical information
included in this book. If you want to learn search engine optimization this
can't be avoided. We've made these areas as simple as possible, while
providing additional resources, including an SEO checklist, that will speed up
your journey to SEO mastery.
If you are an advanced SEO optimization professional, this SEO book covers
Google's latest updates, new SEO marketing best practices to refresh your
memory, solutions for common technical problems, and new tools and
resources to sharpen your skillset—all written in an easy-to-read format, so
refreshing your knowledge doesn't feel like a chore.
Whether you're a complete SEO beginner or a seasoned Internet marketing
veteran, SEO 2024 covers these areas and makes it as simple as possible to
achieve rankings, traffic, and sales.
Enjoy.Chapter 1: Introduction to how Google
works.
You can feel like a dog chasing its tail trying to figure out how Google
works.
There are thousands of bloggers and journalists spreading volumes of
information that simply isn't true. If you followed all the advice about SEO
written on blogs, it's unlikely you would receive top listings in Google, and
there’s a risk you could damage your site performance and find it difficult to
rank at all.
Let me tell you a secret about bloggers…
Articles about the latest SEO updates, techniques, or tips are often written by
interns, assistants, and ghostwriters. Their job is to write articles. The
majority of blog posts about SEO are rarely written by experts or
professionals with the day-to-day responsibility of growing site traffic and
achieving top rankings in search engines.
Can you learn from someone who doesn't know how to do it themselves?
You can't. This is why you have to take the advice spread by blog posts with
a grain of salt.
Don't get me wrong. I love bloggers. There are bloggers out there who
practice and blog about SEO and do it well. But it has become increasingly
difficult to sort the wheat from the chaff.
Fear not. This chapter will disperse common misconceptions about SEO,
show you how to avoid falling into Google's bad books and reveal how to
stay up to date with how Google ranks sites.
But first, to understand how Google works today, we must understand a little
bit about Google's history.Old-school methods no longer work.
In the early days of Google—around 25 years ago— Google started a smarter
search engine and a better experience for navigating the World Wide Web.
Google delivered on this promise by delivering relevant search results.
Internet users discovered they could simply type what they were looking for
into Google—and BINGO—users would find what they needed in the top
results, instead of having to dig through hundreds of pages. Google's user
base grew fast.
It didn't take long for smart and entrepreneurially minded webmasters to
catch on to sneaky little hacks for ranking high in Google.
Webmasters discovered by cramming many keywords into the page, they
could get their site to rank high for almost any word or phrase. It quickly
spiraled into a competition of who could jam the most keywords into the
page. The page with the most repeated keywords won and rose swiftly to the
top of the search results.
Naturally, more and more spammers caught on and Google's promise as the
“most relevant search engine” was challenged. Webmasters and spammers
became more sophisticated and found tricky ways of repeating hundreds of
keywords on the page and completely hiding them from human eyes.
All of a sudden, the unsuspecting Internet user looking for “holidays in
Florida”, would find themselves arriving at a website about Viagra, Viagra,
Viagra!
How could Google keep its status as the most relevant search engine, if
people kept on spamming the results with gazillions of spammy pages,burying relevant results to the bottom?
Enter the first Google update. Google released a widespread update in
November 2003, codenamed “Florida”, effectively stopping spammers in
their tracks. This update leveled the playing field by rendering keyword
stuffing useless and restoring balance to the force.
And so began the long history of Google updates—making it hard for
spammers to game the system, and making ranking in Google a little more
complicated.
Google updates and how to survive them.
Fast forward 25 years and ranking in Google has become 
extremely
competitive and complex.
Simply put, everybody wants to be in Google. Google is fighting to keep its
search engine relevant and must constantly evolve to stay on the cutting edge
and always deliver great search results to users.
And now, Google is progressively using AI to power the search results.
Google even has an AI-powered spider called SpamBrain dedicated to
finding spammy and insecure websites and filtering them out of the search
results.
And every couple of months, Google releases a game-changing update that
often has website owners scrambling to fix their websites overnight or face
the very real risk of completely disappearing.
If it sounds cutthroat, that's because it is. But you can absolutely survive and
thrive through Google's updates.
How to recover from these updates, and how to avoid being penalized by
updates, is covered in later chapters. But for now, I want you to focus on two
things...
1. If you want to stay at the top of Google, never rely on one tactic.
2. Always ensure your search engine strategies rely on best practices.Authority, expertise, trust, relevance & user
experience. Five powerful SEO strategies explained.
Google considerably evolved from its humble origins in 1998.
Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of Google, once reported Google considers
over 200 factors to determine which sites rank higher in the results.
Today, Google uses well over 200 factors. Google assesses how users are
behaving on your site, how many links are pointing to your site, how
trustworthy these linking sites are, how many social mentions your brand has,
how relevant your page is, how old your site is, how fast your site loads…
the list goes on.
Does this mean it's impossible or difficult to get top rankings in Google?
No. In fact, you have the advantage.
Google’s algorithm is complex, but you don’t have to be a rocket scientist to
understand how it works. It can be ridiculously simple if you remember just
five principles. With these five principles, you can determine why one site
ranks higher than another or discover what you have to do to push your site
higher than a competitor.
Some of these principles have been around for donkey’s years, and others
just added in the past year or so, but these five principles summarize what
Google is focusing on in the algorithm now, and are the most powerful
strategies SEO professionals currently use to rank high in search engines.
The five principles are Trust, Authority, Expertise, Relevance, and User
Experience.
1. Trust.
Trust is a common theme in Google's updates. Google wants to filter out low-
quality sites from the search results and have legitimate and trustworthy sites
showing up at the top. A site with well-researched, high-quality content, and
backlinks from reputable sources is considered trustworthy. And having
visible business details, contact information, and real personal profiles on
your site will increase its chances of ranking high.It also helps if you make your website secure, adhere to national laws and
regulations, and have easily accessible legal policies and customer service
pages.
2. Authority.
Authority isn't just about how many social media followers and backlinks
you have, but also the quality and relevance of these elements. A site that has
a lot of links from authoritative sources and a lot of content by industry
experts will have a higher chance of showing up high in the search results.
 
3. Expertise.
Expertise is about your qualifications or expertise in your topic. Are you
credentialed, experienced, and have hands-on knowledge of your topics? If
so, you should make it clear on your website and you will perform better in
the search results.
4. Relevance.
Google awards the relevance of websites. It's why niche sites or local
businesses often show up higher than generic giants like Wikipedia.
For example, if you're an expert on pet training, you are probably going to
find it difficult to show up for searches about travel deals or accounting. But
you'll find it easy to show up for searches about anything related to training
pets.
Adding relevant content and relevant links to your site is a powerful tactic for
achieving high rankings.
 
5. User Experience.
User experience isn't just about how users behave on your site. It includes
technical things like having good site speed and mobile support. If your site
offers a frictionless user experience, you're more likely to show up high in the
search results.
You can take advantage of this by improving your website’s user experience,
techniques we’ll cover later in this book. 
How Google ranks sites right now—Google’s
newest top 10 ranking factors revealed.
You may have wondered if you can find out the exact factors in Google’s
algorithm.
Fortunately, there are a handful of industry leaders who have figured it out
and regularly publish their findings on the Internet. With these publications,
you can get a working knowledge of the factors Google uses to rank sites.
These surveys are typically updated every couple of years, but the biggest
factors don’t often change, so you can use them to your advantage by
knowing which areas to focus on.
- The content on your site.
- The external links pointing to your website.
- The internal links in your website.
- The anchor text in your links.
- Having good Core Web Vitals.
- Having fresh content on your site.
- H1 tags - and the keywords in those tags.
- H2-H6 Tags - and the keywords in those tags.
- Having HTTPS on your website.
- Having a mobile-friendly site.
- Having good page speed.
- The relevance and distance of your business - if you are a local business.
If some of the terminology seems a bit technical, don't be alarmed. We'll
cover them later in this book.
Simply, if your competitors have more of the above factors than you, they
will rank higher in Google's search results. If you have more of these factors,
you will rank higher.
Combine this knowledge with an understanding of the Google updates
covered in later chapters, and you will know what it takes to achieve top
rankings.
The above ranking factors are from the following industry survey. If youwant a deeper look into recent studies, you can browse the full reports by
searching for "Google Ranking Factors" in Google. I also cover the newest
updates to Google’s algorithm in the Google Algorithm Updates chapter later
in this book.
The Google Algorithm Ranking Factors - Search Engine Journal
https://www.searchenginejournal.com/ranking-factors/
Google's Mobile-First Index.
Historically, Google primarily used the desktop version of a page's content
when calculating the search results. Since the majority of users now access
Google via a mobile device, Google primarily relies on the mobile version of
a page's content to calculate the results.
Want simple language? Google uses the mobile version of websites as the
first touchpoint in calculating the search results, for both desktop and mobile
devices.
It makes sense when you think about it. The vast majority of the Internet's
users are mobile users. To ensure smartphone addicts are delivered with
better results on the move, it makes sense for Google to make mobile the
highest priority in the algorithm, with desktops the second priority for Google
(and not the other way around).
If you haven't jumped on the mobile bandwagon by now—with mobile traffic
making up around 70%-80% of traffic for most websites—you're missing out
on traffic this very second and you may find it hard to appear in the search
results at all.
Fortunately, there's an elegant solution discussed in the mobile SEO section
in the on-page SEO chapter, but I'll let Google spokesperson Gary Illyes take
the reins, with a direct quote from a discussion about this technology...
"If you have a responsive site, then you're pretty much good to go. Why?
Because the content on your desktop site will be pretty much the same as on
your responsive site. The structured data on your desktop site will be the
same.”
In other words, if your site is responsive and supports mobile users, you canlie back and enjoy a Piña Colada, knowing your desktop-only competitors
will find it difficult to get a leg up in the search results, while you bask in the
glory of a mobile-first paradise.
Google’s use of machine learning technology to
power the search results.
When Google announced its machine-learning technology titled RankBrain,
RankBrain had been influencing search results secretly for several months.
Does this mean super-intelligent robots created by the genius minds at
Google are slowly taking over our search results?... Yes, it does.
Over 15% of Google’s daily searches have never been searched before. On
these never-before-seen types of searches, Google doesn’t have any historical
data to ensure it is delivering the right answer. Understandably, Google needs
a strong capability to understand the actual meaning behind a user’s query as
they type it into the search box, even if it has never been searched.
Enter RankBrain, RankBrain forms connections between words to get a
better understanding of what a searcher wants, when the searcher only gives
Google a small amount of information. It then delivers a relevant answer,
even when the best answers don’t use the exact words the user searched for.
In the above example, simply by searching “fastest runner” the first searchresult lists Usain Bolt at the top of the search results. That’s some solid
guesswork from Google! We can see Google’s strong capability to infer the
actual meaning behind our search, even though I only hinted at the person I
am searching for. This is Google’s RankBrain technology at work, forming
connections behind the scenes. As popular trends come and go, this matching
technology is automatically applied in new searches and organically changes
to adapt to the times.
Ever since Google released RankBrain, Google has been gradually working
new A.I. and machine learning technologies into the search results. The new
technologies help Google to understand more complicated searches, deliver
more relevant results to users' questions, and strengthen Google's status as the
world's most advanced search engine.
The overall impact on business and website owners has been positive,
allowing websites to show up at the top of the search results for more
searches.
Google understands how humans speak.
Let's face it, we're often lazy about how we use the Internet. Getting the
laptop out feels like a drag and we're shouting shorthand voice searches into
our phones like, "movie 1990s people experiment dying Kiefer Sutherland",expecting Google to do the heavy lifting...
And it does! Displaying the Wikipedia entry for the 1990's film "Flatliners",
a cult classic about medical students experimenting with near-death-
experiences. On the Flatliners Wikipedia page, the word "experiment"
appears only once, but Kiefer Sutherland appeared in over 29 movies in the
1990s, in which lots of characters died. Notice how I accidentally typed in
the 1980s and Google figured it out, anyway? Solid work by Google.
To combat increasing ambiguity in searches that RankBrain can't handle—
and just getting a better grasp on human language—Google developed the
biggest leap forward in search technology called... BERT.
Or for short, Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers... A
machine-learning technology to better understand human language.
Before BERT, Google would previously struggle with searches like "can you
get medicine for someone pharmacy", delivering a non-specific result about
getting prescriptions filled. It could figure out the main topic of the search.
But it had difficulty picking up the nuance.After BERT, Google understands the searcher's intent much better, now
delivering a result about whether a patient can send a friend or family
member to get their prescription filled.
RankBrain and BERT round out Google's strong capability at understanding
searches much like a human, powered mostly by AI technology.
Google speaks like a human.
Google's latest advancement, the Search Generative Experience (SGE), is
completely changing how we use search engines. Now Google doesn't just
understand like a human but speaks like a human too.
Right above Google's search results, Google has a simple chat dialog where
you can literally chat with the search results, just like having a conversation
with a knowledgeable friend.
SGE's core strength lies in its ability to interpret and respond to questions
conversationally. This allows us to ask complicated questions, make
refinements, and get answers that would be impossible with the traditional
search results.
If you have no idea what I'm talking about, it's possible you haven't enabled
SGE, because it's still an experimental feature. The following resource will
tell you how to set it up.Get AI-powered overviews & ask follow-ups on SGE in Search
https://support.google.com/websearch/answer/13572151
The impact on SEO strategies.
This shift toward a more human-like search experience has started a
revolution of traditional SEO.
The focus now extends beyond just optimizing for keywords and backlinks.
Instead, there's a growing emphasis on creating content that resonates on a
human level, incorporating elements like expert opinions, and well-
researched content based on first-hand experiences.
But one thing is unlikely to change, Google's reliance on revenue from
advertiser clicks. The majority of Google's ad revenue comes from people
clicking on the sponsored links in Google's search results.
So what will emerge will likely be a hybrid search experience. A user starts
with a conversation with Google's AI, then dives deeper and clicks on a link
when they want specific resources, first-hand experiences, or products and
services.
Google’s Gemini.
Google is pushing the boundaries of search with their new project, Gemini.
It's an AI assistant you can have a conversation with, get answers to complex
questions, and create content. Gemini is Google's answer to competition from
AI chatbots like ChatGPT.
Gemini goes beyond traditional search engines by understanding not just
keywords, but conversations, images, code, and audio. Gemini can reason, it
can follow instructions, and you can even get it to write blog posts for you. In
an easy chat interface.
OpenAI's ChatGPT and Google's Gemini are completely changing how we
use the Internet. Search users are becoming multi-modal - using Google and
other search engines for simple and informational questions, and using chat
assistants for complex questions, content creation, and sometimes just to
have a chat!How to stay ahead of Google’s updates.
Now and then, Google releases a significant update to its algorithm, which
can have a massive impact on businesses from any industry. To hone your
SEO chops and make sure your site doesn't fall into Google's bad books, it's
important to stay informed of Google’s updates as they are released.
Fortunately, almost every time a major update is released, those updates are
reported on by the entire SEO community and sometimes publicly discussed
and confirmed by Google staff.
A long-extended history of Google’s updates would fill this entire book. But
with the resources below, you can stay abreast of new Google updates as they
are rolled out. This is essential knowledge for anyone practicing SEO, at a
beginner or advanced level.
Keep your ear to the ground with these sources and you’ll often be
forewarned of future updates.
Search Engine Round Table
https://www.seroundtable.com/
Search Engine Round Table is a blog that covers the daily happenings in the
world of SEO. The author, Barry Schwartz, provides breakdowns and
summaries of Google's updates and is often one of the first places to break
news on major changes in the SEO industry.
List of Google Search Ranking Updates - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/updates/ranking
Wouldn't it be great if there was an official page where Google announces its
major updates to Google search? Well, there is. Google maintains an official
list of all the major updates (that Google wants us to know about). It's a good
resource to visit because whenever Google releases a massive update, you
can read the official documentation and guidelines about what to do instead
of playing guessing games.
The Keyword - Google
https://blog.google/Google's public blog, The Keyword, publishes Google's major news and
announcements. Often big changes are reported here by Google before they
are rolled out, which makes it an important resource for staying up to date.Chapter 2: Keyword research. The
most important step of SEO.
Why is keyword research so important?
Keyword research is the most important step of every SEO project for two
reasons:
1. To discover keywords with traffic. Otherwise, you could waste lots of time
and effort trying to rank for keywords that don’t generate any traffic.
2. To find keywords that are easy to rank high in the search results. If you
don’t investigate keyword competitiveness, you can waste lots of time and
effort on a keyword only to find it is far too difficult to rank on the first page.
These two goals are the ultimate decider of how successful an SEO project is.
This chapter will cover how to find the best keywords and how to avoid
spending time on the wrong keywords. First, we must define what a keyword
is.
What exactly is a keyword?
If you are an SEO newbie, you may be wondering—what is a 
keyword?
A keyword is any phrase you would like your site to rank for in Google's
search results. A keyword can be a single word, or a keyword can also be a
combination of words. 
If you are trying to target a single word, look out! You will have your work
cut out for you. Single-word keywords are extremely competitive and
difficult to rank highly for in the search results.
Head-term keywords are keywords with one to two words, i.e. classic
movies.And long-tail keywords are keywords with three or more phrases, i.e. classic
Akira Kurosawa movies.
Mastering keyword intent.
Keyword intent is the underlying reason behind every search. It's about
figuring out what that person is really looking for. If you can establish the
main reason someone is searching and what they're looking for, then craft
compelling content to fulfill that desire, you're much more likely to show up
higher in the search results for that search.
If this sounds a little overwhelming, it's actually quite simple if we look at
the four different types of intent...
Informational Intent.
These searchers are on the lookout for information. Their queries are like
“How to bake a cake” or “What is blockchain?” They want to learn
something and you need to teach them.
For informational keywords, your content should be full of answers. Start
with a direct response to the query and expand with thorough, easy-to-
understand explanations. Answer common questions. And provide unique
insights, data, or references.
Navigational Intent.
Users with navigational intent have a specific destination in mind. They type
things like “Instagram login” or “Download Zoom.” They know where they
want to go, and you need to help them get there quickly.
Customers often use Google to find a particular page or product on your site.
Ensure they can find it easily by having a page for all the major topics or
touchpoints on your site (like customer service or shipping information).
Commercial Investigation.
These folks are nearly ready to buy but are still comparing options. They
search for “best gaming laptops 2024” or “Samsung vs. iPhone.” They need
convincing, and your content should provide that nudge.Offer detailed, unbiased comparisons or reviews. Provide all the information
a buyer would need to make a good decision, including pros and cons, user
testimonials, and expert opinions.
Transactional Intent.
Here, the searcher is ready to buy something. They're looking up terms like
“buy Bluetooth speakers” or “order flowers online.” They’re ready to spend
and your content should make that as easy as possible.
Put on your best sales pitch. Highlight the features and benefits of your
product or service and make the buying process simple. Include clear calls to
action and answer burning questions customers might have.
Semantic keywords, entities, and ontologies:
speaking Google's language.
Well, times have changed since SEO was all about cramming as many
keywords into a page as humanly possible.
Now, Google's algorithms look at the words on your page, and the
relationships between those words, to determine how well your page covers
the topic.
If jargon sometimes makes you feel dizzy, don't sweat it. I'll make it simple.
Entities are things. Ontologies are relationships. And semantic keywords are
just words.
Semantic keywords, entities, and ontologies help search engines understand
the meaning of your page.
Understanding semantic keywords.
Semantic keywords are the evolution of basic keywords. Think of them as
the 'friends and family' of your main keyword.
For example, if your main keyword is 'coffee', semantic keywords might
include 'arabica', 'fair trade coffee beans', or 'morning brew'. They paint a
fuller picture of what your content is really about. And a page that really
covers this topic should naturally have those words on the page somewhere.The role of entities in SEO.
Entities are the 'who', 'what', 'when', and 'where' in your content. They are the
nouns and proper nouns—people, places, things, or concepts—that are
essential to the topic you're covering.
Search engines, like Google, use entities to quickly understand and
categorize content, which helps them answer queries more accurately.
To identify entities, look at your content and ask, "What are the major
subjects that need to be discussed in a complete resource on this topic?" Then
finally, make sure all of those entities are included on your page somewhere.
This process also helps to ensure you don't miss any important topics when
writing your page.
Ontologies and their impact on SEO.
Ontologies in SEO are about the relationships between entities. They are like
family trees in your content.
This isn't really something you consciously target. The main thing to keep in
mind is that the relationships need to be there somewhere. If you've put the
word "organic coffee" on your page a dozen times, and you've also copied
"fair trade", "sustainable", and "ethical" into your page a dozen times, and
there aren't any obvious relationships between those words, then it just looks
like you've just copied keywords into the page and you won't be rewarded
with higher rankings.
But if you naturally talk about how your organic coffee is sustainable and
ethically sourced, and how your supply chain for those organic coffee beans
is fair trade from end-to-end, Google's algorithms will understand the
relationships.
Practical steps to implement semantic SEO.
 
Naturally, finding entities and semantic keywords for your content is easier
when you use tools. You can use inspiration straight from the "People Also
Ask" or "Related Searches" sections in Google's search results.
After you've identified your entities and semantic keywords, you want toweave them naturally into your content. Don't force them; let them flow as
they would in a natural conversation.
If you dial things up a notch, paid tools such as SurferSEO
(
https://surferseo.com
) and NeuronWriter (
https://neuronwriter.com/
) will go
out and find all of the semantic keywords and entities on competing pages,
and it will even write the article for you.
How to generate a massive list of keywords.
There are many ways to skin a cat. The same is true for finding the right
keywords. Before you can find keywords with loads of traffic in Google, you
must first develop a list of potential keywords relevant to your business.
Relevance is vital.
If you spend your time trying to cast too wide a net, you can end up targeting
keywords irrelevant to your audience. For example, if you are an online
football jacket retailer in the United States, examples of relevant keywords
might be:
Buy football jackets
Buy football jackets online
Online football jackets store USA
Irrelevant keywords might be:
Football jacket photos
How to make your own football jacket
Football jacket manufacturers
How to design a football jacket
You can see how the first pool of keywords is more relevant to the target
audience of football jacket retailers, and the second pool of keywords is
related but unlikely to lead to customers.
Keeping relevance in mind, you must develop a list of potential keyword
combinations to use as a resource, so you can then go and uncover the best
keywords with a decent amount of traffic each month in Google.
Here are some powerful strategies you can use to generate this list.1. Steal keywords from competitors.
If you're feeling sneaky, you can let your competitors do the heavy lifting for
you and snatch up keywords from their sites.
There are many tools out there created for this purpose. A simple, free tool is
the Keyword Extractor. If you enter a page into this tool, within seconds, it
will scrape a list of the keywords your competitor has optimized into their
page. You can then use this to bulk out your keyword list.
Keyword Extractor - Wordcount
https://wordcount.com/keyword-extractor
While the Keyword Extractor is a lightweight tool for revealing keywords
your competitors have optimized into the page, a more robust tool is Ahrefs’
Organic Keywords report. This tool estimates the keywords that are sending
the largest amount of traffic to competitors' websites. The estimates are
reasonably accurate and are a valuable resource for bulking keyword lists.
While Ahrefs’ reports are powerful, they come at a cost. Monthly plans start
at $99 per month.
Ahrefs
https://ahrefs.com
2. Use AI chat tools like Gemini and ChatGPT to generate keyword
ideas.
When it comes to generating keyword ideas, AI chat tools Gemini and
ChatGPT can save a lot of time and effort.
These tools can churn out relevant and unique keyword ideas lightning-fast,
making your SEO game plan much easier to execute.
Let's put Gemini to the test with NFL merchandise as our focus.
When we type in "Give me a list of 30 core keywords for an NFL
merchandise store, that sells NFL Jerseys, NFL jackets, and so on," Gemini
flexes its AI muscles and returns this list of NFL-related keywords...
General NFL merchandise:
NFL merchandiseFootball gear
Team apparel
Sports memorabilia
Fan clothing
Official team wear
NFL shop
Football fanwear
Game day gear
Team spirit
Specific NFL clothing:
NFL jerseys
NFL jackets
NFL hats
NFL accessories
NFL t-shirts
Football jerseys
Custom NFL jerseys
NFL sweatshirts
NFL caps
Player jerseys
Other NFL items:
NFL collectibles
NFL gifts
NFL tailgating gear
NFL scarves
NFL bags
Football equipment
NFL team flags
NFL home decor
Licensed NFL products
Additional keywords:
NFL for [Team name] fans
Women's NFL clothing
Men's NFL clothing
Kids' NFL clothingPlus size NFL clothing
NFL clearance sale
New arrivals NFL merchandise
NFL combine apparel
NFL draft apparel
NFL playoffs merchandise
While the keyword suggestions are nothing short of excellent, the one thing
you have to keep in mind with generative AI chat tools is you can't trust the
accuracy of the data.
By all means, get keyword ideas, just don't trust any traffic or SEO difficulty
estimates that come out of these tools—we'll cover how to get those in a
minute anyway.
3. Brainstorm a master list of keywords.
Assuming competitors have been thorough with their research isn't always
the best strategy. By brainstorming combinations of keywords, you can
generate a giant list of potential keywords.
To do this, sketch out a grid of words your target customer might use. Split
the words into different prefixes and suffixes. Next up, combine them into
one giant list using the free Mergewords tool. With this strategy, you can
quickly and easily build up a massive list of relevant keywords.
Mergewords
https://www.toptal.com/marketing/mergewords
Prefix
- buy
- where do I buy
Middle word
- NFL jerseys
- NFL uniforms
- NFL jackets
Suffixes
- onlineCombined keywords
- NFL jerseys
- NFL jerseys online
- NFL uniforms
- NFL uniforms online
- NFL jackets
- NFL jackets online
- buy NFL jerseys
- buy NFL jerseys online
- buy NFL uniforms
- buy NFL uniforms online
- buy NFL jackets
- buy NFL jackets online
- where do I buy NFL jerseys
- where do I buy NFL jerseys online
- where do I buy NFL uniforms
- where do I buy NFL uniforms online
- where do I buy NFL jackets
- where do I buy NFL jackets online
- NFL jerseys
- NFL jerseys online
- NFL uniforms
- NFL uniforms online
- NFL jackets
- NFL jackets online
4. Going undercover and researching your niche.
With 5.3 billion active Internet users, there's a community of people floating
around on the web interested in what you’re selling—even if you're selling
leopard print dog watches!.. You've just got to go and find them.
Open up a few tabs and browse through online communities like Reddit,
Quora, Facebook Groups, Slack communities, and Twitter hashtags, going
through popular threads. Keep a close eye on popular and trending topics,
and questions with a tendency to resurface. You'll find burning questions
needing to be answered, generating the best kind of keyword ideas—ideas
directly from customers’ keyboards. You can discover additional niche-specific forums with the following search queries:
"keyword" forums
"keyword" discussion board
"keyword" community
5. Use tools that reveal hidden trends on the web.
Researching Internet trends and getting insights behind Google's search box
isn't a new idea, and fortunately, clever people have built powerful tools to
make this job easy. Add these tools to your keyword research arsenal. Not
only will you save precious time researching, but you'll also receive a ton of
relevant suggestions you wouldn't discover otherwise.
Ubersuggest.
https://neilpatel.com/ubersuggest/
No SEO guide would be complete without mentioning Ubersuggest. This
handy tool reveals autocomplete suggestions behind Google's search box. It
provides region-specific data for countries and languages all around the
globe, and the best part—it's free.
Answer The Public
https://answerthepublic.com/
Answer The Public crawls the Internet and generates automatic lists of
customers burning questions related to your keyword. Answer The Public
starts with phrases starting with common question-type words, such as
“how”, “when”, “can”, and so on, followed by your keyword. It provides
long lists of phrases containing prepositions, such as "can", "is", "with", and
"without", preceded by your keyword. And topping things off, it lists
common questions users type in Google, from a-to-z, after your keyword
(postpositions, if you want to talk fancy). In other words, it’s a giant database
of questions customers are asking about your topic.
Buzzsumo
https://buzzsumo.com/
Sometimes, ideas become popular on the Internet before being typed into
Google’s search box. You can get ahead of these trends with content
discovery tools like Buzzsumo. Buzzsumo lists content going viral over the
Internet right now. You can keep your finger on the pulse of what's hot acrossthe web even when other tools haven’t picked it up yet.
Use the above tools and you’ll have more than enough keywords, and you’ll
be ready to start finding which keywords have solid amounts of traffic to
send to your site.
How to find keywords that will send traffic to your
site.
Now you have a list of keywords, you need to understand how much traffic
these keywords receive in Google. Without search traffic data, you could end
up targeting keywords with zero searches. Armed with the right knowledge,
you can target 
keywords with hundreds or thousands of potential visitors
every month.
Unfortunately, in recent years Google restricted access to the data behind
Google's search box, leaving us with two options for finding keyword traffic
data.
Firstly, if you have a Google Ads campaign running with Google and are
already spending a modest amount, then you’re in the clear, you can access
this info for free in their Keyword Planner tool. If this isn’t you, the other
option is to use a paid keyword research tool for a small monthly fee. Either
way, you need the traffic data behind your keywords otherwise you are
running blind.
1. Estimating keyword traffic data with Google’s Keyword Planner.
Google Ads Keyword Planner
https://ads.google.com/home/tools/keyword-planner/
As mentioned, to access all the juicy traffic data provided by the Google Ads
Keyword Planner tool, you need an active Google Ads campaign running and
must be spending a modest amount of money regularly. If this is you, sign in,
click on Tools in the top menu, click on “Keyword Planner” then click on
“Get search volume data and forecasts”, and copy and paste your keywords
into the box. Select your country, and then click the blue “Get started”
button. When finished, you will have the exact amount of times each
keyword was searched for in Google.Mmm. Fresh data. This is just the kind of data we need.
Now we know which keywords receive more searches than others, and more
importantly, we know which keywords receive no searches at all.
2. Estimating keyword traffic data with a paid tool like KWFinder or
Ahrefs.
KWFinder
https://kwfinder.com/
If you want a research tool with a stronger SEO focus, then you can use a
paid tool such as KWFinder or Ahrefs. You're not limited to these tools,
many alternatives are floating around that you can find with a couple of
Google searches.
Using KWFinder as an example, after creating an account, simply log in,select the local area you are targeting (i.e. Los Angeles, California, if that is
your focus), enter your keyword ideas, and download the juicy data. Now you
can ensure you spend time focusing on keywords with traffic potential, as
opposed to chasing after keywords with no traffic and no opportunity for
growing your business.
How to find keywords for easy rankings.
Now you need to find out how competitive your desired keywords are.
Armed with an understanding of the competitiveness of your keywords, you
can discover keywords you can rank high for in Google.
Let’s say you are a second-hand bookseller and you want to target “book
store online.” It's unlikely you are going to beat Amazon and Barnes and
Noble.
But, maybe there’s a gem hiding in your keyword list few people are
targeting. Something like “antique book stores online.”
You have the advantage if your competitors haven't thought of targeting your
keyword. You simply have to do better SEO than they are doing and you
have a really good chance of beating their rankings. Part of this includes
having a large keyword list for your research.
Next, you need to wash this list and separate the ridiculously competitive
keywords from the easy keywords no one is aggressively targeting.
There are many schools of thought on how to find the competitiveness of
your keywords. The most popular practices are listed below, with my
thoughts on each.
1. Manually going through the list, looking at the rankings, and checking
if low-quality pages are appearing in the top results.
This is good for a glance to see how competitive a market is. However,
unreliable and you need real data to rely on.
2. Look at how many search engine results are coming up in Google for
your keyword.The amount of results is listed just below the search box after you type in
your keyword. This tactic is common in outdated courses teaching SEO and
is completely unreliable.
The reason? There may be a very low number of competing pages for a
particular keyword, but the sites ranked at the top of the results could be
unbeatable.
3. Using the competition score from the Google Ads Keyword Planner
tool.
Don't be tempted. This is a common beginner's mistake, and sometimes
recommended as an easy way to judge SEO competitiveness for keywords on
some blogs, and it just simply doesn't work!
The competition score included in the Google Ads Keyword Research tool is
intended for Google Ads advertising campaigns only. It is an indication of
how many advertisers are competing for a particular keyword through paid
advertising. Completely irrelevant to SEO.
4. Using an SEO competitive analysis tool, such as KWFinde
r’
s SEO
Difficulty report or Ahref’s SEO Difficulty Score.
Now we’re talking. To get a realistic idea of your chances of ranking high for
a particular keyword, you need to understand the strength of the pages
currently ranking in the top 10 search results for that keyword.
A great tool for this is KWFinde
r’
s SEO Difficulty report. With
KWFinde
r’
s SEO Difficulty report, enter your keyword into their tool, click
“check difficulty”, and it will show vital stats for pages appearing in the top
10.Of these stats, the most important are Domain Authority, Page Authority,
Links, and Facebook Share
s…
 If you do
n’
t have high Domain Authority or
Page Authority—do
n’
t freak out. If your site is more relevant to the topic,
you can often nudge your way up the results by creating great content,
focusing on building backlinks to your page, and improving your social
media activity.
Alternatively, Ahrefs has a great keyword difficulty score with its keyword
tool. Enter your keywords into the Ahrefs keyword tool, and you can get a
general idea of how difficult it will be to rank high for those keywords, by
looking at the SEO difficulty score for each keyword.
You can also enter your website into Ahref’s Site Explorer tool, enter your
competitor's sites into Ahref's Site Explorer, and set targets for beating the
competition. This a great strategy for more difficult keywords.
Ahrefs
https://ahrefs.com/
You can find keywords competitors are using, how much traffic they are
getting from those keywords, and even where they get their links from!Many keyword tools and site analysis tools can be found with a couple of
Google searches. Every SEO professional ultimately has a different favorite
tool they prefer, but in general, you'll find that Ahrefs is used for intermediate
to advanced SEO professionals, and Moz's Keyword Explorer and KW
Finder are used by beginners.
When finished reading this book, you can work through the keyword research
points in the free SEO checklist included at the end of the book, with the
process outlined in a step-by-step approach. Chapter 3: On-page SEO. How to let
Google know what your page is about.
On-page SEO is the process of ensuring your site is readable to search
engines. Learning correct on-page SEO is important in ensuring Google picks
up the keywords you want, and an opportunity to achieve easy wins and
improve your site’s overall performance.
On-page SEO has the following goals or actions:
1. Ensuring your site content is visible to search engines.
2. Ensuring your site is not blocking search engines.
3. Ensuring search engines pick up the keywords you want.
4. Ensuring site visitors are having a positive user experience.
You can do most on-page SEO yourself if you have experience working on
websites.
If you are not technically inclined, please note there are technical sections in
this chapter. You should read these so you understand what has to be done to
achieve rankings in Google. You can easily hire a web designer or web
developer to implement the techniques in this chapter after you know what
needs to be done.
How to structure your site for easy and automatic
SEO.
These best practices will ensure your site is structured for better recognition
by Google and other search engines.
1. Search engine-friendly URLs.
Have you ever visited a web page and the URL looked something like this:
https://www.examplesite.com/~articlepage21/post-entry321.asp?q=3What a mess!
These kinds of URLs are a quick way to confuse search engines and site
visitors. Clean URLs are more logical, user-friendly and search engine
friendly.
Here is an example of a clean URL:
https://www.examplesite.com/football-jerseys
Much better.
Take a quick look at Google's search engine results. You will see a very large
portion of sites in the top 10 have clean and readable URLs like the above
example. And by a very large portion… I mean the vast majority.
Most site content management systems have search engine-friendly URLs
built into the site. It is often a matter of simply enabling the option in your
site settings. If your site doesn't have search engine-friendly URLs, it's time
for a friendly chat with your web developer to fix this up.
2. Internal navigation
There is no limit on how to structure the navigation of your site. This can be
a blessing or a curse.
Some people force visitors to watch an animation or intro before they can
access the site. And in the process, make it hard for visitors, and confusing
for search engines, to read the actual content on the site.
Other sites keep it simple by having a menu running along the top of the site
or down the left-hand side of the browser window. This has pretty much
become an industry standard for most sites.
By following this standard, you make it significantly easier for visitors and
search engines to understand your site. If you intend to break this convention,
you must understand it is likely you will make it harder for search engines to
pick up all of the pages on your site.
As a general rule, making it easier for users makes it easier for Google.
Above all else, your website navigation must be made of real text links, notimages.
If your main site navigation is currently made up of images, call your web
designer and change them to text now! If you do not have the main
navigation featured in the text, your internal pages will almost be invisible to
Google and other search engines.
For an additional SEO boost, include links to pages you want visible to
search engines and visitors on the home page.
By placing links specifically on the home page, Google's search engine
spider can come along to your site and quickly understand which pages on
your site are important and worth including in the search results.
How to make Google pick up the
keywords you want.
 
Many misconceptions are being circulated about what to do, and what not to
do when it comes to optimizing keywords on your page.
Some bloggers are going so far as telling their readers to not put keywords in
the content of targeted pages at all. These bloggers—I'm not naming names
—do have the best intentions and have taken the worry about Google's spam
detection to the next level. But it is madness.
Not having keywords on your page makes it difficult for Google to match
your page with the keyword you want to rank high for. If Google completely
devalued having keywords on the page, Google would be a crappy search
engine.
Think about it. If you search for “Ford Mustang 65 Auto Parts” and arrive on
pages without those words on the page at all, it's highly unlikely you've
found what you’re looking for.
Google needs to see the keywords on your page, and these keywords must be
visible to your users. The easy approach is to either create content aroundyour keyword or naturally weave your keyword into the page. I'm not saying
your page should look like the following example.
“Welcome to the NFL jersey store. Here we have NFL jerseys galore, with a
wide range of NFL jerseys including women’s NFL jerseys, men's NFL
jerseys, children's NFL jerseys, and much, much more.”
This approach may have worked 20 years ago, but not now. The keyword
should appear naturally on your page. Any attempts to go bonkers with your
keywords will look horrible and may set off spam filters in search engines.
Use your keyword naturally throughout the content. Repeating your keyword
once or twice is more than enough.
It's really that simple.
Next, you need to ensure you have a handful of variations of your keyword
on your page. Google believes a page is more naturally written if it has
variations of your keyword. And this helps your visibility because sometimes
different customers will type different words in Google to find the same
thing. And you want to appeal to these customers too.
And finally, you need to have some semantic keywords on the page. What do
I mean by semantic keywords? Well, if you're targeting a keyword like,
"dentist san francisco", then semantic keywords are words that should
naturally appear on a page that really does a great job of covering that topic,
words like "dentist", "root canal", "dental checkup", "dental procedure",
"teeth whitening", "SF, "CA", "California", and so on.
To successfully optimize a page, you need to have your main keywords,
keyword variations, and semantic keywords on the page. Make sure
they’re all naturally covered in your content. Naturally, this process is a bit
easier if you use tools. Ahrefs (ahrefs.com) and SurferSEO (surferseo.com)
are two great tools for finding main keywords, keyword variations, and
semantic keywords, that you should be adding to the page.
Areas you can weave keywords into the page include:
- Meta description and meta title tags.
- Navigation anchor text.
- Navigation anchor title tags.
- Headings (h1, h2, h3, and h4 tags).- Content text.
- Bolded and italicized text.
- Internal links in the content.
- Image filename, image alt tag, and image title tag.
- Video filename, video title.
 
How to get more people clicking on your rankings
in Google.
Meta tags have been widely misunderstood as mysterious pieces of code SEO
professionals mess around with, and “the secret” to attaining top rankings.
This couldn't be further from the truth.
The function of meta tags is quite simple. Meta tags are bits of code on your
site that control how your site appears in Google.
If you don't fill out your meta tags, Google will automatically use text from
your site to create your search listing. This is exactly what you don't want
Google to do, otherwise, it can end up looking like gibberish! Fill out these
tags correctly, and you can increase the number of people clicking on your
site in the search engine results.
Below is an example of the meta tag code.
<title>Paul’s NFL Jerseys</title>
<meta description="Buy NFL jerseys online. Wide range of colors and sizes.
Free delivery and free returns. We accept international orders!"/>
<meta name="robots" content="noodp, noydir"/>  
Below is an example of how a page with the above meta tag should appear as
a search engine result in Google:
Paul's NFL Jerseys
Buy Paul's NFL jerseys online. Wide range of colors and sizes. Free delivery
and free returns. We accept international orders!
https://www.yoursite.com/
Pretty simple, huh?
The title tag has a character limit of roughly 55-60 characters in Google. Useany more than 55-60 characters and Google will likely truncate your title tag
in the search engine results.
The meta description tag has a character limit of roughly 155-160 characters.
Just like the title tag, Google will shorten your listing if it has any more than
155-160 characters in the tag.
The last meta robots tag indicates to Google you want to control how your
listing appears in the search results. It’s good to include this, while unlikely,
i
t’
s possible Google can ignore your tags and instead use those listed on
other directories such as the Open Directory Project and the Yahoo Directory.
To change these tags on your site you have three options:
1. Use the software your site is built on. Most content management systems
have the option to change these tags. If it doesn't, you may need to install an
SEO plugin to change these tags.
2. Speak with your web designer or web developer to manually change your
meta tags for you.
3. If you are a tech-savvy person and familiar with HTML, you can change
the tags in the code yourself.
Load speed—Google magic dust.
If your site is as slow as a dead snail, then it’s likely your site is not living up
to its potential in the search engines and is disappointing website visitors.
Improving your site's load speed is an opportunity for an easy SEO boost.
Why? Because when visitors browse your website and it's blazing fast, they
stick to it like glue instead of clicking back to the search results. And the
positive user behavior associated with your website gets sent to Google and
you get rewarded with higher rankings.
Not only is load speed important for having great performance in search
engines, but extensive industry reports have also shown for each second
shaved off a site, there is an average increase of 7% to the site conversion
rate. In other words, the faster your site loads, the more people you will have
completing a sale. Simply put, load speed is not an aspect of your site to
overlook.Every site is built differently, with an endless variation of server
configurations, which means improving your load speed isn't as simple as
following a checklist. However, the following techniques will work on most
sites.
Common load speed improvements.
1. Host your site in the city where your customers reside and load speeds will
increase.
2. Alternatively, use a CDN (Content Delivery Network) to host your site on
servers all over the world. Visitors will get super-fast load speeds regardless
of location. Popular CDN services include CloudFlare and Amazon
CloudFront.
3. Enable load speed technologies like caching, compression, minification,
and HTTP/2. Most platforms have plugins for this, e.g. W3 Total Cache is a
popular plugin offering most of these features on WordPress.
4. Find large files on your site and shrink them. Use software like Adobe
Photoshop and you can compress image file sizes from 3MB down to 250KB
without visual loss in quality, by using Photoshop's "save for web" feature.
An easy win for image-heavy sites.
The above are just a handful of the infinite possibilities for improving a site’s
load speed. Fortunately, several tools are making it easy to identify speed
improvements and speed bottlenecks, irrespective of the technology your site
is built on.
Load speed analysis tools.
1. Google Page Speed Insights
https://pagespeed.web.dev/
Google's great free tool, Page Speed Insights, will give you a page load score
out of 100. You can see how well your load speed compares to other sites.
You can also see how well your site loads on mobile and desktop. Scores
closer to 100 are near perfect.
After running a test on your site, the tool will give you a list of high-priority,
medium-priority, and low-priority areas for improvement. You can forward
these to your developer to speed up your site, or if you are a bit of a tech-
head, you can have a crack at fixing these up yourself.2. GTmetrix
https://gtmetrix.com/
Gtmetrix is the cream of the crop when it comes to load speed tools,
providing detailed breakdowns of files and resources slowing your site down,
listing file sizes of individual files, server load times, and much more. It goes
into greater depth than the other tools, though probably best suited for a web
developer or someone with a basic level of experience building websites.
Large images are easy targets for load speed improvements. If you have any
images over 200kb, these can usually be compressed in Photoshop and
shrunk down to a fraction of the size without any quality loss. Take note of
any large files, send them to your web developer or web designer, and ask
them to compress the files to a smaller file size.
3. Lighthouse – Tools For Web Developers – Google
https://developer.chrome.com/docs/lighthouse/overview/
For advanced developers working on complicated projects or sites—i.e.
programmers who know what a Node module is—Google released a
powerful Chrome extension called Lighthouse. Lighthouse provides reports
on website performance, accessibility, adherence to programming best
practices, SEO, and more—with actionable steps on improving each of these
areas. While owners of basic websites probably won't get additional insights
from this tool, on top of recommendations provided by earlier tools,
programming ninjas looking for a well-rounded tool to enhance their
performance chops will find Google's Lighthouse is the Swiss Army knife of
site performance analysis.
The usual suspects—sitemaps.xml and robots.txt.
Sitemaps.xml
Search engines automatically look for a special file on each site called the
sitemaps.xml file. Having this file on your site is a must for making it easy
for search engines to discover pages on your site. Sitemaps are essentially a
giant map of all of the pages on your site. Fortunately, creating this file and
getting it on your site is a straightforward process.
Most CMS systems have a sitemap file automatically generated. Thisincludes systems like WordPress, Magento, and Shopify. If this is not the
case on your site, you may need to install a plugin or use the free XML
Sitemaps Generator tool. The XML Sitemaps Generator will automatically
create a sitemaps.xml file for you.
XML Sitemaps Generator
https://www.xml-sitemaps.com/
Next, ask your web developer or web designer to upload it into the main
directory of your site or do it yourself if you have FTP access. Once
uploaded, the file should be publicly accessible with an address like the
below example:
https://www.yoursite.com/sitemaps.xml
Once you have done this, you should submit your sitemap to the Google
Search Console account for your site.
If you don’t have a Google Search Console account, the following article by
Google gives simple instructions for web developers or web designers to set
this up.
Add a website property – Search Console Help
https://support.google.com/webmasters/answer/34592
Login to your account and click on your site. Under “site configuration” click
“sitemaps” and submit your sitemap.
Robots.txt
Another must-have for every site is a robots.txt file. This should sit in the
same place as your sitemaps.xml file. The address to this file should look the
same as the example below:
http://www.yoursite.com/robots.txt
The robots.txt file is a simple file that exists so you can tell the areas of your
site you
 don’t
 want Google to list in the search engine results.
While there is no boost from having a robots.txt file on your site, it’s
essential to check you don’t have a robots.txt file blocking areas of your site
you want search engines to find.The robots.txt file is just a plain text document, its contents should look
something like the below example:
# robots.txt - a good example
User-agent: *
Disallow: /admin
User-agent: *
Disallow: /logs
If you want your site to tell search engines to not crawl your site, it should
look like the next example. If you 
do not
 want your entire site blocked, you
must make sure it 
does
 
not
 look like the example below. It is always a good
idea to double-check check it is not set up this way, just to be safe.
# robots.txt - example blocking the entire site
User-agent: *
Disallow: /
The forward slash in this example tells search engines their software should
not visit the home directory.
To create your robots.txt file, simply create a plain text document with
Notepad if you are on Windows, or TextEdit if you are on Mac OS. Make
sure the file is saved as a plain text document, and use the “robots.txt good
example” as an indication of how it should look. Take care to list any
directories you do not want search engines to visit, such as internal folders
for staff, admin areas, CMS back-end areas, and so on.
If there aren’t any areas you would like to block, you can skip your robots.txt
file altogether, but just double check you don’t have one blocking important
areas of the site like the above example.
Duplicate content—canonical tags and other fun.
In later chapters, I will describe how Google Panda penalizes sites with
duplicate content. Unfortunately, many site content management systems will
sometimes automatically create multiple versions of one page.
For example, let’s say your site has a product page on socket wrenches, butbecause of the system your site is built on, the same page can be accessed
from multiple URLs from different areas of your site:
http://www.yoursite.com/products.aspx?=23213
http://www.yoursite.com/socket-wrenches
http://www.yoursite.com/tool-kits/socket-wrenches
In the search engine’s eyes, this is confusing as hell and multiple versions of
the page are considered duplicate content.
To account for this, you should always ensure a special tag is placed on every
page of your site, called the canonical tag.
The canonical tag indicates the original version of a web page to search
engines. By telling Google the page you consider the “true” version of the
page with the tag, you can control which page is listed in the search results.
Choose the most straightforward URL for users, the URL that reads like plain
English.
Using the earlier socket wrenches example, by using the tag below, Google
would be more likely to display the best version of the page in the search
engine results.
<link rel="canonical
" href="http://www.yoursite.com/socket-wrenches
"/>
As a general rule, include this tag on every page on your site, shortly before
the </head> tag in the code.
Usability—the new SEO explained.
Mobiles and tablets have overtaken desktops in the vicious battle for Internet
market share, with mobile devices now making up more than 60% of all
traffic. To ensure a great search experience for users, Google gives
advantages to sites with great support for users on all devices. As a result,
many SEO pundits found you can get an advantage simply by improving
your mobile support.
For example, let’s say a mobile user is searching for late-night pizza deliveryin Los Angeles. One local business has a site with a large number of
backlinks but no special support for mobile users, it’s difficult for the user to
navigate, the layout doesn’t automatically fit the screen, and the menu text is
small and hard to use on a touch screen.
Another competing local business has low amounts of backlinks, but great
support for mobile users. Its design fits perfectly to the screen and has special
navigation designed for mobile users, making it easy to use.
In most cases, the second site will now rank higher than the first, for mobile
users. This is just one example of how usability can impact your rankings.
While a term like "usability" can seem vague, let’s look at practical steps to
improve your usability and the SEO strength of your site.
1. Make your site accessible for all devices.
Make your site accessible and easy for all users: desktop, mobile, and tablet.
The simple way is to make your site responsive, which means it
automatically resizes across all devices and has mobile-friendly navigation
for mobile users. Mobile support is covered in more detail later in this
chapter, but you can enter your site into the following tool quickly to see if
Google registers your site as mobile-friendly.
Mobile friendly Test - Google
https://search.google.com/test/mobile-friendly
2. Increase your content quality.
Gone are the days of hiring a bunch of low-quality writers to bulk out the
content on your site. It needs to be proofread and edited, and the more
“sticky” you make your content, the better results you will get. If you provide
compelling content, users will spend more time on your site and are less
likely to bounce back to the search results. Users will also be more likely to
share your content. Google will see this and give your rankings a boost.
3. Use clean code on your website.
There’s a surprisingly high amount of sites with dodgy code, difficult for
both search engines and Internet browsers to read. If there are HTML code
errors in your site, which means, it hasn’t been coded according to industrybest practices, your design may break when your site is viewed on different
browsers, or worse, confuse search engines when they come along and look
at your site. Run your site through the below tool and ask your web developer
to fix any errors.
Web standards validator
https://validator.w3.org/
4. Take it easy on the popups and advertisements.
Sites with spammy and aggressive ads are often ranked poorly in search
results. The SEO gurus have reached no consensus on the number of ads
leading to a penalty from Google, so use your common sense. Ensure
advertisements don’t overshadow your content or occupy the majority of
screen real estate.
5. Improve the overall “operability” of your site.
Does your site have slow web hosting or a bunch of broken links and
images? Simple technical oversights like these contribute to a poor user
experience.
Make sure your site is with a reliable web hosting company and doesn’t go
down in peak traffic. Even better, make sure your site is hosted on a server in
your local city, and this will make it faster for local users.
Next up, chase up any 404 errors with your web developer. 404 errors are
errors indicating users are clicking on links in your site and being sent to an
empty page. It contributes to a poor user experience in Google’s eyes.
Fortunately, these errors are easily fixed.
You can find 404 errors on your site by logging into your Google Search
Console account, clicking on your site, then clicking on “Crawl” and “Crawl
Errors.” Here you will find a list of 404 errors. If you click on the error and
then click “Linked From” you can find the pages with the broken links. Fix
these yourself, or discuss them with your web developer.
Google Search Console
https://search.google.com/search-console/about
If you want external tools to speed up improving your site’s usability, I’vefound the following two resources helpful:
BrowserStack - Free to try, plans start at $29 per month.
https://www.browserstack.com
BrowserStack allows you to test your site on over +20,000 different browsers
and devices at once. You can preview how your site works on tablets, mobile
devices, and all the different browsers such as Chrome, Firefox, Safari,
Internet Explorer, and so on. It helps make sure it displays correctly across
many different devices.
Trymata - Free to try, test results start from $333 monthly
https://trymata.com/
Trymata provides videos, audio narration, surveys of users going through
your site, and reports on any difficulties they uncover. Usability tests are
good for larger projects requiring objective feedback from normal users.
Mobile support—important SEO explained in
simple language.
Whether we like it or not, mobile users are here to stay and Google is driving
the mobile revolution. With the largest mobile 
app store in the world, the
largest mobile operating system in the world, and the largest amount of
mobile search users, it’s safe to say mobile users are a high priority for
Google.
If you are not supporting mobile users, it’s important to implement mobile
support, not just for better search engine results, but for better sales and
conversions. Simply put, the majority of your traffic is coming from mobile
users. So let’s take a look at how to support mobile users.
How to best support mobile users.
If you want to increase support for mobile devices and be more search engine
friendly, you have three options:
1. Create a responsive site.
Responsive sites are the cream of the crop when it comes to sites that supportboth desktop and mobile devices. With responsive sites, both mobile and
desktop users see the same pages and same content, and everything is
automatically sized to fit the screen. It’s also becoming more common for
WordPress templates and new sites to feature a responsive layout.
2. Dynamically serve different content to mobile and desktop users.
You can ask your web developer to detect which devices are accessing your
site and automatically deliver a different version of your site catered to the
device. This is a complicated setup, better suited for large sites with
thousands of pages, with complicated infrastructure, when a responsive
approach is not possible.
3. Host your mobile content on a separate subdomain, e.g.
m.yoursite.com
While Google stated this implementation is supported, I recommend against
it. You need a lot of redirects in place and must jump through giant hoops to
ensure search engines recognize your special mobile subdomain as a copy of
your main site. Responsive sites are popular for good reason: it’s easier and
cheaper to maintain one site, than both maintaining a desktop copy of your
site and a separate mobile copy of your site on a mobile subdomain.
Improving performance in the mobile search results.
Google stated mobile support is straightforward, either your site supports
mobile devices or it doesn’t... Well, it’s not straightforward. You can get an
edge over competitors by using a handful of tools to improve your mobile
usability and make your site faster for mobile users. Run your site through
Google's Mobile-Friendly Test Tool to confirm if you support mobile users,
use Google's "Test Your Mobile Speed and Performance" tool for actionable
steps to speed up your mobile site, and review the Mobile Usability report in
Google Search Console and check for any errors worth fixing—and if you're
lazy like me, delegate. Send the reports and errors over to your web
developer and get them fixed. Who doesn't like a competitive advantage?
Work through these tools, make your mobile support better than competitors,
and you will crush it in the search results.
Mobile Friendly Test Tool
https://search.google.com/test/mobile-friendlyGoogle PageSpeed Insights
https://pagespeed.web.dev/
Mobile Usability – Google Search Console
https://www.google.com/webmasters/tools/mobile-usability
The technical details of building a responsive site are beyond the scope of
this book and could fill an entire book. In fact, it does, I counted close to 17
responsive web design books on Amazon as I wrote this paragraph… That
said, mobile SEO can be ridiculously simple.
If you have a responsive site that delivers the same content to mobile and
desktop users, automatically resizes content to the screen, and is fast and
user-friendly, all you have to do is follow the SEO recommendations in this
book, and your mobile results will be top-notch from an SEO perspective.
Alternatively, follow one of the recommended implementations discussed
earlier in this section.
For guidelines, direct from the horse’s mouth so to speak, you can read
Google’s mobile support documentation for webmasters and web developers.
Mobile Friendly Sites – Google Developers
https://developers.google.com/search/mobile-sites/get-started
Google's Search Quality Guideline
s—
and how to
use them to your advantage.
Search quality is a popular topic in the SEO industry because it has a massive
impact on the search results. Why is this so? Making sure users are sent to
high-quality and trustworthy search results is critical for Google to safeguard
its position as providing the best all-around search experience. 
While this sounds a little vague, you can use Google's search quality
guidelines to your advantage and get an edge over competitors. Did you
know that Google’s search quality team published their “Search Quality
Evaluator Guideline
s”
 publicly? If you didn't, now you do.
The document's 168 pages long, so presuming you don't consider a
whitepaper leisurely reading, I'll list the most important and actionable
takeaways, so you can use them to your advantage.Google Search Quality Evaluator Guidelines - Most Important Factors
Google's whitepaper lists the holy grail of important factors when it comes to
search quality. And here it i
s
…
EEAT... That's right, E.E.A.T. Experience, Expertise, Authority, and Trust.
Acronym choice aside, to establish quality, Google is looking at the
experience, expertise, authority, and trustworthiness on the page and across
the website. This includes things like the content quality, the reputation of the
website and its authors, publicly-listed information about site ownership,
contact details, first-hand experience, and several other factors. 
Now we know what's important from a top-level perspective, let's zoom into
actionable and practical takeaways that will affect the average Joe trying to
nudge his way up the search results.
Search Quality Evaluator Guidelines—Key Takeaways
1. Does the writer have first-hand experience? If the author of the page has
first-hand experience with the product, place, or topic they are discussing,
they are likely to provide real value and insights for the reader, as opposed to
an article written by someone with no experience at all.
2. Real name, company name, and contact information listed on an about
page. If you don't have this information listed on your website, why should
Google, or anyone else for that matter, trust you? Better make sure you
include it.
3. Excessive and unnatural internal structural links across sidebars and
footers. If you've got 150 links in your footer, it's obvious to Google you're
trying to do something sneaky, so be conservative with the footer and sidebar
links. Keep it restricted to the most important pages on your site or what's
useful for your users.
4. Over monetization of content. Specifically, if you are disguising
advertisements as the main content or your advertisements occupy more real
estate than the main content, then one of Google's search evaluators will
probably flag your site as spam. Take a common-sense approach with your
ads, don't overdo it!5. List editors & contributors. Are you publishing a bunch of articles under
pseudonyms or generic usernames? Listing editors and contributors, i.e. real
people, is more trustworthy and will increase the perceived quality of your
page.
6. Provide sources. Publishing generic articles en masse without any
reputable sources? You'll get a better-quality assessment, and a higher
ranking if you list sources for your articles. Listing sources shows the writer
has performed diligence in their research and increases the credibility of the
page.
7. Financial transaction pages. All you drop-shippers and ecommerce
retailers out there stand up and take note—pages associated with financial
transactions (shopping cart, checkout, product pages, etc.) must link to policy
pages for refunds, returns, delivery information, and the terms and conditions
of your site. Think about it from the user's perspective, if you are an average
Joe shopper thinking about buying something and the page doesn't list any of
this information, how safe would you feel checking out?
8. Pages offering financial information must be of the highest quality. Google
is stricter with these types of pages, as they fall into the “Your Money or
Your Life” category—meaning it could affect the financial well-being of the
user. If you're publishing this kind of content, make sure you're doing
everything you can to provide high-quality, detailed articles, citing sources,
fully disclosing financial relationships, and making it clear what author or
company is behind the content.
That sums up the most important takeaways from the Google Search
Evaluator Guidelines. If you haven't got them on your site, work
 
‘
em in and
you'll get a leg up over your competitors, or worse, your rankings could
suffer. And if you really, really want to sit down and read through the 168-
page whitepaper on page-quality assessment, here it is for your enjoyment.
Search Quality Evaluator Guidelines – Google
https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/guidelines.raterhub.com/en//searchqualityevaluatorguidelines.pdf
 
Readabilit
y—
SEO for the future.One of the strongest ranking factors has been flying under the radar,
overlooked by many SEO professionals in their optimization checklists,
leaving a golden opportunity for those who know about it. 
I’
m talking about
readability.
Google has been outspoken about readability as an important consideration
for webmasters. Googl
e’
s former head of web spam, Matt Cutts, publicly
stated that poorly researched and misspelled content will rank poorly, and
clarity should be your focus. And by readability, this means not just avoiding
spelling mistakes, but making your content readable for the widest possible
audience, with simple language and sentence structures.
Flesch readability surfaced in the Searchmetrics Google ranking factors
report, showing a high correlation between high-ranking sites and easy-to-
read content. The Searchmetrics rankings report discovered sites appearing in
the top 10 showed an average Flesch reading score of 76.00—content that is
fairly easy to read for 13-15-year-old students and up.
It makes sense readability is important for Google. By encouraging search
results to have content readable to a wide audience, Google maximizes
advertising revenues. If Google were to encourage complicated results that
mostly appeal to a smaller demographic, such as post-graduates, it would
lower Google's general appeal and its market share.
You can achieve an on-page SEO boost, while increasing your user
engagement, by making your content readable to a wide audience. Run your
content through a Flesch readability test. It will look at your word and
sentence usage, and give you a score on how readable it is. Scores between
90-100 are easily understood by an 11-year-old student, 60-70 are easily
understood by 13 to 15-year-old students, and 0-30 are best understood by
University graduates.
You can use the free tool below and should aim for a readability score
between 60-100. To improve your score, edit your content to use fewer words
per sentence, and use words with a smaller number of syllables.
Readability Score
https://readable.com/How to accelerate traffic and rankings with content
marketing.
One of the most powerful on-page SEO strategies is adding more unique,
fresh content to your site. If you consistently add new pages to your site, you
are going to receive more traffic. In fact, not only can you increase your
traffic, but you can receive an 
exponential
 traffic increase as you publish
more content.
It’s a no-brainer when you think about it. This is why blogs, publishing, and
news-type sites consistently get good results in search engines. More content
means more rankings, more visitors, and more sales. Let’s look at getting
started with improving your traffic by adding fresh content.
1. Post new content on a regular schedule.
If you are going to add new content to your site, you need to decide on a
schedule and stick to it. This might seem obvious, but you would be surprised
at the large number of businesses that talk about starting a blog and never get
around to it. It’s the businesses with a regular roster of adding content to their
site that see regular increases in search rankings, increases in overall search
engine performance, and a growing loyal audience. Without a dedicated
roster or schedule, it will never get done.
If you can’t create content yourself or don't have a budget to hire a full-time
marketing assistant, try hiring a ghostwriter.
Good quality writers can be sourced between $25-$75 US per article and you
can regularly churn out fresh content to your heart’s content. Textbroker and
the Problogger job board are two popular services that can put you in touch
with talented writers.
Textbroker
https://www.textbroker.com
ProBlogger Job Board
https://problogger.com/jobs/
2. Leverage your social media accounts.It almost goes without saying, but you should be leveraging social media to
drive traffic to new posts or pages added to your site.
Whenever you post new content, post it across all of your social media
accounts. Then post it again in a couple of days and you will expose your
content to a different segment of fans. You’ll increase your social activity and
as a result, get higher rankings.
3. Reach out to bloggers writing roundup posts on your blog’s topic.
Bloggers often write roundup posts listing their hottest must-read blogs or
articles on a particular topic. Reach out to authors, with a personalized
message and links to your best blog posts. Take it to the next level by making
it easier for the author to update their post—with a short blog description,
image, and link to your social channels. Ensure you have a base level of high-
value content to start, then start reaching out to bloggers. You can start seeing
links to your blog in a week or two, with enough outreach efforts.
Here’s a handful of search queries to find relevant roundup posts and digests
of blogs in your industry, replace “keyword” with your blog’s topic:
“keyword” blogs you should follow
“keyword” blogs you should read
“keyword” blogs in 2024
“keyword” trends in 2024
“keyword” give their tips in 2024
best “keyword” blogs
 
HTTPS & SSL certificates.
Google has publicly admitted site encryption is a positive ranking factor in
its algorithm. This means if you haven't already, it’s a good idea to install an
SSL security certificate on your site.
If that isn’t motivation enough, Google Chrome shows security warnings to
users visiting sites without SSL-enabled. The security notice shows up before
the user tries to visit the website stating that the website is “Not Secure”.
If you’re wondering what the hell I am talking about, you have seen website
encryption in action when you log in to your Internet banking or Gmailaccount. When you see a padlock at the start of the web address, this means
the connection is encrypted and the site owner has installed a security
certificate and verified ownership of the site.
Website encryption provides a direct connection between the user and the
website server, a bit like a tunnel. Because it’s encrypted if anybody tries to
eavesdrop on this connection any information intercepted will look like
gibberish. The only parties who can read the information are the web server
and the user. Pretty neat, huh?
Unfortunately, installing a security certificate isn’t enough to get an extra
boost to your rankings. There is a migration process required to ensure
Google picks up everything correctly if your website doesn't have one
installed.
I’ve listed basic steps below for upgrading your website without any loss in
rankings or SEO juice. But this process is more technically involved than
weaving a few keywords into the page, you should read the supporting
documentation by Google, ask your developer to do this, and possibly
consider using professional SEO help before completing this process.
What if you already have SSL installed? Then you don't have anything to
worry about. You're good from a security standpoint. And you only have to
proceed through this checklist if you're upgrading a website that doesn't have
an SSL certificate installed or enabled.
1. Contact your web host or domain registration provider to install a security
certificate. Common fees can range from $50 to $500 per year, depending on
the type of certificate.
2. Make sure both HTTPS and HTTP versions of your site continue to run.
3. Upgrade all internal resources and internal links in your HTML code to
use relative URLs. This includes references to HTML files, CSS files,
Javascript files, images, and all other files referenced in your HTML code.
This means instead of referring to internal resources in the website code with
an absolute address (e.g. http://www.yourwebsite.com/logo.jpg), it should
use a relative address (e.g. ./logo.jpg).
4. Update all of your canonical tags to point to the new HTTPS version of
your site.
5. Upload 301 redirects for all HTTP URLs to point to the new HTTPS-secured URLs.
6. Verify the new HTTPS version of your site in a new profile in Google
Search Console.
7. Upload an XML sitemap to the new HTTPS Google Search Console
profile. This sitemap should include all of the old HTTP pages from your site
and the new HTTPS pages. We are submitting the old pages to encourage
Google to crawl the old pages and register the redirects.
8. Update all links on your social media accounts and other marketing
materials to point to the new URLs.
If you want a downloadable copy of this checklist, the SSL upgrade steps for
SEO are covered in the free SEO checklist at the end of the book.
Before working through the SSL upgrade steps, make sure you or your
developer read through the support guides by Google on performing this
upgrade.
Enabling HTTPS on your servers - Google Developers
https://web.dev/enable-https/
How to move a site – Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/crawling-indexing/site-move-
with-url-changes
User Behavior Optimization—how to use Google’s
machine learning technology to your advantage.
Ever heard of Project Pigeon, the top-secret World War 2 U.S. military
project for developing missiles guided by pigeons tapping on transparent
screens?
Project Pigeon was developed by famous Harvard behavioral psychologist B.
F. Skinner in the 1940s, and later decommissioned, because in Skinner's
words, "no one would take us seriously." Later, Skinner's more notable work
on behavioral analysis was taken seriously, establishing behavioral
psychology as a legitimate field of psychology.
How we behave online—tapping on screens—has become a point of focusfor Google, with user behavior signals, such as bounce rate, time-on-site, and
click-through rate positioned strongly in Google's top 10 ranking factors.
Google's machine learning algorithm RankBrain observes these behavior
signals, recalculating search results in real-time. Fortunately, you can use this
to your advantage and get higher rankings with user behavior optimization.
Improving user behavior on your site is no longer a 'nice-to-have'… It's a
serious requirement for any SEO practitioner and a powerful technique for
anyone who wants to rank in the top 10 results.
Read on for actionable techniques for leveraging Google's machine-learning
algorithm to shoot your pages to the top of the rankings faster than a pigeon-
guided missile.
Boosting Click-Through Rates.
Your click-through rate (CTR) is the percentage of people who see your
search listing and click on it. If more people click on your search result than
others, this tells Google your page is appealing to users. Get higher click-
through rates with these 7 techniques.
1. Fill out the meta title and meta description tags on your target pages.
Unfilled meta tags lead to automatically generated snippets by Google, which
generally receive low CTRs. For every page on your site with unfilled meta
tags, an SEO technician silently weeps.
2. Make meta tags compelling. Think actionable, descriptive, and specific.
Sell your page and make it clear why the user should click on your result
instead of competing pages.
3. Use numbers and special characters to stand out. Specific numbers
naturally attract higher click-through rates. Special characters such as pipes,
em-dashes, and brackets make your rankings more eye-catching and gain
more clicks.
4. Use keywords in URLs. URLs with keywords indicate your page is
relevant at a glance, getting automatic clicks.
5. Use short URLs. Both users and Google like short URLs, and so do I.
Case closed.6. Target featured snippets and rich snippets. Rich results can gain up to 30%
more clicks. The rich snippets chapter later in this book details these types of
rankings.
7. Improve low-performing pages. Look through your Google Search
Console keyword report for keywords with low CTRs. Improve the meta tags
and URLs on those pages and make them more click-worthy.
Here’s an example of a title tag and URL that has been expertly written to
attract clicks:
How to Save Money: 20 Simple Tips | DaveRamsey.com
https://www.daveramsey.com/blog/the-secret-to-saving-money
Boosting Time On Site.
Time-on-site, bounce rates, pages-per-visit... These metrics measure similar
things—are users sticking to your content like glue, or are they immediately
clicking the back button to find a better result?
How users engage with your content is considered super important by
Google's machine learning algo RankBrain, if you can improve your time on
site, you can improve your rankings. Let’s look at 4 simple techniques for
getting users hooked to your content.
1. Increase internal links in your content. Creating relevant internal links
within your content encourages users to open up more tabs and browse more
pages on your site, 2 to 3 internal links per blog post is enough without
becoming annoying.
2. Make your content readable. Use large font sizes, preferably 16px-18px so
people don't need to fetch the magnifying glass to read your content. Use
short and simple words. Break your content down into subheadings,
numbered lists, short paragraphs, and sentences.
3. Use longer word counts. It stands to reason it takes longer for users to read
long articles. And according to a study by Ahrefs, content with long word
counts attracts more links automatically. Nice.
4. Use videos. Video is 65% of all Internet traffic according to several
studies. Simply put, Internet users love video. Every user who watchesvideos on your pages boosts your time-on-site metric in heavenly ways.
5. Use interactive media. Interactive media such as slideshows and online
tools are time-tested techniques to boost time on-site and user engagement.
Google's Core Web Vitals.
Ever waited for a slow page to load on your mobile, moved your finger to tap
where you want to go—and BAM—an annoying ad appeared under your
finger and you've accidentally tapped to a page you never wanted to visit?...
Annoying, right? Well, thank goodness Google decided to send the Page
Experience Police to put an end to this ghastly behavior.
Google HQ laid out the master plans for the "Page Experience Update", a
major update to the algorithm, on the Google Search Central Blog, which
confirmed three new signals into Google’s algorithm known as the "Core
Web Vitals", which measure a user’s experience when they visit your page.
Google announcing a change to the algorithm is rare. It’s time to sit up and
pay attention when this happens. It is something that will affect all websites
and is an opportunity to get an easy rankings boost.
These ranking factors focus on mobile and desktop. So when working
through your site, make sure these areas are improved for both mobile and
desktop users, and you'll be two steps ahead of competitors. Read on for
details on taking advantage of the web vitals to boost your rankings.
What are the Core Web Vitals?
The Core Web Vitals are three metrics that measure how positive (or how
annoying) a user's experience is. Here they are:
- Loading. How long it takes for most of your content to load?
- Interactivity. How quickly does the page respond to user interactions?
- Visual Stability. How visually stable your page is while loading—does
everything stay in the same place or does it look like a popcorn machine
about to explode?
How to Improve the Core Web Vitals.
If you're a technical newbie, there's some tech jargon ahead. Forward thelinks to your tech team or developer, ask them to improve the following
areas, then skip on to the next section. This is a technical update and there's
no way around it. Just ask for screenshots of the performance, before and
after any changes, so you can measure results.
If you're a JavaScript ninja or a tech junkie like myself, read on for easy wins
for improving the 3 vitals, tools for measuring the 3 vitals, and official
documentation from the smart lads at Google.
1. Improving Loading.
The first Core Web Vital, Largest Contentful Paint, is all about making your
main content show up faster. Having your Largest Contentful Paint occur
within 2.5 seconds is a good range according to Google’s guidelines. Fixing
the following easy wins should be more than enough to make your content
load blazingly fast, but if you want to do a deep dive, read the developer's
guide below.
- Slow server response times.
- Optimize your server.
- Route users to a nearby CDN.
- Cache assets.
- Serve HTML pages cache-first.
- Establish third-party connections early.
Optimizing Largest Contentful Paint - Web.Dev
https://web.dev/optimize-lcp/
2. Improving Interactivity.
The second Core Web Vital, First Input Delay, is all about how fast your
page responds to user input. Overall, the biggest cause for slow
responsiveness is heavy JavaScript clogging up the page. Ensuring your
pages respond to user interactions within 100 milliseconds is a good range,
according to Google’s technical guide. The following easy wins will speed up
page responsiveness, if you want more juicy details, then check out the
developer's guide below.
The second Core Web Vital, Interaction to Next Paint (INP), is all about how
fast your page responds to user input. Overall, the biggest cause for slowresponsiveness is heavy JavaScript clogging up the page. Ensuring your
pages respond to user interactions within 200 milliseconds is a good range,
according to Google’s technical guide. The following easy wins will speed up
page responsiveness; for more details, check out the developer's guide below.
- Break up Long Tasks.
- Optimize your page for interaction readiness.
- Use a web worker.
- Reduce JavaScript execution time.
Optimize Interaction to Next Paint - Web.Dev
https://web.dev/articles/optimize-inp
3. Improving Visual Stability.
The third Core Web Vital, Cumulative Layout Shift, is all about how much
your page bounces around while loading, less is better (well, duh!). Making
sure less than 10% of your layout shifts while loading is a good goal,
according to Google’s guidelines. Fix the following low-hanging fruit and
your page will be visually stable while it loads. If you still experience issues,
read the following technical documentation.
- Images without dimensions.
- Ads, embeds, and iframes without dimensions.
- Dynamically injected content.
- Web Fonts causing flashes of invisible or unstyled text.
- Actions waiting for a network response before updating DOM.
Optimize Cumulative Layout Shift - Web.Dev
https://web.dev/optimize-cls/
Core Web Vitals Tools.
The following tools will help you measure the Core Web Vitals on your
website, find opportunities to improve them, and track results.
Chrome Web Vitals – Google Chrome Extension
https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web-vitals-extension
Core Web Vitals Report – Google Search Console
https://support.google.com/webmasters/answer/9205520Lighthouse – Google Chrome
https://github.com/GoogleChrome/lighthouse
Core Web Vitals Resources.
Again, if you’re not very technical, don’t be overwhelmed, forward the above
links to your web developer, the three areas of improvement are easily fixed
on most sites. If you’re a developer or technical person like myself, the above
easy-wins are more than enough to ensure the Core Web Vitals perform well
on most websites. For the detail-a-holics out there wanting all the official
details from Google HQ, check out the links below.
Evaluating Page Experience For a Better Web – Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2020/05/evaluating-page-
experience
 
Learn Web Vitals
https://web.dev/learn-core-web-vitals/
Voice search optimization: your how-to guide for
voice search results.
Imagine asking your car where the nearest coffee shop is and getting a
perfect answer instantly. That’s the convenience of voice search, a
technology that's rapidly transforming the SEO playing field. As screens give
way to spoken commands, let's look at essential strategies for optimizing
your online presence for voice search.
Understanding voice search.
Voice search is not just a fad. It began as a novel way to conduct searches
without typing and has matured into a sophisticated technology that’s
changing user behavior. It's pivotal for SEO because voice search results are
often drawn from the very top of the search engine results page — the
coveted position zero. Voice searches are typically more conversational and
can be significantly longer than text queries. Now, here's a nugget to chew
on: Did you know that over 50% of all searches are expected to be voice-
based by the end of this year?Setting up for voice search success.
The foundation of voice search readiness is a website that loads in the blink
of an eye and displays seamlessly on any device. Google’s voice search
algorithms favor sites that have SSL certificates, signaling that they’re secure
and trustworthy. Your mobile support needs to get a pass, and your Core
Web Vitals and load speed needs to be good too. Make sure you get these
basic elements in place first, because they are prerequisites for a voice search
result.
Want to see how your site stacks up? Google’s PageSpeed Insights and
Mobile-Friendly Test are go-to tools for a quick health check.
 
Planning content for voice search.
When it comes to voice search, your content should be conversational. Long-
form content may demonstrate authority, but it's the precise, concise answers
that win voice search results. Creating 'snippet bait' – content designed to be
featured as a direct answer – can give you an edge. Incorporate FAQs and
How-Tos that mimic natural language questions. For instance, a page
answering “How do I change a tire?” with clear, step-by-step instructions is
ripe for voice search success.
Here's an example outline of an article:
Main Heading (H1): "Quick Garden Salad Recipe"
Subheading (H2): "What Ingredients Do I Need for a Simple Garden Salad?"
Bulleted list of essential ingredients
40-50 words
Subheading (H2): "How to Make a Garden Salad Dressing?"
Easy-to-follow dressing recipe
40-50 words
Subheading (H2): "How to Toss a Fresh Garden Salad"
Step-by-step instructions for assembling the salad
40-50 words
Subheading (H2): "What Can To Your Garden Salad for Extra Crunch?"List of crunchy toppings with short descriptions
40-50 words
Subheading (H2): "Can I Make a Garden Salad Ahead of Time?"
Tips for preparing a salad in advance without losing freshness
40-50 words
By crafting content that's specifically targeting rich snippets, and by making
headings and content conversational, you're much more likely to be picked
up for a voice search result.
Use speakable structured data.
Structured data speaks directly to search engines in a language they
understand, helping them digest and display your content for voice searches.
Adding schema markup can significantly enhance your visibility for voice
queries. The Speakable schema, in particular, is designed for voice search,
signaling which sections of your content are suitable for audio playback. Add
schema markup to your page with the speakable schema telling search
engines which parts of your content can be spoken easily. You should add
this in addition to any regular schema markup you have on the page. Here's
an example of the SpeakableSpecification portion of schema markup.
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
...
"speakable": {
"@type": "SpeakableSpecification",
"xpath": [
"/html/body/main/article/h2[1]",
"/html/body/main/article/p[1]",
"/html/body/main/article/h2[2]",
"/html/body/main/article/p[2]",
"/html/body/main/article/h2[3]",
"/html/body/main/article/p[3]",
"/html/body/main/article/h2[4]",
"/html/body/main/article/p[4]",
"/html/body/main/article/h2[5]",
"/html/body/main/article/p[5]"]
}
...
</script>
When you're done, you can use tools like the Schema Markup Generator and
Google’s Structured Data Testing Tool, invaluable for implementing and
testing your structured data.
Structured data markup that Google Search supports
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-
data/search-gallery
Rich Results Test
https://search.google.com/test/rich-results
Voice search optimization is no longer optional. By using these techniques,
you’re not just adapting to current trends; you’re future-proofing your SEO.
Start by improving your site’s mobile responsiveness and loading speeds.
Then craft voice search-ready content. And finally, add structured data to
your page. With these steps, you'll be well on your way to dominating the
voice search results.
~
That sums it up for the on-page SEO chapter.
If you have a small business, the optimization factors mentioned earlier in
this chapter are what will make a difference—such as ensuring your site has
the right keywords and is accessible to all users.
If you are doing SEO for a large company and need a large amount of traffic,
regularly publishing new content and ensuring structural areas of your site
are set up correctly, are strategies that will make a difference—such as
regularly posting new blog posts, ensuring you have sitemaps working
correctly, and no duplicate content or 404 errors.
What’s most important is you act. On-page SEO is often the easiest part of
SEO. The power is in your hands to fix these areas on your site. Remember
small changes can lead to big results. Put these methods into practice and
start improving your rankings.Just like the keyword research steps, for readers who want to put the theory
into practice, all on-page optimization tips from this chapter are included in
the SEO checklist. I recommend finishing the book before downloading the
checklist and the on-page SEO steps, so you are familiar with the theory
behind the practical steps.Chapter 4: Link building. How to rank
extremely high on Google.
Why is link-building so important?
The previous chapter described how to make your site more visible to search
engines with on-page SEO. But if you want to show up at the top of the
search results your site needs links.
You may have wondered what makes links so important, especially when
there are so many factors Google uses to rank sites. The truth is, that links are
such a strong factor, that it is unlikely you will rank high for a keyword if
you are competing against sites with more backlinks.
When you think about it, links are the currency of the web. Each time a page
links to another, it is a vote for the value of the page being linked to. If a page
provides massive value to Internet users, it stands to reason it will get links
from other websites. This is why links are such a strong factor in Google's
algorithm.
Link building is the key to ranking your site high in search engine results.
The dirty little secret no one wants to tell you about
link building.
There are a lot of opinions circulating the Internet about the best 
kind of links
to build to your site. So much so, that they often escalate into heated
discussions.
What is the best link? A link from a government site or a high-trafficked
blog? Is it better to get a link from a highly relevant site or a site with a lot of
social media activity?
The dirty secret no one wants to tell you about link building is 
there is nosingle best kind of link
.
If this weren’t the case, Google wouldn't work. Everyone would go out and
find a way to spam their way to the top of the rankings very quickly. Having
thousands of one type of link pointing to a page is suspicious and a clear sign
the site owner is gaming the system.
That said, as a rule, you should try to build links on authoritative, relevant,
and high-quality sites. High-quality, relevant links are much stronger than
links from low-quality, unrelated sites.
How to acquire links and what to avoid in link
building.
Many stories are floating around about business owners being slammed by
Google for no good reason. Don't let the horror stories mislead you.
In most cases, what happened is the webmaster was doing something
suspicious or outdated, like building thousands of links to their site from link
directories, and then their rankings suddenly dropped off from Google's top
10 search results.
If you don't exhibit overly spammy behavior in your link building, as a
general rule you will be OK.
These best practices will ensure you acquire links correctly and don't break
Google's terms of service:
1. Acquire links naturally and evenly over time. Your links should be
attained consistently and organically.
Google has made its approach to assessing link acquisition with time public
knowledge. Patent US20050071741 outlines how Google analyzes the age of
links and the rate they are acquired and then uses this information to calculate
the search results.
If you don’t fancy reading up on patents in your spare time, then just
remember to gradually build up your links over time, so Google sees that
your website is acquiring links organically. Don't go out and buy one
thousand links pointing to your site overnight or you’re sure to set off a redflag in Google’s system and get into its bad books.
2. Don't purchase links unless you know what you are doing. Buying links to
boost your rankings is against Google's spam policies and you risk being
penalized. These kinds of links may work but are generally not worth the
potential damage unless you are confident you know what you are doing.
3. Forget about link-swapping or link-trading. These schemes are completely
obvious to Google, and either no longer work or may harm your site. This
goes against common knowledge, but I've achieved countless number-one
rankings for ridiculously competitive keywords without ever swapping links.
Link-swapping is extremely time-consuming and completely unnecessary.
Get by without it.
4. Don't spam message boards, article sites, or blog comments with crappy
content. This might work temporarily, but strategies such as these are
outdated very quickly.
5. There are paid networks out there offering to build new links to your site
for a low monthly fee each month. Never use them. These networks are
against Google’s spam policies and using them is a quick way to ensure you
find yourself in hot water with Google.
Anchor text. What's all the fuss?
There has been some controversy around anchor text, as touched on in a
previous chapter. Anchor text is the text contained in a link. Anchor text 
was
one of the strongest factors for achieving top rankings.
If you had one thousand links to your site with “NFL football jerseys” as the
link text, and competitors only had a handful of links with the same anchor
text, it was likely you would rank number one. That is until Google’s
Penguin update effectively put an end to SEOs using “exact match” anchor
text as their strategy. Now it is just simply too risky.
Not only is it no longer as effective as it once was, but building hundreds of
“exact match” links to a site actually can prevent it from ranking for that
keyword.
So then, you might wonder, what is the best way to build up anchor text?It should be natural.
It is OK to have your targeted keyword in your anchor text, but it should not
be the only keyword or the main keyword in all of your links, and there
should be a mix of related keywords.
If you think about it, this is a pattern all legitimate sites naturally attract. It
defies logic that a quality site would automatically be linked with the same
text throughout the entire World Wide Web.
Look over the below examples to see a bad anchor text profile compared to a
natural anchor text profile:
Bad anchor text – text in external links
http://www.examplefootballbrand.com/football-jerseys.html
NFL football jerseys - 200 links
Good anchor text - text in external links
http://www.examplefootballbrand.com/football-jerseys.html
examplefootballbrand - 50 links
NFL football jersey store - 10 links
NFL football jerseys - 5 links
http://www.examplefootballbrand.com - 25 links
football jersey store - 5 links
football jerseys online - 5 links
football jacket store - 15 links
click here - 7 links
website - 15 links
The above good anchor text example illustrates the natural way sites
accumulate links over time. Your target keyword should not be the most
linked phrase to the page.
You can learn a lot by looking at the search engine results ranking in Google,
entering high-ranking sites into Link Explorer, and looking at their anchor
text. You'll notice almost every top-ranking page has natural anchor text, like
the good example above.
Track your link-building efforts and keep them in a spreadsheet. This way
you can monitor your anchor text and make sure it fits in with best practices.Link Explorer
https://moz.com/link-explorer
Simple to advanced link-building strategies.
The link-building strategies below will help you build up quality links
pointing to your site, and give Google a nudge to rank your site higher,
ranging from simple tactics for the small business, right up to the enterprise-
level SEO agency looking to roll out links on a large scale.
Business directories.
Business directories are a tried and true form of link building that received
some flack in recent years. This is due to Google penalizing spammers who
built ridiculous amounts of low-quality directory links to their sites.
Business directories shouldn’t be overlooked. In fact, directory links should
be the first place to start with any link-building project. There’s a solid
amount of high-quality business directories where you can get powerful
backlinks with a minimum of effort.
I'm talking about trusted, industry standard websites like Yelp, Better
Business Bureau, and Yellow Pages. Business directories that screen and vet
applications and list legitimate businesses.
But just to be safe, your these types of links should not make up much more
than 10-20% of your total links. They must also be relevant and quality sites,
i.e. not sites with web addresses like seolinksdirectory.com or
freelinksdirectory.com. Sites like these just smell like spam! Before building
a link on a directory, ask yourself, “Does this look like a legitimate and
trustworthy website?” If the answer is no, then move on and focus on
legitimate, quality sites only.
 
To find relevant directories, use the below search terms in Google, replacing
“keyword” with your targeted keyword or industry, and you can find relevant
directories for your niche:
keyword + submit
keyword + add URL
keyword + add linkkeyword + directory
Here is a short list of business directories to get started:
https://www.linkedin.com/
https://www.bingplaces.com/
http://www.yelp.com/
https://www.mapquest.com/
https://www.yellowpages.com/
https://www.manta.com/
https://www.local.com/
https://www.citysearch.com/
https://www.merchantcircle.com/
Stealing your competitor’s links.
Stealing your competitor's links is an old-school tactic receiving a resurgence
in recent times, due to Google’s increased focus on links from quality sites,
making it more difficult to find easy link opportunities.
If your competitor has done all the heavy lifting, why not take advantage of
their hard work? Use the below sites to export your competitors’ backlinks.
By looking through their links you can often find link opportunities to build
links pointing to your site. In most cases, you can be confident you are going
after SEO-friendly link sources if the competitor is already ranking well in
Google.
Ahrefs - $99 per month.
https://www.ahrefs.com/
Majestic SEO Backlink Checker – Free to try then $49 per month.
https://majestic.com
Moz Link Explorer – Free to try then $99 per month
https://moz.com/link-explorer
Video link building.
Google loves videos, and it especially loves videos from video powerhouse
YouTube. Probably because Google owns YouTub
e…
 If you want the
opportunity to capture visitors from the world's largest video search engine,posting videos will considerably help your SEO.
Post relevant how-to guides, industry news updates, and instructional videos
for the best response from users. Then link to the relevant pages on your site
in the description.
The key to success in video link building is to ensure the video and your
description are related. You should aim to have your targeted keywords on
the page somewhere.
And don't worry. Your video doesn't have to be on par with the latest Martin
Scorsese masterpiece. It can be a simple 5 or 10-minute video, educating
visitors with useful knowledge about your topic. Just focus on making it
contribute value for the viewer.
The tools below can help with quickly creating videos and uploading them to
the web.
OBS Studio
https://obsproject.com/
OBS Studio is free, open-source screen recording software that allows you to
record high-quality screencasts from your computer. You can download
video files in high quality after you have finished or make live streams. OBS
Studio is free, and works on Windows, Mac, and Linux, but can be a little
technical to use. User-friendly alternatives include QuickTime Playe
r’
s
native screen recording function for Mac users or a paid screen recording app
like Camtasia.
High-quality sites you can easily visit, upload videos, and get backlinks from:
https://www.youtube.com/
https://www.vimeo.com/
https://www.veoh.com/
https://www.dailymotion.com/
https://www.archive.org/
Guest posting.
Guest posting has become standard practice for many link builders, for its
effectiveness in getting high-quality, highly relevant, and contextual links—the type of links Google loves.
Finding guest post opportunities is fairly straightforward. Simply do a few
Google searches with the following search terms and you'll find some quality
placements. This strategy does require that you or your writer produce
articles with a reasonable standard of quality... Articles that are well-written,
researched, articulated, and preferably citing sources, are more likely to get
social shares and high user engagement—which will increase the strength of
the links. Further, if you have a reasonably sized social platform behind you
—the editor or site owner might be more enticed to post your blog post.
On the other hand, if you try this strategy on a large scale with cheap, poorly
written outsourced articles with bad grammar, providing little benefit for
users, it's possible you could harm your rankings. Quality is critical for a
successful guest posting strategy.
Try the following search queries in Google, replacing
 
“
keywor
d”
 with
your industry, niche, or topic, for finding guest post opportunities. And paste
the search results into a spreadsheet, so you can reach out to the blogs for a
guest post placement—which will be covered later in this chapter.
keyword "guest post"
keyword "guest article"
keyword "guest author"
keyword "guest contributor"
keyword "contributor"
keyword "sponsored post"
keyword "write for us"
keyword intitle:"write for us"
keyword inurl:"write-for-us"
keyword "guest post guidelines"
Experiment with it and come up with your own search terms!
Broken link building.
Broken link building is a new, but effective strategy. With this new strategy,
you can reach out to quality sites with broken links on their pages, and use
this as an opportunity to convince the site administrator to provide an updated
link to your site.When you find a broken link, let them know the broken link exists and that
you have an alternative resource on your site that will benefit their readers.
With this strategy, you should create a linkable resource on your site. This
makes it very easy for the webmaster to point the link to your replacement.
Use the search phrases below to find potential pages with broken links,
adding your keyword to the start of the search phrase:
keyword useful links
keyword useful resources
keyword useful sites
keyword recommended links
keyword recommended resources
keyword recommended sites
keyword suggested links
keyword suggested resources
keyword suggested sites
keyword more links
keyword more resources
keyword more sites
keyword related links
keyword related resources
keyword related sites
If you want to automate this process, the service below will do the heavy
lifting and tell you which broken links exist on any page you enter into the
tool.
Broken Link Checker – Ahrefs
https://ahrefs.com/broken-link-checker
Broken brand mentions.
Broken brand mentions are a fast, simple, and reliable form of link building
you can use for almost every SEO project. It goes like this: in some cases
when someone mentions your brand they forget to post a link. Track
mentions of your brand, and where suitable, reach out and ask for a link back
to your site. Use the below tools to track mentions of your brand. If you see a
mention of your brand without a link, send a quick email to the author, andthey will often be happy to link to your site.
Brand monitoring sites I’ve found useful:
Google Alerts - Free
https://www.google.com/alerts
Google Alerts is a very powerful brand monitoring tool. Get email alerts
whenever your brand name is mentioned, or, when any keyword is mentioned
across the web. Both are free and powerful, making them worth checking out.
Mention - Free to try, pricing starts at $49 per month.
https://mention.com/en/
Mention is a powerful brand-monitoring tool that will send an email alert
when your brand is mentioned online, so you can respond quickly.
Paid links.
While paid links are against Google’s terms of service, these below link-
building tactics do work and can fly under the radar. Needless to say, if
you’re feeling daring, you’ve been warned and I take no responsibility for
what happens as a result of paid link strategies.
Donate to charities & non-profits.
Charities and non-profit sites often have a donors’ page. Search for “site:.org
+ donors” or “site:.org + sponsors” in Google for a list of organizations that
have these pages, offer a donation, and request a listing on the page.
Better Business Bureau.
Links from the Better Business Bureau are among the best links you can
receive. Better Business Bureau links will pass authority and trust. Check
your listing to see if you are already linking back to your site, and if you’re
not already a member, then consider signing up.
Harnessing the power of digital PR for SEO.
Imagine if every piece of content you create becomes a magnet for links.
Drawing the attention of industry leaders. And resonating so profoundly with
your audience that they can't help but share it. That's the power of digital PR -
the new approach to link building.Content that attracts links.
Not all content is created equal when it comes to attracting links. Journalists
and bloggers are more likely to share pieces that:
- Offer unique insights and data.
- Solve specific problems.
- Tell compelling stories.
- Go beyond the ordinary.
Fortunately, you don't have to reinvent the wheel. There are tried and tested
formats of content that attract links. Here's a short list of compelling content
that attracts links almost automatically...
- Comprehensive guides and how-tos.
- Industry reports.
- Thought leadership pieces.
- Style guides.
- Interactive tools and calculators.
- Visual storytelling via infographics.
- Interviews with industry experts.
- Whitepapers.
- Free templates and resources.
- Curated content collections.
Research & brainstorming link-worthy ideas.
Because you want to ensure that you're running with content that is likely to
perform well. To do this you need to understand what topics are trending
online. And you want to unearth topics that are doing well in search engines.
Buzzsumo (
https://buzzsumo.com
) can show you which articles are going
viral on social media and in the press. And tools like Exploding Topics
(
https://explodingtopics.com/
) and Google Trends
(
https://trends.google.com/trends/
) will let you see what topics are trending
on search engines.
Next, if you want to use data in your content, there are several great, free,
publicly-owned and privately-owned websites that have a ton of valuable
data for making compelling content. Use these to find insights that only datacan provide.
Publicly owned platforms:
- Data.gov (
https://data.gov/
) - The official U.S. government open data portal,
offering datasets across various agencies and topics.
- World Bank Open Data (
https://data.worldbank.org/
) - Open access to
development-related data covering countries worldwide.
- UNData (
https://data.un.org/
) - Provides access to statistics and indicators
from various UN agencies.
- Eurostat (
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat
) - Statistical data portal for the
European Union.
- FAOSTAT (
https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home
) - Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations statistical database.
Privately owned platforms:
- Statista (
https://www.statista.com/
) - A leading provider of market and
consumer data, offering statistics, infographics, and reports on various
industries and topics.
- Numbeo (
https://www.numbeo.com/
) - A crowdsourced cost-of-living
database that allows users to compare prices and living conditions in different
cities worldwide.
- Kaggle (
https://www.kaggle.com/
) - A platform for data scientists to share,
explore, and analyze datasets.
- Quandl (
https://data.nasdaq.com/publishers/QDL
) - Provides financial and
economic datasets for various markets and industries.
- Socrata (
https://dev.socrata.com/
) - A data platform offering data access and
analysis tools for various sectors.
Craft compelling content.
You want to ensure your writing is clear, concise, and error-free. And you
want to focus on having great readability. This means, using short sentences,
active voice, and bullet points to break up text for easy consumption.
Hemingway Editor (
https://hemingwayapp.com/
) will make your text easy to
read, by trimming down your sentences so they are clear and readable. And
Grammarly (https://www.grammarly.com) will remove typos and
grammatical errors.Design great content.
Create visually appealing infographics, charts, and diagrams to enhance
engagement and data visualization. Consider quizzes, polls, or calculators to
boost audience participation and shareability.
Piktochart (https://piktochart.com/) and Canva (
https://www.canva.com/
) can
help you create compelling visuals like infographics, diagrams and
illustrations.
For interactive elements, like interactive maps or charts, you might need to
hire a front-end developer. This might come at a premium, but it's worth it—
interactive content attracts shares and links.
Reach the right journalists and bloggers.
Contacting the right journalists and bloggers is crucial for securing
placements. Research their areas of interest, comment thoughtfully on their
content, and pitch your story in a personalized and concise email. Target
journalists who have covered similar topics and shared relevant content.
By following these steps and continuously refining your approach, you can
leverage the power of digital PR to build a strong backlink profile and build
your brand at the same time.
Link outreach—scaling up high-quality link-
building campaigns.
Link outreach is a common and powerful link technique in use by SEO
professionals these days, and for good reason—it's an effective way to scale
your high-quality and relevant links.
What to avoid with link outreach campaigns.
Before we jump into link outreach techniques, Google publicly stated
guidelines on this practice and it's important to know what to avoid, so you
don't get into Google's naughty book.
Here's a direct quote of the combination of factors Google considers bad
practice, as discussed in guidelines about large-scale article campaigns:- Stuffing keyword-rich links to your site in your articles.
- Having the articles published across many different sites; alternatively,
having a large number of articles on a few large, different sites.
- Use or hire article writers who are
n
’
t
 knowledgeable about the topics
the
y’
re writing on.
- Use the same or similar content across these articles; alternatively, duplicate
the full content of articles found on your site (in which case use of
rel
=‘
canonica
l’
 and rel
=‘
nofollo
w’
 tags are advised).
The guidelines are a little vagu
e…
 The reason being, that Google can't
completely outlaw guest-posting, nor can it outlaw site owners talking with
other site owners to collaborate—that would hardly be fair and an over-reach
on Google's part.
Google is mostly concerned the articles are relevant, high-quality, posted on
relevant sites, aren't stuffed with extreme numbers of links pointing to your
site, and you're not annoying a billion site owners with spammy
unpersonalized email blasts filling up their inboxes. Avoid these practices,
and you'll avoid getting a slap from Mr. Google.
Here are the official guidelines from the guys over at Google HQ if you want
to read up further.
A reminder about links in large-scale article campaigns - Google Search
Central Blog
https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2017/05/a-reminder-about-links-
in-large-scale
Steps for link outreach campaigns.
Typically, there are two steps for link outreach campaigns:
1. Prospecting - finding link opportunities and finding contact information.
2. Outreach - writing and sending emails, follow-ups, replies, and managing
relationships.
We've already covered link opportunities, such as looking through
competitors’ backlinks and finding guest post opportunities, so let’s jump
into the nitty gritty of finding contact information and conducting a link
outreach campaign.Finding contact information.
Finding contact information is easy with the right tools. First, you can use a
standalone tool for automatically finding contact details on sites while
browsing through link opportunities, like Hunter.io's very handy Chrome
extension which automatically finds contact details for you, or you can make
things simple and try an all-in-one email outreach platform covered in the
next section, that both find contact details and sends emails.
Secondly, you should track all your link opportunities in a spreadsheet or
Google Doc, and make sure you leave a personal note for each link
opportunity, which will later be dynamically inserted into your email (more
on this later).
Hunter
https://hunter.io/
Hunter is purely focused on finding contact details and is very good at it. It
has a nice Chrome plugin that shows you the contact details it can find for a
particular site while browsing. Free plans include up to 100 contact
information requests, for more contact requests plans start at $49 per month.
Personalization.
Whichever outreach platform you use, you should always ensure your email
is personalized in some way. This includes addressing the author or editor by
name, mentioning a recent article that captured your interest, a similarity
between your sites, or how you have a particular resource or topic that aligns
with something the site owner is passionate about. Leave a note of this in
your spreadsheet while reviewing opportunities...
Remember, there's a big difference between contacting a site owner with a
relevant, personalized email and mutually beneficial opportunity for
collaboration, and a big spammy email blast to a thousand site owners using
the same email template—which could quickly get you in hot water with
Google. Do
n’
t skip the personalization.
Outreach platforms and scheduling emails.
There's a growing number of outreach platforms due to the increasing
popularity of this technique. Here are some popular options on the market.Some only send emails, while others offer end-to-end outreach campaign
management, including finding prospects, contact details, sending emails,
automated follow-ups, and the whole kit and caboodle. Anyways, here they
are.
Mailshake
https://mailshake.com/
Mailshake is pure-outreach. You will need to provide contact information
yourself. It is very effective at sending personalized email campaigns, and
you can import personalization info including name, address, and a personal
message via a CSV file. Includes automatic follow-ups, email template
libraries, and more. Plans start at $59 per month.
Buzzstream.
https://www.buzzstream.com/
Buzzstream is the darling of many link builders and content marketers. It is
an end-to-end outreach platform, meaning it can find contact details, send
emails, track relationships, and more. Buzzstream doesn't allow automatic
follow-ups or one-click sending for your campaigns, so a bit of manual work
is required to run campaigns through Buzzstream. Plans start at $24 per
month.
Ninja Outreach
https://ninjaoutreach.com/
Ninja Outreach is another end-to-end outreach platform, including finding
contact details, sending emails, personalization, automatic follow-ups, and
more. I have noticed the majority of bloggers on this platform ask for you to
pay to contribute to their site, which is a downside in my opinion. Pricing
starts at $389 per month.
Pitchbox
https://pitchbox.com/
Pitchbox is an enterprise-level outreach platform, including finding contact
details, personalized emails, automated follow-ups, detailed reporting, and
more. Pitchbox is more suited for larger teams or campaigns, SEO agencies,
and SEO professionals. It comes at a higher price point, but is sometimes the
preferred tool for serious SEO guys and gals, due to having more features and
flexibility than the other platforms. Plans start at $550 per month.How to get links from major news outlets for free.
Did you know you can get links from major news outlets such as Fox News,
The New York Times, and Time Magazine without paying a cent? Well, you
can. The service is called Help A 
Reporter Out and it connects over 55,000
reporters with sources for news articles every day, for a wide range of topics
from cooking tips, small business advice, tech news—you name it. If you've
ever wanted badges on your site saying, "featured on Fox News, MSNBC,
and CNN", then you've come to the right place.
HARO sends a massive email blast around 3-times every day with reporters'
requests for contributors for stories. HARO's emails will flood your inbox,
which is why they have paid plans for filtering emails with keywords and
SMS alerts. If you're on a budget, no problem, you can use their free plan and
only see relevant opportunities by setting up Gmail filters, as described later
in this section.
How to get started with HARO step-by-step.
1. Sign up for HARO with the link at the end of this section.
2. Enter your personal information and select the categories you are interested
in. It's better to use more categories, we will filter out irrelevant opportunities
later.
3. It's a good idea to upload a high-res professional headshot to your website
in JPG or PNG format. And if you have one handy, upload a press kit while
you're at it (a quick one-pager on the background of your company with
contact details for PR professionals). Don't email attachments to reporters or
you'll set off antivirus and spam alerts over at HARO HQ and get yourself in
hot water. Send links instead.
4. Wait until you start receiving daily emails from HARO. You won't miss it,
they will flood your inbox.
5. Follow the instructions in the next section to filter the emails out of your
inbox so you're not overwhelmed.
Help A Reporter Out
https://www.helpareporter.com/
Use the "HARO One-Two Punch".I would like to introduce a technique I call the "HARO One-Two Punch", for
maximizing HARO results and keeping your inbox tidy. We're going to
create two Gmail filters for HARO emails, one specific and one broad. The
specific filter helps you respond to relevant opportunities faster. After you've
responded to relevant opportunities with higher success rates, you can
respond to broad opportunities to improve your overall media mentions. Best
of all, HARO emails will be kept in their own folder, away from your inbox,
keeping it all nice and tidy.
Perform the following searches in your Gmail account. Create a Gmail filter
for each search, making sure to select "skip the inbox" and "apply label". In
the following examples, I've used a Gmail search that would match a travel
startup founder based in the San Francisco area. Change the keywords to suit
your background.
Example HARO-specific Gmail search - apply the label "haro-specific":
from:(haro@helpareporter.com) (tech|startup|founder|CEO|travel|San
Francisco)
Example HARO broad Gmail search - apply label "haro-broad":
from:(haro@helpareporter.com) -(tech|startup|founder|CEO|travel|San
Francisco)
See the difference? The minus sign in the second Gmail search hides the
specific results from the broad results. If you haven’t created Gmail filters
before, check out the guide below.
Once set up, make a habit of checking your HARO-specific Gmail folder
first, for the most relevant opportunities. Reply to as many relevant
opportunities as possible before replying to broad opportunities, to maximize
results.
Create Rules to Filter Your Emails - Gmail
https://support.google.com/mail/answer/6579?hl=en
Advanced tips to increase success with HARO.
1. Keep at it. Don't give up on the first or second day. Success rates range
between 5%-15%. The more opportunities you reply to, the more you'll be
featured.2. Keep it relevant. Reporters are flooded with responses. If you want to
stand out, don't waffle, and don't tell your whole life story. Get straight to the
point and answer reporters' questions directly. If you want to provide more
background information, provide it after replying to the reporter’s questions.
3. Establish your expertise. If you’ve got it, flaunt it. Reporters want to quote
experts. If you are an expert, make it clear in your bio and email signature.
4. Reply to anonymous opportunities. Big publications often send HARO
emails with the publication listed anonymously. Why? They don't want to be
flooded with irrelevant pitches from small website owners desperate to get a
link. Replying to anonymous media opportunities increases your chances of
being mentioned in a big publication. It also increases your chances of being
featured on smaller and less known sites, a fair trade.
5. Set up Google alerts and get an email alert whenever you’re mentioned
across the web. More often than not, sources get featured in news articles,
sometimes weeks or months later, without even knowing. Fortunately,
Google alerts can help you never miss a mention in the media. If you do get
mentioned without getting a link, reach out to the reporter or webmaster and
ask to have your link included in the article.
Google Alerts
https://www.google.com/alerts
6. Automate your responses with Gmail templates. There’s no need to start
from scratch every time you write a reply to reporters’ questions—we’re
living in the age of automation, baby! Respond to a few reporters’ questions,
then save your email as a template in Gmail. Next time, automatically insert
your email with just a few clicks, make it customized to the reporter’s
questions, and get your emails out 10 times faster. To access Gmail
templates, click on the more button at the bottom right corner of Gmail’s
compose window (it looks like three vertical dots). If you can’t figure out
Gmail’s email templates, check out the simple guide below.
Create Email Templates – Google Workspace Learning Center
https://support.google.com/a/users/answer/9308990?hl=en
Additional link-building opportunities.The aforementioned link-building techniques are enough for 99% of readers
to push rankings higher than competitors. For link-building junkies who’ve
exhausted the above options, here’s a handful of strategies listed in rapid-fire
fashion. These are intended for advanced SEO users, who are already actively
blogging and building links.
1. Create your own authority links.
The most powerful link-building strategy is to simply go out and make your
authority links. By buying a previously owned website or domain, you can
turn it into a blog and unlimited source for powerful, highly relevant links for
your site.
There are readers out there who will scoff at this strategy and there are
readers out there nodding their heads—it’s the readers nodding their heads
that know how powerful this strategy is. Links from authority sources in your
market are much more powerful than any other kind of link, and the easiest
way to get authority links is to create your own authority site. Consider
buying a website more than three or four years old with a relevant domain,
for a more powerful effect.
Be careful with this strategy. If you create a network of sites like this and
obscure the ownership details at the domain registry, and only link back to
websites you own, you risk being labeled as the owner of a private blog
network by Google and could receive ranking penalties. However, if you
create a legitimate, authoritative resource that creates genuine value for users,
you should be fine.
Flippa
https://flippa.com
Marketplace for buying and selling websites.
Sedo
https://sedo.com
Buy and sell domains.
2. Relationship link building.
If you’ve been following the online advice on blogging and link-building in
the past couple of years you will have noticed a 
recurring theme: buildingrelationships. Building relationships with other bloggers is a powerful way to
consistently earn strong backlinks.
While this strategy is only relevant for users with active blogs on their site,
fortunately, creating these relationships and getting the links is easier than it
sounds. Other bloggers in your industry are just as dependent on links as you
are. So why not link to them in your blog posts first? By linking out in your
blog posts to other bloggers you 1) give a valuable backlink to the blogger,
and 2) give recognition to the blogger for being an authority in the industry.
Everyone likes recognition, and the law of reciprocity comes into play here,
you will find most bloggers are grateful for being mentioned and happy to
link back in a social media post or future blog post.
Try creating or curating popular blog posts into a top-level summary, then
send a quick email to the bloggers mentioned, let them know, and very
politely ask for a mention or link back. The best part of this strategy is
curating blog posts; it is often easier than creating content from scratch.
Example email:
Hey [expert blogger],
Just thought I’d give you a heads-up. I’ve just featured you in my post [xyz]
…
Hope you don’t mind. If you’re happy with the article, I would appreciate a
mention on social media or perhaps a link back. Or if you want anything
changed, feel free to let me know.
Really enjoyed your post on [xyz].
Thanks!
An example expert round-up post:
The top marketing trends of 2023 & how they've changed - data from 1000+
global marketers
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/marketing-trends
3. Testimonial link building.
An awesome way to get high-quality, relevant links back to your site is to
give out testimonials. Sometimes you can earn a link back to your site from
somebody else’s homepage, possibly one of the strongest types of links! I
will sometimes go as far as purchasing a product just to get a testimonial link.Give this strategy a try by finding a few sites with testimonials and offering
your own. Of course make it easy for the webmaster by including all the
information they need, such as a photo, your name, job title, testimonial and
link back to your site. The key is to look for businesses or services with a
testimonials page already, or a testimonials carousel or widget on their
homepage. Speed up your search with a couple of Google search queries:
"keyword" + testimonials
"keyword" + recommendations
"keyword" + "client testimonials"
"keyword" + "customer testimonials"
"keyword" + "what customers say"
"keyword" + "what people say"
That wraps it up for links. Let's have another look at the techniques we just
covered...
- Submitting to business directories.
- Creating videos and creating links in the descriptions.
- Guest posting.
- Broken link building.
- Outreach and asking for links.
- PR and getting featured in news articles with HARO.
- Creating relationships with other bloggers.
- Creating your own authoritative websites for unlimited relevant links.
- Creating testimonials for other products.
Are there more techniques than this? Probably. But they will use the same
principles and processes as the techniques we just covered. The techniques
covered in this chapter are more than enough to get started and see results.
Exhaust these techniques first. Then when you have experience seeing what
works and what doesn't, improve the processes and come up with your
techniques.Chapter 5: Social media & SEO.
Is social media important for SEO?
Social media has become integral to the way we use the Internet. Important
content is not only linked, it is shared, liked, tweeted, and pinned. How
people use the Internet has drastically changed, and this hasn’t gone
unnoticed over at the Googleplex. Many independent studies on Google’s
ranking algorithm show a large correlation between high-ranking pages and
strong social media activity.
While the official stance from Google is that social signals are not directly
used in the algorithm, the SEO community pretty much agrees it certainly
helps with achieving rankings. Disagreements aside, I can tell from my own
experience, that sites with large social followings consistently get higher
rankings in shorter timeframes. What's most likely happening is that Google
collects a broad range of data points on a website's popularity, and social
activity is among those data points. And it uses social activity as a gauge of
the overall strength of the brand.
 
Not only can you use social media to build social activity to increase your
overall SEO strength, but you can also use social media to regularly create
backlinks that are free and easy to build. It also increases referral traffic back
to your site and engages previous customers. As a rule, social media should
be a part of every SEO project, or perhaps every marketing project.
Twitter & SEO: harnessing the tweet for search
domination.
Twitter has unique advantages over other social media, being primarily a
text-based social network, and because of its public crawlability. Twitter's
tweets and profiles are like open books to search engines. Every tweet is a
tiny invitation for search spiders, inviting them to crawl, index, and add to
their massive index.And Twitter's real-time content has become a reliable source for search
engines to gather breaking news. Its timely updates fuel the search engines'
need for the latest news. While a tweet may not always impact search
rankings immediately like a breaking news story, it will at least encourage
Googlebot to come along, visit your link, and act accordingly.
Simply put, if you want something showing up in Google's index quickly,
post it on Twitter.
Leveraging hashtags for SEO.
Hashtags are like the links of Twitter, guiding users to content. When used
wisely, they can catapult tweets from niche to noteworthy, increasing their
visibility significantly. And they are an opportunity to build semantic
keywords around your content.
Master the art of the hashtag with a sprinkle of strategy. Learn how to select
and use hashtags that resonate with your audience and bolster your SEO
efforts at the same time. Just don't overdo it, while online reports vary, the
sweet spot for optimum reach and engagement ranges between ~2-4 hashtags
per post.
Twitter content strategy for SEO.
Every brand and audience is different. And coming up with a content strategy
requires experimentation. Try different formats, measure the results, and then
double down on what works.
A great place to start can be condensing your blog posts and content into bite-
sized tweets, posting them in a thread, and sharing a link to the article on
your website.Facebook & SEO.
Facebook is the world’s most popular social network. What’s popular on
Facebook is essentially a snapshot of global popularity. You should consider
using Facebook to build your brand authority and social signals associated
with your website.
To improve your site’s Facebook social activity, share content from your site
on your Facebook page regularly.
Each time you do this, you receive more exposure from your fan base, and
you also build up social activity around the content on your site. Be careful to
mix this up with relevant, engaging non-commercial content for your user
base, so you don't turn them off and maintain high levels of engagement.
Examples include infographics, inspirational quotes, inspirational photos, and
so on.
If you want to speed up building your audience, you can use Facebook
advertising to build a relevant audience of loyal customers. This is a good
strategy if your competitors in the rankings have a larger following and you
are looking to beat them. You can also use Facebook advertising to increase
exposure for your posts or run advertising campaigns for a promotional offer.
Facebook advertising stands out as a great way to build up an audience,
social activity, and referral sales, for projects with a budget.
Meta for business
https://www.facebook.com/business
Facebook ads
https://www.facebook.com/business/ads
Other social networks.
Let’s face it, we'd all love to play around on social networks all day, but we
don't have the spare time to be sharing content endlessly on social media
accounts.
If you have limited resources, focus on Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook.If you are looking for an extra edge, doing SEO for a large brand, or maybe
you have an army of helpers waiting for your command, you can gain
significant boosts by expanding your social activity to several social media
sites.
Set up an account on the below networks, posting on the networks most
relevant to your business:
LinkedIn
https://www.linkedin.com/
LinkedIn is Facebook for professionals. LinkedIn is a fantastic networking
tool if you are in the business-to-business industry and looking to build up
your brand or the brand of your site. If you want to increase your
effectiveness on Linkedin, join groups and participate in discussions, post
relevant updates about your industry, and post content in the news feed.
Pinterest
https://www.pinterest.com/
Pinterest has become one of the fastest-growing social networks in a very
short timeframe. Pinterest’s fast-growing user base is primarily made up of
women. The site has effectively turned into a giant shopping list of wish-list
items. If your target audience is women, you should be on Pinterest.
Instagram
https://www.instagram.com/
Initially, a mobile app to help users make their photos look pretty, Instagram
has skyrocketed from a fledgling mobile app to competing with major social
networks in just a few years. Instagram limits the number of links you can
post, which essentially means the links from your profile on Instagram are
much more powerful. If you work in a fashion or image-heavy industry,
Instagram is a must-have social network to incorporate into your SEO and
overall digital strategy.
Social media analytics.
If you invest time and effort in building up your social media profiles, you
will want to track your results so you can separate the parts of your strategythat are successful and not so successful.
Social media analytics are different compared to other web analytics because
social analytics are geared toward measuring the conversation and interaction
of your fan base with your brand. Using the software listed below, you can
monitor results and get valuable insights on how to improve your social
media efforts:
Sprout Social - Free for 30 days. $249 per month for regular use.
https://sproutsocial.com/
Sprout Social is a great web analytics and social media management package
that allows you to track the performance of your social media profiles over
time. It has a free trial, is suited to advanced-level use, and offers powerful
analytic reports for major social networks.
Hootsuite - Free plan available. Paid plans start at $149 per month.
https://www.hootsuite.com/platform/analyze
Hootsuite is quoted many times in this book and for good reason—Hootsuite
is a robust social media management platform allowing for control over many
social networks, as well as powerful web analytics insights. Its paid plans are
also quite affordable for pro-users.
Google Analytics Social Tracking - Free
https://marketingplatform.google.com/about/analytics/
Google Analytics social-tracking features are great for tracking basic social
interactions that occur when visitors are on your site. It is free and includes
an out-of-the-box solution with the standard setup. To see social reports, log
into Google Analytics, click on the “Acquisition” tab in the main menu, then
“Social.”Chapter 6: Web analytics in a nutshell.
How to measure your success.
Web analytics changed how we do business in the 21
st
 century. We can now
find insights into customers previously impossible to discover, including
information on demographics, interests, online behaviors, and more. We can
find out what works and what doesn’t, cut underperforming marketing
campaigns, and increase budgets for winning campaigns. Simply put, web
analytics have made it easier to grow almost any business. Read on for a
quick guide to the nuts and bolts of web analytics, and how to put web
analytics to work for your business.
Tracking your search rankings.
With every SEO project, it’s important to start tracking how your website
appears in the search rankings, for several reasons:
1. Tracking your search rankings measures progress over time and helps you
see what works and what doesn't.
2. Tracking search rankings will warn you of potential threats, such as sneaky
competitors trying to move into your territory, or Google algorithm updates
shaking the search results around. 
3. If you really want to be tricky, you can track competitors' rankings and get
an overview of what they are doing.
Fortunately, tracking search rankings is easier than ever. Most all-in-one SEO
platforms already offer rankings tracking with their paid plans, such as Moz
and Ahrefs.
All you have to do is copy and paste your keywords into their rankings page
listed below, and you're good to go—you can see how high you rank for your
keywords in Google, how your rankings perform on both desktop and mobile,
and measure their movements over time.When you enter your keywords just make sure you select the correct location,
otherwise, you could be trying to rank for keywords in New York and
tracking search results in San Francisco...
Google Search Console does have reports on search rankings but is not as
detailed or customizable as the professional SEO tools. And Google has a
history of removing or hiding keyword data from webmasters, for various
reasons.
I wouldn't rely on Google Search Console reports alone, unless you’re fine to
wake up one morning and discover all your data has disappeared because
someone at Google HQ decided to change the free reports available to
webmasters. Paid SEO tools track keyword rankings for a reason…
SerpWatcher - From $49 Per Month
https://mangools.com/serpwatcher/
Moz Pro Rank Tracking - From $99 Per Month
https://moz.com/products/pro/rank-tracking
Ahrefs - From $99 per month
https://ahrefs.com/rank-tracker
Search Performance Report - Google Search Console
https://search.google.com/search-console/performance/search-analytics
Why use Google Analytics?
You may have already heard about Google Analytics. Google Analytics is
the web analytics platform used by the majority of sites. It has its quirks, but
it’s the best readily available, all-around analytics tool available for
understanding site traffic. And the best part is it's free.
If you don’t have Google Analytics installed, put down this book, install
Google Analytics now, and then have some harsh words with your web
developer. I'm not joking. Without Google Analytics set up, growing a
business online is like trying to pilot an airplane blindfolded. 
Without Google Analytics it's difficult to find out what works and what
doesn’t, identify issues and fix them before they turn into bigger issues, andget a sense of the general direction where your business is headed. Google
Analytics is useful for monitoring the performance of a business and useful
for about 95% of businesses.
To get started with Google Analytics, head on over to the below URL and
click on “sign in.” Create a Google account if you do not have one already,
and walk through the simple steps to get started. You may need help from
your web developer if you are unable to edit code on your site.
Google Analytics
https://www.google.com/analytics/
How to use Google Analytics.
Let me tell you something a little risqué. On its own, most data is useless.
You heard correctly. For real awareness and insights, we need to compare
data and identify trends over time. There are two ways to analyze and
understand data in Google Analytics using time:
1. Compare two date ranges.
Click on the date field input in Google Analytics. Enter two timeframes and
you can compare them both. Useful date comparisons include comparing this
week's performance to last week's performance, last month's performance to
the month prior, and last month's performance to the same month of the
previous year.
2. Look at the charts over a long time frame.
Look at the charts over the longest period possible and look for trends,
without comparing date ranges. This is not so effective for difficult-to-find
information or granular insights, but this is useful for a bird’s eye view of the
overall direction your traffic is heading.
Note: Seasonality is a factor affecting many businesses. Sometimes you may
see a downturn in traffic, but this may not necessarily indicate your site is
performing poorly. It could be that your market experiences a downward
trend in certain months. If your business is experiencing a downward trend,
use the “compare two date ranges” approach and compare the current month's
traffic to the same month last year. If you are seeing increases, then youknow your site is performing well, irrespective of seasonal trends.
Acquisition.
Acquisition is an area of Google Analytics that any business owner or
marketer should spend a lot of time reviewing. The Acquisition section of
Google Analytics breaks down where your site traffic is coming from.
Without keeping a close eye on your traffic sources, it is almost impossible to
make informed decisions about the performance of your site.
Click “Acquisition” in the main sidebar on the left. In the “Traffic
acquisition” section you can see the actual amounts of traffic you’ve received
from any source. The channels are of special interest. Channels are the
sources sending customers to your website. You can get insights into which
sources are sending customers to your site, such as social visitors, search
engine visitors, email visitors, and so on.
Organic Search.
Organic Search is essential for monitoring your performance in search
engines. You can see how many times you received a visitor from a search
engine, by looking for any data labeled “Organic Search”.
We measure the overall performance of search engine traffic by looking for
increases or decreases in Organic Search over time.
To view Organic Search, click on the Acquisition tab on the left sidebar and
click on “Traffic acquisition”.
Segments.
Imagine if you could narrow down to a particular segment of your audience,
such as paid traffic, search engine traffic, mobile 
traffic, iPad users, and so
on, and instantly see how many inquiries these users have made, how much
time they spend on your site, what country they are from, how many sales
they are making, and so on. This feature exists and it is called Segments
Segments are powerful. With Segments, you can identify portions of your
audience that generate more inquiries or sales than other customers. You canalso identify portions of your audience having difficulty using your site, and
get insights for better performance.
To use Segments, simply click on the “Explore” tab at the left of every page
and you can start creating Segments for deeper insights.
Common web analytics terms explained.
Views.
A view is counted each time a user loads a page on your site.
Session.
A session is what occurs when a visitor arrives at the site and at some point
closes the browser. If that visitor returns, this is an additional session.
User.
If a user visits your site and then returns at a later stage, this is counted as one
user.
Conversion.
One of the most important metrics to monitor is conversions. A conversion is
when a user completes a desired action. The action could be filling out an
inquiry form, downloading a product, or buying something from you.
Events.
Events are custom metrics you can set up in Google Analytics to track
particular goals or targets you have for your website.
Common events to set up include newsletter signups, product downloads,
inquiry form completions, button clicks, and so on.
 
Leveraging AI and machine learning for powerful
insights.
Today's analytics tools aren't just number crunchers; they're smart and
learning every second. Integrating AI and ML, these tools can now spottrends and patterns that are easy to miss with the human eye.
Take Google Analytics, for instance. It's now supercharged with AI to
predict which customers are most likely to convert. Then there's Adobe
Analytics, you can chat with the AI Assistant like a friend and it will give
you powerful insights into your business. Let's have a look at some of the AI-
powered features of modern web analytics.
This new wave of AI-powered analytics tools offers capabilities previously
impossible, such as...
1. Forecasting trends.
Google Analytics, with its Predictive Metrics feature,  employs machine
learning to identify which users are most likely to make a sale based on their
behavior on your site.
2. Anticipating customer needs.
AI doesn't just predict; it anticipates needs.
Adobe Analytics shines with its 'Customer Journey Analytics' feature. It
automatically stitches together data from different channels to create a
detailed view of the customer journey. It's like having a map of your
customer's journey, from when they started researching, right up until after
they completed a sale. Which path did they take? Which path doesn't work
out?
3. Enhanced customer behavior insights.
With AI, you can go deeper than ever into understanding customer behavior.
You can literally have a conversation with your analytics, with AI being the
interpreter making sense of it all.
This democratizes web analytics. Analytics was previously something an
expert needed to do. Now, someone with no technical knowledge can chat
with their analytics and get a sense of how their business is performing.
Navigating web analytics in the era of user privacy.
The globe has experienced a tidal wave of stringent data privacy laws,notably the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in Europe and the
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the U.S.
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) isn't just a European affair;
it's a global game-changer in data privacy. If your customers are located in
Europe, you are supposed to follow its rules (if you can make sense of them).
For the average Joe running a business or crafting marketing strategies,
fortunately, the GDPR boils down to a few crucial points:
1. Consent is king: You need explicit permission from individuals to collect
and use their data. No more pre-ticked boxes; consent must be a clear
affirmative action.
2. Right to access and erase: Individuals can ask what data you have on them
and request deletion. It's about giving people control over their personal
information.
3. Data breach notifications: If you suffer a data breach, you're required to
notify those affected promptly, typically within 72 hours.
4. Fines are hefty: Non-compliance isn't cheap. Fines can reach up to 4% of
annual global turnover or €20 million, whichever is higher.
The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) is California's answer to data
privacy, but its impact extends beyond state lines. For the everyday business
owner or marketer, here's what it means:
1. Californian consumer rights: Californians can know what personal data
you're collecting, request its deletion, and opt out of its sale.
2. Disclosure requirements: You must inform users at the point of collection
what categories of data are being collected and why.
3. Financial incentives transparency: If you offer financial incentives for
collecting data, they must be detailed clearly.
Privacy-compliant analytics.
Modern analytics are designed from the ground up to comply with privacy
regulations. Fortunately, platforms like Google Analytics 4, Microsoft
Clarity, and Adobe Analytics will do the heavy lifting for you. And you can
use a platform like Iubenda (https://www.iubenda.com/) to manage yourcookie notices for you.
Other web analytics tools.
There are many web analytics tools out there to help with improving the
performance of your site. Google Analytics is great for understanding overall
traffic performance, but if you want to delve deeper, check out the following
tools for greater insights:
Crazy Egg - Free to start. Plans start at $29 per month.
https://www.crazyegg.com/
If you want a visual indication of how visitors behave on your site once they
arrive, Crazy Egg is a fantastic tool. With Crazy Egg, you can get heat maps
of where visitors click on the page. You can also see heat maps of how far
visitors scroll down the page.
Visual Website Optimizer – 30-day free trial.
https://vwo.com/
Visual Website Optimizer is a popular split-testing analytics tool. With
Visual Website Optimizer, you can split-test different variations of your site,
see which version makes more sales or conversions, and increase your overall
sales.
Google Tag Assistant
https://get.google.com/tagassistant/
Google Tag Assistant is a handy free tool, for diagnosing any issues with the
tracking codes for all the fancy web tracking tools yo
u’
ve set up on your
site. I
t’
s especially useful for developers diagnosing issues when yo
u’
re
having obvious problems with your web analytics.
Looker Studio by Google
https://lookerstudio.google.com/overview
If you’re a data junky then you’ll get your fix with Looker Studio. Looker
Studio is hardcore, it can create visual reports so you can monitor almost
anything—calls, ad campaigns on various platforms, search rankings,
Salesforce leads, your bookkeeping system, and the list goes on. The bestpart is, it’s free.Chapter 7: Troubleshooting common
SEO problems & how to fix them.
Dealing with Google can be massively frustrating at times. Customer support
barely exists, and trying to understand why your site isn't playing well with
Google can spiral into a wild goose chase.
Don't let Google's lack of customer support or the horror stories dishearten
you. Most of the time, if a site is experiencing Google problems, it is only
temporary. SEO problems are rarely irrecoverable.
Usually, it's simply a matter of finding out the underlying cause of the
problem—more often than not, the cause isn't what the popular blog posts are
saying it might be. This sometimes means fixing several items. Once all
fixed, you have stacked the deck in your favor and you are more likely to
make a speedy recovery.
This chapter outlines common SEO problems that plague website owners.
If you are not at all technically inclined, I urge you to read the section on
getting additional advice or consider getting professional help if your site is
experiencing serious SEO issues.
What to do when your site is not listed in Google at
all.
This is a common problem among webmasters and business owners alike.
If you have just launched a brand-new site, it is possible Google has not
crawled your site yet. You can do a quick spot check by typing
“site:yoursiteaddress.com” into the Google search bar and checking to see if
your site comes up at all. If it doesn't, it’s possible Google's spider hasn't
crawled your site and doesn't know it exists.
Typically, all that’s required for Google to pick up your site is to generate ahandful of links to your site and some social activity.
Tweeting a link to your site is a quick way to ensure your site is indexed by
Google's software, typically within 24 hours. Try to share your site from a
handful of social networks for faster results.
Check Google again in 24 hours with the “site:www.yoursite…” search
query and see if any pages from your site come up. If you do see pages, this
means Google has indexed your site.
If this doesn't work, ask your web designer to set up Google Search Console
for you, log in, and see if there are any errors. If there are errors, Google will
outline the steps to fix them, so Google can see your site.
Google Search Console's handy URL inspection tool is great for
troubleshooting and finding issues. It confirms if your page is supported by
Google, not suffering from any penalties, successfully appearing in the index,
is mobile friendly, and more. To access the URL inspection tool, click "URL
inspection" in the left sidebar of Google Search Console.
Google Search Console
https://search.google.com/search-console/about
What to do when your business is not ranking for
your own business name.
A business not coming up in the top position in Google for searches for the
official business name is a surprisingly common issue among brand-new
sites. Google is smart, but sometimes you need to give Google a nudge to
associate your new site with the name of your brand.
This problem is easily fixed by building links to your site, with some of the
links using your brand name as the anchor text. This can take up to a couple
of weeks for Google to see these links, connect the dots, and realize your site
is the real deal.
The fast way to get the ball rolling is to do a quick search for the business
directories used in your country—Whitepages, Yellow Pages, Yelp, and so
on—fill out a listing for your business on each site and include a link back to
your web site. The more links the better, but you should be aiming for aminimum of 50 links. In 95% of cases, this will solve the problem of a site
not coming up in the top results of searches for the business name.
If this doesn’t work, set up Facebook and Twitter accounts for your business,
filling out as much information about your business as possible in the profile.
Then do a post a day for about two weeks, mixing in links to your site in the
posts.
If you still can't get your site ranking high enough, use Link Explorer to spy
on competing sites ranking higher for the brand name. Do their pages have
more backlinks than the total amount of links to your site? If this is the case,
you are going to need to build more links.
What to do when your rankings have dropped off.
Here's a sad truth about SEO: if you achieve a top ranking, it may not keep its
position forever. There are billions of web pages competing for top positions
in Google. New sites are being created every day. It requires an ongoing
effort to keep pages ranking high.
If your rankings have dropped off from the top position and slowly moving
their way down the search results, you may have been affected by a Google
update or spam filter. Read through the Google Updates chapter later in this
book, and also look through the additional resources for keeping updated on
new Google updates in the same chapter.
On the other hand, it's more likely your competitors have simply acquired
more links or more social activity than your site. Use Link Explorer to spy on
competitors, find out how many backlinks they have, and how much social
media activity they have, and set these amounts as your target to build your
rankings back up.
Next, it's time to start a link-building campaign with the targeted keywords as
outlined in the chapter on link-building.
How to seek professional help for free.
Finding the right SEO help can be frustrating for site owners. There is a lot of
information to navigate, with varying levels of quality and accuracy. It’s
difficult to get in touch with SEO practitioners at the top of their field.That said, some sites can put your questions in front of world-leading experts
on almost any topic for free. Use the below sites for highly technical
responses, and you can create an army of Internet experts to try to solve your
problem for you. 
The key to success with the following resources is to be specific. The more
specific you are, and the more information you provide, you increase your
chances you will receive a detailed answer that will point you in the right
direction.
For greater results, post your question on 
all
 of the sites below, and sit back
and wait for the answers to come in. You will get more answers and will be
in a better position to consider which solution is best.
Moz Q&A
https://moz.com/community/q/
Moz's Q&A forums used to be private, but were eventually recently released
to the public. Here you can speak with a large number of SEO professionals
directly and attract high-quality answers to your questions. Great for SEO-
specific problems.
Pro Webmasters
https://webmasters.stackexchange.com/
The Pro Webmasters Q&A board can have your questions answered by
webmasters of high-performing sites.
Quora
https://www.quora.com/
Quora is a Q&A posting board, where you can get a question answered on
almost anything. On Quora, questions are sometimes answered by high-
profile experts. Marketers, business owners, you name it, there are many
leading industry authorities posting answers to questions on Quora.
WordPress Answers
https://wordpress.stackexchange.com/
If your site is built on WordPress, inevitably, you will eventually encounter
some kind of technical hurdle. The WordPress Answers Q&A board is a greatresource to seek out help.Chapter 8: Local SEO. SEO for local
businesses.
Why use local SEO?
Unless you have been living under a rock, you have seen listings for local
businesses appearing at the top of search results in Google and Google Maps.
Local listings—previously known as Google+ business pages, then rebranded
as Google My Business, now known as Google Business Profile—however
they will be named next, they are a powerful marketing tool for small
businesses.
Let’s look at some statistics, the following facts were discovered in several
recent studies on the behavior of local customers.
- 97% of search engine users have searched online to find a local business.
- 76% of consumers who conducted a local search on their smartphone
visited a store within a day.
- 78% of local mobile searches lead to an in-store purchase.
From 12 Local SEO Stats, Every Business Owner and Marketer Should Know – Social Media Today
Holy mackerel, if you are a local business owner and those figures aren’t
making your jaw drop, I don’t know what will. Now that we know if you
own a local business, local search can be the Yoko Ono to your John Lennon,
let’s delve deeper and find out what makes a local search result.
Local search results differ from traditional organic search results by
representing a local business instead of a normal web page and appearing at
the top of the search results and on map listings.Users can get business contact details, opening hours, and reviews and find
the information they need quickly and easily, instead of having to dig around
a clunky business site.
Local listings can be a powerful tool to attract traffic. In many cases, local
listings can lead to many more inquiries than regular SEO rankings. But does
this mean you should scrap traditional SEO in favor of local SEO? Nope.
You can do both and potentially double the amount of traffic you can receive.
How to rank high with local SEO.
Ranking high with local SEO takes a different approach than traditional SEO.
Google's algorithm looks for a different set of signals to determine the
popularity of a business, to then decide how to rank it in the search results.
If you think about it, if a restaurant is really popular in a city, a whole bunch
of links from all over the world probably isn't the best factor to determinehow valuable the business is to the local area.
A better indicator of the importance would be mentions of the business’s
name and phone number across the web, customer reviews, and details on the
website that show the business is based in the area being searched.
The most important factors Google uses for local results are listed below:
- Primary GBP Category
- Keywords in GBP Business Title
- Proximity of Address to the Point of Search (Searcher-Business Distance)
- Physical Address in City of Search
- Removal of spam listings through spam fighting
- High Numerical Google Ratings (e.g. 4-5)
- Additional GBP Categories
- Quantity of Native Google Reviews (w/text)
- Verified GBP
- Proximity of Address to Centroid
 
If you want to rank high in the local results, all you have to do is ensure your
site and Google Business Profile have more of these factors than competitors.
For more detailed breakdowns of the local SEO ranking factors, you can visit
the link below.
Brightlocal Local Search Ranking Factors
https://whitespark.ca/local-search-ranking-factors/
Getting started with local SEO.
To get started, the first step is to create your business page on Google
Business Profile. Visit the URL below and complete every area of your
profile possible. This means creating a detailed description of your business,
available payment methods, and so on. The more information you complete,
the more you increase your chances of ranking your page higher.
Google Business Profile
https://www.google.com/business
When creating your business listing, make sure you choose the most accuratecategory for your business, e.g. if you provide plumbing as a service, you
want to choose “plumbing” as your category, not “trades” or “home repairs.”
Building citations.
Citations are like the links of local SEO. A citation occurs each time your
name, address, and phone number (NAP) are mentioned on the web. The
more citations you have, the more likely your site will rank high. The easiest
places to build citations are local business directories for businesses.
While there are many online directories for creating business listings, the
following websites would be a good start for a US-based business.
https://www.facebook.com/business
https://www.linkedin.com/
https://www.yellowpages.com/
https://business.yelp.com/
https://www.local.com/
https://www.whitepages.com/business
https://www.manta.com/
http://www.citysearch.com
https://business.foursquare.com/
https://www.merchantcircle.com/
I've also put together a list of one hundred business directories where you can
list your business and build citations and links for your website. You can
download it at the reader resources and SEO checklist page...
Reader resources and SEO checklist
https://www.simpleeffectiveness.com/seo-videos-and-checklist
Encouraging reviews.
Citations and reviews are the link-building of local SEO. If you are only
building citations, you only have half of the equation covered. To rank high,
your business needs to accumulate online reviews.
Many businesses struggle with this. This is because it’s tough to get
customers to fill out reviews! You have to make it easy.Include links to your business Google My Business page on your site, email
signatures, flyers, and business cards, prompting customers to leave a review.
Encourage customers at the end of each sale or transaction to leave a review.
By creating every opportunity possible for customers to leave a review, you
can significantly increase reviews.
But whatever you do, don’t buy reviews. This is a quick way to get into
Google's naughty book. Purchased reviews can be picked up by Google's
filters and are likely to be excluded from your business profile anyway.
Feeling lazy to hire a graphic designer? No problem! Google created an
awesome tool that generates free posters, signs, and stickers to put in your
store and encourage more reviews from customers. Check it out at the
following URL.
Google My Business Marketing Kit – Think With Google
https://marketingkit.withgoogle.com/
Supercharging local SEO with photos and videos.
For better or worse, for many people, taking selfies and photos of what
they're eating has become a daily habit, and it comes as no surprise Google is
capitalizing on this ubiquitous trend.
Google allows video uploads from the general public to Google Business
listings on Google Maps—an underused marketing opportunity flying under
the radar for now—and savvy local business owners can use this to their
advantage.
Why are photos and videos important for a local business?
Whether or not the number of photos and videos uploaded to a Google
Business listing is a ranking factor is unknown—it wouldn't be surprising if it
is, because it would be a solid indicator of the popularity and activity of a
local business. But you can be sure Google will stay tight-lipped on the
matter. Either way, more photos and videos uploaded to your Google
Business page will lead to higher user engagement with your profile, which
will likely lead to higher rankings.
But the real advantage lies in enticing more customers to your businessthrough imagery. Ever heard the phrase, “A picture is worth a thousand
words?” Customers researching a local restaurant, cafe, or hotel are heavily
focused on photos when deciding where to go. Just look at your own
experience—ever taken a peek at the photos and videos of a restaurant or
hotel, and a particular photo put you over the edge? If you haven't included
photos and videos in your local SEO efforts, you're missing out on a piece of
the pie. Here are two simple approaches to get amongst the action.
1. Encourage customers to share their experience at your business.
Encouraging customers to share their experience at your business with a
photo or video is an effective way to build up authentic photos associated
with your page. It'll build up the perceived popularity of your business too.
Why not take it to the next level, and entice customers with a free drink or
discount on their meal by sharing their experience?
For the general public to upload photos or videos, all they need to do is tap
on your listing on Google Maps, scroll down, and click “add a photo”, and
done! The official guide by Google is listed below.
Add, Remove, or Share Photos and Videos – Google Maps Help
https://support.google.com/maps/answer/2622947
2. Add photos and videos to your business profile.
If you're running a restaurant, hotel, cafe, or any other local-type business for
that matter, you should have a handful of professional-looking photos
uploaded to your profile at a bare minimum—so customers know what to
look forward to when visiting your business, or what the
y’
re missing out
o
n
…
Fortunately, adding photos and videos to your Google Business profile is as
easy as pie. Simply log in to Google Business Profile, click photos on the left
menu, and upload away. For additional documentation, check out the official
guide from Google HQ below.
Manage photos or videos for your Business Profile - Google Business Profile
Help
https://support.google.com/business/answer/6103862Local SEO ranking checklist & essential resources.
While looking at your local competitors and working to beat them is probably
the best overall strategy, progressing through the following checklist will put
you well on your way to ranking high at the top of the local search results.
1. Verify your business profile on Google Business Profile.
2. Fill out as much information as possible on your Google Business Profile,
including description, category associations, images, and videos.
3. Include your business name and location somewhere on your website, this
could be your contact page or home page.
4. Include your full business name, address, and phone number somewhere
on your site, these should be grouped together so Google will register them as
a citation.
5. Include the appropriate schema.org tags in your website markup, following
the specification for local businesses at the following URL.
Schema.org Local Business Specifications.
https://schema.org/LocalBusiness
6. Encourage customers to review your business.
7. Submit your website to major business directories like Yelp, Yellow
Pages, CitySearch, and so on. You can use tools like Moz Local to submit
your business to all of the major directories in one go.
Moz Local.
https://moz.com/local
8. Cross-check your business listings for correct NAP data. These details
need to be consistent across your Google Business Profile, website contact
page, and external business listings.
A downloadable copy of the above steps is also available at the reader
resources page.
Essential local SEO resources for keeping up to date.
Just like traditional SEO, local SEO constantly changes and becomes more
complex over time. To keep your skills sharp you need to stay up to date with
the latest knowledge in the industry. The resources below should be
considered essential reading for anyone looking to hone their local SEO skill
set.Local SEO Guide
https://www.localseoguide.com/
Andrew Shotland’s Local SEO Guide is an enduring commentary on local
SEO techniques and updates in the industry. His useful blog has been around
for as long as local SEO has been a thing and is popular among the SEO
community for good reason—the blog’s regular contributions and willingness
to give away valuable and actionable advice.
WhiteSpark Local Search Blog
https://whitespark.ca/blog/
Local SEO News by WhiteSpark is a blog that covers all the latest updates
and techniques in Local SEO, with lots of useful guides for getting better
performance with local SEO and new best practices you should be aware of.Chapter 9: How to dominate search
with rich results.
What are rich results?
Ever searched in Google and seen a ginormous ranking just above the search
results?... These large search results are called "rich results" and can send a
mind-blowing amount of traffic.
Before I jump into techniques, are you still not sure what I'm talking about?
Quickly Google a couple of questions and look for the giant search result at
the top of the results, you can't miss it—it's four times bigger than a regular
search result. Here are example searches that usually deliver a rich result in
the results, “what are rich result”, “how to get started in real estate”, “how to
increase your blog traffic”, and so on...
Why you need to focus on rich results.
Considering banging your head against the wall, wondering why you're
reading such a soul-destroying dry topic? Well, don't throw this book out the
window just yet...These new technologies allow greater control over search listings, making it
easier for search engines to crawl your site, potentially featuring your content
as a “rich result” appearing at the top of the results, helping you get higher
click-through rates and get more eyeballs on content. Think of this
technology like meta tags on steroids…
Still not convinced? With 40% of voice search results originating from rich
results, targeting rich results is a must if you want to get amongst the rising
voice search trend.
Why use structured data and JSON-LD?
To tell Google which parts of your content you want to be considered for a
rich result, you need to use code called “structured data.” With new
technologies, as always, there's a debate about the best to use—JSON-LD,
RDFa, microdata, the list goes on…
I won't waste your time with a technical debate. Google has openly stated
JSON-LD is the preferred code—and made it clear not to mix structured data
technologies for fear of confusing the search engine spider…
We're here for high rankings and traffic, not a lengthy diatribe on each
individual technology, so let's go with what Google recommends for the
purposes of this book—JSON-LD.
How to get started with JSON-LD.
So, what does all this JSON-LD structured data stuff look like? Let’s look at
a business listing to see how it should be coded, according to Google’s
recommendations.
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
"@context": "https://schema.org",
"@type": "Organization",
"url": "http://www.example.com",
"name": "Unlimited Ball Bearings Corp.",
"contactPoint": {
"@type": "ContactPoint","telephone": "+1-401-555-1212",
"contactType": "Customer service"
}
}
</script>
The JSON-LD example code from Google gives the search engine a friendly
nudge to recognize the information as a business listing, such as the name
and the phone number.
While the above example will be just enough if you have a simple business
listing, you or your developer will have to use Google’s documentation and
tools, listed later in this chapter, to ensure your code is implemented
correctly.
Different Types of Rich Results Supported by Google.
 
Google supports the below rich results. If you have any of these content types
on your site, you can benefit from Google’s recommended additional code.
 
- Article
- Book
- Breadcrumb
- Carousel
- Course
- Critic review
- Dataset
- Employer Aggregate Rating
- Event
- Fact Check
- FAQ
- How-to
- Job Posting
- Job Training (beta)
- Local Business Listing
- Logo
- Movie
- Occupation- Product
- Q&A
- Recipe
- Review snippet
- Sitelinks Searchbox
- Software App (beta)
- Speakable (news content)
- Subscription and paywalled content
- Video
Holy cow! That’s a lot of different search result types. Fortunately, Google
has listed them neatly with example code on the following page.
Structured data markup that Google Search supports – Google
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-
data/search-gallery
You can also use the Merkle Schema Markup Generator to automatically
generate the code for you. The Merkle Schema Markup Generator is a free
tool that generates the code for you. All you have to do is select the type of
rich snippet you are targeting (e.g. a local business, a recipe, a FAQ page),
type in as much information as possible, and it will print out the
recommended code, ready to paste directly into your website.
Schema Markup Generator - Merkle
https://technicalseo.com/tools/schema-markup-generator/
Finally, when you or your developer are testing the code on your site, use
Google’s Structured Data Testing Tool and make sure the code is
implemented correctly. And use Google’s Rich Results Test to preview how
your page can appear in the search results.
Structured Data Testing Tool - Google
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-data
Rich Results Test – Google
https://search.google.com/test/rich-resultsHow to target featured result rankings in Google’s
search results.
After you’ve uploaded a bunch of fancy JSON-LD code to your site, you’re
probably wondering when you appear at the top of the results... Using JSON-
LD is just one step, if you want to achieve the coveted featured result
ranking, you'll need to satisfy the following requirements.
1. Rank on the first page, first. Almost all featured results are fetched from
rankings on the first page. Follow techniques from the On-Page SEO and
Link building chapter and work your way up the results first.
2. Create "snippet bait" targeting 40-50 words. SEMrush did a giant study on
rich results, finding almost all text-based rich snippets range between 40 to
50 words.
3. Structure your content to target featured results. Hint: putting target
keywords as H2 or H3 headings, followed by clear and concise paragraphs
around 40-50 words, is a solid approach.
4. Use images. Featured results often contain images. Using images increases
chances for both text and images appearing in the featured snippet.
According to Google's official guidelines, images should be at least 1200
pixels wide. And using multiple high-resolution images with aspect ratios of
16x9, 4x3, and 1x1 can help with appearing on different devices.
How to target “People also ask” and question-based
rich results.There’s another popular type of rich result appearing for almost any question
type search—the “People also ask” rich result. Fortunately, some clever
SEOs have figured out general techniques for targeting these sexy rankings.
1. Your desired ranking must be a question-type keyword. Searches not
phrased as a question won't always trigger a “People always ask” snippet, so
it's best to focus on question-type keywords.
2. Your answer should be clear and concise. Well-written and clear answers
have a much greater chance of being featured than poorly written answers.
Remember the 40-50 words technique from earlier in this chapter.
3. Include a Q&A or how-to section on your site. Increase content in a
question-and-answer format and increase your odds of being featured for
question-type searches.
4. Provide more valuable information than a simple and direct answer. If your
answer has numbered lists, rich media such as images and videos, and isgenerally more helpful than an obvious answer to the question, then you have
a greater chance of being featured.
5. Add Google’s recommended question-type JSON-LD code to relevant
pages... While this won’t guarantee results, it’ll encourage Google to look at
your pages and consider them for use in the rich results. Recommended
JSON-LD code is listed on each of the following pages.
FAQ Structured Data - Google Search
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-
data/faqpage
How-to Structured Data - Google Search
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-data/how-to
Q&A – Structured Data, Google Search
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-data/qapage
6. Use the Also Asked tool to find questions people are searching for. The
Also Asked tool tells you the "People Also Ask" questions that appear on any
topic. You can use this information to improve your chances of appearing for
multiple results.
"People Also Ask" keyword research - Also Asked
https://alsoasked.com/Facebook Open Graph.
While we know schema.org is the best approach for adding metadata to your
site, there is one additional metadata technology you should also use.
Facebook's Open Graph language allows you to determine how your site
listing appears when shared on Facebook.
If you do not include Facebook's Open Graph code on your site, when a user
shares your content on Facebook it will show a plain listing on the news feed,
putting the responsibility on the user to describe the article and make it worth
reading. But if you do include Facebook Open Graph code, it comes up
looking sexy, just like your search listings if you have been using your meta
title and meta description tags correctly.
By putting your best foot forward, and making your listing show up correctly
on Facebook, you will encourage more customers to click on your site and
increase the number of likes and shares for your page. This will increase the
overall social signals of the page.
Here's an example of properly formatted meta code using Facebook Open
Graph. As you can see, there are only minor tweaks required to make your
page show up nicely on Facebook's news feed. So go ahead and use it on
your site!
<title>Buy Baseball Jackets Online</title>
<meta property='og:type' content='site'>
<meta property-'og:description' name='description'  content='Wide range of
Baseball Jackets online, for all leagues and players. Free delivery and free
returns both ways in USA.'/>
If you're worried about confusing search engines by using several “structured
data” technologies at the same time, such as Open Graph and schema.org,
don’t worry, you won't have any problems.
Facebook Open Graph is mainly used by Facebook's web crawler, not by
search engines, so you can use Open Graph and schema.org in tandem
without any problems.If you want to read up further on Facebook's Open Graph, or if you have
complex types of listings on your site, check out Facebook's Open Graph
guide below.
Open Graph Protocol
https://ogp.me/Chapter 10: Technical SEO.
Turbocharge Your Performance.
This is where the gears grind and the magic happens. Technical SEO is where
we review and improve your website from top-to-bottom to get it to perform
well in search engines.
If you're wary of anything "technical", don't fret. I've stripped away the
complexity to make these concepts as simple as they can be. If technical
terms make you feel like you're going to pass out, you can skip this chapter.
But if you stick with me, I promise you'll come out the other side with a new
set of powerful tools to supercharge your performance.
Crawling, Indexing, and Accessibility.
Before we dive into the gritty details of optimizing your website, there are a
few things you need to know about how Google works. I'm talking about
crawling, indexing, and website accessibility.
Understanding crawling.
Google needs to know what websites exist to deliver relevant search results.
To do this, Google uses a technology called a spider, also known as a web
crawler or a bot. The official name of Google's spider is Googlebot.
Picture a world-class detective, like Sherlock Holmes, meticulously combing
through every nook and cranny across the web. That's what Google's spider
does. It scours the internet, visiting websites to understand what each page is
about. This process, known as crawling, is the first step in getting your
content noticed by search engines.
But how does Google's spider decide where to look? The answer lies in links.
Just as clues lead a detective from one spot to another, links guide Google'sspider across the web. Every time it encounters a new page, it examines the
content and follows the links to continue its journey. It's literally building a
map of the Internet.
Indexing: getting your webpages in
Google’s database.
Once the Google spider has crawled the pages on your website, the next step
is indexing, where it decides which pages to retrieve when someone searches
for a topic. Indexing is like getting your pages into the world's most
comprehensive library catalog – Google's index. Google's index is a giant
database of everything on the web. If you want to show up in Google's search
results, you need to have your website in Google's index.
It's super important to view indexing through a mobile lens. Google
predominantly uses the mobile version of your site for indexing and ranking.
Why? Because most people are searching on mobile devices. So don't make
the mistake of only reviewing your website on desktop. You should review
your website on mobile and desktop. Google looks at both, and you should
too.
Search engine accessibility.
In simple terms, technical SEO ensures your website speaks the same
language as search engines. It's like teaching your 
site to communicate
effectively with Google, Bing, and others. Technical SEO is all about rolling
out the red carpet for search engines and users, making your site easy to find,
read, and understand. It's about making your website accessible.
And guess what? Search engines love it when they can read your site. More
of your content shows up in Google's search results, and you get rewarded
with higher rankings.
User accessibility.Your website doesn’t only need to be accessible to search engines. It needs to
be accessible to users too.
Having slow load times, difficult-to-find contact information, layers upon
layers of popups, content, or navigation that’s difficult to access, these things
add up and contribute to users having a bad experience. And Google works to
find websites with really bad user experiences and filter them out of the
search results.
More often than not, websites aren't set up optimally. And worse, they have
things blocking search engines and creating problems for users. When we do
technical SEO, we clear away those problems, making it easier for Google to
register our website, and easier for users to navigate through our website. It's
a win-win.
Why you need to do a technical SEO audit.
More and more, Google is using AI technologies to grade your website. Just
recently Google confirmed their "Helpful Content System" looks at your
website's overall helpfulness. If Google sees that you have a lot of helpful
content, you get rewarded in the search results.
Google's SpamBrain is another AI web crawler that makes an overall
assessment of your website. But this one is looking for spammy websites to
kick them out of the search results. If you have a lot of security issues or a lot
of pages doing morally questionable things on your website, it might pick this
up and you'll find it difficult to show up in the search results.
Both SpamBrain and Google’s Helpful Content System make overall
assessments of your website. SpamBrain could block your website from
showing up at all! What does all of this mean? It's not just one specific thing
that will boost your performance—that can happen—but all the details add up
and improving as many areas as possible is what leads to great performance.
You have to go through your entire website top-to-bottom and improve as
many areas as possible. You need to look at all the pages on your website and
do a technical SEO audit. Google's AI systems will take notice and your
performance will improve as a result.
This might sound overwhelming. Fortunately, some tools will do most of the
heavy lifting for you. We’ll cover those shortly, but first, let's look at thedifferent areas you need to improve to get your website performing great.
Site structure and URL optimization.
Understanding URL basics: web
address fundamentals.
WWW vs non-WWW.
Let's start with the foundations of URL structure. When it comes to 'www'
versus 'non-www', it's essential to understand that search engines see these as
two separate entities. It's similar to having two doorways to the same room –
while they both 
lead to the same place, they are distinct paths. Avoid having
the website available through both www and non-www domains. Consistency
is key; choose one format and stick with it to avoid confusion.
Subdomains.
Have you ever seen a website address like blog.companyname.com? These
are known as subdomains. Think of these like specialized sections within
your larger site. They are treated almost like independent entities. Use them
sparingly; they're excellent for segmenting large sections you don’t want to
be associated with your main site, but overuse can dilute your main site's
SEO strength. And any link-building efforts don’t get shared between
subdomains.
Top-level domains.
Top-level domains (TLDs), such as '.com', '.org', or '.net', are the final
components of the URL puzzle. While they don't significantly impact SEO,
choosing the right TLD can influence user perception and credibility. And
where possible, it's best to use the geographical TLD of your target market.
For example, if you want to show up on Google.co.uk, your website address
should end with .co.uk.URL cleanliness: dashes vs.
underscores.
In the realm of URLs, cleanliness equates to readability and search engine
friendliness. Using dashes in URLs rather than underscores isn’t just a
stylistic choice. Search engines read dashes as spaces, which makes 'seo-tips'
more readable than 'seo_tips'. And it's an industry standard. This small
change can significantly make it easier to read and remember.
Canonicalization: managing
duplicate content.
Canonical tags tell search engines the 'canonical' or preferred version of a
webpage. Think of them as a way to tell search 
engines, "This is the version
of the page I want you to consider and prioritize." Without canonical tags,
search engines can get confused by duplicate or similar pages. So if you have
pages doubling up on your website, make sure the canonical tags point to the
one true page, otherwise you'll find it difficult to rank in Google.
Navigational best practices: creating
a structured and efficient site.
Your website navigation is a super important thing for search engines and
users. Well, duh! At the very least, you should have a main menu linking to
the most important pages and categories on your website. You can have a
sidebar to link to pages related to the current page. In your footer, link to the
most important pages on your site, like contact pages, service pages, and
legal policies. And if you have a lot of pages on your website, use
breadcrumbs.
It sounds simple, but you'd be surprised how many websites mess this up.SSL, meta tags, HTML optimization, and internal
linking.
Embrace HTTPS: the cornerstone
of website security.
HTTPS ensures a secure line of communication between your website and
your users. Google acknowledges this and considers HTTPS a ranking factor.
Therefore, setting your HTTPS version as the canonical URL is crucial. It's
the equivalent of choosing the safest route for your users and telling search
engines to prioritize this path. And make sure your SSL certificate—which
allows your HTTPS to run—is free of any security errors.
HTML best practices.
Think of HTML as your site's foundation. It's not just code—it's the blueprint
search engines use to understand your content. Start with semantic HTML.
Use tags like <nav>, <article>, and <footer> to clearly map out sections of
your page. They're like signposts for search engines, telling them what each
part of your page is all about.
Headings are your friends. Use H1 for your main idea and H2, and H3 for
details. This makes your content easy to follow, like a well-laid-out map,
guiding both readers and search engines through your points.
Finally, make sure everyone can visit your site by following the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines. Simple things like alternative text can make a huge
difference. And run your website through the W3C HTML Validator
(https://validator.w3.org/) and clear any errors. Not only is it the right thing to
do, but accessible sites also get a thumbs-up from search engines.
Meta tags: avoid common pitfalls.
Meta tags – specifically title tags and meta descriptions – are the snippets of
text that appear in search engine results. They're your first interaction withyour audience on the search page. Common issues like duplication, missing,
or incorrect tags can significantly impact your performance. Ensure each
page has unique, descriptive, and compelling meta tags. It’s like putting the
right label on each product in a store; it guides and entices the customer to
choose your product over others.
JavaScript and SEO.
Optimizing JavaScript-driven websites presents unique challenges.
JavaScript, while powerful for creating interactive 
user experiences, can
sometimes obscure content from search engines. The key is to ensure that the
essential content and navigation elements are readable by search engines,
even on a JavaScript-heavy site.
Internal linking: the art of SEO
navigation.
Internal linking is not just about connecting pages; it's about strategically
guiding users and search engines through your site. Effective internal linking
involves not only linking to top-level pages but also linking to deeper,
valuable content. This creates a network within your site, allowing users to
journey effortlessly through related topics, enhancing their experience and
your site's performance. Make sure there’s sufficient internal links in your
website, especially for high value pages you want ranking in search engines.
Content and quality control.
Address duplicate content.
If your website has the same information on several pages, search engines get
mixed signals about which page to show people. This can weaken your SEO
because the search engines can't pick the best page. To fix this, use tools to
find and fix these duplicates. You can sort it out by using canonical tags,
which tell search engines your preferred page, or by setting up redirects. Or,
if it makes sense, just remove the extra copies altogether. This keeps thingsclear and strengthens your SEO.
Tackle thin content.
Having a lot of content that lacks depth doesn't provide enough context for
search engines to rank it effectively. Your content should be informative,
engaging, and serves the user's intent. This not only improves user experience
but also signals to search engines the quality of the content on your website
overall.
Build trustworthiness.
For e-commerce sites, trust is super important. Trust factors such as clear
return policies, secure payment gateways, and easily found contact
information are essential. They build confidence in users, encouraging
transactions and repeat visits. Clearly displayed policies and trust signals can
significantly impact user experience and trust, and consequently, your site's
SEO performance.
Mobile responsiveness and speed optimization.
Review mobile support.
Having a mobile-friendly website is not optional; it's imperative. Google's
mobile-first indexing means the search engine predominantly uses the mobile
version of content for indexing and ranking. A site not optimized for mobile
is only open to half of its potential customers. Ensure your site is responsive,
with content and navigation optimized for mobile devices, and doesn't break
on mobile devices.
Review site speed.
A slow-loading site drives users away and lowers your overall performance.
To enhance site speed, focus on easy wins like optimizing images, leveraging
browser caching, reducing server response time with a faster server, usingCDNs, and minimizing CSS and JavaScript.
Enhancing crawlability: sitemaps, robots, and
errors.
Review sitemaps.xml files.
Sitemaps and robots.txt files are essential guides for search engine crawlers.
An XML sitemap is like a map of your website, guiding search engines to all
the pages on your site. It ensures that search engines can discover and index
your content efficiently. But more often than not, sitemap xml files are
outdated, have pages missing, or are just plain wrong. Make sure the
sitemap.xml file is updated, lives in the correct location, e.g.
yoursite.com/sitemap.xml, and is submitted to Google Search Console.
Review robots.txt files.
The robots.txt file acts like an air traffic controller, instructing search engines
on what they can and cannot visit on your site. The robots.txt file should be
reviewed to ensure it's not blocking critical areas of your website. It's also
important that the non-public areas of your website, like CMS administration
pages, are blocked in your robots.txt file, so you don't dilute the topical
relevancy of your site.
Navigating errors: avoid common
pitfalls.
Managing common errors like 404s, crawl errors, and server errors is crucial
for maintaining a healthy website. These errors can create bad user
experiences and act as roadblocks for search engine crawlers, dragging down
your performance overall.
Audit your site for errors and implement fixes, such as correcting broken
links, fixing broken scripts, and clearing crawl errors from Google Search
Console. This will significantly enhance the crawlability and overall health ofyour site.
Essential SEO tools for navigating technical audits.
We’ve just covered the main areas you need to review to get your 
site
performing well. Naturally, it's a heck of a lot easier if you use tools to
automate and streamline the process. These tools are your eyes and ears,
helping you pinpoint exactly where your site needs a tune-up, saving a lot of
time and work. Let's look at specific tools that can make your audit a breeze.
Google Search Console: the starting
point.
Google Search Console is a must-have. It's your go-to tool for basic insights
into your site's presence in Google search results. It's great for spotting initial
issues but won't catch everything. It's the foundation, but for a full audit,
you'll need more.
Tools for serious SEOs: SEMrush,
Ahrefs, Moz.
These tools are step-ups for those expanding their SEO toolkit. SEMrush,
Ahrefs, and Moz offer more detailed analyses of your site's SEO health, from
tracking rankings to assessing backlinks. They're user-friendly and provide
actionable insights, perfect for those with a handle on the basics and looking
to dig deeper.
Tools for hardcore SEO’s:
Screaming Frog.
Screaming Frog is for the seasoned professional who needs a comprehensive
overview of basically everything. It crawls your site meticulously, revealing
what's working and what's not, from broken links to duplicate content andmissing meta tags. It's a powerful tool for those who like to get their hands
dirty with detailed data and customizable reports.
Tools for CMO and CEO’s: Lumar,
Conductor.
For large-scale operations, Brightedge, Lumar and Conductor offer
enterprise-level solutions. They handle the complexity of big websites,
providing extensive audits and tracking across thousands of pages.
With these tools, you'll have what you need to conduct technical SEO audits
at any level.Bonus chapter 1: Google's algorithm
updates.
You need to be informed about Google’s updates to ensure your site doesn't
trigger Google's spam filters. In some cases, you can take advantage of
updates to the algorithm and get higher rankings. In this chapter, I will walk
you through the biggest updates you should be aware of. And at the end of
this chapter, I will show you resources for catching wind of new updates.
Let’s get started.
Google's Helpful Content Update (a.k.a. Google's
secret new ranking factor).
Much to the chagrin of the SEO community, Google announced an
impending A.I. update on August 2022, just a few weeks before it was
expected to go live.
You know it's going to be big when Google pre-announces an update, which
is why this update was expected to turn the industry upside down. SEO pros
scrambled to check their search rankings weren't about to disappear into a
black hole. Site owners threw their hands in the air wondering what to do.
And SEO bloggers went into a heated frenzy, churning out articles and
analyses around the clock, trying to predict the impact of this update.
And when the update was finally released, it was met with... crickets.
The "Helpful Content Update", was completed on September 9, 2022. And
while the actual impact appeared to be small—so small some industry
analysts actually got cheesed off—this is a much, much bigger update
disguised as a small update. So, let's dive into the gritty details.
What is the Helpful Content Update?
According to the official word from Google HQ—brace yourself, we're aboutto get technical—Google's Helpful Content Update is a site-wide, weighted,
continuous, artificial intelligence classifier search signal...
Simple words? Google now uses AI to detect if your content sucks.
It makes sense that Google does this when you think about it...
Instead of picking out one or two bad things spammy websites are doing each
year and then kicking them out of the search results (what Google did in the
past), Google uses this new AI system to automatically determine if your
content sucks. Google then uses this information as a ranking factor to
calculate the search results, so it's always running in the background.
So overall, websites showing up high in the search results have really good,
helpful content. And websites with really spammy, unhelpful content appear
lower in the search results.
But how do we know if our content sucks? Well, I'm glad you asked. Google
released a series of guidelines to make sure our content doesn't get labeled as
bad. Let's take a look at the official guidance from Google.
People-first content (a.k.a, good content).
- Do you have an existing or intended audience for your business or site that
would find the content useful if they came directly to you?
- Does your content clearly demonstrate first-hand expertise and a depth of
knowledge (for example, expertise that comes from having actually used a
product or service, or visiting a place)?
- Does your site have a primary purpose or focus?
- After reading your content, will someone leave feeling they've learned
enough about a topic to help achieve their goal?
- Will someone reading your content leave feeling like they've had a
satisfying experience?
- Are you keeping in mind our guidance for core updates and for product
reviews?
Search engine-first content (a.k.a., bad content).
- Is the content primarily to attract people from search engines, rather than
made for humans?
- Are you producing lots of content on different topics in hopes that some of
it might perform well in search results?- Are you using extensive automation to produce content on many topics?
- Are you mainly summarizing what others have to say without adding much
value?
- Are you writing about things simply because they seem trending and not
because you'd write about them otherwise for your existing audience?
- Does your content leave readers feeling like they need to search again to get
better information from other sources?
- Are you writing to a particular word count because you've heard or read
that Google has a preferred word count?
What creators should know about Google's August 2022 helpful content
update - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2022/08/helpful-content-update
In other words, Google wants you to be making content that’s original,
helpful, and at least somehow related to the main topic of your website. If
this sounds like you, then you're fine. You don't have anything to worry
about.
If you’re churning out mass-produced content that’s been copied from other
sites, you could be in trouble. If this sounds like you, it's a good idea to read
Google's official documentation and get an outside opinion before making
changes. And confirm you definitely had traffic problems when this update
was released.
If you're confident you have "bad content", follow Google's official guidance
to remove unhelpful and irrelevant content from your website, and you will
naturally recover within a month or two. And if your site already has
significant levels of traffic, only make changes if you're entirely confident
you were negatively affected by this update.
Google's October 2022 Spam Update.
In October 2022, Google tried to slip one by us by quietly announcing a
spam update on their search updates page. Fortunately for us, some super
smart SEO professionals (who have nothing better to do) picked up the tiny
change on Google's search updates page, put on their detective hats and
started digging around, looking for clues on what to do.About once per year, Google improves its technology for picking up spam
and then karate chops the dodgy sites out of the search results. This is an
important time to pay attention if you're doing anything just slightly risky,
like affiliate marketing and creating large amounts of low-quality content, or
low-quality links.
Look over your traffic around October 21, 2022. If you had massive changes
in traffic or rankings around this time, you might have been hit by Google's
super smart artificial intelligence-powered spam detection robot called
SpamBrain.
What is SpamBrain?
SpamBrain is an AI-powered tool Google built to automatically pick up spam
and hacked pages and boot them out of the search results. Every several
months, Google's SpamBrain looks at your website, and your content and
decides one thing—are you a spammer? If you are, look out! Because your
search rankings might just disappear off a cliff.
What to do about SpamBrain and spam updates?
If you're ever negatively affected by a spam update by Google, here's the
good news. All you have to do is remove the offending content or practices
from your website completely, show Google that your site has improved over
several months (it will be detected automatically), and you can recover. Look
over the following list from Google's spam guidelines, see if anything looks
familiar, and remove it from your site.
If none of the words on the list make sense to you, then you can take a deep
breath. You're probably fine. It's almost impossible to be doing these things
by mistake, so you have to have to be doing this stuff on purpose before
getting in trouble for it.
Things in Google's spam policy you shouldn't be doing...
- Cloaking.
- Doorways.
- Hacked content.
- Hidden text and links.
- Keyword stuffing.- Link spam.
- Machine-generated traffic.
- Malware and malicious behaviors.
- Misleading functionality.
- Scraped content.
- Sneaky redirects.
- Spammy automatically-generated content.
- Thin affiliate pages.
- User-generated spam.
Google Search Spam Updates and Your Site - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/updates/spam-updates
Spam Policies for Google Web Search - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/essentials/spam-policies
Google's February 2023 Product Reviews Update.
Google has done it again—another update to its product reviews system,
leaving affiliate SEOs scrambling to make sense of the changes. Fear not,
SEO aficionados, because we'll break down the February 2023 Product
Reviews Update, shed some light on what happened, and cover action steps if
affected.
What happened?
In February 2023, Google released its Product Reviews Update, focused on
rewarding high-quality product reviews that provide insightful analysis,
original research and are written by experts or enthusiasts who truly know
their stuff.
This update was completed on March 7th and released in multiple languages,
including English, Spanish, German, French, Italian, Vietnamese,
Indonesian, Russian, Dutch, Portuguese, and Polish. The number of
languages it's released in indicates that it's a global update, which means that
it's a big one.
If you're an e-commerce site owner, blogger, or publisher with a large
number of product reviews, you'll want to pay close attention to this update.
The changes primarily evaluate product reviews on a page-level basis, but ifa significant portion of your site is dedicated to product reviews, your entire
site could be affected.
Since the update, Google now prioritizes product reviews that demonstrate
firsthand knowledge and expertise of the products and is now paying extra
attention to in-depth research, original analysis, and expert opinions in
product reviews.
Action steps if affected.
If you think the update has affected your site, it's important to look over your
traffic and rankings around February 2023. If your traffic is stable, then you
probably shouldn't change anything. But if your traffic fell off a cliff on
February 2023, you may need to improve the quality of your product reviews
by:
1. Evaluating products from a user's perspective.
2. Demonstrating your expertise and knowledge of the products.
3. Provide evidence of your experiences with the product, such as photos or
videos.
4. Sharing quantitative measurements of the product's performance.
5. Comparing the product with competitors and discussing different use
cases.
6. Identifying key decision-making factors and how the product performs in
those areas.
Remember, content that was impacted by a product reviews update might not
recover until the next update. However, Google's assessment of product
review content is just one of many ranking factors, so changes can happen at
any time for various reasons.
Best practices for product reviews.
Overall, whether you've been affected or not, it's generally best to follow
Google's best practices to lessen your chances of being negatively affected by
future updates.
To ensure your product reviews continue to thrive in the search results,
follow these best practices:1. Describe how a product has evolved from previous models/releases.
2. Explain the product's design choices and their impact on users.
3. Include links to other useful resources and multiple sellers.
4. When recommending a product, provide firsthand supporting evidence,
such as photos or videos.
5. Demonstrate expertise in the subject matter.
You can check out Google's official guidelines on product reviews on the
following page...
Write high-quality product reviews - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/specialty/ecommerce/write-high-
quality-product-reviews
Google's Bard versus Chat GPT - the vicious battle
of the AI chatbots.
In the rapidly changing digital landscape, we're witnessing a groundbreaking
shift in how we interact with technology. While virtual assistants like Alexa
and Siri have been around for some time, AI chatbots like ChatGPT and
Google's Bard are taking the game to a whole new level, offering a 10x or
even 100x improvement in their ability to respond to our questions.
These revolutionary tools use machine learning to mimic human
conversation, transform how we access information, and create content with
unparalleled precision and ease.
For the average person, this means having a virtual sidekick that's far more
sophisticated and efficient than its predecessors, ready to help with anything
from answering questions to writing code, making our digital lives more
powerful than ever.
And right in front of our very eyes, a battle is unfolding between two AI
chatbots. In one corner, we have Google's BARD, a newcomer to the ring. In
the other, the heavyweight champion, ChatGPT. This face-off between the
two AI titans is nothing short of fascinating. Let's take a closer look.
OpenAI's ChatGPT: the champion.
Launched in November 2022 by Elon Musk-funded AI lab OpenAI,ChatGPT became an overnight sensation, sparking widespread enthusiasm
for AI products across the web. ChatGPT users found they could have natural
conversations, write songs, essays, blog posts—and even write code—in just
a few seconds with ChatGPT's powerful technology.
GPT-4, released in March 2023, continues to build on its success with more
accurate results. Now backed by Microsoft, ChatGPT has even found its way
into the Bing search engine, hinting at how the technology could disrupt
Google's long-standing search market dominance.
Google's Bard: the challenger.
Introduced by Sundar Pichai, Google's CEO, in February 2023, BARD faced
initial internal criticism for its rushed development in response to ChatGPT.
Regardless, Google released BARD in March 2023, inviting users in the
USA and UK to join a waitlist. Built on Google's LaMDA technology,
BARD aims to be a "launchpad for creativity," despite occasional
inaccuracies, as seen during a live demo involving the James Webb Space
Telescope.
Google's BARD, like ChatGPT, gives users a chat interface to brainstorm
ideas, recipes, blog posts, ideas for parties, or email responses, and if the user
wants more information they can click through to the search results.
Google is almost a year behind its rival OpenAI in the development of this
technology, which is innovating rapidly, so it's going to be interesting to see
how this saga unfolds.
While both BARD and ChatGPT have their strengths and weaknesses, they
provide unique opportunities for marketers, SEO professionals, and business
owners. With the ability to blaze through certain tasks three or four times
faster, those who adopt this technology quickly will have a major advantage
over competitors who lag behind.
Practical insights for marketers and SEO professionals.
There are a few action steps you can take right now to stay ahead of this
trend.
1. Embrace the AI-driven content creation wave. As AI chatbots likeChatGPT and BARD become more sophisticated, they'll increasingly be used
for content creation, from writing blog posts and landing pages to drafting
emails. Embrace these tools to streamline your content creation and stay
ahead of the curve. This isn't something that you save for a rainy day.
2. Engage with AI chatbots as a user. Try chatbots like BARD and ChatGPT
to familiarize yourself with their capabilities and limitations. By
understanding how these tools work from a user's perspective, you'll be better
equipped to direct your team to use them effectively in your marketing.
3. Understand the limitations of AI. While chatbots are evolving rapidly, they
still have limitations, such as outdated knowledge or incorrect information.
As a marketer, be mindful of these shortcomings. For example, you want to
ensure that any AI-generated content is fact-checked and revised before it's
published.
4. Monitor the space. It can't hurt to mosey on over to Bing once in a while
and to keep an eye on AI chat competitors like You.com and Perplexity AI,
as well as stay on top of any news, to stay informed about new technologies
and strategies that could impact your marketing.
The rapid evolution of AI chatbots has a growing impact on the world of
marketing. By adapting to these advancements, you can continue to thrive in
a likely AI-dominated future.
Google’s Cookieless Tracking Update.
When you visit a website, it usually saves a little file on your computer called
a cookie. Google is going to completely phase out cookies in the Google
Chrome browser in late 2024. And in a move to improve privacy across the
web, in July 2023, Google Analytics stopped working for website owners
that haven't updated their code to use Google Analytics’ new “cookie-free”
code.
These changes will likely have a positive impact on improving our privacy
across the Internet, which is very good.
But here's the thing. If you rely on web analytics right now, you rely on
cookies to know how your website is performing. So, when Google starts tophase out cookies, you could lose important information about your
marketing campaigns.
It’s a good idea to get ahead of this change and ensure the long-term success
of your marketing campaigns. Here's a quick rundown.
What you need to know.
- In mid-2022, Google announced the slow phase-out of external cookies in
the Google Chrome browser, giving business owners, advertisers, and
publishers several years notice to update the tracking codes on their websites.
- On July 1, 2023, old Google Analytics accounts stopped processing data.
So if you haven't already, you need to install Google Analytics 4.
- In late 2024, the use of these files in web analytics and advertising
campaigns will be completely disabled in the Google Chrome browser.
- If you don't update the tracking codes for your analytics and advertising
campaigns on your website, you will eventually lose performance and
conversion data—and we don't want that!
How to prepare for cookieless web analytics.
There are some simple steps to prepare for this update. If you're a non-
technical person, no worries, simply discuss this list with your developer and
skip to the next section. This process is best managed by a technical person,
such as a web developer or marketer with a technical background.
1. Make sure you’re using campaign URLs to track the performance of all of
your online advertising campaigns.
2. Create a new Google Analytics 4 profile and install the tracking code on
your website.
3. Enable Google Signals in Google Analytics 4, if you want information
about conversions without the use of cookies.
4. If you have other analytics or ad campaigns running right now, such as
Meta Ads, you might want to start "scaling in" the new cookieless tracking
codes, while leaving old tracking codes running, so you can make sure
everything is running smoothly over several months.
5. Review the data in your analytics ad campaigns.
6. Set a date around mid-2024 to remove all of your old cookie-enabled
tracking codes.7. Be mindful of your load speed. Tracking codes tend to really slow down
your load times!
Campaign URL builder - Google
https://ga-dev-tools.web.app/ga4/campaign-url-builder/
Meet the next generation of Google Analytics – Google Analytics
https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/10089681
Google Analytics
https://analytics.google.com
Google's August 2023 core update: Riding the SEO
roller coaster.
Remember the thrill of riding a roller coaster for the first time? Google’s
August core update was a bit like that –surprising turns, some ups, some
downs, and a whole lot of SEO professionals gripping their seats. But don't
worry, we've got you covered with a smooth breakdown of this update.
On August 22, 2023, Google announced its second core update of the year. It
took two weeks to roll out globally. While the update significantly rattled
news and retail domains, core updates take no prisoners and affect all
websites and industries.
Even the giants weren't spared from Google's far-reaching update. Intel
witnessed a staggering drop in traffic by nearly 70%. On the flip side,
behemoths like Apple, Amazon, and Facebook navigated the changes rather
successfully. Apple's traffic surged by over 40%, while Amazon and
Facebook enjoyed increases of 12.46% and 16.21% respectively.
While the impacts were broad and far-reaching, there were some surprising
commonalities among websites impacted by this update...
Winners and losers analysis.
I analyzed the websites that experienced the most gains and losses in traffic
from this update and here’s what I uncovered:Losers:
- Websites with their main content buried low below the fold on both desktop
and mobile.
- Websites with sparse info about the actual entity behind it in the footer (e.g.
no legal name, address, or contact details).
- Design elements clashing and overlapping in mobile views.
- Ads playing the lead role of the website, occupying the top half of the
screen.
- Multiple popups layered on top of each other like a bad lasagna, obscuring
the main content.
- Homepages that sneakily redirect to landing pages.
- Cookie notices so huge they could probably have their own website.
Winners:
- Mobile layouts where headers, navigation, and content align neatly and fit
just right on the screen.
- Mobile navigation that's clear, simple, and easy to use.
- Content headers and banners that stay where they should be: above the fold
on both mobile and desktop.
- Banner graphics that use real text for headings.
- Main content with genuine substance—headings, paragraphs, and images.
- Ads just chilling at the bottom of the screen, on mobile and desktop, and
not taking up more than 10%-15% of the window.
Action steps if affected.
If your site took a nosedive, don't fret! Here are some steps to get back on
track:
- Re-evaluate your mobile design and optimize your mobile design for
friendliness and ease.
- Minimize popups and ensure your main content is visible and accessible.
- Check ads' placement and size, reduce their size and placement if they're
hogging the screen.
- Ensure your content is rich, valuable, and easy to navigate.
- Clearly state who you are, especially in the footer.
- Avoid homepage redirects.Further reading.
For those who love to dive deep, check out Google's official guidance on
core updates.
Google’s Search’s core updates and your website – Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/updates/core-updates
Google's November 2023 Core Update: the curious
case of the November core update
Just when you thought you had Google figured out, the November 2023 core
update comes in with a plot twist worthy of a best-selling novel. Google
released a medley of updates around the same time, making it difficult to
isolate exact changes in this update.
Fortunately, we can pick apart websites that gained and lost traffic. This
helps us find out what Google’s focusing on in the algorithm right now and
uncover best practices to apply to our websites.
In this update, we saw some websites ascend to SEO stardom, while others
take a tumble.
Big brands weren't spared from this update, with websites like Reddit.com,
Quora.com, and Asos.com seeing search visibility gains of 21%, 15%, and
10% respectively. Websites that experienced losses include Netflix.com,
Thesaurus.com, and BBC.co.uk, losing -11%, -11% and -10% in search
visibility respectively.
Grab your magnifying glass as we investigate the case of the November core
update.
Official announcement from Google.
Google's November 2023 core update, announced on November 2nd, was
expected to bring a whirlwind of changes over two weeks. This update, hot
on the heels of the October 2023 update, and the November 2023 reviews
update, is focusing on improving different core systems within Google's
complex ranking algorithm.
Analyzing the impact.This core update distinctly favored websites that embraced clear, user-
friendly designs, especially on mobile devices. We're seeing a celebration of
simplicity and functionality across websites that gained traffic. Conversely,
websites that neglect the basics of user experience, content quality, and brand
transparency are feeling the pinch. Let's have a closer look at the winners and
losers of this update.
Winners:
- Crystal clear homepages - websites that effectively communicate their
purpose and the company behind them.
- Simplistic mobile navigation - user-friendly mobile interfaces are getting a
big thumbs-up from Google.
- Informative footers - shopping sites that include essential information like
returns, contact, and help in the footer.
- Accessible content - content that is immediately visible and accessible on
mobile devices.
- Text-rich websites - those rich in HTML text content, as opposed to being
image-heavy.
Losers:
- Content-poor pages - pages lacking in real text content.
- Opaque branding - websites that fail to provide clear information about
their backing organization.
- Clunky mobile experience - difficult-to-navigate mobile sites and those
with overlapping and clashing design elements.
- Invasive and difficult cookie notices - sites with overbearing cookie notices,
especially those obscuring navigational content.
- Ad-heavy layouts - websites where ads dominate the landscape, particularly
above the fold, are not faring well.
Best practices and action steps
If your site felt the impact of the November 2023 Core Update, don't despair!
Here are some actionable steps to help you align with Google's latest
standards:
- Conduct a site audit - review your site's traffic since November 2nd.
Identify pages that have suffered and scrutinize their content and layout.- Embrace mobile-friendliness - ensure your mobile site is a breeze to
navigate and that important content is easily accessible—regardless if the
user accepts your cookie notices or not.
- Improve content quality - focus on enriching your site with text-based
content that adds real value to your visitors.
- Streamline user experience - cut down on intrusive ads and popups, and
ensure cookie notices are non-intrusive and user-friendly.
- Be transparent - display legal and privacy policies, and make sure your
website clearly states the company behind it.
Remember, Google's core updates are not about penalties, but about pushing
the web towards becoming more user-friendly, content-rich, and transparent.
Embrace these changes as opportunities for growth and improvement.
By staying on top of core updates such as these, you can keep your website
sailing smoothly through the choppy conditions that occur during updates,
and decrease your chances of running into problems when Google releases its
next update.
For a deeper dive into Google's core updates and how they impact your site,
check out the official guidance below:
Google Search's core updates and your website - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/updates/core-updates
Google's 2024 bulk email sender guidelines: the new
rules of email engagement.
Picture this: It's February 1, 2024. Google has just rolled out its 
new
guidelines for email campaigns. The SEO world is buzzing, and there's a
slight air of panic among those who rely heavily on email outreach. But fear
not, just like a seasoned captain steering a ship through turbulent waters, I’m
here to guide you through these changes with a pragmatic and clear approach.
Understanding Google's new email standards.
On January 28, 2024, Google turned the page on email marketing practices
by announcing its comprehensive bulk email sender guidelines. This update
shines a light on the need for verified authenticity, user consent, and iron-clad security in email communications. At its core, the announcement isn't
just about stricter rules; it's a call for marketers to foster trust and deliver
value with every email sent. These guidelines are set to become the new gold
standard, ensuring that only the most relevant and welcomed emails land in
users' inboxes.
First off, let's break down what Google’s new standards mean for your email
campaigns:
1. Email authentication. Your emails must be authenticated. This involves
setting up SPF (Sender Policy Framework), DKIM (DomainKeys Identified
Mail), and DMARC (Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting &
Conformance). Think of these as your email's passport, visa, and boarding
pass – essential for its journey to the inbox.
2. No unsolicited emails. Sending emails to people who haven’t opted in?
That’s a big no-no now. Your outreach must be to individuals who have
shown interest in what you're offering.
3. Easy unsubscribe options. Make unsubscribing as easy as pie. One-click
should be all it takes.
4. Keeping spam rates low. Your spam rate should be below 0.10%, and
definitely not hit 0.3% or higher. It’s like keeping your cholesterol levels in
check – essential for healthy email marketing.
5. Enhanced security with TLS. Use TLS (Transport Layer Security) for
transmitting emails. Security is not just a feature anymore, it’s a necessity.
Link outreach in the new Google era
Link outreach, a staple in the SEO diet, will need some tweaking. The focus
should be on crafting emails that are genuine, engaging, and provide value to
the recipient. It's not just about asking for a link; it's about building a
relationship.
Whether you’re doing email outreach already or intend to set up outreach
campaigns in the future, there are a few action steps you can take to make
sure you're fully compliant. Let's look at action steps to gear up for the
change.1. Audit your email list: Scrub it clean of any contacts that haven’t engaged
with your emails recently or have never opted in.
2. Authenticate your emails: If terms like SPF, DKIM, and DMARC sound
like alien lingo to you, now is the time to familiarize yourself with them or
get an expert who can set them up for you.
3. Revamp your email content: Ensure your emails provide real value and
aren’t just a thinly veiled plea for links.
4. Monitor your metrics: Keep an eye on your spam rate. Treat it like a vital
sign of your email campaign’s health.
5. Test your emails: Before the big roll-out in February, conduct A/B testing
to see what works and what trips the spam alarm.
6. Educate your team: make sure everyone involved in your email campaigns
is up to speed with these changes. A well-informed team is your best defense
against falling afoul of these new regulations.
Remember, it's not just about surviving these changes; it's about thriving
through them. By getting ahead of this change and pivoting, your
performance doesn't need to suffer, in fact, you can outperform your previous
campaigns with better engagement, as a result of better deliverability and
personalization.
Keeping up-to-date with Google's updates.
As of the last couple of years, Google updates have become more frequent.
While I understand the constant changes by Google might make you feel like
throwing your hands in the air and doing a nudie run through the office, don’t
be disheartened. The following resources are great for staying updated. If
ther
e’
s a significant update to Google's algorithm, it will be covered on at
least one of the following pages.
Google Algorithm Change History
https://moz.com/google-algorithm-change
Google PageRank & Algorithm Updates
https://www.seroundtable.com/category/google-updatesGoogle Search Central Blog
https://developers.google.com/search/blog
List of Google Search Ranking Updates - Google Search Central
https://developers.google.com/search/updates/ranking
Google’s 2024 updates—what’s on the horizon?
Cracking the code of Google’s future updates doesn’t require mystic powers
or insider scoops. By understanding the patterns in Google’s past updates, we
can get a clear picture of changes likely to come.
Historically, Google's updates have focused on two main objectives:
eliminating spam and low-quality sites and creating a better, user-friendly
Internet experience. In recent years, integrating AI into search experiences,
and an increasing focus on user privacy. All objectives that have been
publicly acknowledged on Google's radar. The following key areas Google is
likely to focus on in coming years, and you should too.
1. AI’s growing role in search:
AI is becoming a bigger part of Google’s search engine. This includes
advancements like Search Generative Experience (SGE) and the creation of
generative content, where AI helps to provide more accurate, conversational
responses to search queries. Expect Google to leverage AI for deeper
understanding and more relevant, context-rich search results. And expect
SEO practitioners to use generative content in clever ways to scale their SEO.
2. Better understanding of user intent:
Google is improving at figuring out why people search for certain things. To
align with this, SEO strategies are now focusing on creating content that not
just answers queries, but also addresses the underlying intent behind
searches, such as providing comprehensive guides or follow-up detailed
answers to specific questions.
3. Increased focus on privacy:
Google’s updates are increasingly driven by consumer preferences for
privacy. This includes the move away from third-party cookies andenhancements to user control over personal data. These changes reflect a
larger trend where user privacy is becoming a key force in shaping how
Google operates and affects targeted advertising strategies.
4. Content quality and structured data:
High-quality content remains crucial, but now Google is assessing the
helpfulness of your entire site. It’s looking for content that benefits users site-
wide, so focusing on overall site quality and helpfulness becomes more
important. Structured data helps Google understand the context and content
of your site, making it vital for SEO.
5. Enhancements in local SEO and commercial experiences:
Google is focusing on bridging the gap between online searches and in-store
experiences. This includes improving search results for local businesses and
online shopping, aiming for seamless transitions from online research to
physical store visits.
All of these insights are based on Google’s recent trends. Incorporate them
into your SEO practices. By doing so, you'll align with Google’s direction
and improve your site's performance in the ever-evolving digital landscape.
And you'll reduce your chances of being overtaken by competitors, or worse,
hit by a Google update.Bonus chapter 2: The quick and dirty
guide to pay-per-click advertising with
Google Ads.
Why bother with pay-per-click advertising?
You would have to be as crazy as a box of weasels to pay each time someone
visits your site with pay-per-click advertising when you can rank high in
Google for free, right?
Not necessarily. Pay-per-click advertising has some advantages over SEO,
with PPC campaigns you can:
- Send customers to your site within hours, not the months it sometimes takes
for solid SEO results.
- Track results down to the penny, and get very clear insights into the
financial performance of your advertising. Simply set up conversion tracking
with the instructions provided by Google, or whichever pay-per-click
provider you choose.
- Achieve a much larger overall number of customers to your site by running
pay-per-click in tandem with your other marketing efforts.
- In most cases, achieve a positive financial return on your marketing spend
and keep on selling to these customers in the future.
There is one caveat to the last point. If you are a small fish trying to enter an
extremely competitive market, such as house loans, insurance, or
international plane flights, it's likely the big players in the market are buying
a large amount of advertising, forcing the average cost-per-click to
astronomical prices, and making it difficult for new players to get a profitable
return.
If you're selling pizza delivery in New York, pool cleaning in Los Angeles,
or cheap baseball jackets... In other words, if you're selling a common localtrade, service, or product online, you can likely receive a profitable return on
your advertising spend.
While pay-per-click marketing really deserves its own book, this is a quick
and dirty bonus chapter, jam-packed with just enough information to get a
pay-per-click campaign set up, avoid common mistakes, and send more
customers and sales to your business.
If you want to delve deeper into the science of pay-per-click advertising, I've
included some great resources on Google Ads at the end of the chapter.
Sound good? Let's get started.
Which is the best PPC provider to start with?
There are many pay-per-click providers out there, Google Ads and Bing Ads
are just two.
Google Ads text ads are generally the best starting point. You can sell
anything on Google Ads if you have money to spend because the user base is
so large.
If you're looking to jump into pay-per-click advertising, get started with
Google Ads. Move on to the other pay-per-click networks after you have
some experience under your belt.
Here’s why I think Google Ads text ads are usually the best choice for a first
venture into pay-per-click advertising:
- With Google's search engine market share at 88.61%, and Bing at 2.72%,
you can reach out to the largest potential amount of customers with Google.
- Fast and instant results. Send new customers to your site within a couple of
hours.
- Advanced targeting technology. Target users based on where they are
located, or what browser or device they are using. Google's ad-targeting
technology is among the best in the world.
- Due to the popularity of Google Ads, there's a wealth of knowledge on
running Google Ads campaigns successfully.
Ensuring success with research and a plan.Like all marketing projects, for a Google Ads campaign to be successful, you
need to start with research and a solid plan. Without first defining your goals,
and designing a robust strategy to achieve them, it's impossible to create a
successful marketing campaign—you'll have no way of determining if the
outcome is successful!
Here are some important questions to ask yourself before you get started:
- What is the objective of the campaign? Sales, web inquiries, sign-ups, or
branding?
- What is the maximum monthly budget you can afford?
- What is the maximum cost-per-inquiry, or cost-per-sale you can afford? For
example, if you are selling snow jackets at $100, and your profit margin is
20%, you really can't afford to spend much more than $20 on each customer
you acquire. Write this figure down and review it later. You may need to first
run a small test campaign to determine if pay-per-click is profitable, and the
right tool for marketing your business.
- What are the most common characteristics of your customers? For example,
if you're selling late-night pizza delivery in New York, you don't want to be
paying for the lovely folk in Idaho searching for late-night pizza delivery.
Write down your customers’ common characteristics, and later in the settings
recommendations, if there's an option to target these customers, I'll tell you
how to target them.
How to choose the right kind of keywords.
It's the moment you've been waiting for. The keywords! Precious keywords.
Just like SEO, getting your keywords right with text ads is critical if you
want a successful campaign.
Unlike SEO, with Google’s text ads, there are different types of keywords
called keyword match-types. I've listed the main keyword match types below.
Broad match keywords.
The default type of keywords all Google Ads campaigns use—if you don't
change any settings—are broad match keywords. With broad match
keywords, Google will take any word out of your phrase, and serve up ads for
searches hardly related to your phrase.Needless to say, almost all new campaigns should NOT be using broad-
match keywords to start with. Have a look at the example below.
keyword:
tennis shoes
will trigger ads for:
tennis
designer shoes
dress shoes
basketball shoes
tennis bags
tennis equipment
Phrase match keywords.
Phrase match keywords will only show your ad for searches containing your
core phrase or close variations. With phrase-match keywords, you can reach
more customers while having a higher level of control over the relevancy of
the traffic you're buying. And higher relevancy usually means more sales.
To enter a phrase match keyword, when adding keywords to your account,
wrap the keywords with "" double quotation marks and these keywords will
become phrase match keywords.
keyword:
"tennis shoes"
will trigger ads for:
tennis shoes
tennis shoes online
best tennis shoes
best shoe for tennis
where to buy shoes for tennis
will not match for:
tennis players
tennis rackets
Margaret thatcherExact match keywords.
Exact match keywords will only trigger ads for the exact phrase you enter,
and close variants. Needless to say, with exact match keywords in your
campaign, you can have a high level of accuracy, and achieve more sales.
Exact match keywords are indispensable for every Google Ads campaign.
To enter exact match keywords, wrap the keywords with [] square brackets
when adding keywords to your account and they will become exact match
keywords.
keyword:
[tennis shoes]
will trigger ads for:
tennis shoes
tennis shoe
will not match for:
men's tennis shoes
women's tennis shoes
Negative keywords.
One of the most important, but easily overlooked keywords are negative
keywords. Negative keywords will prevent your ads from showing for
searches that include your negative keyword.
If you are using phrase match or any kind of broad match keyword, you
should be using negative keywords. Negative keywords are vital for ensuring
you are not paying for advertising for irrelevant searches.
Enter negative keywords in your campaign by adding a - minus sign in front
of your keywords when adding keywords, or going to the shared library on
the left-hand column in your Google Ads account, and you can apply
negative keywords across your entire account, a great time-saving tip.
keywords:
car service
-guide
-manualwill trigger ads for:
car service Los Angeles
car service mechanic
car service tips
will not trigger ads for:
free car service guide
Ford Mustang 65 car service manual
When choosing keywords, you need a balance between keywords with a high
level of accuracy, such as exact match keywords, and keywords with a larger
amount of reach, such as phrase match.
Use a mix of the above keywords in your campaign, then review the
performance of different keyword types after your campaign has been
running, when you have some data.
Structuring your campaign with ad groups.
Google Ads offers an excellent way of organizing keywords called ad groups.
If you organize your campaign correctly with ad groups, you can quickly see
which areas of your campaign are profitable and not so profitable.
Let's say you have a Harley Davidson dealership, with a wide range of HD
gear from bikes to accessories and clothing, below is an example of ad
groups you might create.
- Harley Davidson motorbikes
- Harley Davidson parts
- Harley Davidson accessories
- Harley Davidson jackets
With ad groups, you can:
- Create multiple, and separate ads for each product line. Great for testing.
- Have a select range of keywords, specific to the ad group.
- Set a specific bid for the ad group. Great if you have higher-priced products
or services you're willing to pay more for.
- Get detailed data on the performance of your ad groups and differentproducts.
Structure your campaign with ad groups with a very clear and simple sense of
organization when you set up your campaign. You'll get clearer performance
insights, and it will make your life easier when you want to make
improvements later on down the track.
How to crush the competition with killer text ads.
Writing a killer text ad is essential to the success of your campaign. Poorly
written ads can increase the overall costs of your campaign, sending less
traffic to your site for more money. We don't want that.
With your text ads, you want to:
- Attract clicks from interested customers, not tire-kickers.
- Include keywords related to what the user searched for.
- Encourage a clear call to action and benefit for the user.
Text ads are made up of the following components:
1. Headline. Your headlines have a maximum of 30 characters. With your
headline, you should include the keyword the user is searching for or capture
the user's curiosity.
2. Description lines. You have two description lines at a maximum of 90characters each. Your description lines should make it crystal clear what you
are selling, the benefits of clicking through to your site, and a call to action.
3. Display URL. You have 30 characters for a custom URL that will be
displayed to users in the search results. Display URLs are great as you can
actually display a different URL to the users than the URL of the page they
will arrive on. You can take advantage of this to encourage more users to
arrive on your site.
I've listed some winning ads so we can see why they are so successful:
Logo Design ® *SALE* $49
www.logodesignguarantee.com/Logo-USA
100% Custom-Made Special USA Sale
100% Money Back. Order Online Now…
Injured in an Accident?
www.1800needhelp.com/
You May Be Entitled to $10,000 +
Free Case Evaluation. 24/7 Call Us
Flowers Online - $19.99
www.fromyouflowers.com/
Delivered Today Beautiful & Fresh!
"Best Value Flowers" - CBS News
In each of the above, we can see some similarities. Each ad has:
- An interesting headline. Each ad captures the curiosity of the user, through
use of special characters, asking a question, or posting a competitive offer
right in the headline.
- Clear benefits. Each ad has a compelling offer in addition to the core
product or service being sold, making the ad stand out from the search
results, such as a no-risk, money-back guarantee, same-day delivery, or a free
evaluation.
- A clear call to action. The first two ads make it clear what the next step
should be. In the third ad, the call-to-action is not explicit, but it is obvious.
By having “Online - $19.99” in the headline, and “Delivered Today”, it is
clear the user can order flowers online to be delivered the same day.How much to pay for keywords?
A burning question for text ads newbies is, how much should I bid on my
keywords?
There is no clear answer for finding your ideal bid price. You should only
pay for what you can afford. You can find out how much you can afford by
doing some simple math.
For example, let’s look at an example scenario:
- You're selling video courses for $200.
- For every 100 visitors, 3 turn into customers. This is a conversion rate of
3%.
- If you bought 100 visitors at a cost-per-click of $3, this would cost $300.
- With your 3% conversion rate, you will have made $600 in sales, spent
$300 on advertising, and made a profit of $300.
So, to calculate your ideal CPC, 
I’
m sorry to say, you do need to sit down
and do some math and figure it out. It can’t be avoided. But to keep it simple,
you should only pay what you can afford—otherwise, you should be
spending your marketing dollars elsewhere.
Here's the catch, you can only find out what your cost-per-click is after
running your campaign for a while, when you have accumulated some data.
So, run a small test campaign to begin with, to collect data. Use the
information to make projections, and only pay what you can afford in a
larger, more serious campaign.
In case yo
u’
re wondering how prices get calculated, the Google Ads cost-
per-click network uses a bidding system, which means you are taking place in
an auction with competing advertisers. By increasing bids, your ad position
increases, leading to more traffic or customers to your site.
Here is where it gets interesting. Google awards an advantage to advertisers
showing ads with high quality and high relevancy. This is Google's Quality
Score technology. Ads with a higher number of clicks and relevancy are
awarded with a higher Quality Score, and subsequently receive increased ad
positions and cheaper prices!Keep this in mind when writing ads and choosing your keywords. Your ads
should be relevant to achieve the highest Quality Score possible, so you can
receive the cheapest cost-per-click.
Google Ads settings for getting started.
The single most important factor to ensure your campaign is successful is to
fill out all of the settings when you set up your campaign. Whatever you do,
don’t rush through the campaign settings, otherwise, you will end up paying
for advertising to people who have no interest in what you're selling.
I've listed recommended Google Ads settings below for reference, but if you
are not setting up your Google Ads campaign right now, feel free to skip to
the end of this chapter for closing recommendations on managing Google
Ads campaigns for long-term success.
1. If you haven't done so already, create an account at
https://ads.google.com/home/
. When signing up, enter your Google account,
or let the tool create one for you if you don't already have one.
2. Once fully signed in, click on the big button “Create” on the main menu on
the left, then click “Campaign”.
3. What’s your campaign objective?:
Choose the objective for your campaign, whether it’s sales, leads, website
traffic, or one of the other options.
4. Select a campaign type:
Choose “Search” from the options. This is important. This ensures you start
with a campaign that appears on the Google Search Results to start with.
Enter a URL to your website as well.
5. Choose your website traffic conversion goals:
Select page view if you don’t have any other options.
6. Campaign name:
Put in a relevant campaign name. It helps if you make it descriptive and
perhaps the month and year you’ve created the campaign, so you don’t get
confused if you create more campaigns later.
7. Turn on enhanced conversions.If you have the option, turn on enhanced conversions. It just means Google
will have more data to calculate the performance of your campaigns.
You can leave the rest of the settings for now, hit “save and continue”, and
you're good to go with setting up the rest of your campaign.
Optimization tips for tweaking your campaign for
better profit.
I've touched on a handful of secrets of starting successful pay-per-click
campaigns, but now I'm going to cover the most important technique for
ongoing pay-per-click success.
Review and improve your campaign regularly.
Leaving a Google Ads campaign running without keeping your head around
the performance is like leaving a freight train running without a driver.
Regularly review your ad, ad group, keyword, cost-per-click, and cost-per-
conversion performance. This will allow you to back the winning horses of
your campaign and swiftly cut the losers.
Fortunately, the Google Ads platform offers endless opportunities for deep
insights into the performance of your campaign.
As a starting point, below are example areas in your campaign to regularly
look over:
- Ad group performance. Review click-through-rates, cost-per-click, and
cost-per-conversion. Allocate more funds from your campaign to winning ad
groups, and decrease funds or pause losing ad groups if you see any obvious
trends.
- Ad performance. Look for winning ads with higher click-through rates,
lower cost-per-clicks, and lower cost-per-conversion. Pause expensive ads,
and create new ads to split-test based on your winners. Progressively build up
new ads with higher click-through rates into your campaign over time.
- Keyword performance. Review which keywords are running at a higher
cost, which keywords have low-quality scores, and see if you can pause any
overly budget-draining keywords with low conversions.
- Search terms and negative keywords. You should regularly review yoursearch terms report for any irrelevant searches that are somehow coming
through in your campaigns. Add these irrelevant search terms to your
negative keywords, so you are not paying for them in future.
Further Google Ads resources.
If you want to delve deeper into the pay-per-click rabbit hole, the resources
below are a great starting point for anyone starting with pay-per-click
advertising:
Ultimate Guide to Google AdWords
 - Perry Marshall
The 
Ultimate Guide to Google Adwords 
by Perry Marshall is often the
starting point for many professionals starting with PPC. Offers a great
overview of Google Ads and delves into the inner game of successful Google
Ads campaigns. Great for beginners, but for more advanced techniques check
out the following resources.
Advanced Google AdWords
 - Brad Geddes
If you want to be a pay-per-click guru, then look no further than this fantastic
guide to advanced Google Ads management, great for both agencies and
business owners running their own campaigns. Brad Geddes' magnum opus
on advanced Google Ads pay-per-click advertising has been the secret
treasure of many successful pay-per-click consultants, and readily available
in Amazon and many other bookstores.
PPC Hero
https://www.ppchero.com/
PPC Hero is loaded with free advice on the latest Google Ads tricks and tips
but also covers fundamental pay-per-click methods that never change.
Updated regularly.
Google Ads & Commerce Blog
https://blog.google/products/ads-commerce/
Google's official blog for Google Ads. Great for the latest Google Ads news
direct from the hors
e’
s mouth.
That brings us to the end of the last bonus chapter of SEO 2024, and almostto the end of the book. Make sure you download the SEO checklist available
on the following page as well as read through the final chapter for some final
tips in ensuring your overall success in ranking high in the search results.Bonus: Free SEO for beginners video
course.
Watch the complimentary (free)
SEO for beginners video course.
As a small thank you for reading this book, I've created a free video course,
"SEO for beginners", that you can access instantly on the following URL.Privacy-minded folk who don't want to join my SEO newsletter can just
simply click on 'no thanks, take me directly to the resources' at the following
page. But I highly recommend joining my newsletter if you want to keep
updated with the latest changes in SEO.
Complimentary SEO for beginners video course
https://www.simpleeffectiveness.com/seo-videos-and-checklistGet the free SEO checklist, link
building resources, and more...
Get the free SEO checklist PDF,
link building resources, and more.
I've uploaded the following resources to my resources page for readers,
including...- SEO checklist (worth $99).
- SEO for beginners video course (worth $99).
- SSL upgrade checklist to hand to your developer.
- Google review request card for local businesses.
- Guest post opportunities for building links.
and much more!...
You can check it out here...
SEO checklist, videos, and resources
https://www.simpleeffectiveness.com/seo-videos-and-checklist
And join my exclusive SEO newsletter…
I often get emails from readers asking when I will release new content, if I
have other technical guides in simple language, and a heads up on Google
updates, so I put together an SEO newsletter. If you want to get…
- A heads-up on super important changes to Google.
- New SEO techniques.
- Discounts on my premium courses and training.
- Some extra (secret) updates for readers….
You can join my newsletter on the same page
.Final thoughts & tips.
We've covered a lot of ground.
This book was written in a positive, light, and conversational style in the
hope of making a sometimes difficult topic readable for readers from any
background. If you’ve read to the finish line, you’ve covered a lot of ground,
including:
- The basics of how Google works.
- Google's current ranking factors according to industry studies.
- Keyword research.
- Semantic keywords, entities, and ontologies.
- Improving your site's load speed.
- Optimizing keywords into your pages.
- Essentials for supporting mobile users.
- Optimizing user behavior.
- Google's official quality guidelines.
- Link building - examples of beginner and advanced strategies.
- Link building - how to get featured in the mainstream news for free.
- Link building - content driven link building.
- Social media and SEO.
- Web analytics basics.
- Fixing common SEO problems and solutions.
- Local SEO essentials.
- Targeting rich snippets.
- Steps to secure your website with HTTPS encryption.
- Google’s Core Web Vitals.
- Major Google updates such as the August 2023 and November 2023 Core
Update.
- The vicious battle between ChatGPT and Google's SGE.
- Google's bulk email sender guidelines for 2024.
- Staying ahead of future updates.
- Basics for Google Ads campaigns.... and much more.
Congratulations on being a positive and proactive reader and finishing this
book! The knowledge we’ve covered is more than enough to get started in
SEO. It's also enough to increase rankings, traffic, and sales if you already
have moderate levels of success.
Don’t forget why we learn SEO in the first place, details are important, but
don't get bogged down in them. I often see many readers, business owners,
and marketers lost in endless articles, forums, and blog posts on SEO, and not
making any progress with their projects.
If there is one thing I want you to take away from this book, it isn’t an
appetite for details. I want you to finish this book with a propensity to action.
Of all the readers I encounter, the most successful are those with a positive
and proactive attitude, who put their new knowledge into action.
Remember, what matters most is that you optimize your site well enough to
beat competitors, make sales, and grow your business. If your site shows
stronger signals to Google than competitors, you will win in the rankings.
Most importantly, have fun with it, make it your own, and be positive and
proactive!
~
Corrections & feedback.
I want this book to be the best for all readers, which is why 
I’
m open to
feedback from all readers and use feedback in updates as much as possible. If
you are unhappy for any reason, noticed a mistake, or want something
included, give me a chance to fix it, and email me at
adam@simpleeffectiveness.com. I’ll be happy to hear from you. Seriously!
What to do next.
Would you like more books in this simple and easy-to-understand format?
Please take a quick moment and leave a review on Amazon, it will encourage
me to get my next book out! I read all reader reviews and just a small
moment of your time will sincerely make my day.For Kindle readers, swipe to the next page and rate this book.
- Adam Clarke