 
 
 
DAVID ROGERS 
CEO, The David Rogers Group 
Bestselling  author  
Faculty, Columbia  Business School 
 
 
David Rogers is the world’s leading expert on digital 
transformation,  a member of the faculty at Columbia  
Business School, and the author of five books. 
 In his newest book, "The Digital Transformation  
Roadmap"  (2023), Rogers tackles the barriers behind the 
70% of businesses  that fail in their own digital efforts. 
He
 shows why every business must transform  not just its 
products―it must transform  the organizaƟon itself. 
Rogers offers a five‐step roadmap to rebuild any 
organization  for continuous  digital change.  
 
His previous landmark  bestseller,  “The Digital Transformation  Playbook”  (2016), was the first 
book on digital transformation  and put the topic on the map. Now published  in thirteen 
languages,  it defined the discipline  by arguing that digital transformation  (DX) is not about 
technology;  it is about strategy, leadership,  and new ways of thinking.  
 
Rogers has helped companies  around the world transform  their business for the digital age, 
working with senior leaders at corporations  including Google, Microsoft,  Citigroup,  Visa, HSBC, 
Unilever, Procter & Gamble, Merck, GE, Toyota, Cartier, Pernod Ricard, China Eastern Airlines, 
NC Bank Saudi, and Acuity Insurance,  among others. 
 Rogers regularly delivers keynotes at conferences  on all six continents  and has appeared  on 
CNN, ABC News, CNBC, Channel News 
Asia, and in The New York Times, The Financial Times, 
The Wall Street Journal, and The Economist.  
 At Columbia  Business School, Rogers is faculty director of executive  education  programs  on 
digital business strategy and on leading digital transformation.  He has taught over twenty‐five 
thousand  executives  through his programs  in New
 York City, in Silicon Valley, and online. His 
recent research has focused on new business models, innovating  through experimentation,  
governance  for growth, and barriers to change in digital transformation.  
 For new tools and weekly content from David, visit www.davidrogers.digital . 
The DX Roadmap
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digitalProblem/Opportunity  Statements
The Four Stages of Validation
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digitalThe Four Stages of Validation
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital
© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digital© 2023 David L. Rogers  Excerpted  from The Digital Transformation  Roadmap
(Columbia  Business School Publishing)  Visit www.davidrogers.digitalPage 1 of 1 
 Praise for The Digital Transformation Roadmap  
 
 “Required reading for corporations grappling with how to thrive in  the digital age. Rogers takes 
you behind the scenes of companies that are gett ing digital transformati on right to drive real 
organizational change.” —Athina Kanioura, Chief Strategy a nd Transformation Officer, PepsiCo 
 
“To succeed in today’s digital revolution, companies must reinvent not just their business models 
but also their organizations. R ogers’s book gives you the essential tools to tackle both challenges 
and to lead any established business to real and lasti ng transformation.” 
—Alex Osterwalder, CEO, Strategyzer, and inventor of the Business Model Canvas 
 “Rogers opens the doors on what makes tran sformation work inside high-performance 
organizations. The key: engaging your own peopl e at every level and every function of the 
business. Don’t miss this book!” —Philipp Wohland, Chief People and Tran sformation Officer, Virgin Media O2 
 “The Digital Transformation Roadmap  lays out the five fundam ental steps for corporate 
transformation. It’s the essentia l resource for corporat e leaders navigating continuous change.” 
—Steve Blank, the “father of modern  entrepreneurship” and coauthor of The Startup 
Owner’s Manual  “To thrive while facing disruption at every turn, leaders must rei nvent their companies again and 
again. The Digital Transformation Roadmap  shows them how. In these pages, Rogers provides 
the indispensable guide for how to drive continuous change.” 
—Chris Reid, Executive Vice Presiden t, Identity Solutions, Mastercard 
 “When it comes to digital transformati on, don’t get overly enamored with the digital  and instead 
pay close attention to the transformation . That’s the key lesson of Rogers’s book, which calls on 
everyone in the enterprise, not just  the IT team, to drive change.” 
—Geoffrey Moore, author of Crossing the Chasm  and Zone to Win   
 
 
 
 
 
ORDER	NOW	on	AMAZON 	
 https://amzn.to/41U85dl   
 