WUNDERMAN STRATEGIC PLAN
2006–2008“ W henever you get confused, go to the store.
                                    The customer has all the answers – and all the money .”
                                                                             — S am Walton3 W underman Strategic Plan Manifesto
Simply put, what brings our strategic plan together is our single-minded focus on  
the customer. We recently reafﬁrmed our mission with the following quote:  
                   “Whenever you get confused, go to the store. 
                                      The customer has all the answers – and all the money .”
                                                                                         – Sam W alton
The Wunderman mission is to follow the customer’s journey (see Atticus 2001), listen to 
the customer, understand what motivates him/her and then give  
the customer the tools to get back to that store time and time again. 
Understand this simple mission and our key initiatives become clear and, we believe, 
become supporting pillars of the WPP focus on creativity and new business. Everything 
we do has to be centered on following the customer. 
We will: 
•  Invest in people and take a long-term view of our talent need. We don’t just deliver 
commercials – our intellectual capital is core, and we can’t afford to lose it.
•  Invest in the types of resources that bring us closer to customers.
•  Invest in uniﬁed platforms that allow us to engage consistently around the world; to use 
data to its fullest; and to leverage process – the same way, wherever we are and with 
whomever we are engaged.
•  Deliver content to customers in the channels they want and ask for. To do that we will invest, 
at least time, in marketing technology so that we are always at the forefront of development 
and channel evolution, and we will propose investments in areas that we believe will better 
deliver in those channels, from creative to production to deployment if appropriate.
•  Invest in research that leads to insights like BES so that we can enhance data – historical 
records – with a deep understanding of what motivates. 
•    Leverage our global and regional accounts, as well as the WPP team accounts we are 
members of, as examples of our ability to provide consistency across the globe, and 
we will make sure that we destroy all remaining account silos that prevent us from 
delivering on this key promise. 
Clearly, new business growth that is organic and/or net new is the lifeblood that fuels 
corporate success. It is our deeply held conviction that pursuing our initiatives will create an 
environment in which organic growth becomes a natural extension of our client engagement 
and where our percent conversion of net wins becomes highest in the WPP marketing group.
What follows is our plan for success.Redeﬁning Customer Journey…
The customer has all the answers – and all the moneyT  he Wunderman 
mission is to follow the 
customer to the store   
learn the route     get 
familiar with all the stops 
along the way     become 
intimate with the customer 
and his/her environs      
be sensitive to customer 
moods     understand 
customer needs, wants and 
desires     and ultimately 
garner for our clients the 
lion’s share of repeat, long-
term, high-value customers.
Facilitating the Customer 
Journey, making it 
interesting and worthwhile, 
and ensuring that the 
customers feel that their 
“answers” are right and 
their money is well spent, 
requires expertise and 
infrastructure. 5 The Wunderman Strategy Plan for 2006–2008 addresses both issues:
Expertise
• Insight/data
• Strategic planning
• Channel planning
• Creative/production
• Digital
Infrastructure 
• Data
• Digital tools
• Training
• Network
• HR
 
Wunderman is differentiated by its ability to provide its clients with a seamless 
environment where expertise and infrastructure mesh in a global network, creating 
programs that deliver ROI against Lifetime Value.6 To that end, in order to focus on creating Lifetime Value  for our clients’ customers and 
Long-term Value for our clients, Wunderman has taken steps to position itself for the 
future by redeﬁning many of our key client deliverables to better reﬂect the mission:
•  Creative  has to be thought of as Content – in order get the customer to the store we 
need to deliver depth of message, powerful offers, and compelling arguments. We must 
inform, educate and entertain. Go beyond the traditional constrictions of channels and 
connect directly and intimately with customers in ways that give power and excitement 
to the customer.
•  Channel Integration,  an industry buzz concept – yet an old advertising mantra – must 
be recast as Customer Journey . It is not about how we integrate the message – it’s all 
about how customers interact with their total environment on a daily basis.
•  CRM has been recast as Dialogue – Customers Really Manage  is another spin.  
No customer wants to be managed. The Wunderman task is to put tools in the hands  
of the customer that allow them to manage their own relationships with our clients.  
Do that and you can lead the customer to the cash register and help them buy and 
then buy again. We also believe that in the competitive world of Google and Yahoo, 
CRM must take on the role of “after the click.” Wunderman’s task becomes even more 
important as advertising models shift to “connectivity.”
•  Data is nothing more than a historical record of transactions – yet it is the single most 
important ingredient in personal communications. Obviously without it we can never 
connect with the right customer. Yet, without Insight  we don’t know why you bought or 
what might make you buy again. That is why the industry has been satisﬁed with low, 
single-digit buy rates for response. By combining the right and correct data with a deep 
understanding of the customer, we are no longer just predicting, we are facilitating –  
a more efﬁcacious way to create Long-term Value.  
What follows is our plan for 2006–2008: a blueprint for growth, acquisition and our global 
initiatives for continued proﬁtable operation; an analysis of who we are and how we are 
viewed; and our market and our competition. 7 …IntegrationO  verview
Wunderman competes in a number of areas, against a variety of competitors. In truth, 
some of the sectors we compete in have become commoditized, or run the risk of 
commoditization. For example:
• Data 
• CRM 
• Customer Service
However, they become commodities only when viewed in a vacuum against a similar 
competitive set. Combine them, deliver them seamlessly, and what could be viewed as  
a commodity becomes a value-added service.
Wunderman cannot allow itself to be pigeonholed against any one set of deliverables.  
And deliverables in the Wunderman lexicon can be as broad as:
• Data analytics 
• Data hygiene
• Traditional ad-like creative
• Digital production
• Tele-services
However, unlike more traditional ad agencies, where the deliverable is often measured in 
a single unit – a :30 second TV spot, a print ad – unless we get the full chain of customer 
contacts right, we cannot fulﬁll our client mission.
8 Competitive Brand Position
ChannelOfferAnalytics ListFeedback 
MechanismInsightData Analytics
Content/
Creative9 Bottomline: no matter how good the creative, if the list is not accurate, there is no program; 
no matter how good the list, if the offer is wrong the best creative will not sufﬁce; and no 
matter how good the list, offer and content, if the channel choice is off, we will have failed. 
Wunderman must be able to visualize the complete Customer Journey and deliver against 
it – seamlessly – by strengthening its position as a full-service marketing company focused 
solely and fully on its clients’ customers.
Therefore, Wunderman must develop, enhance  and grow all of its resources that enable 
delivery of content directly to customers, with the single-minded endgame of creating 
greater Lifetime Value from our clients’ customers. Key to this effort is the Wunderman 
network and its global ability to provide consistent infrastructure for clients’ marketing and 
sales challenges:
Wunderman
 
A global marketing services network built on a uniﬁed data platform secured by an 
integrated marketing technology infrastructure;
delivering direct to customers, powerful and relevant content in a motivating and 
differentiated creative way;
creating ongoing relationships with high Lifetime Value, through channels that are of 
signiﬁcance and importance to customers;
staffed with uniformly trained “Wunderpeople,” joined by technology and celebrating a 
united Wunderman culture.
This vision is the ﬁlter through which we will evaluate ourselves, our people, our competitors, 
our investments and our acquisitions.10 C ompetitive Set
Over the past few years, a growing cross section of companies across a spectrum 
of marketing service industries has increased Wunderman’s competitive challenge. 
To understand our positioning opportunity, it is critical to understand the challenging 
environment in which we are positioning ourselves. Please note that creative has been 
addressed two ways – embedded with and integral to all we discuss below – and 
magniﬁed on its own later in this document.
•  At the most basic level we compete in the traditional Direct Marketing  category. Our 
competitors in this arena are both global and local. From a global perspective – that is 
global clients looking for a cohesive network – Rapp-Collins, Ogilvy One and MRM ar e 
the familiar names we face. Draft occasionally surfaces, as does Digitas, but neither 
has a credible global credential. However, in the US in particular, they are both ﬁerce 
competitors. On a local basis, we encounter Tequila and Proximity (occasionally at the 
regional level too), and there are many small DM shops with excellent reputations that 
compete primarily on price and speed-to-market but also deliver good pr oduct. That 
being said, the locals often surface as competition with the local subsidiaries of global 
giants as procurement-driven pricing pressure pushes work to the lowest cost provider.
•  Digital Marketing  is an area of growing competition and an arena that is becoming 
more and more blurred as traditional shops migrate towards more digital-based 
services and as the newer all-digital ones try to migrate towards the traditional. Here 
our competition is all over the place and getting more and more complex. We compete 
with the now “traditional” larger Web producers like Organic and Razorﬁsh. We are 
head-to-head with the smaller shops like AKQA and Global Beach, which tend to hone 
in on one engagement and service it with focus. And we still are plagued by the latest 
“garage” operations that undercut everyone by delivering quickly and cheaply off others’ 
platforms. This competitive set is driven by price, speed-to-market and cr eativity. 
Creative delivery can often be a great differentiator – witness R/GA. However, these 
are just the tip of the iceberg. We compete with every new technology application that 
has marketing relevance. From SMS to downloads to VOIP, we are called upon to pitch 
against small-focused players who promise marketing marvels and new customer 
connectivity.
•  Promotions , a component of the Wunderman heritage (WCJ), is of increasing importance 
to us. Many of our clients make little or no distinction between Pr omotions and our 
other activities. And Promotions covers the gamut from simple gift with purchase to 
elaborate ofﬂine/online integrated programs. Here we compete with a wide variety of 
companies from ad agencies to DM to promotion shops to Web-based players.11 •  We compete against Advertising Agencies,  and not only because they would like to 
expand their own activities. There are clients who believe that if their business depends 
upon acquisition and retention/upgrading, they need to change their marketing services 
paradigm. It is trite to parrot the familiar “30 seconds don’t cut it anymore” mantra 
without examining the real client need and the resources necessary to get there.
•  Data Services  are integral to our model. Yet data has many meanings and crosses 
many competitive categories for us. At the “factory” level, data is about the practical 
servicing of our clients’ data sources. It can include basic data hygiene, list services 
and simple database build. The more functionary, but higher-level engagements, 
can include complex database building and the design and execution of intricate 
data strategies. Moving up the chain, campaign management is often a stand-alone 
deliverable and at the top is analytics and modeling. Across the board we compete with 
the major – going global – players like Acxiom and Experion; we confr ont Harte-Hanks 
more and more, as well as a myriad of small intellectual and technological players, not 
to mention Accenture and their ilk. N.B., both Acxiom and Harte-Hanks, have added 
both creative (low-end at this point) and strategic services (planning).
•  CRM, an amorphous category that encompasses many of the previously mentioned 
areas, continues to evolve and in its evolution continues to look more and more agency-
like. Also known as RM (Relationship Marketing ), we have run into specialized players, 
consulting companies, systems players looking to expand and specialized divisions of 
our more traditional competitors. Once strictly technical, its failure as a pure tech play 
has pushed it into a bigger playing ﬁeld.
•  Retail  has many applications from the design of the entire retail environment to the use 
of the environment to maximize selling opportunities through better communications. 
And while there are many specialists in this ﬁeld, we do a growing business at POS.
•  Where once Media/Channel  companies were clearly positioned as planning and buying, 
they are increasingly involved in the delivery, or creating and delivering content, 
and using that content to create and sustain dialogue. From a traditional and digital 
perspective, companies like Group M, Forward, Yahoo, Google and others are often 
vying with us for the same slice of the client pie.
•  Finally, our own Clients . In a market driven by share price and procurement, anything 
that smells of commodity seems to be fair game to be taken in-house or outsour ced by 
the clients through their own control. Data and customer service are two areas that are 
particularly vulnerable.12 S trengths and Weaknesses
To recap, we have identiﬁed nine major categories of clear competitive activity and have 
ranked ourselves accordingly:
1.  Traditional DM  – Market by market our name is synonymous with best practice and  
we are always in the top consideration set. However, this is a double-edged sword, 
as we have been seen as the DM pack company and need to ﬁght that perception 
whenever it raises its head.
2.  Digital Marketing  – While we have won against all of our competitors, our wins are not 
consistent nor are our practices. We are not always in the key consideration set for this 
kind of DM and ﬁght to get into reviews as opposed to traditional, where we are usually 
players. That being said, many in the market believe that we have the best chance to get 
it right and are ready to work for/with us to make it happen. In general, we receive praise 
for our strategic focus, how to use the space; our creative is OK, getting better through 
investment in better players; and our delivery is expensive and slow.
3.  Promotions  – The Chicago ofﬁce remains the only true center despite activity in most 
markets. We are not on the long list scorecard, even in Chicago. Other than those who 
work with us, few, if any, see us as a promotional power.
4.  Advertising Agencies  – While we have won business in open pitches against traditional 
shops and have had other business transferred from agencies as well, we don’t 
compete on a like basis. We have been included on some long lists but more as a 
novelty. We are not seen as an ad agency with a brand focus.
5.  Data Services  – We have accounts like Ford and Microsoft where data is key and critical 
to the relationship, and others where it’s not even on the table. In some markets, we 
have a strong data reputation, in others, almost none. In general, we are seen on par 
with Ogilvy One and MRM – ahead in some markets, behind in others. We need to ﬁnd 
the right balance and positioning to distinguish the Wunderman offering from the pure 
data players as well as from our more direct competitors. We must also better position 
ourselves against and with KBM to make clear where we differ as well as where we are 
better together.
6.   CRM – As clients come to realize that CRM is the new traditional DM, we have a clear 
advantage. Where we are seen as the DM shop (as in mail), we are weak. Digitas has  
a better reputation in the US but in the rest of the world, it’s a dog’s breakfast.
7.  Retail  – The US does a fair amount of retail; but in the rest of the world, almost none. 
And even where we do it – it’s not clear that we get the credit for it in the market. We 
are not on any long lists or known in a stand-alone fashion for our retail expertise.
8.  Media/Channels  – An area in need of enhancement. We work closely with our media 
partners, in particular MEC. We see neutral channel planning as an area of growth.
9.  Clients  – Clients in actuality are often able to compete against us and surpass us in 
delivery when the activity is core to their business model. They normally do not compete 
in creative delivery but are often able to meet and/or beat us in customer service and 
data analytics.13 In addition, we have benchmarked ourselves beyond our direct competitors, and against 
an independent consortium of other professional service providers—ﬁnancial, consulting, 
HR, IT and executive search.
First, feedback from a survey of 40 senior Wunderman EMEA executives indicates:
1.  We share the same challenges, including serving clients across borders, deepening 
trusted advisor skills, knowledge management, managing procurement and client 
listening and service innovation.  
2.   Areas where we perceive ourselves to perform better than benchmark include ﬁnancial  
client metrics and senior relationships. Areas where our people gave widely different 
feedback include linking compensation to tracked sales and feedback pr ocesses. 
And areas where our responses indicate we under-perform versus other professional 
service organizations include R+D/innovation resource, engaging clients and outside 
partners in service innovation, rewards and compensation linked to sales and teams, 
sufﬁcient “branded experts” and achieving appropriate margins for high-value work.
The area of greatest concern is our own lack of faith in our innovations, across the board, 
and our inability to achieve appropriate margins for high-value work. Both areas are 
addressed in the plan.
Wunderman – Industry Rankings
Industry rankings in the press have changed dramatically since Sarbanes-Oxley. WPP 
policy prohibits Wunderman from releasing ﬁnancial and headcount information. Other 
large communications agencies, including Omnicom and Publicis, have similar policies. 
Over the past three years the advertising/marketing media, particularly in the US, have 
struggled to revamp ranking systems, either by creating formulas by which to derive 
revenue estimates or new approaches. As a result, Wunderman has had inconsistent 
representation in country ranking tables. 
 
That said, here are some rankings in key countries. 
 
North America  – Our US ofﬁces participated in rankings conducted by PROMO  magazine, 
Advertising Age  and Adweek . Generally, Wunderman ranked at the same level as prior 
years and/or “with the pack” of our competitors.  
 
•  PROMO magazine, Top Promotion Agencies, June 12, 2005, and in the Promo 
Sourcebook/2006 (issued 10/05)  – Wunderman ranked 3rd with revenues listed at 
$194M, behind Draft ($365M) and Digitas ($245M). (NOTE: Wunderman did not pr ovide 
ﬁnancial ﬁgures.) Based on campaign work, Wunderman, which submitted AICPA’s 
“Catch Me If You Can,” was in a ﬁve-way tie for 24th with AMP, Arnold Brand Promotions, 
Draft and IMC.  14 •  AdWeek’s Interactive Rankings, February 21, 2005  – Wunderman’s 11th place ranking is 
deceiving and doesn’t tell the full story for 2005. This report reﬂects the prior year and 
doesn’t take into account VML/TDE (which ﬁled separately and ranked 12th). Together, 
Wunderman and VML’s combined capability would place it in the top 5 interactive 
agencies. We can expect to move up in the rankings next year.  
•  Advertising Age Top US Marketing Services Agencies, July 12, 2005  – Wunderman 
ranked 9th, down one from the prior year. Revenue ﬁgures were not provided and 
reﬂected press estimates.  
•  Advertising Age Top US Direct Marketing Agencies, July 12, 2005  – Wunderman ranked 
3rd, based on revenue (ﬁgures not provided by Wunderman and reﬂected estimates), 
behind Draft (2) and Rapp (1). 
•  Marketing (Canada), October 10/17, 2005  – Canada’s leading marketing publication 
names Trish Wheaton of Wunderman Canada to the Marketing Power List 2005 – the 
100 most inﬂuential people in Canadian Communications. Trish is one of three people 
from the WPP network to be included in this prestigious list. 
UK – Harrison Troughton Wunderman was a serious contender for Campaign’s  Direct 
Agency of the Year (awarded February 25, 2005). It ranked 7th on the list of 300 
agencies. It addition, Harrison Troughton Wunderman was runner-up Agency of the Year at 
the Cannes Lions Direct Festival in 2005, winning 2 Lions and short listing a record nine 
campaigns.
Germany/Austria  – Wunderman Frankfurt ranked 4th moving up from 14th from the 
previous year. Wunderman Vienna ranked 10th, moving up from 27th.  
 
Spain  – Wunderman Spain was nominated as Agency of the Year (Direct Marketing 
category) in the 36th Annual Control Magazine Awards. Results will be announced 
November 3, 2005.  
 
Argentina – Wunderman Argentina was named Agency of the Year in 2004 (reported in 
2005), for the fourth year in a row. Our agency in Buenos Aires was awarded a Bronze 
Lion at the 2005 Cannes Lions Direct competition, the ﬁrst Direct Lion for any Argentine 
agency. In addition, Wunderman Argentina won the prestigious Globe Award from the 
Marketing Agencies Association for best world promotion in the category. 
In summary, where we are ranked – certainly in key markets and where we can provide 
accurate information to enhance the rankings—we have some measur e of credibility and 
seem to be on an upward trend.15 P ositioning Opportunity
In essence we are like the “Blind Men and the Elephant.” From a certain point of view we 
are what the client has engaged us to do. If they use us for data, they view us as a data 
company; if they use us for more traditional DM, they often see us as a creative shop. 
Those who have only digital contact with us see us in that light, and if we have been 
providing promotions or retail support, that is who we are. In every instance there is an 
obvious opportunity to expand and capture a greater piece of the clients’ total marketing 
spend – while producing more efﬁcient service and thinking through sheer scale and more 
holistic thinking through greater connectivity. Yet the “Blind Men” are stubborn in their 
beliefs. Therein lies the challenge and the opportunity for positioning ourselves.16 
17 Your business might be global – but all relationships are local.
Our reputation is as broad and complex as is our competitive set. But we do have 
a recognized differentiating competitive edge – a true global network, with local 
connectivity, able to deliver any or all of our 9 categories across the globe, down to the 
customer level. So while image can be driven at a global or regional level, our powerful 
selling message is that all relationships are local.
More and more we see from our clients the need for global brand compliance with the 
expectation that their local subsidiaries will follow suit yet deliver “on-site r elevance” and 
of course commensurate sales. To that end, our focus on local relationships as local 
nodes of a global network is critical – think Metcalfe’s Law.
When our competitors are selling centralization – in fact we have seen this with Ogilvy 
One as well as MRM – our challenge is to exploit the real differences between the more 
linear organizations and our own more organic approach.
Our network methodology is particularly critical as local subsidiaries are increasingly 
accountable for delivering corporate goals – sales as well as adher ence to global 
standards. They are constantly caught between their need to do what works locally versus 
what some central function has told them will work, despite all market intelligence to the 
contrary. Our ability to balance the two, deliver relevance and adherence while staying 
true to the global brand directive is our strength with Microsoft and Citi, and is what has 
interested P&G. Of equal importance and critical note are the growing opportunities in the 
healthcare market, most recently highlighted by our ability to extend our North American 
relationships with AstraZeneca and Novartis to the European market. These opportunities 
reﬂect the need for global coherence with the realities of diverse regulatory environments 
and differences between doctors, patients and healthcare systems. 
It is also interesting to note that our focus on local relationships is what makes our 
network credible and powerful. When ad agencies speak about local needs, it is often 
viewed as a desire to claim “Not Invented Here” and create new/different work. Our 
point is that data and the customer’s behavior is the local key – an “organic” connection 
with the customer and market. You can create a global image for Citi but what makes 
someone request a credit card in Frankfurt is different from what motivates the same 
transaction in Singapore or Moscow.
The Wunderman network is a critical competitive weapon, and strengthening it is a 
critical focus.18 A ddressing Weaknesses
However, while the network is viewed as a powerful asset in its aggregate, our delivery 
of resources is spotty. Depending upon the market in question, we range from strong to 
weak – and from number one to commodity – depending upon the area of focus.
That being said, it is because we are leaders in key areas and because we have the 
network that we can address the issues and credibly discuss being able to deliver in a 
consistent fashion across the globe.
We have undertaken four global initiatives – through our own networks:
•  Data – Across Wunderman and across our client base, data acts as the core ingredient 
in formulating impactful marketing programs—data as content, data as insights, data 
as a driver of predictive behavior, individual data and community behavioral data. Data 
is the constant that ties it together. Wunderman has always been a market leader in 
deploying data and insights to fuel results for our clients. Now in this new paradigm 
we’re taking it one step farther by appointing Andrew Rutberg as Wunderman’s Chief 
Data Ofﬁcer to create a virtual data practice; to address gaps and deﬁciencies; to 
ensure the privacy and security of our clients’ data; all while highlighting and sharing 
success and expertise. To supplement this strategy, we’ve created a network of 
planners to ﬁt in with our data focus. Coupling data and insight is a powerful tool. 
Furthermore, we see the need to better integrate the KBM offering and Foretelligent (as 
well as future acquisitions) into the basic Wunderman delivery model.19 •  Digital Marketing  – Mark Taylor has been charged with broadening our digital offering to 
include more elements of technology-enabled marketing, by harnessing and leveraging 
the diverse power and expertise within KBM and VML to enhance our global capabilities 
in delivering digital marketing solutions. One of our key initiatives is to use VML as a 
global backbone for technology and process. The issue of production is separate, and 
we are examining many options as we think there might be/should be a WPP play in this 
area that is, in fact, a commodity at the low- and mid-levels.  
      –  Furthermore, we are implementing a program called Digital Ignition . It is an initiative 
that has as its ultimate goal an increase in the number of digital-experienced 
talent available for Account, Creative and Strategy & Insights roles throughout the 
network. The MD of each Wunderman network ofﬁce will receive performance  
goals in 2006 tied to increasing the level of digital talent; 10% of their STIP will 
be linked to meeting/exceeding this goal. Digital talent doesn’t always follow a 
traditional path to employment – the very nature of the digital world allows talent 
to maintain successful careers in new ways that don’t ﬁt into traditional “employer/
employee” boundaries. New options must be incorporated to allow this talent to 
bring the best solutions to our clients and maintain an independent existence.  
We will seek to build external digital virtual communities with both small digital-
focused ﬁrms (i.e. “garage shops”), and a global network of independent digital 
workers whose services and insights can be tapped on an “as needed” basis for 
our clients. In an effort to lock in on the digital talent that seeks a more traditional 
employment situation, Wunderman HQ will sponsor a program to aggressively 
source digital-experienced talent for hire into local ofﬁces, using direct sourcing  
and recruiting techniques. Wunderman HQ will also develop a unique on-board 
program for digital-experienced hires to smooth transition into Wunderman, giving 
them core DM skills on an accelerated basis and providing linkage for them into 
the existing digital network at Wunderman, especially at VML. In addition, we will 
partner with VML to develop a “Digital Institute” (similar to Wunderman University) 
to increase the digital marketing knowledge of current employees through an 
aggressive immersion.20 •  Creative  – The Wunderman initiative, led by Steve Harrison and using Cannes as a 
focal point, has been instrumental in raising our bar and continues to elicit market-by-
market motivation to improve and achieve #1 status as well as enhance our reputation. 
Creative leadership will continue to enhance our overall reputation and add to our ability 
to differentiate. Key to our success will be the enhancement of our digital creative 
to the status of our more traditional work by moving from what is seen by many as 
“advertising online” to the more customer-focused “marketing online.” Furthermore, 
we see all areas of our business as creative and have developed an internal awards 
program (The Lester Wunderman Award) to highlight and reward that focus.
•  Training  — WUNDERMAN LEARNING — In 2005 Wunderman University was established 
as the framework for standardizing learning across the organization. Our 2005 goal to 
train 20% of the network by year’s end has been met through enrollment of employees 
in Expert Classes (key focus DM 101), Learning-in-a-Box (skills training) and independent 
training (eLearning). Additional ExpertTraining on negotiation skills, creativity and 
leadership training were also offered as part of the University curricula. A database 
system linked to our P3 performance management process is currently being pilot-
tested to align training with career-pathing and to track employee participation. Moving 
into 2006 we will continue to build our DM offering by developing an Advanced DM 
Program and several other “deep-dive” sessions that focus on speciﬁc disciplines  
(e.g. interactive marketing). For senior levels, our top two areas of focus are managing 
and growing current accounts and pitching new business. We will continue to build 
and grow our other scaleable training techniques through independent learning and 
Learning-in-a-Box modules that can be conducted at the local level. And, as we expand 
our learning offering, we will continue to build our network of trainers/administrators 
to develop and manage programs. With rollout of the P3 link to development planning 
system, we will establish certiﬁcation for different levels in the organization. An ongoing 
campaign to promote Wunderman training opportunities will be important to supporting 
all of these efforts.21 A ﬁfth initiative, although not as advanced as the others, is in the area of loyalty programs 
and marketing. Loyalty is highly linked to promotions, and digital marketing is key to both. 
We have lost out on a number of opportunities over the past few years – worldwide – as 
we do not have a “plug and play” system to deploy. Our ability to provide one will provide 
us with another tool and edge.
Finally, in order to answer some of the issues raised by the CFL survey and our own need, 
we piloted a leadership program in EMEA. The program, facilitated by David Butter, was 
piloted successfully with 70 senior EMEA executives in Berlin in 2005 and will be r olled 
out and extended globally during 2006.
This workshop-based program seeks to engage and align leaders using a shared 
“Contextual Framework.” It includes goals and objectives, our client par tners’ world, 
stakeholder needs, and the co-creation of deliverable service offers, capabilities, 
strategies and plans. It links “big picture” insights with team participation and individual 
implementation. It also connects directly to business planning through the live evaluation 
of alternative priorities and decisions. 
The feedback from Berlin participants was excellent: “The best meeting we ever had.” 
Most asked to repeat it next year.  
Our goal is therefore to:
1.  Hold a global WUNDERMAN LEADERSHIP “Berlin” early in the year to engage and align 
leaders throughout the network.
2.  Follow up with a workshop in each region to engage and cascade to regional teams.
3.  Offer “Mini-Berlins” to local managers to maintain momentum, build local strategic 
understanding and engagement, and drive local revenues.
4.  Propose to pilot client planning sessions, using the same “Contextual Framework,” to 
deepen and broaden our relationship and engagement across their business.  We will 
seek to co-create and visualize the customer-value chain and our role in delivering it 
across our clients’ whole business. These sessions will also provide real value to our 
client partners and will be billable. 
We will also seek synergies between WUNDERMAN LEARNING and WUNDERMAN 
LEADERSHIP.…Crea
tivity
22 23 W hat is your creative or professional reputation in the market and where does it 
need to be strengthened? 
Our creative reputation is spotty, ranging from number one in a market – the UK; to non-
acceptable—Russia. It is also discipline-skewed with our most consistent honors coming 
from more traditional DM printed type work as opposed to digital or other channels. That 
being said, we have won a number of key awards for our digital creative as well as for 
promotional and retail work as well.
The challenge, from a creative and professional point of view, is to deliver seamless 
thinking and execution that tracks the Customer Journey. It might be print, could be 
broadcast, possibly outdoors and most deﬁnitely web. Unless we can translate our 
thinking and ideas into all channels, our reputation will remain spotty.
Our focus going forward is on digital integration and key hires in the UK and Germany 
have already begun to pay off. And, through our digital network, we continue to make this 
a prime cause.
Furthermore, beginning to develop excellence in developing markets will be a driving issue 
for us, and by using talent from the UK and the US, we have already begun making headway.
A ﬁnal piece of our initiative is the understanding of how to use “content.” Like CRM, this 
is a word much overused and little understood. Lester once said:  
“Success through substance. It’s a simple formula and one that serves our clients well.”
Substance is what drives our relationships with customers. We listen and we make 
available substantive and important information that drives Lifetime Value. 
We believe that creative needs to be considered as content – how do we inform, educate 
and entertain while allowing the customer to engage as much or as little as they desire. We 
will be relentless in our pursuit of connecting relevant content with brand experience and 
customers. In a practical sense this will require us to play with a broader range of content 
providers, Yahoo, Google, movie producers, publishers, news sources and others. 
The action will be a series of high-value and high-visibility “par tnerships” to connect  
the dots for the producers of content to our clients and their customers.
•  How do you rank in your industry in terms of creative or professional awards? Please  
list the top 2-5 award shows as appropriate on a global or regional basis and how you 
ranked in each.
Over the past year, Wunderman has won over 150 global creative awards with top honors in:
Gold – 18
Silver – 27
Bronze – 27Creative or Professional Product and Reputation24 Country # of 
Awards/
CitationsAward Designation Client Work  
RecognizedCompetitions
Argentina 6 1 Gold
1 Silver
2 Bronze
2 Other designationsBayer
LoJack
GilletteAmer. Design Awards
Cannes Lions Direct
Gramado’s Festival
Globes Award
Australia 10 1 Silver
9 Finalist Ford ADMA
Lester Wunderman Awards
NOTE: ADMA TBA Nov. 17th
Brazil 4 2 Silver
2 BronzeMicrosoft
FedEx
FordABEMD (Brazil’s DM Awards)
Lester Wunderman Awards 
Canada 1 1 Bronze  Ford  Lester Wunderman Award
China 25 1 Gold
1 Silver
4 Bronze
9 Outstanding/Best
8 Finalist 
1 – 4th PlaceJaguar
Land Rover
Motorola
Panadol
Sony Ericcson
Zhaopoin.comJohn Caples
Internet Adv. Awards
Media Adv. Awards
Internet Adv. Comp. 
Clios
NY Festivals 
Click Awards
DMA Echo Awards
Germany/
Austria26 2 Gold
4 Silver
3 Bronze
1 Outstanding/Best
4 Finalist 
10 Shortlist
2 Other DesignationsFord
Aktion Mensch
Vivendi 
HMD Druck
Jaguar
Lufthansa
Amory Pearl 
Land Rover
P&GGerm. Direct Mktg – DDV
Art Directors Club
Golden Award Montreux
P&G Client Award
Cannes Lions Direct
NY Festivals
Greece 1 4th Place Ford DMA Echo Awards
India 1 1 Leadership Award ICIC Prudential DMA Echo Awards
Italy 2 1 Silver
1 Bronze AIRC
MediaworldTarga d’oro
Portugal 2 1 Gold
1 Bronze Corinthia Alfa Hotel
Ford Creative Club of Portugal
Spain 4 1 Gold 
2 Bronze
1 Nomination (Agency 
of the Year)Diageo
Ford
ReposolIMAN
Interactiva Magazine
Control Magazine
Switzerland 5 1 Bronze
1 Finalist 
2 Seal of Approval Axpo Swiss Dialog Mktg Awards2005 Wunderman Awards
(as of Oct. 21, 2005)25 Country # of 
Awards/
CitationsAward Designation Client Work  
RecognizedCompetitions
Thailand  13 4 Gold
4 Silver
4 Bronze
1 Finalist Citibank
FordTDMA
DM Asia
UK
HTW 
Automotive43 1 Diamond
5 Gold
9 Silver
3 Bronze
1 2nd Place
11 Nomination
5 Commendation
1 Highly Commended
7 ShortlistFord
M&G
Star Alliance
Royal Marsden
Cannons
Court Security
Fetal Alcohol Syn.
IBM
Microsoft
NABS
Jaguar
Wunderman
XeroxInt’l Mobius Awards
Inst. of Direct Mktg Awards
Cannes Lions Direct
Campaign Direct Awards
Lester Wunderman Awards
US  
Detroit 8 4 1st Place
2 2nd Place
1 Finalist 
1 CEO AchievementSalvation Army
Lincoln Mercury
Ford Motor CreditTelly Awards
Target Awards
Lester Wunderman Awards
Irvine 3 2 Gold
1 SilverLand Rover Int’l Auto Advertising Awards
DMA Echo Awards 
Lester Wunderman Awards
NY 9 3 Bronze
2 Best/Outstanding 
2 1st Place
2 FinalistCitibank
AICPA
PﬁzerTelly Awards
Rx Club Show
Midas Awards
Internet Adv. Competition
DMA Echo Awards 
DC 4 1 Gold 
3 SilverRoad Runner Cable and Telecom. Assoc. 
for Mktg Awards2005 Wunderman Awards
(as of Oct. 21, 2005)
Total: 157
Gold: 18
Silver: 27
Bronze: 27
The Lester Wunderman Award is an internal competition.26 W hat are your existing efforts in the creative area, how effective have they been and 
what plans do you have to maintain your creative strengths and address any areas  
of weakness?
• How can you merchandise success more effectively?
• Where do you have creative talent gaps? e.g. key ofﬁces, clients
• Where do you need to invest in new research/services/products?
• What internal programs are you planning to launch? e.g., training, etc.
•  What incentive plans and other recognition programs do you have in place to reward 
and recognize creative or professional success?
Wunderman has placed a keen emphasis on creativity since 2002 when we established 
the Lester Wunderman Award program and began our aggressive involvement in the 
Cannes Lions Advertising Festival. Since then, these programs have become a crucial 
part of the fabric of our creative culture.27 L ester Wunderman Award 
The Lester Wunderman Award is much more than an employee recognition rewards 
program. It is a knowledge resource that enables Wunderman around the world to start 
each year – on day one – with an inventory of the 100+ best case studies by client, 
category and geography. Since launching the program, we have amassed more than 
350 cases in this way. The fact that it bears the name of our founder brings with it the 
added prestige that makes this award a keeper. The Lester Wunderman Award, which 
launches its fourth year in October, masks itself as a rewards program; however, it is 
also a springboard for our participation in the Cannes Lions competitions. The Lester 
Wunderman Award starts the process. It involves our senior-most creative members as 
judges to ensure global knowledge is exchanged. Our judging process is similar to that 
of the Cannes Lions competition, so we are constantly grooming new jurors for the 
industry competition.28 C annes 
Wunderman’s involvement in Cannes is on many levels:
• In competition 
• On the juries
• On the agenda
• In market 
• And with our Global Annual Creative Directors meeting  
We compete — and win. In 2005, Wunderman placed 16 campaigns on the Lions Direct 
Shortlist, the most of any other agency. Wunderman won 3 Lions. And Wunderman’s 
London ofﬁce (HTW) was runner-up Agency of the Year. We are aggressive in getting 
representation on the juries. In 2005, we secured 5 slots in the Cyber and Direct 
categories. In 2006, we have conﬁrmed that Steve Harrison has been selected as the 
Lions Direct jury president. Wunderman’s seminar, delivered by Steve Harrison in 2005, 
was the best attended seminar in the Direct/Media track, with nearly 600 recorded. 
Wunderman’s market presence is high proﬁle. This year’s Cannes campaign targeted a 
message toward clients, and leveraged the successful campaign of 2004 that focused on 
talent – a campaign that brought us a high proﬁle hire in the UK for digital creative –  
Jon Williams.
Our Annual Global Creative Directors Meeting takes place in Cannes during Festival week. 
Our two-day meeting also serves as a precursor to more public involvement in the Cannes 
Lions Festival agenda (i.e. as jurors, as speakers, as teachers in the Academy and as 
creatives for Wunderman’s positioning campaign). Everything is interlinked. 
In 2006, our plan is to extend our award emphasis to other venues with international 
signiﬁcance, such as the International ECHO Awards. 
 29 O ur 2005 corporate press focus zeroed in on four key areas: talent, thought 
leadership, creative work and heritage.  [Note: press coverage listed is only a sampling of 
total coverage.]
 
Talent:  Focused on Wunderman’s ability to attract signiﬁcant players from competitors 
and the industry as well as the bench-strength of senior leaders, who have expanded the 
business or developed new accountabilities. Sample coverage:
• AdAge , Sept. 28 – “Director Fits in At Wunderman” (Sean Howard joins Team Microsoft) 
•  Media  - Hong Kong, Jul. 1 – “Wunderman taps Oracle marketer for Executive VP post” 
(Lisa Watson joins AP region) 
•  Precision Marketing  – UK, Mar. 25 – “Wunderman creates top database role for EMEA” 
(Mark Taylor’s new data responsibilities) 
•  AdAge , Jan. 14 – “Wunderman Hands Williams Online Job” (Jon Williams joins 
Wunderman in London) 
 
Thought Leadership:  Wunderman executives are frequently asked their perspective  
on business, trends and issues. In addition, Wunderman emphasized expertise in the 
IT/Technology sector. Sample coverage: 
• B2B, Sept. 12 – “Use multiple media to reach IT pros in their channel of choice” (byline)
• Marketing  – Canada, Jul. 4 – “Hitting the Target” (commentary)
• B2B, June 13 – “It ain’t about technology, it’s about customers” (commentary)
• Delaney Report , May 23 – “A Direct Response” (cover story)
• AdAge , Apr. 25 – “Next for the Ax: Marketing Service Shops” (commentary)
• Delaney Report , Apr. 18 – “Good Disruption” (DM feature)
•  Ad Age , Apr. 11 – “Bob Garﬁeld’s ‘chaos scenario’ – A look at the marketing industry’s 
coming disaster” (commentary)
Heritage:  Lester Wunderman continues to be a well respected and sought-after industry 
ambassador. The re-release of his book Being Direct with a new chapter on the Internet 
and the inclusion of the Consumer’s Communication Bill of Rights provided signiﬁcant 
media fodder during the ﬁrst half of 2005. Business Week , Marketing News , as well as 
leading business press in London, Amsterdam, Milan, Madrid and Paris gave signiﬁcant 
play to his latest thinking. Furthermore, his high proﬁle in the press drew unsolicited 
mentions of his marketing prowess.    30 Creative:  We have been more successful in 2005 than in previous years in getting our 
creative reviewed by key advertising/marketing inﬂuencers. “Scottish Courage,”  
“Meet the Lucky Ones,” Land Rover, Motorola and Burger King were among campaigns 
cited. In addition, our senior creatives – Steve Harrison, Jon Williams, Joel Sobelson and  
others – were vocal players in Cannes and other industry events.    
Wunderman’s exposure at the important Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival 
cuts across every aspect of the festival: as jurors, on the agenda (Wunderman’s seminar 
was the second best attended at the festival), as teachers (in the Academy), market 
presence, and on the shortlist and in the winner’s circle (15 shortlisted/3 Lions). Harrison 
Troughton Wunderman was named runner-up Agency of the Year.  In 2006, Wunderman 
again has a chance for great success, as Steve Harrison was named Lions Direct jury 
president (pending conﬁrmation).  
A testament to Wunderman’s success in Cannes is perhaps best demonstrated by a story 
that appeared in Strategy  (a Canadian marketing publication). The story, a color piece 
on the festival, focused on “10 things I didn’t know about Cannes.”  On the r eporter’s 
list at #7 was “Coincidently, Wunderman has its Annual Creative Directors’ Conference 
afterwards as well.”
Business Wins:  A key challenge for Wunderman, particularly in the larger US market, 
is press coverage on new business wins.  London, however, continues to have great 
success in this area with the signiﬁcant announcement of its Rolls Royce, Hotels.com  
and Samsung wins.31 
…Ev
olution32 W hat is your projected growth rate for the next 3 years and where do you expect to 
grow? How does this break down between organic growth and growth by acquisition?
Wunderman’s growth rate is 5% going into 2006, including acquisitions. Over the next 
three years, growth will be about 6% with organic in the 5% range, which is in line with our 
historical organic growth. We anticipate that revenues will exceed $600 million by 2007.
$0$100$200$300$400$500$600$700$800
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009$408$452$542$568$614$657$702
8 1061 537389106
Total AcquisitionGrowth and Client Development33 O rganic Growth
How are you developing your offer to clients and what major changes do you plan  
to make? E.g., new products or services, critical disciplines to offer, such as mobile  
and interactive.
The Wunderman offer needs to be developed as a seamless whole. Our basic Value 
Proposition must encompass the full chain reﬂected in the Customer Journey, including 
data and data analytics. Today, with the exception of a very few clients, we are rarely able 
to engage across the board and often ﬁnd ourselves ﬁghting for pieces of the budget with 
smaller competitors, or worse, we watch larger competitors nibble at our budgets and 
client relationships. 
Some of the barriers are related to budget issues – add a service and the budget 
goes up. Clearly, in today’s budget-cutting environment we need to be cognizant of the 
pressures our clients face and structure our offering so that the value-added takeaway  
is perceived to be more valuable than the added budget is costing. We have tried to  
“bake-in” as much of the chain as we can – however, clients are equally sensitive to added 
overhead and until they see value, they will not pay for it.
The challenge here is to work on a new economic model that will allow us to engage our 
clients – current and new – in a way that creates immediate impact with our full offering. 
Today we look at bringing “unpaid” resources as an investment that we have to sell and 
often agonize long enough to lose the opportunity. We can’t be seen as selling – the client 
must buy.
Other barriers will be overcome by the continued development of, and standardization 
of, our network. A seamless infrastructure based on a global technology platform will 
increase the size of our client “toolbox” and just as importantly give Wunderman leverage, 
as its use will be the same all over. Our focus will be on:
• Digital Marketing technology
• Database 
• Training
This will give us a competitive edge by allowing for a more holistic approach to client 
solutions with a uniﬁed global engagement philosophy.
Furthermore, we see the value of this approach to be the continuation of the Wunderman 
Philosophy of following the customer. Frankly, we don’t care if it is print yesterday, web 
today, SMS tomorrow or laser transport next week – the key principles are the same 
– who is the customer, how do you reach them, what turns them on and what do they 
want to buy – everything else is simply an evolution in channel and delivery mechanism.34 
…Partnership35 A cquisitions
Our acquisition focus is to further develop our expertise and the network. The ﬁlter 
through which we look at opportunities is:
• How does it strengthen our overall expertise?
• How does it strengthen the local market resource?
• How does it strengthen and help our global network to grow?
Through our acquisition process, we have passed on many acquisition candidates as 
evidenced by emForce (identiﬁed as a better ﬁt for servicing global clients out of Korea), 
MadeForChina (unable to leverage solely around Wunderman network) and ipsh! (mobile 
marketing wanted very rich valuation of a company with no proﬁts). 
Applications of our acquisition strategy is as follows:
•  Increase the scale, depth, breadth and reach of our data capabilities: 
   –  Establish a data-based marketing presence in EMEA to serve as a foundation for 
global clients like Microsoft, Samsung, Ford – as well as local clientele. These clients 
demand a full range of data-based services at a cost-efﬁcient price point. Optimally, 
acquisition candidates would have established off-shore capabilities that lower overall 
services’ price-point.
   –  Expand the capabilities in the rest of the world. A key area of focus is the emerging 
consumer-list marketplace in China, Russia and elsewhere where very few lists are 
available. Demand is gaining exponentially along with market expansion.
   –  Continue to explore emerging analytics organizations – with specialized offerings in 
technologies – like sophisticated visual data analysis or that can monitor , measure 
and leverage consumer-generated media (online consumer word-of-mouth/online 
buzz). Examples of companies in this space are Spotﬁre (data visualization) or 
Intelliseek (online buzz).
•  Amass new digital interactive capabilities including creative/content expertise. Based 
on our review of the top independent interactive agencies, we have initiated discussions 
with a select list of interactive shops based on reputation, clients, size and growth. 
This is reﬂected in EVB and Blitz Agency which are on our current targets (schedule 
presented below).
•  Target acquisitions in high-growth markets: Brazil, Russia, India, China and Korea. In 
China, Russian and Korea, we are especially interested in data, digital interactive and 
one-to-one media channels.36 •  Acquire a company with a loyalty engine. We have been searching for over 2 years 
without success. The market prices have been at a premium to our valuation – thus 
preventing us from offering competitive bids. To this end, we are initiating discussions 
with an established loyalty program provider in the hospitality category (Accor). The 
goal is to form a partnership where we will use their engine outside of hospitality. We 
will continue to pursue opportunities with Brierley. 
•  Take advantage of opportunistic availability through WPP holdings, or other sources 
even in established markets.37 Closing Thoughts
As the general environment in marketing services gets ever more 
competitive and as the response to procurement drives ever  
more commoditization and lack of premium pricing opportunity –  
the ﬁlter to the Wunderman challenge in summary and  
in order of importance is:
Assemble and retain the right/best talent
Stay out in front of what’s new
Drive the network – relentlessly
Increase our recent impact of organic, current client growth and 
increase share of new business wins
Add value – be worth the extra price
Stop managing and start advising/partnering
Break out from the pack
Deliver seamless customer-centric programs