 
www.demandmetric.com     Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 
 
 
How To Guide  
Supporting Stakeholders with Extranets  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary:  
 
 
This report provides practical advice for developing secure, user -friendly 
extranets for your key stakeholders.  
 
Read this brief 7 -page report to learn:  
 
 What is an Extranet?  
 Business Benefits of Creating an Extranet  
 Security Issues Surrounding Extrane ts  
 Extranet Design Best Practices  
 How to Set -up your Extranet  
 
 
Review this report to understand how to implement an external 
communication tool for employees, partners, customers, or other key 
stakeholders. Use our Extranet Development Checklist to ens ure you 
don’t miss any key steps in the process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 2 
Table of Contents                                Page  
 
 
 
What is an Extranet?        3  
 
Business Benefits of Creating an Extranet     3  
 
Security Issues Surrounding Extranets      4  
 
Extranet Design Best Practices       5  
 
How to Set -up your Extranet       6 
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 3 
What is an Extranet?  
Business Benefits of Creating an Extranet    
 
 
 
 
An extranet is an extension of a company’s internal network that allows 
authorized users to access information in a secured manner. Public 
access can be given to employees, customers, partners, investors, or 
other key stakeholders.  
  
Extranets generally r eside on a company’s private server rather than on 
a public Internet server. However, they use Internet protocols so users 
can navigate with a web browser. Access from the Internet can be 
controlled through various architectures that are username/password 
specific, thus limiting users to pages relevant to their needs, while 
keeping other areas of the extranet private and secure.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Many service oriented companies use extranets to provide a system for 
customer support and to have a single user interface to communicate 
with business partners. Other reasons companies tend to use extranets 
are as follows:  
 
 Supply Chain Integration : Onli ne ordering, order tracking, and 
inventory management.  
 
 Cost Reduction : Companies will often make manuals, 
catalogues, or technical documentation available online to save 
money on printing and distributing hard copies.  
 
 Accountability : Past projects and draft documents can be 
archived, accurate time and billing information can be 
documented, and a communication log can be maintained to 
ensure service level agreement are met.     
 
 Collaboration between  Business Partners : Allowing members  
of a product team to work with common documentation remotely 
can increase collaboration.     
 
 Improve Business Relationships : Extranets provide better 
communications among business partners.      
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 4 
Security Issues Surrounding Extranets   
 Improve Customer Service : Allows customers to have direct 
access to information and to resolve their own inquiries 24/7.     
 
 Work remotely : Enables constant communication and access to 
business information regardless of time or location. This can also 
make servicing remote clients easier and less expensive than 
traditional methods.     
 
 Security : Provided this is a requirement for your extranet, 
exchanges will take place in a secure environment with log 
information readily available.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
When business data is made available to stakeholders, it is expected to 
be available, up -to-date and secure at all times. It is often difficult to 
protect all extranet applications using the same security infrastructure 
because each business application te nds to have its own unique set of 
performance and security requirements.  
  
 
The following is a list of key security considerations:  
  
 
 Align Stakeholder Security Expectations : ensure that all 
users of the extranet understand that they have a responsibility 
to ensure that data is kept secure.     
 
 Document Service Level Agreements (SLA) : clearly 
document resolution times for customer issues, based on 
severity, business impact, and available resources. Minimize any 
liabilities regarding customer support.     
 
 Take Extranet Liabilities into Account : risks such as 
unplanned disasters (denial  of service), performance 
degradations or application unavailability, and security breaches, 
can cause major problems if your business becomes entirely 
dependent on this system.     
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 5 
Extranet Design Best Practices   Review Extranet Access Controls  to validate that they 
represent the best c hoices for the specific business applications 
and user connectivity needs. Consider adding two -factor 
authentication to increase security.  
 
 Cost Development Efforts Accordingly : All administration, 
integration, and management costs should not be overlooke d or 
underestimated.     
 
 Consider Other Security Measures on a per application 
basis : These include data encryption and protection, mutual 
client/server authentication, and user access rights verification 
along with non -repudiation.     
 
 Establish Security Policies : user access and privilege 
requirements must be established, disseminated to users, and 
actively enforced to reduce your risk.     
 
 Review Privacy Legislation : evaluate HIPAA, Sarbanes Oxley, 
and other legislation to ensure that the information you  plan to 
provide is permitted.     
 
 Application Security Reviews : should be conducted to ensure 
that security policies are working as planned. Be sure to actively 
check access logs on a weekly basis.   
  
 Servers and Physical Storage  must be situated in a sec ure 
environment to ensure application availability.     
 
 Don’t Forget to Create Backups : on a daily basis.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
1. Take Time to Select the Right Solution : Employees must be 
comfortable with the solution. It must also reflect the right 
amount of information you want to store and exchange with 
clients, partners, or other users.  
 
2. Consider Outside Assistance : If you don’t have internal IT 
skills, hire a reput able IT service provider who can help with set -
up, hosting and on -going support.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 6 
How to Set up  your Extranet  3. Monitor the Solution : Monitoring can be done both internally 
(through employee survey) and externally (through client 
feedback). Also, review adoption rates and application 
performance on a regular basis.  
 
4. Review the Solution : After a few months, conduct a formal 
review to see how much money the system has saved your 
organization. It is also important to consider intangible benefits 
like increased customer satisfaction.  
 
5. If It’s Not Working, Don’t Use It : Don’t  waste time trying to 
force a fit for all stakeholders. You can always add functionality 
or sections for stakeholder groups on an incremental basis. 
Current solutions may need to be replaced with more user -
friendly or secure applications.  
 
6. Don’t Put Everything In : Too much information in your 
extranet can make it more difficult for users to find what they are 
looking for. Create a homepage that lists the most commonly 
searched for information, to facilitate user adoption rates and 
experience.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Make sure to use Demand Metric’s Extranet Development Checklist  
to ensure nothing is overlooked when setting up your extranet. It is 
import ant to take the following criteria into consideration before moving 
forward:  
  
1. Define your Requirements : Conduct ample research into 
external and internal stakeholder requirements. Use our 
Business Requirements tool  to document requirements for 
each stakeholder group.  
 
2. Goals and Objectives : Align internal and external goals with 
senior level objectives. Also, outline desired outcomes and how 
success will be measured.  
 
3. Select Target Audience : Discuss your target audiences and 
how this solution will address their needs. Ensure that all key 
requirements can be delivered.  
  
 
 
www.demandmetric.com   Call a Principal Analyst:   
  (866) 947 -7744 
 7 
4. Content : Determine what content you would like to deliver via 
your extranet and create a content structure that is intuitive and 
easy to find information. Read our report on Revitalizing 
Intranets  to gather ideas for content that you would like to 
make available externally.  
 
5. User Access Controls : Develop a strategy to control access and 
to manipulate data (i. e. rights given to add records, modify 
records, and delete records). This is generally done by user, by 
role, or by workspace.  
 
6. Create Role Based Functionality : Address roles in your 
organizations (administration, client, employee, management) 
and assign features and functions to roles. Training and on -going 
support must also be addressed, when determining maintenance 
processes.  
 
7. Implement your Solution : work with your IT department or 
service provider to technically implement your extranet and 
conduct ad equate testing procedures.  
 
8. Go Live : This is done following a period of testing. Be sure to 
communicate the launch of this new resource.  
 
9. Conduct User Training : Ensure that all user groups are 
comfortable using the extranet to drive adoption.  
 
10. Review an d Monitor : Monitor user adoption and review goals, 
objectives, and metrics on a regular basis.  
  
 