©2022 by Scott Aaron
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means---electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written
permission.C
ONTENTS
Foreword
Acknowledgments
Chapter 1
: Why LinkedIn
®
 And How It All Began for Me
Chapter 2
: Creating Your Perfect Profile
Chapter 3
: Using The Search Engine And Groups To Build Your Network
Chapter 4
: Exploding The Reach Of Your Network
Chapter 5
: How To Start Conversations With New Connections
Chapter 6
: You Have Someone On the Phone, Now What?
Chapter 7
: Creating Engaging Posts on LinkedIn
®
Chapter 8
: Publishing Articles/Newsletters And Using Group Discussions
Chapter 9
: Leveraging Daily Notifications To Start Conversations
Chapter 10
: The Latest Updates To LinkedIn
®
Chapter 11
: Case Studies, YOU Can Do This
Summary
About the AuthorM
Foreword
any dream of having a career not tied to a boss, time constraints, or
lack of freedom. With so many choices, network marketing is a viable
way to create income for many. Occasionally, you find a book that
can help take your network marketing business to greater heights.
The 
LinkedIn
®
 Book for Sales and Marketing
 is that book.
I met Scott Aaron several years ago online, and as I got to know him and
his work, I realized what a vast and fantastic heart he must help people with.
As I followed him on LinkedIn
®
, I noticed that he is very active on that
platform—as he should be!
And so should you.
Scott takes us on a step-by-step journey to creating a thriving source of
leads and sales for any online marketing business using LinkedIn
®
. If you
don't use anything else, you can create a lucrative income using that alone.
He shows you how to create a profile that will entice people to connect
with you, generate leads, create messages that grab attention, and most
importantly, follow up with past leads.
If you have doubts about whether Scott is the go-to LinkedIn
®
 mentor to
work with, check out his testimonials on his LinkedIn
®
 profile. There are
more than 475 of them, some of which are included in this book.
While Facebook
®
 is the platform where most people spend their time, you
might be surprised that your best clients might not be there. Scott explains
why that is the case.
If you want to not only start your business but also build it to greater
heights than you thought possible, buckle up for the ride. What most people
lack is a clear battle plan on a day-by-day basis.You will find that here.
Not only is your battle plan here, but it is being taught and explained to
you by a master of his craft. Learn everything you can from Scott Aaron, and
even consider reaching out to him privately after you are done.
He also provides an abundance of case studies of people like you who
made it happen, and if you use everything Scott teaches, you can change your
life.
Read and apply what you see here; you won't regret it.
All the best,
Brian K Wright,
Host of Success Profiles Radio and
Publisher of Success Profiles MagazineA
Acknowledgments
project like this can never be done alone, and for that reason, there are
some people I want to thank. First, I want to thank my parents, my sister
Blair, my brother Jason, my incredible nieces Sia and Pepper Anthony,
Andi, and my extended family and friends for always believing in me during
the good and bad times and for always being present. I love you very much.
To all the wonderful clients who have invested in me so I can invest back
into them, thank you for being amazing clients, inspirations, and friends. I am
confident I have gotten even more from those trainings than anyone can
imagine.
To my inner circle of close friends, thank you for always being willing to
listen and help me through this journey called life. Your love and support
have been instrumental, and I thank you and honor you.
To you who are reading this collection of wisdom, takeaways, and
business growth strategies, thank you for your support. I hope this book
blesses you as much as it has me.
To my writing coach, mentor, and content driver Brian K. Wright, thank
you so much. This book, content, and project could not have been
implemented if it wasn’t for you. Thank you for your constant contact,
wisdom, and advice as the book has come to fruition. Forever grateful for
you and your guidance!
To my incredible son Taylor, thank you for always showing me the
importance of being a kid at heart, having fun, taking risks, and loving life to
the fullest. You bring joy and light to my life and all those lucky enough to
know you. I love you, buddy, and I am so thankful and blessed to be your
father and have you as my son!
And finally, to my fantastic wife, best friend, and “partner in crime,”Nancy, for giving me the confidence, love and, seeing me through many
challenges, obstacles, bumps, bruises, and giving me the desire to make a
lasting impact on the world. Without having you in my life, I would not be
who I am today. Thank you so much for everything, and I love you with all of
me.C
C
HAPTER
 O
NE
Why LinkedIn® And
How It All Began for Me
ongratulations on your wise decision to purchase this book. You are
clearly interested in building a thriving and dynamic business using
LinkedIn
®
. Many people dream of building a business and creating
financial independence for themselves.
However, many don't go all-in—for many reasons.
Why would someone fail at business? For some, it's because they didn't
pick an opportunity or create something that fully resonated with who they
are but were chasing the promises of making gobs of money. Doing
something ONLY for the money is usually a prescription for failure because
negative energy gets attached to that, and people sense it.
For others, they fail because they didn't receive suitable training. Most
“influencers,” companies, business owners, and online coaches mean well
and try to help as many people as possible. Still, those organizations and
individuals are typically concerned about teaching the basics and just closing
another sale.
I am always asked how I ended up using LinkedIn
®
 in the first place.
Well, that, my friends, is a critical story. I was always a traditional brick-and-
mortar business owner in the health and wellness industry, owning multiple
fitness clubs, splitting my time as a personal trainer, certified sports
nutritionist, and corporate wellness speaker. I only had so many hours in the
day to grow my business, and when your entire calendar is full ofappointments, that will keep you working “in your business” and not working
“on your business.”
It could have ended up being a recipe for disaster as I was 33 years old,
tired, burnout, unmotivated, and wondering what my next step would be.
Someone asked me an interesting question. They asked, “if you got sick or
injured and could not train people anymore, or your company went under,
how would you earn income, and in what manner would you be able to do it?
First, I had never been asked this question before. Second, it got the wheels
turning in my brain for the first time in ages. Before that question, I had spent
the last 15 years and 80+ hours a week running on the “treadmill of life.”
My day would start at 4 am, so I would have time to get ready and get to
the gym by 5 am. Once there, I would train clients every hour until nine
o'clock at night. That was my life. That was my daily routine. That was the
only way I knew how to earn money and grow my business. The more clients
I trained, the more money I made. I was officially working harder and not
working smarter. Going back to the original question my friend asked me,
now that I was thinking about my “business mortality,” I started thinking
about other ways to create income, impact, and build a life I loved.
Shortly after this impactful conversation with my friend, I found myself in
San Diego, California, at a personal development event. As I sat there
listening to some incredible speakers who were sharing their knowledge,
wisdom, and things that they had done on their path to achieving their
success, there was a point in the conference where the host of the event
welcomed some of the top entrepreneurs onto the stage to share some of their
journeys. He asked each of them the same question, “How many
conversations has it taken you to get your business to where it is today?” That
was a very off-the-wall question because I would never have thought to ask
about that aspect of a business. But it became abundantly clear when
everyone grabbed that dry-erase marker and walked over to the whiteboard,
with each of them writing conversation numbers that all exceeded 5000; I
needed to re-think how I was approaching my online business.
Sitting there, I thought about what I was doing to move my business
forward. I had a couple of revelations. The first revelation was understanding
that I needed to start improving what I was doing in the online space. I only
had so much bandwidth for meeting clients face-to-face but also networking
with people belly-to-belly. I needed to create more flexibility in the way I
was moving my business forward.The second thing was understanding that social media would play a
prominent role in helping my business get to where I wanted it to be. But a
secondary question came up in my mind: "Which social media platform
should I be using?” Should I use Facebook
®
? Should I use Instagram
®
?
Those were the top platforms consistently and constantly being taught and
spoken about. But as I sat there and thought about those two things, I
remembered a social media platform I'd signed up for back in 2009 but did
nothing with it, and that platform was LinkedIn
®
.
As I thought about the types of people that spend their time on Facebook
®
and Instagram
®
 compared to the kinds of people that spend their time on
LinkedIn
®
, I began to get the clarity that I needed to reopen that account and
start looking at what LinkedIn
®
 was all about.
I remember when I first logged back on in late 2013. It changed
completely. It wasn't just a place where people went to look for a job or get
recruited. It was a place where people could connect, network, and pass
business back and forth. In diving deeper into the inner workings of
LinkedIn
®
, I started by changing my profile, making connections quickly and
abundantly, which led me to message people, and I even began to get
responses back.
After a few days of this, I had phone call after phone call. Within a few
weeks, my calendar began to fill up in a way that it had never filled up
before. Now, as you can imagine, this was very exciting. A fire that had been
dimmed for many years was lit and ignited inside me. Each day I would log
onto LinkedIn
®
 and go through the same process of utilizing LinkedIn
®
. Day
after day and week after week, I would get the same results I was getting
when I began: more connections, more conversations, more sales, and more
business growth. This was my “lightbulb moment.” I realized at that moment
that I had created a flow and a system for anyone to maximize their use of
LinkedIn
®
.
After acknowledging that this could be something big for the sales and
marketing aspect of someone's business, I reached out to a friend of mine to
share with him what had been working for me. When I got him on the phone,
I mentioned how LinkedIn
®
 was producing these drastic and impressive
results for me and my business, and he should be doing what I was doing. Italked him through the specific nuances and ways I was leveraging
LinkedIn
®
 and what he should be doing. As we ended the conversation, he
told me he would apply what he had learned from me and report back with
his experience. Two weeks passed, and I got a text message from this friend.
I remember this like it was yesterday. I grabbed my phone, opened a text
from this friend, and the message read, “call me.” That was it.
So, I called him and said, “what's going on?” He said, “Listen, whatever
you shared with me the other day on how to leverage LinkedIn
®
, it 100%
works”. He said that after doing what I instructed him to do, he had booked
over 14 discovery calls with ideal client prospects. He told me that in the 20-
plus years of being in sales, he had never had that many calls in one week. He
told me, “you should be teaching this. This is a gap and a hole in so many
people's businesses that you can fill with this system you created”.
There's an old saying that some of the most fantastic businesses, products,
and services are created when the marketplace has a void or a gap causing
people not to achieve a certain success. These businesses are formed when
that individual creates something that solves many people's problems. That's
precisely what I did with my LinkedIn
®
 system.
I started to dive deeper into LinkedIn
®
, and as I did, more and more, it
began to feel like a “parting of the Red Sea” moment. The quality of the
conversations, connections and the overall user-friendliness of the platform
made this a no-brainer for every business owner.
Not to mention, even more, head-turning statistics.
According to statista.com, following a dramatic increase of over 20 billion
U.S. dollars from 2016 to 2017, total expenditure on training in the United
States dropped from 93.6 billion in 2017 to 
82.5 billion U.S. dollars in 2020.
What does that statistic tell you? It tells me that fewer people are investing
in themselves to learn proven strategies and techniques to grow their
business, increase their leads, and close more sales.
That is a sad statistic—and it is entirely preventable!
If you want to build a thriving and impactful business, the starting place is
knowing where to find quality people to talk to about your business.
Where do you find these people?
Many organizations and coaches teach that your warm market—your
family and friends—is the best place to start (which has some validity). That
might be a good idea if you haven't burned through all these people inprevious businesses or opportunities. But are your family and friends the best
examples of your ideal client for what you have to offer? For many, the
answer is no. This is because the true magic in building your online business
happens outside our comfort zone (family and friends). The more you get
uncomfortable, the more impact and progress you will see.
This begs the question once again: Where do you find these people
interested in what I have to offer?
The answer may surprise you, but Forbes has said that if you are serious
about building your business, using LinkedIn
®
 is the best way to do it.
There are four significant reasons for this.
First, LinkedIn
®
 is the best way to connect with ideal clients, and if you
are looking to generate more qualified leads, you are fishing in the right
pond. There are two ways that people get sales and clients in business. You
can wait passively for people to come to you or actively look for other
business-minded people who want to hear what you offer.
What I see many people doing right now is building their topsoil. Building
on your topsoil means you have a lot of “low hanging fruit.” However, to
successfully market yourself on LinkedIn
®
, you must have a tree to your
business.
To build your “business tree,” you must make sure you grow the most
important branch of your business. That branch of your tree is your ability to
generate consistent leads. You must have a deep pool of leads because it's the
foundation of your business. If you are only focusing on hoping people reach
out to you, you will never build the strong roots of your business to support
your tree. If you don't have strong roots, then this means that your tree will
eventually collapse and die.
Therefore, generating quality leads will help you build the best business
you can have that is strong, stable, and set up for success.
Suppose you are only using Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
. In that case, your
chances of building an actual business are much smaller because those are
designed to be SOCIAL and ENTERTAINMENT networks, whereas
LinkedIn
®
 is specifically designed for business networking, connecting, and
collaborating.
The second reason why LinkedIn
®
 is the most effective tool for lead
generation, as Forbes.com explains, is that LinkedIn
®
 is 277% more effectivefor unpaid and organic lead generation than Facebook
®
. It simply makes
sense to use an effective lead generation tool because if you are looking to
expand your business and have no leads, then you also have no business.
Posting and praying is not a strategy.
Reaching out to the same people repeatedly to convince them to work with
you is also not a strategy.
You don't want to waste time and energy convincing someone to invest in
your offering. You want to connect with people who already have a healthy
money mindset. The average income for people on LinkedIn
®
 is $100,000
per year, and you can have 30,000 connections there compared to only 5,000
contacts allowed on Facebook
®
. In addition, the average income someone
makes on Instagram
®
 and Facebook
®
 is $30,000 or less.
The third reason using LinkedIn
®
 is the best way to build your business is
because it is ideal for thought leadership. For example, Lewis Howes got his
start on LinkedIn
®
 because he wanted to relate to other thought leaders.
When you post content regularly, and people like and share it, you become an
authority in your niche.
In addition, LinkedIn
®
 is the only social media platform in the world
where every Fortune 500 company has a presence. That is HUGE! This
means there are compelling and influential people at your fingertips.
The final reason why LinkedIn
®
 is the best way to build your business
because it is the most effective content distribution platform for business-to-
business. Forbes.com has said that LinkedIn
®
 is 94% more effective for
content distribution, which means people will see your content when you post
it. Content is not only the messages you send to people who could be
interested in your offering but also the posts that you make.
Many may argue that LinkedIn
®
 is not the right place to build your
business. The truth, however, is that when you decide to become a business
owner and your ideal client is a professional, you will have a great chance of
succeeding online using LinkedIn
®
 over any other social media platform.
I can confidently say that if you want to make it in business and be
someone who makes multiple six-figures on up, doing what you love, you
must be on LinkedIn
®
.
You may wonder how to leverage this powerful platform to youradvantage.
That's what this book is about.
You also may be wondering how to attract the right people, what to say to
them in messages or on the phone, why groups are essential, and a whole host
of other questions you may have.
Be prepared to learn a lot. Most people don't use LinkedIn
®
 nearly enough
simply because it is a mystery. I promise the top business owners are all
using LinkedIn
®
, and I am here to show you how to do this correctly.
Let's begin!W
C
HAPTER
 T
WO
Creating Your Perfect Profile
hat is the first thing people notice once they look you up on
LinkedIn
®
 or any social media platform? The correct answer is your
profile. People will decide to keep reading or not based on their initial
impression of it. You only have two or three seconds to make a remarkable
impression on your readers, or they will move on to someone else. If you
don't grab attention immediately, the consequences could be a lost business
opportunity, a missed referral or joint venture partnership, or a chance to
speak to someone's group. Therefore, the initial first impression is critical.
The success I experienced with my LinkedIn
®
 profile was trial and error. I
didn't have a guide like this to inform the choices I should (or shouldn't) be
making with my LinkedIn
®
 profile. I don't want you to make the same
mistakes I made initially.
The first thing you need is a welcoming, attractive background photo. You
want your background photo to set yourself apart from other people, so this
would not be simply a photo of you. The goal for this photo is for someone to
be inspired as soon as they visit your page. In my current profile, I have a
cover that shows me in action speaking at an event, in addition to my profile
picture. If you don’t yet have photos like that for your background, you can
simply go to www.canva.com, type in “LinkedIn
®
 Cover,” and create your
own that is branded to you and what you do. If you think of doing a
Facebook
®
 cover photo, for example, it serves the same purpose—it gives
people insight as to who you are and what you do in a visually appealingway.
Next, you need a profile picture. This photo needs to be a clear
professional picture of you. For example, I spent most of my career as a
sports nutritionist and personal trainer. I was also an amateur bodybuilder.
But that is not who I am anymore. I am now a coach, consultant, podcaster,
and speaker. Therefore, when people see what I look like, I want them to
know I am serious. This is who I am, what I represent, and what I stand for. It
makes sense that you have a profile picture that describes you, fits you, and is
you.
Below your profile picture, your name will appear. Then after that, you
need a brief description. This is where viewers will get an immediate sense of
who you are.
For example, if you're a financial advisor, marketing professional, real
estate professional, business coach, or business consultant, you always want a
powerful adjective to define your business.
You can use titles such as President, CEO, Founder, Creator of, Head
Lady Boss, Head Honcho of, etc. I chose “Creator” because it felt good to me
and should always accurately reflect who you are.
Many people put their LLCs in their profiles. I have an LLC, but it's
nowhere found on my page because I want people to be connected to me, and
that's it. Honestly, no one cares about your LLC, so there is no reason to
include it.
Using keywords in your headline is vital for you to appear in more
searches. When you appear in more searches, you have a more significant
opportunity to connect with the right people who could benefit most from
what you offer. You never put a “mission statement” as your headline. Many
people have, “I help you create 7 + figures with ease and only have to work
one day a week”. That is not genuine. That is not authentic. And it is
undoubtedly keyworded. Try something like (Coach | Business Consultant |
Podcaster | Business Mentor).
One of the most frequent questions is about listing past positions in
profiles. For example, "Should I list my previous job as a bartender even
though I was there for a very short time? I would recommend it because later,
I will show you how you can utilize those past experiences to your benefit by
connecting the right people into your network.
Now, you also want to have the proper description for each of these listed
positions. For example, mine could say, "I'm a Business Coach. I facilitateOnline Marketers, Entrepreneurs, Financial Advisors, Real Estate Agents,
Insurance Agents, Accountants, and Online Coaches on how to not only use
the power of LinkedIn
®
 to grow your business but how to implement social
media to make yourself stand out without paying for leads or having to do
funnels."
Next, you need to make sure that you have completed your summary.
What I see many people do is that they either have a simple one-liner that
does not go into depth about who the person is and what they do, or I see
people with outdated information that has no reference to what they are
currently doing.
The summary should be about WHY you do what you do, not what you
do. To demonstrate, here's what I wrote: "As an experienced professional
with two decades of work in leadership, sales training, lead generation, and
the personal coaching industries, but most importantly being a husband and
father to a beautiful little boy, I have learned the importance of creating the
life that you deserve, but more importantly the mindset and loving each day
with the utmost happiness.
I am passionate about spreading my mission of teaching others how to
create human connections, build their brands and grow their wealth through
the means of LinkedIn
®
.
I specialize in showing Entrepreneurs, Business Coaches, Financial
Services Professionals, and Online Marketing Professionals who are ready to
fundamentally change the skills needed to shift the entire scope of their life
by making new decisions that create the outcomes they deserve in life and for
your business.
As an award-winning online marketer, 3x best-selling author, top
podcaster, and speaker, I am the go-to specialist in converting traffic,
establishing connections, creating income, and building personal brands on
LinkedIn
®
.
Fully immersing myself in learning LinkedIn
®
 and social media strategies,
I quickly gained traction as a leader in generating significant results for other
Entrepreneurs, Online Business Owners, Financial Advisors, Financial
Planners, Network Marketing Professionals, and Business Coaches.
Being extremely motivated about helping others achieve success while
building their network organically and without complicated and costly
marketing tactics sets my coaching apart from others.The program I created has helped thousands experience explosive business
and monetary growth.
I am people-focused and result-driven, and my strategic approach to
teaching others how to be creative in achieving wealth online and organic
traffic changes the game when competing in a saturated digital world.
Website for more info: 
www.scottaaron.net
 or email to contact me:
scott@scottaaron.net
.
So, you can take that and wrap it around yourself. For example, "In being
a loving wife, mother, and educator, I have learned the importance of shaping
people's mindsets. I now wake up with a growing passion for showing people
how to live their life out loud and enjoy every moment simultaneously."
Now, it's essential to have every section filled out: Education, Volunteer
Experiences, your Endorsements, Skills, Recommendations, and
Accomplishments. List as many things as you can that relate to your journey.
Books you have written, articles you have been featured in, and awards you
have won over the years will make your profile stand out.
Make sure you have an excellent, clean profile because it represents who
you are. If you need an example, go to my LinkedIn
®
 profile, and see what I
have done. As I mentioned, you need to make this not about what you do—
it's about why you do it.
Once you have a unique profile, you can start searching for groups to join
on LinkedIn
®
 so you can begin bringing people into your network.
We will discuss that in the next chapter.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Jackie Serviss - Talent Strategist and Executive
Coach
Jackie Serviss is a seasoned Human Resources Executive and Certified
Executive Coach (CEC) with over a decade of assisting leaders in aligning
people strategies and talent acquisition best practices to scale their
organization. As a business owner and people strategist, Jackie leverages her
leadership & integrated approach to drive strategy around talent planning &
forecasting, organizational design, leadership development coaching, changemanagement & staffing services.
With a passion for driving sustainable business growth through the power
of people, Jackie is focused on strategic partnerships with leaders to drive
results, build teams and create sustainable impact.
Facing disruptors in today's business landscape with a consistent lens on
talent is at the forefront of all organizations. Jackie has developed a method
to attract, develop and retain high-performance talent and is here to help you
assess your needs and construct the right people strategy for you.
Jackie’s experience working with companies like PepsiCo, Toll, and
BlackRock, along with startup founders like Plexxis Software, Spitzen
Limited, and Legacy Coaching, has given her the ability to create and
produce attainable organizational talent plans that can scale up or scale
back with ease. If you are trying to figure out what to do to grow the fantastic
talent on your team, or attract the best talent into your company, connect
with Jackie today to assess how best to get started.
“Hey there, my name is Jackie Serviss, and I am a business strategist,
transformational coach, and speaker. My former life was as a corporate
executive, and I've recently transitioned into being an online coach and
building an online business, which is how I came across Scott Aaron.
You know, Scott has not only been my LinkedIn
®
 coach, but he has also
been my strategic coach and helped me see all facets of my business in a new
light. It has been an absolute honor working with Scott, and I'll tell you, in
the multiple weeks that we've worked together, his systems and how he
explains things to you are simple and to the point and land you new clients.
In the first couple of weeks, I had a couple of new clients coming to my
door, and that is all from the system that Scott teaches. So, Scott, a good
friend and a dear coach, thank you so much for everything and for teaching
me LinkedIn
®
”.
Learn more about Jackie at
http://jackieserviss.com/
Key Takeaways:
Your profile is the first thing a new contact will see. It only takes
seconds for someone to decide whether to connect further, so make itmemorable and impactful.
Use clear and professional photos of yourself. People want to put a face
to what they are reading.
Use power adjectives to describe who you are.
Your summary is critical because it gives you a chance to tell people
WHY you do something, not simply what you do.
Fill out every section. Remember, your profile is designed to tell people
how they can benefit from being connected with you—it's not a generic,
boring resume.
Bonus:
 As a gift from me to you, please go to www.scottaaron.net and claim
your free infographic about the best way to set up your profile on LinkedIn
®
so you can get started quickly and easily.L
C
HAPTER
 T
HREE
Using The Search Engine
And Groups To Build Your Network
et's talk about laying down the foundation for joining the right kind of
groups, as well as how we can connect your past and present to
searching for the suitable types of people who would be most likely to
accept your connections so you can start building your network. Groups get a
bad rap on LinkedIn
®
. So many say, “they don’t work,” “they are a waste of
time,” and “people just sell and pitch all day long.” To a certain extent, that is
true. But I will respectfully disagree that they don’t hold any value. They do,
and I am going to explain why.
Later, we'll discuss how you can connect with people, two different
methods you can use to communicate with people, and how to keep track of
all that. This is important because you want to ensure that those people you're
searching for and now connecting with are working for you and are suitable
for your business.
With that in mind, let's talk about groups. On your main profile page, in
the upper right-hand corner, you will notice a square grid with the word
"Work" underneath it. You will also see a down arrow next to it. This is
where all your groups are stored. Now, if you're not in any groups, I will
show you how to join them. For example, my background includes wellness,
coaching, podcasting, marketing, and mindset. Therefore, most of my groups
have to do with those areas of business—things that relate to me. You don't
necessarily want to join groups based on how many people are in thembecause those people may not be your ideal audience.
The reason you join groups is to find YOUR audience. Find the right
groups with the right people in them so you can build your business.
You could search for groups in the same way that you would search for
people. If I was searching for podcasters but wanted to search for podcasting
groups, I can use the search bar and type "podcaster," and then it will allow
me to filter what I want. In this case, I want "Groups." If I find a group called
the Podcasters Network, I can select it and ask to join. Some groups you will
instantly get access to, and others have a moderator that, in time, will accept
your request to join.
Let's say you're a business coach and want to connect with more people in
coaching; you can type in "Business Coach Groups." It will automatically go
to groups, and you will find some coaching groups to join. You can also type
in "real estate groups" and see a group called “Real Estate Agents Group.” If
you're an accountant, search "accountant groups." You would find, for
example, Accountant-Lawyer Alliance, ALA. Let's say you want to connect
with bartenders instead. You can search "bartender," “bartending jobs,” or
“bartending mixologist,” and you would find thousands of people. The great
thing about groups is that these are people whom you are not directly
connected within your network that you can still connect with, which is a
fantastic thing.
It's crucial to search for the “right” people. I always tell people that on
LinkedIn
®
, you want to connect with the mirror image of yourself (your ideal
client avatar). You don't want to search and connect with just anyone. You
want to be able to search and connect with people who would be most
relatable to you, get the most value from what you have to offer, and could
network with to gain even more business opportunities. When I'm on
LinkedIn
®
 conducting searches for myself, I make sure I'm searching and
connecting with podcasters, business coaches, business consultants, and
course creators—and I'll show you how I do this.
If I want to be broad, I'll type in "podcaster" and click on "People." Then
you always want to make sure that you click "Second Connections," and
people always ask, “Why?”. First connections are already your connections,
so you don't need to filter them out because you are already connected to
them. Second connections are your connections' connections; third
connections are your second connections once removed, which means that
third connections are your first connections' connections' connections. To getto the third, you need to either pay for premium or know the person's email—
and I don't pay for Premium. It's not that I don't believe in it, but I think you
can stay within the tight niche of the general network you have right here and
work off that without paying for Premium. Whether you want to pay for
Premium or not is up to you, but I have not found a need for it.
I always filter by second connections. So, when I searched, I just
mentioned that it brought back 49,000 people. That's a good number, but the
value in this is finding specific connections. I can pursue this search further
and type in "podcaster, course creator." Again, it's someone who's just like
me. That search result moves from 49,000 down to 3,600. This simply proves
that the more specific you get with your searches, the more specific you will
get with the type of person you bring into your network.
I can go even one step further. I can add “business coach” to that search,
so now my search is for "podcaster, course creator, business coach." The
result is now 16 people who are just like me. Now, if I adjust the search, I can
get rid of “podcaster” and just do "course creator, business coach," which
brings 152 people. I can do "podcaster, business coach" and get 37 results, or
just "business coach" by itself and get 16,000. You must play around with the
types of people you want. Now that was a search I did for myself; your
search terms might differ.
As another example, let's say you are currently a business consultant, but
you were an HR coordinator before consulting. If your target client is burnt-
out professionals like you, your search could be "business professional,
Human Resources" and yield 570 results. If you searched for "HR,
Coordinator," you would get 355 results. Now, if you want to get specific and
incorporate coaching and mentoring into your search, you can do "HR,
Coach" and get 11,000. You can also search for "Human Resources, business
mentor" because you're looking for someone like who you were as an HR
professional. Still, you're also looking for someone potentially interested in
coaching or mentoring. The key is being very, very specific about whom you
search for.
In chapter four, I'm going to get more in-depth on the searching and
connecting technique, how often you should search, how many searches
you're allowed, other ways to connect, and how to keep track of those new
connections as they come in. Then in chapter five, I'm going to wrap up with
exactly how and what kind of message you can send, two different types of
messages, some of the objections you're going to get, and how to set upphone calls to connect with the people you find.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Jeremiah Campbell, Owner of Brickworks LLC:
Jeremiah Campbell has been actively involved in residential and commercial
masonry contracting since 2004. He started as a laborer and worked his way
up into an owner/operator of Brickworks. From 2004-2007 every job was
sold and installed by Jeremiah, and by 2008, he took more of A management
role, influencing others and showing them his leadership, knowledge, and
community.
He works hard to ensure. Brickworks standards are far above the norm to
deliver excellent service. Jeremiah holds the following certifications: CSIA,
CCP, CCR, HeatShield, historically accurate mortar, lime mortar, and
residential builder’s license. He has worked for hospitals, schools,
corporations, historic landmarks, governments, police stations, city halls, etc.
On top of his business, he and his wife Mallory have an incredible podcast
called “Destined to Be.”
They believe everyone deserves to live a life unstuck. Mallory and
Jeremiah have always dreamt of working together. They decided it was time
to take a leap of faith, and with the help of some divine timing, their
businesses and podcast took shape.
They’ve been married since 2011, and are raising two boys, while still
making time for each other. Focusing on improving their mental wellness can
lead other couples and individuals to do the same in their lives. They strive to
teach and offer everyday practices to help you to become un-stuck, design the
life you want, and help you become the person you are destined to be. They
are building a community of like-minded and like-hearted people and want to
invite you to be a part of the family!
“Hey, Scott, I just wanted to send you this message in appreciation. I got a
letter yesterday about a deal we've been working on that would have been
impossible if not for your LinkedIn
®
 strategy. I hired you about three or four
months ago for LinkedIn
®
 coaching. I never had any LinkedIn
®
 presence. I
made a LinkedIn
®
 account. You helped me optimize it; you taught me how toreach out. So, this contract was the biggest in my company’s history.
We've been in business for this will be our 15
th
 season. So, it's the biggest
contract. It's entering us into an entirely new world of our business. I am a
mason contractor, and I reached out to you for help, and you taught me how
to target my general contractors, architects, project managers, and property
managers. With that help, we closed the biggest deal. A $300,000 contract!!
I’m so grateful to you. Anybody that is in the process of or thinking about
hiring him as a LinkedIn
®
 coach? It's so worth that. Love you, Scott.
Thanks.”
Learn more about Jeremiah at:
https://www.chimneyrepairdetroitmi.com/
or
www.destinedtobepodcast.com
Key Takeaways:
Join groups to find YOUR audience, not just to accumulate connections
who don't share common interests.
Be specific in your searches to find highly targeted connections. It's
better to connect with a smaller, highly focused group than a large group
with fewer things in common with you.
Filter by second connections. These are individuals who are connected
to people you are already connected to. It's a great way to build your
network.S
C
HAPTER
 F
OUR
Exploding The
Reach Of Your Network
o far, we have discussed setting up your profile correctly to make it as
attractive as possible for potential connections. We also discussed laying
down the foundation and the groundwork for searching for the right
groups to join and finding the suitable types of people to bring into your
network.
Now let's talk about strategies you can incorporate to make the most of
your searches.
There is a method to my madness regarding how I grew my connections
from 500 to 27,600 in 4 years, how I get as many conversations per week as I
require, and how I close anywhere between two to four sales per week, just
on LinkedIn
®
.
I will show you precisely what you need to do daily to make this happen.
I'll go through it slowly because there is a process, and I will explain some
tools you need to make this work effectively for you.
First things first. Start from your home screen.
The methodology begins with sending no more than 100 connection
requests per week. LinkedIn
®
 will block and potentially remove you from the
platform if you violate this too often. So that could be 20 connections five
days per week or 14 connections seven days a week. The choice is yours.
This is imperative because people won't know who you are if you don't reach
out. You can't expect people to reach out to you first. Now when I say reachout to 14 to 20 connections daily, that doesn't mean that all of them will
accept your request. That's 14 to 20 people you're looking to connect with
who are the right fit for you and will enable you to grow an extensive
network. With that being said, I'm going to take you through my daily habit
of what I do to connect with my network.
I'm a big believer in being genuine and authentic and not having to pay for
leads if it's not necessary. I also believe everyone is on LinkedIn
®
 to network
for the proper purpose, especially for a business that requires human
connection to move it forward. We are here to create authentic conversations
with real people to grow an entire network for your business.
The first thing to do when you wake up in the morning is to have a marker
of where your most recent connections are. You'll need to click on “My
Network.” This is going to bring up a couple of different things. It's going to
bring in some people who are looking to connect with you. It's also going to
bring up the “People You May Know” section, which I'm going to get into.
But the most important thing is your connections, and what you're going to
do is you're going to click on “connections.” What this is going to do is going
to bring up all your connections in sequential order, and it is going to show
you “Most Recently Added.”
The idea is to keep track of your new connections and discover who they
are because your new connections are your new leads. Now, for example,
we're going to pretend that you went to “My Network” and clicked on “See
All.” Let's say that Jon Dough was your most recent connection. So, what
you're going to do is get out a piece of paper, and you're going to write on the
top “Most Recent Connection” and add rows for Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, etc., and then you're going to put Jon’s name for whatever day
you found him.
So, this is going to be your marker. You need to have a line in the sand to
know precisely where you need to work up from. Your most recent
connections are at the very top. Your older connections that you've connected
with are below them. Now you have your marker.
Here's my connecting style. I do specific searches on Monday and Friday
because with the free version of LinkedIn
®
; you are only allowed 12 to 15
searches per month. If you've been on LinkedIn
®
 and tried doing searches
before, you will get messages that say that you're getting close to your
commercial limit for your searches. Trust me; I went through that. I wassearching way too much.
So, Monday and Friday, you're going to do specific searches. Your other
connections will come from the “My Network” area on Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday. These are the people you may know, and
they represent your first connections-first connections, which is your
network. With the free version of LinkedIn
®
, you can tap into them
immediately.
Let's run through an example. If it's Tuesday, I'm going to look for people
that I can connect with that fit my description of the mirror image of me,
whether it's a podcaster, someone that's my ideal client avatar, or even a
power partner (someone who could introduce me to someone else) — and I'm
very, very specific.
To review, on Tuesday, I go through my connections first thing in the
morning, then define my marker, and I'm done for the day because I sent out
my connections. On Wednesday morning, I go to my home page and recheck
my most recent connections. Now, we're going to click on “My Network,”
then we're going to click on “my connections” on the left-hand side, and
we're going to look through the list and find Jon. But now Jon is not on top
anymore, because we notice, for example, that we have five new people.
They now represent your brand-new leads and are your brand-new
connections.
You then directly message them, and the next chapter will discuss what
you will say in more detail. Remember that once you identify your new leads,
the only name you must write down is this first name at the top of the list
because that's your new marker. Let's say the person's name is Nancy. The
next time you receive new connections, Nancy is now your new marker, and
every new connection above her name is a new lead.
Since it's Wednesday, this is one of your “my network” days, so you will
use that section to send out your next batch of connections. You wake up
Thursday, and you go back to “My Network,” you go back to “See All,” and
you see who has appeared above Nancy, who was the person from the day
before. So, this is a way to start accumulating leads. So, the first thing you
always do is to get your marker and send messages, then the next thing you
do is to get those subsequent connection requests out, and you're just going to
windshield wipe back and forth between those activities.
This is the basis for what you're going to do. It's 14 to 20 connections
every day. On Monday and Friday, you do specific searches. On Tuesday,Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday, you use the “My Network”
section.
Every day, you're sending out those 14 to 20 connections. That's the
activity that will build your pipeline consistently.
In chapter five, we'll go over messaging those brand-new people, what to
expect with responses, what kind of scripts you can use that are genuine and
authentic, and what you can say to them to get started.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Janis Thorton – Top Rated Golf Personal Trainer
Passions of mine include weight loss/general fitness and golf fitness. I used to
work in cardiac rehab and the pharmaceutical industry for over 25 years
combined. I am passionate about helping others get off medications and stay
out of cardiac rehab. I’ve seen so much illness…it’s time for wellness.
Another passion of mine is golfing, as I play 2-4/week. I always want to be
able to help fellow golfers with their golf game. I’m greedy…I want people to
play golf with me in my 60’s, 70’s, and 80’s! JT Fitness and Golf will help
you reach your fitness goals, whether losing weight or improving your golf
game. You are exactly where you need to be!
Take your time back! Workout from home with fast and effectively online,
individually designed, convenient workouts. Now you can find YOUR best
self. Whether you want to improve your golf game or lose weight, these
workouts are for you! Learn easy-to-use strategies for ultimate health and
fitness.
For over three decades as a wellness professional and, more recently,
being an online personal trainer, I have had two passions when it comes to
life. One is helping those who are on a personal journey and those that love
the game of golf. Both passions require empowering you from the inside out,
so you reach your ultimate goals. But honestly, what inspires me most is
being a loving wife and mother. I know the importance of showing up each
day for those around you that mean the most to you. My mission is to impact
people physically and financially and show those around me how amazing
life can be when you truly see it that way. Whether you want to lose weight,
improve your golf game, get stronger, look younger, have more energy, findtime for exercise, or whatever your goals are, I'd love to guide you, so you
feel your best.... because you deserve it. Not all personal trainers are created
equal. I understand the mind/body battle that can sabotage your efforts. My
professional training, combined with a compassionate approach, gives you a
training companion in a no-nonsense way to build an environment for
results!
“If you find yourself struggling with LinkedIn
®
, not sure what to say,
whom to connect to, what to do with all these groups, I highly recommend
working with Scott, I'm an online personal trainer, and I also do online
marketing.
I'm like, I know I need to be on LinkedIn
®
. I know I want to grow my
business. And where I was getting stuck was, what the heck, I could connect
with people. But then, what do I do with all these connections? And once I
started working with Scott, things began to change. So, for example, I had
about 2300 connections when I started with him nine months ago. And now, I
have over 3400 connections on LinkedIn
®
, which I got in less than nine
months.
Also, I used to have literally 46 people viewing a post or viewing, my
profile was very, very low. Now I'm up to 300, and I'm almost to 400. I'm
someone who will do as much as Scott recommends. I work on LinkedIn
®
probably three to four days a week, instead of the five to six plus days he
recommends. Now also, I will say this, I am that person that works better one
on one. I know Scott has different programs for you to join, so I decided to go
all in with working directly with him because I knew that if I had just to
watch videos and do things on my own, I wouldn't do it. And that's where
Scott comes in to help you.
So, if you are sitting on the fence, wondering what you should do, I highly
recommend that you just take the leap, hire Scott, and have him handhold you
on the weekly calls with him. That way, he can take you and your LinkedIn
®
to the next level so you can truly hit your goals.
I know we all want to grow our business with businesspeople who also
want to do the business. Guess what? I have closed four clients through
LinkedIn
®
. And I never knew them. I never met them. I still haven't met them
to this day. But I'm going to tell you something through LinkedIn
®
 because of
Scott. I was able to connect and close these people.So, you're sitting on the fence. Time to get off!”
Learn more about Janis at
https://jtfitnessandgolf.com/
Key Takeaways:
Commit to doing something every day to build your network. Do
searches on Mondays and Fridays. On Tuesdays, Wednesdays,
Thursdays, Saturdays, and Sundays, send your connection messages via
the “my network” area. Respond to incoming messages every day.
Do specific searches to find people with your shared interest and look
for people with few shared connections. This increases the possibility
that these people have not heard about your opportunity yet.
Have a marker so that you can keep track of your recent connections.
This will help you not skip any new connections or accidentally send an
opening message to the same person more than once.I
C
HAPTER
 F
IVE
How To Start Conversations
With New Connections
've thrown out a lot of information to grasp, so let's recap what we've
learned. In chapter two, we went over setting up your profile to make it
look the most attractive it can be to your network so that when you're
connecting with people, they're thinking, "This is the mirror image of
someone that I'm looking for to connect with." You will get a higher
percentage rate of people accepting your connections.
In chapter three, we went over a specific technique of looking and
searching for the right kind of people for your network whom you may want
to network and collaborate with. You don't want just anyone. You want
specific people, and we went over how to do that.
In chapter four, we took all those pieces and put them into play in a
specific way to connect with people regularly to build a massive network of
the right people for your network.
Now we've got all these new connections. What do we do with them?
Great question!
As we went through the connection process in the previous chapter, we are
building our network and getting new connections. Now it's time to do the
actual work, messaging people. Now that we have all these new leads and
connections, we need to do something with them.
There are a couple of different scripts that you can use. One will be an
example of a very laid-back, relaxed script, and the other will be a more
specific script for the targeted person you're looking for, and you candecipher which one feels better. Then we'll go over the conversion rate of the
messages you send people and what kind of responses you can get back from
that.
The key to messaging someone on LinkedIn
®
 is to make sure your
message is humanizing and genuine. Too many people are getting bombarded
daily with automated messages from software attached to their profiles
(which goes against the LinkedIn
®
 User Agreement and can get your account
suspended if caught) and straight-up slimy sales pitch messages with no
human connection being formed. Many users of LinkedIn
®
 are frustrated
because they are curious as to why so many people do not respond to them
when they do send them a message. As I mentioned, the decreased response
to messages is because of the automated and sales pitch messages. The goal
is to create and craft an authentic message that resonates with the individual
receiving it. Now let’s dive into the messaging process.
First, identify to whom you will send a message. Let's say you have
someone named Shannon on your list as an example. Next, you're going to
click “Message.” The first type of message is a very relaxed one, which I am
comfortable sending to people because I've worked through different kinds of
scripts—with some, I was particular. With others, I was less specific. In this
script, I'm about to show you get a very, very high rate of return for someone
open to connecting. If this exact verbiage doesn't feel right to you, I want you
to make it your own, but use this as a foundation of what you can build from.
Here's what I would say:
“Hi, Shannon. It's great to be connected to you. Do you have any time
this week or next week to discuss what we are currently working on
and how we can best support one another here on LinkedIn
®
?”
Edit your message to ensure everything is spelled correctly, copy the
message, and send it. Go to the next person on your list and paste the
message into the message box. You will change the person's name because
this message is going to a new person. Just like that, two messages were sent
out. That's how quickly you can go through messaging these people.
Again, that is a very, very simple message, and if that doesn't feel good to
you, then do a message that does feel good to you.
Now let me show you an example of the other script I use. Let's use Larryas an example this time. If I was going to message Larry and I wanted to be
more specific, here is something that I would say:
“Hi Larry, and it's great to be connected to you. I noticed that we
shared a background in XYZ profession/industry, and it would be
great to hop on a call to learn more about what we both are doing
and how we best support one another here on LinkedIn
®
. Is there a
day and time that works best for you?”
This is much more specific and may feel more comfortable because
LinkedIn
®
 is seen as more “professional” than other social media platforms.
Here's how you want to break it down.
“Hi, Larry. And it's great to be connected to you.”
 Obviously, you're
edifying the person.
“I noticed that we shared a background in XYZ profession/industry, and it
would be great to hop on a call to learn more about what we both are doing
and how we best support one another here on LinkedIn
®
.”
 You're telling
Larry exactly why you messaged him with a relatable connecting point,
which is good.
“Is there a day and time that works best for you?”
 Now, this is a crucial
line. When you say, “
Is there a day and time that works best for you?
” you're
asking a specific question. Specific questions lead to specific answers. If you
don’t A.S.K, you can’t G.E.T. You must ask in order to get.
Again, you can see the difference. There is a more straightforward and
specific method; furthermore, it's entirely up to you. There is no right or
wrong message to send because you don't know how that person will
respond.
What I can tell you is this. I'm always playing around with different scripts
and messages to see what will play best on the network I've built.
The other thing that I can tell you is that every response rate is different.
There are three kinds of responses you can expect. There's a 33% chance
of getting a response. They're either going to say:
"Yes, let's talk.” “No. I’m not interested”,
 or they say nothing at all.
Those are the only things that can happen. There's a 33% chance of people
responding to want to hear what you have to say.
I will give you a couple of tips. Some people who say yes might say, 
"Yes,
but can you be more specific,"
 or “Yes. Can you send me some information?"Here are my two tips. When someone says, "Yes, can you be more
specific," I would then write back,
"Specifically, I want to connect to discuss what we both do
professionally and how we can support each other on LinkedIn
®
. Do
you have 10 minutes to talk?"
For the person who asks, "Can you send me some information?" I would
write back:
"I would love to send you some information. But before speaking on
the phone, I'm unsure what information is best to send. Do you have
10 minutes?"
The other thing that you need to think about is if you're going back and
forth with someone via email or messenger, you can't get them on the phone,
and they're unwilling to set up a phone call, you must ask yourself, "Is this
person the type of person I want to connect and network with?" Chances are
no because, in any business that’s grown online or offline, it's driven by
conversation, it's driven by phone calls or Zoom sessions. If these people are
unwilling to do that and want to hide behind their email, they're not a good fit
for your network.
In the next chapter, we'll cover an example phone call, how it goes, what
information to send, and what to do if they say yes to your offering, product,
or service.
Later, we'll go over what you should be doing in your groups and
publishing articles/newsletters so you can bring people in that way and
provide engaging content. We'll also go over what you should post on
LinkedIn
®
 and what you should not.
We will also discuss other ways to start conversations with people through
your posts, happy birthday messages, work anniversaries, or job changes.
LinkedIn
®
 gives you built-in opportunities to re-connect, so we will discuss
how to utilize those opportunities best.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:Corey Baker – Best Selling Author/Speaker/Coach
Our society wants to blame everyone for everything. We blame political
parties. We blame our kids. We blame our parents. We blame our bosses. Or
the economy. Or our mother-in-law. So much of our life is out of our control.
There is one thing we can control. We can control ourselves. We can control
whether we put ourselves on a path towards becoming the best “us” we can
be.
All of us have a person that we long to be. That person is fit. That person
doesn’t get impatient in traffic. They are generous and forgiving, and bold.
The problem for many of us is that the person we currently are and the
person we long to be often have a gap. 
Chasing Better
 was written to help
you close that gap.
In Chasing Better, Corey will talk about some critical areas of your life
that you are absolutely in control of. You will laugh. You will be inspired.
You will identify a few areas of your life that you can Chase Better and begin
the process of becoming the you that you have always wanted to be.
Chasing better is introducing you to the person you have always longed to
be. Each of us has a "me" that we want to be. The problem for many of us is
that there is usually a large gap between the person we are and the person
we long to be. Chasing better is about helping you shorten that gap. Written
in an inspiring, honest, and humorous way, author Corey Baker shares from
his personal experience how he has "chased better" in many areas of his own
life. As a former minister, Corey has dealt with his fair share of personal
challenges.
While Chasing Better wouldn't be classified as a Christian book, Corey
uses past church experiences to help readers identify areas to improve in
their everyday life. Everyone that reads chasing better will be able to identify
with one of the critical topics that Corey discusses. Topics in the book
include Fear Overcoming being worried about what others think about you
Importance of coaching, Reading and journaling, Health Money,
Communication Encouragement, Empathy Listening, Learning to love what
you do, and Getting better at things you are bad at. Chasing better is an
equal mix of easy read and in-your-face challenges. It will encourage you. It
will inspire you. It will make you laugh. It may make you angry at times. It
will make you a better person and help you become the person you have
always longed to be.Corey is a husband, father, coach, author, speaker, and avid Chicago
Cubs fan. His life's passion is to help people become the best version of
themselves. Having spent two decades in full-time ministry, Corey now works
from home and lives with his family in Lexington, Kentucky. Corey loves to
write and communicate with an equal balance of humor and candor.
“My name is Corey Baker, and I am a health coach and best-selling
author, and run an online business and have built our business almost
exclusively utilizing Facebook
®
 and a little bit of Instagram
®
. But to be
honest, I was a tad bit intimidated by LinkedIn
®
 and just not quite sure if it
was a good fit for us in our industry.
But I will tell you that I have started utilizing Scott’s methods by reading
this book, then began some consultation stuff, and have since hired him to
coach my wife and me on LinkedIn
®
. And I cannot stop having conversations,
meetings, and opportunities for referrals utilizing his methods to crush
LinkedIn
®
.
So, I just cannot recommend him highly enough to assist you in growing
your business if you're looking to create more revenue and more influence
within your business that you're creating”
.
Learn more about Corey at 
https://coreybaker.us/
Key Takeaways:
Use the template messages I provided or adapt them to your needs. Your
messages to your connections need to feel authentic and comfortable for
you.
How people respond to your messages could be a clue as to whether
they are a good fit for your business or network. You don't need or want
to work and connect with everyone.
There are only three ways someone can respond to your messages: Yes,
no, or nothing at all. If someone wants more information first, you can
still get them on a call with the script provided in this chapter.N
C
HAPTER
 S
IX
You Have Someone
On the Phone, Now What?
ow that we have some calls set up let's talk about what we will say to
them. Getting someone on the phone is one thing. Still, you can make
or break the relationship immediately if you don't know how to present
yourself and what you could offer the individual in your service or a
collaboration.
With that in mind, let's discuss what I say to people every single time once
I get them on the phone.
I'm going to demonstrate a best-case scenario. Of course, there are going
to be some things that come up, and not every conversation will go exactly as
planned; that's just the nature of the beast. If you stick to the process and do
things as I do, you will have better quality connections, collaboration
opportunities, and more sales in your business. You will have more genuine
conversations, making more people open to your offer.
So, let's jump right in.
For example, let's say we will be speaking to Dominic today.
Dominic and I have been messaging back and forth. We finally set up a
call, and he's interested in connecting more. To prepare for the call, I
constantly review someone's profile first and look it over so I can learn more
about what they do. Let's say he has a background in business coaching,
podcasting, and public speaking, which is great because I have that same
background. As I look through a profile, I always endorse the person to show
that I've taken a genuine interest in who they are before I get them on the call.When I have a call set up, I usually use Zoom, Skype, or my phone. Let's say
that Dominic is from the U.K., so I typically would be doing the call on
Zoom or Skype. If you have an international calling plan through your phone
or have WhatsApp, then, of course, that's an option. The best way to do these
calls is through video, if possible. There's nothing like being able to see who
you are talking to and being able to read body language. You can connect on
more levels than through a regular phone call.
Here's how I would structure my phone call.
I would start this way:
"Hey, Dominic, Scott Aaron from LinkedIn
®
. Thank you again so
much for taking the time out to speak today. I can see that you also
have a background in podcasting, business coaching, and public
speaking. Tell me a little about yourself and where you see yourself
and your business in the next 3-5 years?"
What I've done is that within 30 seconds, I've put the conversation with
that person. The reason why you do that is that people like to hear themselves
talk, plain and simple. The more someone can share something about
themselves, the more they will lower their walls with you. Just remember, we
have two ears and one mouth for a reason. Get the other person talking and
listen to what they are saying. The best way to stay engaged in the
conversation is to get a little piece of paper. People will sometimes
unconsciously complain about things they're unhappy with or do not like
about where they are in life and business.
I always make notes about those things so I can wrap my personal story
around those same things. The goal is to be relatable, so listening,
acknowledging, and sharing my own stories around those same things will
increase the connection between us. You want to raise the camaraderie level
and lower the resistance wall. I let people talk so I can learn as much as
possible.
While Dominic is talking, he is probably talking about his life, what he's
doing, and what he likes and doesn't like. When he is done, I say:
"Dominic, thank you for being transparent and sharing your story
with me. Would you be interested in learning about me, my story, and
what I am working on?"At this point in the conversation, you want to move to all “yes or no ''
questions because you want to be very clear about where the conversation
can go. If he says “yes” and stays engaged in the discussion, you are still in
the ball game. However, if he starts saying “no '' and begins acting
disinterested, that's a sign that you should probably end the call sooner than
later. You don't want to waste each other's time.
You might continue by asking:
"Great, Dominic. Is it okay if I share my story with you?"
Chances are pretty good that he will say “yes” to this.
Then you would say:
“Awesome. So, Dominic, I can relate to what you said. I can relate to
some of the same struggles you're going through right now. I've been
a business coach and podcaster for years, and I've put in over 60,000
+ hours in the industry. But some of my greatest frustrations came
from the fact that I only got paid when I was closing one-on-one
coaching clients. I wasn't getting paid if I wasn't picking up a client. If
I went on vacation, I wasn't getting paid. And I think my biggest fear,
Dominic, was that if I got sick or had to take significant time off, God
forbid, I would be cut off from my income. There was no Plan B. I
only had one plan, and it was Plan A. Becoming a father shifted
things for me because I knew the importance of having other means of
income behind what I was doing."
"So, all of that, plus all the hours I was coaching, had me not
feeling good about the road I was on. I constantly had to sell and
wasn't creating meaningful connections. Sure, I was closing sales, but
I still had just an active income stream versus a passive one. That led
me to think about other ways to create more income with what I
taught in my one-on-one coaching. So, eight years ago, that led me to
create a virtual coaching course that could be bought at any time, by
any person, and it didn’t require me to fill up my calendar with hours
and hours of coaching sessions."
This is where you would talk about how you created your program or
course. When I mention the process of what I did to create it, I would say,
"Dominic, have you ever thought about creating a course or program basedon what you teach in your one-on-one coaching?"
In this example, most people you're talking to will give you one of two
different responses.
"Yes, I do, and it’s going great,” or "No, I don’t but always thought
about it."
If they already have a program or course they are offering, you can simply
move to close the conversation by asking, “With what we both are doing,
how do you feel we can best support each other’s businesses?”
We all know how to work our way around that. You'll hear the two most
common answers: "
Yes, but I don't know too much about it” or “No.”
 Those
answers are the same because if they don't know too much about it, they don't
know ANYTHING about it.
If the answer is “No, I don’t have an offering outside of my one-on-one
coaching,” I would move the conversation to my passion for what I do.
Dominic, that's my story, but it's not my passion. My passion is
showing other coaches like you and me the benefits of having another
income stream behind what you're doing based on your one-on-one
coaching. Whether it's to replace your income made in your coaching
sessions, add to your current income, or add a way to create income
where you are not trading time for dollars—whatever it is—there is a
way to create just that. Now my a-ha moment came about when I was
taking a vacation with my family because you and I both know time off
is a week of no money because we aren’t closing sales—but this week
was different."
So that Saturday that I was on vacation, I got a notification in my
email that I had ten people purchase my $1000 course that day. Now
comparatively speaking, that's not what I would have made if it had
been my one-on-one coaching, but at that point, it was the first time in
my career that I ever made $1 not having to get on a call to close a
sale. That was my a-ha moment. Dominic, would you like to learn
more about this and how I help others do the same?"
At this point in the conversation, he's either running for the door or
crawling through the phone/computer because he wants to learn more,
because every person you're talking to in your network that has a similarbackground as you doesn’t have what you have, wants to create that extra
stream of income sitting on the beach, and it's real. So, we're going to go with
the best-case scenario and assume Dominic says, “Yes, let's set up a time to
talk further about this.”
Here is how you then book the call:
"Awesome, so Dominic, here's what I want to do. I want to send you
some specific information about my programs, how they are
structured, and how I help others create programs that sell passively.
That way, you can wrap your arms fully around this, you can write
down any questions you have, and we can set up a follow-up call for
two or three days from now. I can answer those questions, and if you
would like to move forward, I can tell you what the next steps would
look like. How does that sound?”
He then responds with a date and time that works for you, and you close it
out with this:
“Great. Dominic, what's the best email to reach you at? Awesome,
and how is Friday, a couple of days from now, at 3 o'clock? Perfect,
you're in the book. Dominic, I'll send that information out shortly, and
I look forward to following up with you on Friday. Have a great day."
Click (hang up the phone)
Now you can choose to send whatever information you want. I typically
send things about my products, my business structure, and something that
will give them a good picture of this.
Now here are the raw numbers. With any person you can get to a follow-
up looking at your information, you have a 25% chance of closing that person
because you'll get them back on the phone. They're going to say, 
"Yes, let's
do this." "No, it's not for me.” “Not the right time. Can we reschedule for
about a month or two from now?"
 Or they don't show up at all, which
happens all the time. Now the best-case scenario is if someone says, 
"Yes,
let's do this, let's move forward, Scott."
 You then go over the different
offerings you have and which ones are best for that individual.
Here's how you handle that.
"Dominic, that's great. With the information I have provided, are anyof my program options the best fit for you and what you are looking to
achieve with your business?"
Asking that question will have your connection tell you which program
you'll close them into, and then you coach them just like any other client you
have worked with.
It would help if you now understood how you have a conversation with
someone who agreed to speak with you about your products, goods, or
services. Review this chapter as many times as necessary. It will take practice
to get used to answering questions and compellingly telling your story.
Remember what T.Harv Eker says, “Every master was once a disaster.”
Use my scripts as a guide and adapt them to your use. You want to assess
how interested someone is in hearing more and create curiosity through your
own story. What was your life like before your business, what have you
gotten out of it, and how has your life changed? Notice that I did not make
any outrageous claims in my story. I didn't promise anyone they would make
thousands of dollars right out of the gate, and you can't make guarantees. You
have no idea how much someone will apply themselves once they join your
programs. Review my story to guide you.
In the next chapter, we'll go through the basic LinkedIn
®
 posting system
of how you can start providing some content to draw even more people into
what you're doing so you're not spamming; you're simply connecting and
messaging.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Gary J.Miles, Esq – Podcaster and Top Business
Coach To Law Professionals
Gary helps you 
uncover those hurdles
 holding you back, identify them,
ascertain their source, and most importantly, give you actionable steps you
can apply daily to 
free yourself from those prisons
 that entrap you.
Gary tailors his unique coaching sessions to 
focus entirely on your
specific concerns
. He does not use a “cookie-cutter one size fits all
approach.” 
Your needs matter to Gary!He will meet virtually in one-hour sessions to identify your concerns and
fashion a solution with you.
Gary brings over four decades of experience as a problem solver to his
coaching business. He is passionate about helping his clients discover the
blocks holding them back and freeing them to achieve their dreams better. He
has helped clients and parties resolve thousands of issues and disputes over
the years. He is blessed with a calm demeanor and is an empathetic listener.
Those who have worked with him find him inspiring, motivational, wise,
patient, thoughtful, and an exceptional listener. He has used those skills to
coach many attorneys, entrepreneurs, and other professionals to achieve
their goals and enjoy a fulfilling life they did not think possible.
Gary is passionate about healthy nutrition. He believes clean nutrition
fuels our body, creates mental clarity, builds better sleep habits, and gives us
more energy. Although not a nutrition expert, he has successfully coached
clients about clean nutrition habits.
Gary Miles has been a high-level trial attorney for over 40 years in
various areas, including transportation law, serious personal injury, family
law, and estate disputes. He presently focuses on family law and loves to lift
and support his clients when they are in a tough place.
He has been the managing partner of Huesman, Jones, and Miles for over
three decades. He has been an active member of many professional
associations, including the American Bar Association.
He is a trained mediator with over 120 hours of mediation training. He
has participated in over 1000 mediations and settlement conferences as
counsel for one of the parties and as the facilitator. His studies featured
specialized training for divorce mediation, including a focused course on
child access, property and financial issues, and commercial litigation
mediation. He delights in helping clients solve their challenging problems.
Gary is a proud blended family member, with two children (including
Buddy, his law partner), three stepchildren, and five grandchildren in a
growing family. His wife Brenda is a Director of Nursing. He and Brenda
recently relocated to Pinehurst, N.C., where they enjoy the company of their
two treasured English Goldens, Ellie and Dezi. They return to Baltimore
frequently to visit family and friends. He is very active with his family and
enjoys a variety of recreational pursuits, including playing golf and
pickleball often, going to the gym, and taking his pups for long walks through
the neighborhood.“My name is Gary miles, and I’m a podcaster, Lawyer, and business
coach. Some years back, I was suggested that I read this same book on how
to build a business and network through LinkedIn
®
. I then did a group
training with Scott, which whetted my appetite but didn't fully satisfy what I
needed. So, I hired Scott as my coach to help grow my business using
LinkedIn
®
. Full transparency, I have not been 100% on point with what he
taught me, but with only being 90% daily of following what he suggested to
me, the results are somewhat beyond amazing to me. Even somewhat, almost
overwhelming.
I am an attorney with my law firm, and I have time I devote to my online
coaching business and podcast, but I don't have unlimited time, and this is
just incredible to me how effective it has been.
Given where I am in my life and using Scott's system, I've had about 20
Connect calls with new connections per week. I am getting many more
followers on LinkedIn
®
; I'm getting much more engagement, and I have
closed new business on LinkedIn
®
.
I'm averaging four calls a day and a couple on the weekends if I choose to,
and I credit that all to Scott’s system but the time he has spent coaching me. I
highly recommend that any of you genuinely committed to building your
business consider hiring Scott as your coach and using his system.
It only works if we work it, and I've learned that, but I'm committed to
working it and continuing to work it. I honestly cannot evaluate my future
because I can't comprehend the volume of calls and the amount of
engagement I've been getting. So, thank you, Scott, and all of you who are
reading this; I strongly recommend that you consider it too!”
To learn more about Gary and his services, visit
https://www.garymiles.net
Key Takeaways:
When you get someone on the phone, let them tell their story before you
share your opportunity. This enables you to know what to do next.
The person who is asking the questions controls the conversation. Steer
the direction of the call by asking yes/no questions to keep the otherperson engaged.
Your prospect will respond one of three ways: Yes, no, or not now. If
they say yes right away, give them the appropriate options with the
offerings you provide clients.I
C
HAPTER
 S
EVEN
Creating Engaging
Posts on LinkedIn
®
f all we did was message people and try to get people on the phone, some
people might view us as spammers—that's the last thing you want
someone to think about you.
People will look at how active you are on LinkedIn
®
, which means posting
relevant, engaging content. This platform rewards you for being more active,
so let's discuss best practices for this.
On LinkedIn
®
, you will want to post a minimum of three days a week
(Monday, Wednesday, and Friday), but no more than once per day. I have
found that the more relevant the content is, the more of an attractor factor you
will have, not only to your network but to the people you're bringing into
your network.
Here's what I mean. The “Notifications” section is great because it shows
you lots of great information about your connections, such as birthdays, new
job notifications, work anniversaries, and engagement statistics for your
posts.
Here is an example of a recent post that I made on LinkedIn
®
:
“My biggest goal professionally for this year is _________!” Having
goals is beyond important when striving to achieve bigger and better
things in the coming year. Nancy and I set both personal andprofessional goals each year. We all need a bullseye to fire at to
progress. My question is this…. Do you set professional goals the
same way you set personal goals in the new year?”
When you make a post, you want it to be relevant, relatable, and accurate.
It is essential to set goals each year to ensure you are striving toward what
you want to accomplish. This post showed a side of me that humanizes me to
my audience. You want your audience to feel connected to you and the
content that you produce. I want to point out one more essential thing. Being
relatable does NOT mean sharing your trash and letting it sit there.
Many people use social media to complain about their lives, but I believe
that if you share something important, you should also share a resolution.
Your entire focus should be that you are someone who can solve a problem—
that's what your business does. You want to have the reputation of being a
problem-solver, so all your posts—whether it relates specifically to your
business or not—should reflect that.
This specific post had some activity, so in the Notifications, I can click on
the activity associated with that post and see who's engaging with it. This
allows you to stay in good contact with your network. You can see which
specific people are liking and commenting on your posts, so I can like and
reply just to stay in touch.
Another thing you can do is go through everyone that likes it and send
them a nice little message. So, if Steve, for example, liked my post, I can
shoot him a message and just say, “Thank you so much for liking and
supporting my post.”
This does one of two things: it will lead to nothing where he doesn't
respond, or it might lead to something where he might say, “You're
welcome.” And if he says you're welcome, then this is where you can open a
conversation just like we discussed previously,
 “You are so welcome. I know
we haven’t spoken before, but would you have some time to hop on a call or
zoom to see how we can support one another here on LinkedIn
®
?”
 Use
whatever script you want to use.
If the door of conversation is open by reaching out, and they reach back,
you can do whatever you want. When that door swings open, I pounce all
over it with a genuine response. This is another way to stay engaged with
your network and generate more sales for your business.
The other thing I like to do is look at the post's analytics. Let's say my postalready had 21 likes and 2000 views in the first few hours. My network is
around 28,000 connections, so if we break this down, 2000 views would be
just over 8.5% of my network. That's not bad for just a few hours.
The great thing about analytics is that I can also see where my views come
from. I can click on “View Post Analytics.” In this case, I would be able to
see that a small portion of those views come from first connections, which
are the people I am already connected to, and the more significant amount of
those views came from the people I am not connected to yet.
It also gives you the people, what companies they're from, what job titles
they have, and the audience areas. This is important for one reason. If there is
an opportunity for you to connect with a specific company or job title, you
can do a new search for the potential connections within the analytics you are
looking at.
Let's say a bunch of those views from my post happened in New York
City. I can search for “podcast host,” click on “People,” then click on 2
nd
connections to filter out the people I'm already connected to. I will then click
on the “locations and” filter by Greater New York City Area because I saw
that this was one of my posts' most extensively viewed areas.
Now, this is going to shrink down the number of results that I get. As
mentioned before, I look for people with few common connections to me
because I am looking for people whom others have not overly messaged on
LinkedIn
®
. I try to keep it to 50 connections or under, as I have previously
mentioned. Then I send invitations to all these people.
While trying to connect, you may see people you have previously
attempted to communicate with but didn't respond. You may have tried to
connect a few months before, but they were legitimately busy and didn't get
around to answering you. You could simply write to this person again and
ask, 
“Would you be open to having a conversation to talk about what we both
do and how we can support one another here on LinkedIn
®
?
”
It's worth one more attempt. Why not try again? You have nothing to lose.
They will either say yes, no or ignore you. We already discussed handling
that so you could review that information again if needed.
Making the right types of posts is very important. Equally important is
seeing what other people are posting. I tend to post educational and
informational things, so I also like noticing other people who post these
things.You don't always want to be making sales-related posts about your
business. People don't care until they know you but will never buy anything
from anyone they don’t “know, like, or trust.” Putting your ego aside will
probably be the smartest thing you as a human can do. That's going to get
good engagement because it's very value-added.
One type of post that I do weekly is a “LinkedIn
®
 Poll” question. I love
polls because they allow me to find out what my target market and clients are
struggling with or a pain point they may have in business. A prime example
is when I asked my audience, “What are you struggling with most on
LinkedIn
®
?” What this did for me were two things. First, after the poll closed
a week later, it gave me a peek into what my network was struggling most
with so I could better understand where their pain points are. Second, it
allows me to create content based on my network’s struggle and provide a
solution in the form of another post.
Another example of a successful post I made was a video I did entitled:
“Four benefits to producing video content on LinkedIn
®
.”
Below is what I said in the video but what I also included in the
text body of that post:
“First, people cannot only see you, but they can also feel your
passion. Think about how many written posts are produced on
LinkedIn
®
 each day. Think about how many people scroll past each
one because they all end up blending together. When someone comes
across a video, it causes them to stop, pause, and listen to what the
person says. When someone can feel your passion, hear your passion,
and see your passion, it will help you stand out in the crowded space
of content on LinkedIn
®
.
Second, it builds credibility faster with your audience. Again, we
are always looking to generate new ways of building credibility with
our audiences on LinkedIn
®
. Video enables us to do that much more
streamlined and quicker. When you commit to creating consistent
video commentary on the topic or subject you know best, you are
genuinely and authentically seen as the expert in your space, thus
creating instant credibility.
Third. the "know, like, and trust" is communicated much easier via
video. No one buys anything or invests in anyone they don't "know,like, or trust." Video content is a beautiful and easy way to build that
trust with your audience over time. When someone can easily relate to
you, and you are doing your part in providing solutions to their
problems, when the time comes for someone to pull the trigger to
invest, guess whose door they will come knocking on?
Lastly, it makes you stand out from others in your space. We must
do whatever we can to stand out in the crowded and saturated world
of online marketing. Video content is consistently considered one of
the best ways to stand out in a crowded marketplace. Yet so many are
not taking advantage of it. Why? The long and the short answer is
FEAR. We end up standing in our ways of engaging, inspiring, and
encouraging those around us to do and be better. The fear will
subside when you realize how impactful video can and will be for your
business”.
One common question I get is, “Are there good times to post on
LinkedIn
®
?” In my experience, there is no perfect time, but if I were to give
people a specific time to post on LinkedIn
®
, I would say between 7 am, and 9
am EST would be best.
This time would be best because global individuals on LinkedIn
®
 tend to
most commonly be active before they leave for work, on a lunch break, and
after their kids (if they have them) go to bed. Because LinkedIn
®
 is highly
global, when you post in the AM, you can have your content more readily
visible that way.
Another example of a great post is something that is a tip or “list type”
post. I like doing these posts because “how-to or list posts” get 3x more
engagement than a regular inspirational post. Giving a simple solution-type
post can build trust, rapport, and a significant connection with your audience.
It doesn’t have to be anything too deep. A simple post about “4 tips on how
to create work-life balance” would be highly value-added to your network.
If you have not made a post on LinkedIn
®
 before, click the “Home” icon
at the top of the page. Then at the top of your home page, you will see where
you can make a post. Click the “Images” icon (it has a camera next to it), and
you can access photos from your computer or device and upload them to your
LinkedIn
®
 post if you choose.
I find that it's best if the post is relevant to people in my network andaligned with my mission to inspire people to live the best life possible. An
example of this for me would be the following:
“It's never about being the best. It's all about being your best.”
The idea is to put content out there that engages your audience. That lets
you start conversations because it's not about connecting and messaging. You
must provide content that will enable people to want to talk with you.
Once again, messaging people and thanking them for liking and
commenting is a great way to stay connected to people in your network.
Providing valuable and relevant content will encourage them to engage. To
me, it doesn't matter whether they are liking or commenting. I see them both
equally because they have taken action to appreciate your posts, so I
appreciate them in return with messages. If it leads to further conversation,
it's even better.
To summarize, you want to post relevant three times a week at a
minimum. Remember, the more value-added the content is, the more
connection you will build with your network.
That's it.
People will respond most to very relatable things. That means sharing not
only positive, educational, and motivational things but sharing things about
your business.
For example, I previously finished self-publishing my first book. That is
very relatable to people because so many aspire to do that, or perhaps they
already have. That post got 141 likes and 25 comments, but most importantly,
it got almost 8,100 views from my 25,000 connections.
You always want to look at the views because you want to see what
networks they're coming from, job positions, job titles, and locations, so that
can help you with your searches.
That is the benefit of posting on LinkedIn
®
.
In the next chapter, we will dive into things you can do in groups, why you
join them, what things you should do weekly, and publishing articles that are
creating your blog posts on LinkedIn.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Cyndi Walter – Online Wellness Business OwnerFive years after starting my independent home-based health and wellness
company, a film crew was sent to my home to produce a successful video
about my business.
I guess it is cool that a stay-at-home mom from a rural area in Amish
Country could build a dynamic organization and create so many leaders.
This is how I see it:
God has blessed me with the gift of encouragement.
I feel led to serve others in all areas but especially their health.
I want to make a difference in this world and impact other people.
I want to be a role model to my family, friends, and associates and equip
them so they too can impact others.
I want to teach people how to do what I have done.
I get to love on people all day long.
My job is to expand our organization of dedicated and supportive people
seeking wellness and mindset solutions to discover a better version of
themselves. I consider it a HUGE honor to help every single customer. My
blessing is that none of this feels like work because I am fulfilled and doing
what I am called to do. If you are ready for a change, looking for more
fulfillment, or simply prepared to feel better…you owe it to yourself.
Before her current company, Cyndi built a profitable business with two
direct selling companies, but she never fully reached the success she knew
was possible. Cyndi loved her business and was at the top level for six years,
but when there was no longer an opportunity for growth, she decided it was
time to move on.
“I loved it there; I had started to save some money, I had the opportunity
to travel, and I got into personal growth and development,” remembers
Cyndi, “but when my income started going in the opposite direction of what I
wanted, I knew it was time for a change.”
As a marathon runner and fitness instructor, Cyndi has always been
passionate about fitness and working out, so she decided to find a company
that shared her love for health and wellness. In her research, she discovered
Isagenix.
“I couldn’t find a product line I liked any better,” she says. “The quality
of the products and the integrity of the leadership and the Isagenix Team
Compensation Plan, I’d never seen anything like it.”When Cyndi first started, she admits it was intimidating and challenging
to leave her last business and begin again with her new opportunity. She
didn’t know much about online marketing and hated leaving her old
organization and many friends. She wasn’t sure how long it would take to
reach the same level of income that she was making with her last opportunity.
Cyndi understood that Isagenix was an opportunity she couldn’t pass up, and
with her husband’s support, she got to work.
“I'm Cindy Walter, and I'm in the online business space in the online
marketing arena. I hired Scott to coach and teach me how to use LinkedIn
®
to grow my network and connect with people. He was instrumental in
everything from helping me with my profile to learning how to message
people properly, doing discovery calls, and following up. It's resulted in
growing my business and helping me take it to the next level.
I highly recommend him because, as far as a coach goes, he helps you
every step of the way. Still, to this day, when I have questions and need his
help, he makes himself available to me, which I appreciate. He's helped so
many of my team as well. So, if you're thinking about utilizing him, I highly
recommend getting this book and coaching with him because he can help you
understand LinkedIn
®
 and use it. After all, it's a beautiful platform”.
Find out more about Cyndi at
https://cyndiwalter.com/
Key Takeaways
When you make a post, you want it to be relevant, relatable, and
authentic. Make it something that your ideal audience is likely to
resonate with.
Ideally, you should strive to post 3x per week up to once daily to stay in
mind with your audience. You are in the business of solving problems
for people, so let your post reflect whether they are specific to your
business or not.
Don't make every post about your business. Being overly sales-oriented
is a turnoff. I like to post educational material to engage my audience;
then, I acknowledge likes and comments with private messages. These
can be conversation starters, just like your daily searches and messagesstrive to do.I
C
HAPTER
 E
IGHT
Publishing Articles/Newsletters
And Using Group Discussions
n the previous two chapters, we discussed the example phone call and how
that should lead to the follow-up conversation. Then we went over the
posting system, specifically, what you should post, how to look over the
analytics, and how to decide what kind of content you should put out there to
ensure that your posting is relevant information for your network.
In this chapter, we will go over two other essential components. One is
publishing articles/newsletters, and two is starting discussions in the groups
you chose to join.
People frequently ask me, “How often should I publish an
article/newsletter on LinkedIn
®
?” The critical aspect of this is to be
consistent. I prefer posting one article/newsletter per week. I want to clarify
that publishing an article/newsletter differs from making a simple post, as we
discussed previously.
You can publish articles/newsletters through a feature called LinkedIn
®
Publisher, a blog section within your own LinkedIn
®
 account. For example, if
I go to My Profile, under the recent activity, it will break down my posts into
general posts or articles. I've written close to 600 articles. If I click on this, it
will bring up all the articles I have written. Every article I write is based on
business tips, business information, and ways to best use LinkedIn
®
 to grow
your business. These are things that everyone in my network can relate to.I suggest you do the same.
Let's walk through how to do this. Make sure you are on your “Home”
page; it will say “Home” at the top. One of the options is to “Write an
Article.” When you click on that, it will take you to LinkedIn
®
 Publishing.
Towards the end of 2021, LinkedIn
®
 introduced a “LinkedIn
®
 Newsletters”
feature. It is a feature that is slowly rolling out to the entire LinkedIn
community of LinkedIn
®
, so when you click “Write an article” and don’t see
the “start a newsletter” feature yet, don’t be alarmed. The more consistent
you are, the more likely you will be allowed to start your own LinkedIn
®
Newsletter. My newsletter is called “LinkedIn
®
 Tips and Updates.” I started
it in November 2021, and I had over 4,000 subscribers within four weeks.
When you consistently create an article/newsletter weekly, you will see that
kind of growth yourself.
When the blank template comes up for your article, you're going to upload
a background photo that directly relates to what you are speaking on (I used
Canva to create a background banner that I use for each newsletter for brand
recognition), a heading that describes what it is that you are talking about,
and then some content.
The photo you use can be something you have saved; the content might be
something you have written elsewhere or something brand new. First, find a
photo representing what you want to write about or use the template you
created on Canva.
One post I made had to do with a LinkedIn
®
 video (I mentioned this
earlier in the book) that my audience loved. I believe in working smarter and
not harder, so I took the original post and added extra value to it to make it a
full-length article/newsletter. As I mentioned, you will want to create an
attention-grabbing headline. Boring headlines are unforgivable because
people won't read the rest of your article. An example of this could be “The
Most Important Reasons Why You Should Create Videos on LinkedIn
®
.” It
inspires curiosity, and that's what you want a headline to accomplish.
Once you have a headline, then you create your content. In this post, I
started with a brief introduction of what I would speak about. You don't have
to start that way, but it's a great way to get at the main point of your article.
Here is the rest of the content I wrote for this:“Because there are so many features to use on LinkedIn
®
, it can
distract users of the platform in deciding which to take advantage of.
In my opinion, not only on LinkedIn
®
 but on social media in general,
video remains the #1 way to connect with your audience to build the
"know, like and trust" with them. What people still struggle with
regarding LinkedIn
®
 videos is how even to get started. So, what I
wanted to first go over is the simple setup for producing LinkedIn
videos, whether they are live or native (pre-recorded)
Step 1: Make sure your video is between 2 and 4 minutes long. This
will give you and your audience the optimal time to get to know you,
but it will give you the time required to deliver the information you
are providing.
Step 2: Make sure your video does one of two things. Your video
must educate and inform your target audience about what they need
to know. Still, more importantly, your video should solve a problem
your ideal client is currently having. If you want to be seen as the
expert authority in your space, showcase the knowledge that you have
regarding your industry.
Step 3: After your video is done and recorded, as you upload it
onto LinkedIn
®
, make sure you write and clear and straightforward
description of what the video is about, some bullet points of what you
are going to go over, and a simple call to action to engage your
viewers.
Step 4: Commit to doing at least 1-2 videos per week. I suggest
doing a video on Monday and Friday, this way, you start and end
your week with a great visual and audio representation of your craft
and skillset.
Now that you have the outline and structure for producing a
LinkedIn
®
 video Let's go over the benefits of being consistent with
making LinkedIn
®
 videos.
Here are the four benefits of taking advantage of LinkedIn
®
 Video:
1
. 
People cannot only see you, but they can also feel your passion:
Think about how many written posts are produced on LinkedIn
®
each day. Think about how many people scroll past each onebecause they all end up blending together. When someone comes
across a video, it causes them to stop, pause, and listen to what
the person says. When someone can feel your passion, hear your
passion, and see your passion, it will help you stand out in the
crowded space of content on LinkedIn
®
.
2
. 
It builds credibility faster with your audience:
Again, we are always looking to generate new ways of building
credibility with our audiences on LinkedIn
®
. Video enables us to
do that much more streamlined and quicker. When you commit to
creating consistent video commentary on the topic or subject you
know best, you are genuinely and authentically seen as the expert
in your space, thus creating instant credibility.
3
. 
The "know, like, and trust" is communicated much easier via
video:
No one buys anything or invests in anyone they don't "know, like,
or trust." Video content is a wonderful and easy way to build that
trust with your audience over time. When someone can easily
relate to you, and you are doing your part in providing solutions
to their problems, when the time comes for someone to pull the
trigger to invest, guess whose door they will come 'a knocking'
on?
4
. 
It makes you stand out from others in your space:
We must do whatever we can to stand out in the crowded and
saturated world of online marketing. Video content is
consistently considered one of the best ways to stand out in a
crowded marketplace. Yet so many are not taking advantage of
it. Why? The long and the short answer is FEAR. We end up
standing in our ways of engaging, inspiring, and encouraging
those around us to do and be better. The fear will subside when
you realize how impactful video can and will be for your
business.
Of the four mentioned, why are you now going to start doing
LinkedIn
®
 videos?”This article expressed what I wanted to say that day, based on the
importance of LinkedIn
®
 Videos. Some people post much longer or shorter
articles, and there is no set rule about the length of the articles you should
write. One guideline I want to mention is to give as much as possible to each
article. Give tangible tips, value, site action items, and ways people can
improve their life and business just by reading your article/newsletter.
This is something you can do as little as one time per week. Consistency is
far more important than frequency. It's better to post consistently once a week
than it is to post three times one week than not at all for two weeks after that.
Now that you have finished writing the article, you can also get creative to
attract attention to your article by using hashtags that would be relevant to
your desired audience. I can type in #linkedin, #linkedintips, #linkedleads
(which is my hashtag), #business, and #linkedinvideo — these are all great
examples of audiences I want to reach with this.
After you finish, hit the “Publish” button.
Once it publishes, you will be given the option to share it on other social
media platforms, such as Twitter
®
 and Facebook
®
. Doing so will allow you
to reach people you are not connected to on LinkedIn
®
.
Once I share this on my Facebook
®
 timeline, for example, I typically will
share this in groups. I will click “Share in A Group,” write a little heading
and then post it there. The great thing about sharing your article is that this
draws people from other social networks into your LinkedIn
®
 network.
At some point, you will want to see how your articles and posts perform,
so you will want to know the analytics. You can view your stats by first
going to your profile page. Scroll down until you see “Articles & Activity.”
This should be right above your profile. You can either click to see all articles
or see all posts. For example, if you click to see all articles, they will be listed
in reverse chronological order. The most recent post will be on top.
You should see the thumbnail of the picture you used for each article, as
well as the titles of the articles. It also tells you how many views each article
has. If you click on the link to the article, you will see what you have written
and how many views, likes, comments, and shares the article has received.
The comments will be at the bottom of the article.
If you go back to where the articles are listed in reverse chronological
order, you can click on where it shows you the number of views your article
had, and it will give you details about who is viewing it. You can seecompanies, job titles, and locations of the people viewing it. You can also see
whether the viewers are primarily first or second connections. If your articles
are being reshared on LinkedIn
®
, there is a high probability that many of
your article views will be second connections. This can be valuable
information because if your posts are being seen in New York more than
anywhere else, you can target your searches geographically when you are
looking for new connections, as I discussed previously.
This can be great information for you to use going forward, and it is an
activity that can be well worth doing once a week.
Another thing you can do on LinkedIn
®
 is utilize groups. You also want to
start discussions in groups once a week.
At the top of the page, you will see a link called “Work.” When you click
on that, you will see “Groups.” When you click on Groups, it will open all
your groups. You click on “My Groups,” and every single group you belong
to is listed on the page for you.
One of the groups I am in is called “The Podcasters Networking Group.”
If I click on that group, I will see the option to start a conversation. There will
be a space to type in a headline for a discussion, then a place to start a
discussion.
For example, I love doing pod-swaps (a fancy name for guesting on each
other’s podcasts). I did a post on the power of guesting on someone else’s
podcast, so I can copy that post I previously did earlier in the week and then
paste it into my LinkedIn
®
 group discussion post.
It's that easy. That can be my entire discussion. Of course, discussions
don't have to be posts you have previously done; they can be written
discussions based on something new you want to talk about. However, if you
have already created content, why not re-purpose it and use it in your groups?
Now, the great thing about a discussion about pod-swapping in a podcaster
networking group is that it will draw interest and intrigue, especially
considering that there are well over 10,000 people in this group. People might
give positive or negative opinions about the topic—it doesn't matter. The goal
is to get engagement, not necessarily agreement, although the agreement is
excellent if you get it.
You can decide how you want to respond to it, if you do at all, but this is a
way to connect with other people to whom you're not connected.
Remember, in groups, you are likely NOT already connected to thesepeople because they are members, not connections.
There is a difference.
The connections are the people that you're connected to. Group members,
however, are people likely outside of your regular network. If they engage, if
they like, and comment, you can send them a connection and say something
like, "Thank you so much for liking and commenting on my post in the
group." Treat it the same way you would if someone commented on a post or
article you did.
If someone likes or comments on one of your articles, click on the person
who commented, then thank them for liking and commenting on your
published article. It's all about other ways of starting discussions.
There's something good about this: When people visit your profile, they
can see how active you are. They want to see all your activities, including
posts, articles, and discussions. They can see everything you are doing and
what kind of engagement you are getting.
That's the point. You want people to see that you're not just a spammer.
People want to see that you're providing relevant information and content
and things for people to latch onto. Remember that once a week, you want to
write an article/newsletter outside the regular posting. Make it engaging,
inspirational, or motivating.
No selling. No pitching. No spamming.
Again, make your once-a-week articles about something everyone can
latch onto, and then you want to start one discussion weekly in your groups.
That will allow you to start meeting more people who want to do something
along the lines of what you're doing, grow your network, and impact that
network.
In the next chapter, we're going to go over more of the benefits of the
Notifications section on your LinkedIn
®
 account and how you can utilize
other things that pop up there to start more conversations, have more people
get involved in your business, and how you can take that and grow your
network even more.
S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Daniel Wright – Online Business Owner and PeakPerformance Educator
My Story: I grew up on a small farm in England, driving tractors, milking
cows, and making hay. A life that taught me the value of hard work, patience,
and satisfaction in the simpler things...I also learned to communicate and
build relationships with people from all walks of life. After college and a stint
in Industrial roofing, I spent five years in direct B2C sales selling Kirby
Vacuum Cleaners door to door culminating in running a distributorship and
leading a successful sales team. My wife, children, and I moved to Canada in
the late nineties. I spent the next few decades in B2B advertising sales, selling
1000s of ads. And for ten years, I ran a digital marketing agency. Oh, and
along the way, I developed a bodyweight fitness course that I taught built on
the foundations of what has kept me more robust, fitter, and healthier than
men half my age. However, I got tired of the headaches and plate spinning. I
realized there had to be a better way to earn a living. After COVID hit, I
nearly lost everything and resolved to build a recession-proof and economy-
proof repeat income. I did. I found a way to work once and get paid 100
times, creating long-term cash flow. And now, I help burnout 50-year-olds do
the same without sacrificing time with their loved ones. Now life is so much
simpler and more fulfilling. It can be for you too. I am passionate about
helping you realize your dreams. Tangible, significant results in 6-12 months
or less.
“Hey Scott, Daniel here. I just wanted to chime in and give you a minor
update on how I'm doing with my results, specifically from your coaching.
And already, when I started doing the coaching with you, within days, I
started getting results.
My Calendar started getting booked up. I have already brought in my first
business partner, and my calendar is booked up with quality leads. When I
say leads, I'm talking about humans who have agreed to a discovery call with
me.
And what's interesting is that I have only implemented probably less than
half of what you have taught me. I intend to begin implementing the second
half of what you teach beginning next week, and I expect that to accelerate
the results I already have. So, I just want to say thank you, Scott, thank you
very much for the coaching that you have provided. For me, it's moving the
needle. So, I just wanted to chime in, say thank you, and I appreciate all your
help, thanks”.To find out more about Daniel
and what he does, connect with him here:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/danielruperwright/
Key Takeaways:
Posting articles/newsletters on LinkedIn
®
 is something you can do as
little as once per week. Consistency is far more important than
frequency.
You can also post discussions in the groups you belong to. I recommend
doing this once a week also. The idea is to post content relevant to the
group, not necessarily about your business.
When people like or comment on your discussion, you can also send a
private message and thank them for engaging. Then you can try to start a
conversation just like you would when searching for new connections.T
C
HAPTER
 N
INE
Leveraging Daily Notifications
To Start Conversations
o review what we have done so far, we learned how to reach out to
people and schedule calls with follow-ups. We also discussed posting
and what to do, how to look to see who's engaging with your posts, and
then engaging back. We've also discussed starting group discussions and
publishing articles within your news feed.
Let's take another deep look at the “Notification” section on LinkedIn,
where you can start to send other messages naturally through ways that
LinkedIn
®
 gives you and how those can lead to other conversations.
Every day on LinkedIn
®
, you will get notifications for anything that
happens within your network. This could include someone who likes or
comments on a post, someone who viewed your profile, or any activity where
there was an interaction with something you did.
There are only four ways that LinkedIn
®
 gets you notified concerning your
network.
They are work anniversaries, new job positions, promotions, and
birthdays.
This is another excellent opportunity to connect or reconnect with
someone in your network because now you can recognize someone for things
happening in their lives. In LinkedIn
®
, there are default messages for all
these things: “Happy birthday!”, “Congrats on your work anniversary!” andso on.
You can go even further than the automated message provided, and you
can customize the message as well. As a result, instead of using only the
default “Happy birthday!” message, you can add to it and say, “Happy
birthday, Joe. Have an awesome day!” You can add anything to the default
message that you like.
The great thing about these notifications is that you now have a chance to
recognize someone for an achievement, and it's a warm connection that is
being fed to you within your network. You will stand out because not
everyone will reach out to those connections and use the push notifications
you are being provided with. This means you have a chance to be memorable.
You don't want to connect just for the sake of connecting; you want to do it
with a purpose.
Essentially, these are simply messages that you have a chance to send to
different people in your network every day. As your network grows, you will
have more opportunities to reach out to acknowledge these accomplishments.
When you send these messages, there is a chance that someone will
reciprocate and say, “Thank you. I appreciate you taking the time to reach out
to me.”
You'll write a response. Consider this an invitation to begin a
conversation, just as you would if you sent messages to your network, as we
discussed much earlier.
Use the script we talked about: “You are so welcome. Would you have
some time this week or next week to talk about what we both are up to and
how we can support one another here on LinkedIn
®
?"
Don't overcomplicate things. Use the same script you initially created
when you were just sending your regular new connection messages. Now
you're wrapping that into any way you connect with people on LinkedIn
®
.
Once the door of opportunity is opened, once the conversation has started,
you just jump on it. You don't want to miss an opportunity. It's not about
being aggressive; it's not about being too pushy. This is about seizing the
opportunity to connect with people, and that's the best thing you can do with
people.
Every day, you're going to look at your “Notifications” to see who's
having work anniversaries, who's celebrating a birthday, and who’s changed
a job position. These are all additional opportunities to message someone.
Let's say you're organically sending out 5-10 messages a day through theregular new connections that are coming in. Then, between the happy
birthdays, the new job positions, and the work anniversaries, that's another
20. That means you're sending 25-30 messages a day. You have a 33%
chance of getting a response on those.
Out of 30 messages, you might get between 9 to 12 people saying
something back that will lead to conversations.
Let me share an example of what can happen; this is an actual situation
that occurred to me with a guy named Larry.
I sent a message, then he said, “Thank you.” As a response, I sent him the
scripted message.
Then he thanked me for the invitation, and he said that he was not looking
for employment.
Next, I wrote, "Hi Larry, I am not seeking to employ anyone. I want to
connect with business owners who may need help utilizing LinkedIn
®
 or
discuss business collaborations. Is this something you would be interested in
talking about?" And he said, "No, I may have a contact that would be
interested. Currently, my stepson is in North Alberta working and will be
back in Calgary within a week. This may be some of interest to him." And
then I said, "Would you be able to pass his info on to me?"
I got his number, so my next step would be to send a message to his
stepson.
Asking for referrals from these people (power partners) is also essential.
You never know where it can lead.
To summarize, once a day, you'll click on those notifications. You're going
to see who is having a work anniversary, having a happy birthday, or
celebrating some sort of new job position to drum up more conversations that
will lead to more people entering your network.
Now you can piece this all together and start getting the connections and
building the network. Have the conversations and move toward converting
those into prospects and sales in your organization.
Growing your business organically and naturally is not only possible but
very lucrative using LinkedIn
®
 if you do it right.
Most people haven't taken full advantage of the full power of this platform
because they simply don't know how.
Now you do. Simply map your plan using the road map provided here,
then work on the plan every day. If I can do this, so can you!S
UCCESS
 S
TORY
:
Dan Kopp – Owner of Dimanico:
Dan is originally from Platteville, WI, and now resides in the Greater
Milwaukee/Chicago Area. After high school, he entered the United States
Army serving in Frankfurt, Germany, The Republic of Panamá, and Fort
Devens, MA. Dan served in leadership roles in the military before
transitioning to executive roles within the field of education. Dan has led in
various situations utilizing situational leadership while focusing on those he
serves. He has mentored and coached executives across school districts and
businesses.
Dimanico focuses on three core areas:
Compensation
DinamiComp
®
 is a user-definable, data-driven, parameter-based
compensation system in which the organization defines the variables and
controls all the limitations.
Coaching
DinamiCoaching™ improves and enhances your leadership skills by focusing
on the continuous improvement of your organization.
Consulting:
DinamiConsulting™ provides expert guidance and services in business
management, school leadership searches, board development, and data
modeling.
“I am honored to write this recommendation for Scott Aaron. I have only
known Scott for about two months, but let me tell you, our interaction has
been transformational for me.
Several months ago, I enrolled in a Mastermind course that led me to
understand that I needed to focus on LinkedIn
®
 to interact with my idealclients. A little research led me to Scott, a guru of leveraging LinkedIn
®
 for
business purposes.
When we first interacted, I was lost as a new entrepreneur, having never
existed in the business world. I was unsure of my role in my new business and
did not know where to start. Scott's impact on me was profound. He allowed
me to see the bigger picture of what I was doing and that I had to approach
my new role through a networking lens rather than a sales lens.
His tutelage paid off immediately as I could quickly increase my connections
with ideal clients, land discovery calls, and expand my presence on
LinkedIn
®
 via an orchestrated approach. I am now two months into my new
approach, and I am viewed as an expert by those with whom I interact on
LinkedIn
®
.
I strongly recommend you engage with Scott to see what he can do for you.
He is personable, professional, and creative and an expert at maximizing the
tools available on LinkedIn
®
”.
To find out more about Dan and his company
Dinamico, visit: 
https://dinamicosystems.com/
Key Takeaways:
Once a day, click on your notifications and send messages to those
having a work anniversary, a happy birthday, or celebrating a new job
position. It's a great conversation starter.
If you are sending 5-10 messages a day, then sending 20 messages to
those in your notifications, that's 25-30 messages. Chances are, a third of
them will respond. Those are great opportunities.
You can use the default messages to wish people “Happy Birthday” or
“Congratulations,” but customizing those messages is a better idea
because it proves you are trying to engage with people.W
C
HAPTER
 T
EN
The Latest Updates To LinkedIn
®
hat I love about LinkedIn
®
 is that they are not willing to remain
stagnant in the platform's functionality. LinkedIn
®
 consistently looks
at what the other platforms are doing regarding communication with
one’s audience, connection features, and inventive ways of staying in touch
with your network.
Since the release of my 1st LinkedIn
®
 book back in 2018, there have been
several updates to the platform, and it would only be right to make my latest
book as relevant as possible by including every new feature that LinkedIn
®
has that you may not be taking advantage of, or you may not even know
about.
So, buckle up because there are many updates we need to cover. But I can
promise you that after reading about how much LinkedIn
®
 has changed for
the better, you will never look past LinkedIn
®
 again.
1. The "LinkedIn
®
 Bell":
The LinkedIn
®
 Bell will help you grow your engagement and network
organically, and here is how you can do it:
If you check my profile
(
https://www.linkedin.com/in/scottaaroncoach/
), you will see that I put a
simple call to action in the right corner of my background photo. It says,"Ring my bell to stay up to date on all of my content," with an arrow image
directly pointing to the LinkedIn
®
 Bell.
This is something you can easily create on Canva. Make sure there are not
too many other words or text to take people away from what action you want
them to take, which is to "ring your bell, so your connections are notified of
your content updates.
As a reminder, the only people that can ring your bell are those who
follow your account or someone who is a connection of yours.
The LinkedIn
®
 Video story feature gives you 30 seconds to clearly state
what you do, whom you serve, how you help them, and your different
offerings.
Within those 30 seconds, make sure at the end you direct people to go and
"ring your bell" to be notified of all your content updates. As a reminder, the
LinkedIn
®
 Video Story feature can only be recorded through the mobile app
but does appear on the desktop and mobile app.
Again, go to my LinkedIn
®
 profile picture to listen to how I have set mine
up.
I have spoken about this before, but you must make sure you are putting a
call to action in all the content you produce. If you want people to engage or
take a specific action like, "ring your LinkedIn
®
 bell," then you must direct
them.
Over time, adding that call to action at the end of your post, adding it to
the end of a LinkedIn
®
 Live or native video, or simply just putting in an
article or newsletter will boost your total engagement with all the content you
are putting out.
2. The "Add to Featured" Option for the "LinkedIn
®
Featured Content Section:
"LinkedIn
®
 Featured Content" is a section that you can add to "showcase"
what you do for a profession, past content that you have posted, or even have
calls-to-action to take people from "online to offline" much quicker.
What LinkedIn
®
 is doing now to make it even easier for us to showcase
our content is allowing us to add our recent activity directly to our "Featured
Content Section."After you make your post and it goes live, go to that post, and click the
three dots on the top right of your content. You will see the option "Feature
On Top Of Your Profile." When you click this, it automatically adds this to
your "Featured Content Section" on your profile.
If you want to update your "Featured Content Section" manually, head
over to your profile and click on "add profile section," then click on
"recommended," and it will give you the option of "featured."
You can add your most recent post, article, web link, or even a video
source when you click on this.
You can add a link to your calendar, website, or even a direct link to your
podcast.
This feature has endless possibilities, and it has helped me and my
business immensely.
3. The “LinkedIn
®
 Call To Action Link” Link
A few years back, there was a big problem on LinkedIn
®
... People were
downloading a CSV file of their contacts (email included) and auto-opting
those contacts into their funnel. I can't begin to tell you how many lists I
ended up on unknowingly.
LinkedIn
®
 caught wind of this and quickly went into action on how they
could stop this. They figured it out very fast. GDPR regulations (the rights
someone has to opt-in to an email list) were violated by many users of
LinkedIn
®
 by downloading and importing their contacts this way.
Because of this, we are no longer able to get access to our connections'
emails for such a purpose, which is a good thing. But it brings up a very valid
and important question.
How do I get my connections email compliantly and move the relationship
from online to offline?
That is a straightforward question to answer...."The LinkedIn
®
 Call To
Action Link."
This new feature is being utilized by some and not by many, and I am
going over three things you can do with the "call to action link" in your
LinkedIn
®
 Profile Headline.
All you have to do is go to your profile, hit the pencil to the right of your
name, and when you scroll to the bottom, it will say:"Website - Add a link that will appear at the top of your profile."
Once you add your link, you can add "Link Text." This lets the visitor of
your profile know precisely what they are about to click on or why they
should click on the link. This compliantly allows your connections to click
your link and opt-in on their own to what you offer.
4. "LinkedIn
®
 Audio Rooms" and they are going to
compete with "Clubhouse" directly.
What has me most excited is that LinkedIn
®
 indeed looks at and notices what
is going on in the marketplace and what can be improved by bringing it onto
its platform.
It's not that LinkedIn
®
 is always "one step ahead"; they do an excellent job
of seeing what is created, what is working, and how they can implement it to
work even better on LinkedIn.
"LinkedIn
®
 Audio Rooms" is a prime example of this. Now just
remember, it is being slowly rolled out, so if you don't have access to it yet,
have no fear, as it will be made available to us all soon!
If you are on LinkedIn
®
 to build connection, rapport, trust, and meaningful
relationships, this new feature is absolutely for you.
"With the pandemic still disrupting live events and forcing businesses and
industry groups to seek alternative means of networking and community
connection, LinkedIn
®
 has seen a big rise in live events hosted on its
platform, with the creation of Live Events in the app increased by 150%,
year-over-year."
— Social Media Today
"First off, LinkedIn
®
 is launching an initial test of its own, Clubhouse-like
audio events platform, enabling users to tune into live discussions in the app
and participate by raising their virtual hand to join as a speaker or posting
likes in response to the chat.
LinkedIn
®
 has been developing its live audio tools since March last year,
at the peak of the Clubhouse hype cycle. While it has taken some time for the
platform to build its own option, it could still serve a valuable purpose withinthe LinkedIn
®
 environment, providing more capacity for professional
connection within industry-aligned meetings and discussions".
— Social Media Today
“We have the professional context to recommend the most relevant events
that can help you learn, network, and be successful, and we’re investing more
in surfacing these events to you. Whether an event by a creator or page you
follow or a topic you’re passionate about, we will surface the events that will
help you reach your career goals.”
— LinkedIn
®
5. LinkedIn
®
 Video Cover Story:
This is your opportunity to introduce yourself through a 30-second video that
you can add to your LinkedIn
®
 profile when someone views it.
It must be uploaded from the mobile app, but it will appear on both the
desktop and mobile versions.
This is a game-changer as it allows you to tell the viewer of your profile
who you are, what you do, why you do it, and whom you do it for.
The other fantastic thing is that you can update this "cover story" as
needed.
If you are changing something within your business or launching a new
program, you can edit your cover story to be current and relevant to where
you are at that time in your industry.
6. LinkedIn
®
 Creator Mode:
It is so beyond important to "turn on" creator mode. There are two main
reasons: First, when you turn it on, it changes the "connect" button to
"follow." Why is this important? For those who constantly receive connection
requests on LinkedIn
®
 from spammers, this is because they are using
software, a VA, or a marketing company to do so. This will block and
prevents them from doing so because there is now a 2-step process to send
the connection request, as the "follow” button is now present instead of
"connect." People can still send you a connection request, but it must be done
by hitting "more" under their profile and then hitting connect. If you are tiredof getting these, Creator Mode is for you. Second, it also allows you to put
what you speak about under your headline. This is key for anyone looking to
close sales and pick up new clients. When someone visits your profile, they
can immediately see what you speak about; this increases the chances of
them staying on your page and following you, which will build the business
relationship.
7. LinkedIn
®
 Live Video:
No matter what you may hear, no matter what other experts may say, no
matter what other people in your circle may be talking about, video is where
it’s at.
They may be saying that long-form posting is the way to go. They may say
that doing Instagram
®
 reels are the way to go. They may say that doing
TikTok
®
 videos are the way to go. Listen, nothing beats going live and
creating that connection with your audience, and LinkedIn
®
 Live is one of the
best ways to do that.
The crazy thing is that anything you do once that's difficult becomes easier
as you go, so in reality, it may be overwhelming to think about going live on
LinkedIn
®
. Yes, it may be a daunting task to go live on LinkedIn
®
. And yes,
it absolutely may feel uncomfortable.
Everything is uncomfortable in the beginning, so what I want to help you
understand and what I want to help you move forward with is understanding
the 3 top benefits of doing at least 1 LinkedIn
®
 Live video per week.
Something that we are always talking about. We are always looking to
achieve credibility and trust with our audiences.
Credibility and trust are built over time, and when you can go live on
LinkedIn
®
 and educate and inform your audience on things that they need to
know, about what they do for a profession or the industry that they're a part
of, people start to look at you with that notion of credibility and being that
credible source where they're going to go and get their information.
In addition, when trust is formed and when you have the trust of your
audience, a whole new world is opened for you. Going live on LinkedIn just
one time per week is going to earn you that credibility, and it's going to earn
the trust of your network.
So, they will come back to you repeatedly for more information.I always tell people to be a “salmon in a world of fish.” Go against the
grain. Go against the current. Don't go with the flow; go against the flow.
Carve your path, blaze your trail.
There are many people in this same space you are in. Whether you're a
coach, whether you're a consultant, whether you have a mastermind, whether
you're building an online business, there are other people out there just like
you.
But what are you doing that's truly different from everyone else? What are
you genuinely doing to separate yourself from the other people in your
space?
Going Live once a week on LinkedIn
®
 does position you as the expert.
You want to be looked at not only as that credible source but as the expert in
your space. Now many people consider themselves LinkedIn
®
 experts. Are
they? I don't know.
They could be, but whenever I see someone in the space calling
themselves a LinkedIn
®
 expert, that is not doing all the things required to be
an expert in your space, providing value-added content each day, are they
really an expert?
Doing LinkedIn
®
 lives, producing LinkedIn
®
 polls, adding editions to a
LinkedIn
®
 newsletter that you've created, and never selling or pitching to
your audience about a product, good, or service that you have is what I
genuinely feel define someone as an expert.
When they're not doing those things, and when they're giving without
expecting anything back in return, while going live once a week on
LinkedIn
®
, where others in your space are not going live, it will position you
as the expert in the space.
The absolute truth is that every week without fail, after I produce a
LinkedIn
®
 Live, which I now do two times a week, I have someone that
reaches out to me to find out how I can help them better utilize and leverage
LinkedIn
®
.
Do you want to know why? Because each week, I hop on LinkedIn
®
 live
and provide value-added information and education on things people need to
do to move their business forward. If I strike a chord with someone on a
specific day where they want to learn how to leverage LinkedIn
®
 to generatea lead, create more conversations, and produce value-added content like I am,
they will go to a trusted source.
They will go to a credible source, and they will go to the person who is
positioning themselves as the expert in that space. When you go live just
once a week on LinkedIn
®
, you will achieve all those things.
You are going to achieve that credibility. You will gain the trust of the
network you're building. You will position yourself as the expert in your
respective space, and you will, with all those things aligned in the correct
order, generate more leads and sales because of how you are showing up each
week on LinkedIn
®
.
Now that you are fully updated and equipped with all the latest updates to
LinkedIn
®
, it’s time for you to put them into practice and crush it!
Every aspect of this book is taken from what I do each day and week on
LinkedIn
®
. From the content to create to the messages to send to how to use
the new features. I always practice what I preach and hope you take full
advantage of everything that you have learned thus far.
Key Takeaways:
Take full advantage of what “Creator Mode” gives you
Live Video is the best kind of video to do on LinkedIn
®
Use these tools to build the “know, like, and trust”I
C
HAPTER
 E
LEVEN
Case Studies, YOU Can Do This.
n this chapter, I will present three case studies of some clients I
interviewed. Each of them has excelled in my LinkedIn
®
 Accelerator
training program. They all did what I told them to do; they followed the
system and quickly experienced results.
I will let each of them tell their stories below.
Case Study #1: Zilah M.
Scott:
 I finished working with Zilah months back, and she's one of the most
outstanding people I've had the opportunity to work with. She got the
quickest results out of anyone I've ever worked with.
Zilah took her business to a whole different level. She had 20 calls during
her first week of working with me.
Let me tell you a little bit about Zilah first. She graduated from Indiana
University. She's a Hoosier at heart and got her MBA from Loyola University
in Chicago. If anybody followed the NCAA tournament, they made a
fantastic run a few years ago. She was a music teacher for years and then a
brand manager, but then combined music and teaching in business. She
opened her studio teaching “Mommy and Me” classes. She has been a
business owner for ten years and opened her child enrichment center. When
her first child was born, she had to take several steps back from working too
many crazy long hours.
Today she's a wife and mom of three young children and loves onlinemarketing. This is her first dive-in, and she's only been in it for about four
months.
I'll let her tell her story.
Zilah, what about the online marketing business model do you love most?
And then the second question, what was it about what you heard on my call
that lit a spark for you that you had to do something else?
Zilah:
 Online marketing is giving me a chance to be a business owner, which
is what I love. When I was in business teaching my “Mommy and Me”
classes, I would sit down and figure out, “How many classes do I need to
teach per day, per week, or per month to make this certain amount of
income”?
And my income was capped. There are only 24 hours a day, and kids
didn't want to take my music at 11:00 PM. But once I realized my income
was limited, I knew that I needed to hire more people because then I could
increase my revenue.
But I just kept seeing that no matter what I was doing, how I was putting
my business together, or how many kids were in my preschool, there was
always a cap.
It wasn't enough. I still poured so much blood, sweat, and tears into this
business. I worked so many hours. I enjoyed teaching, but there was stress
from not earning what I felt I could or should be earning. So, when I was
open to online marketing, I finally had a big a-ha moment—I get it now.
Scott:
 Let's pause right there. I want you guys to hear what she just said. She
had only been doing this for two months and realized that in eight weeks, she
had to do more than what everyone else was doing. Most people I work with
have been in business for years. They've gone through the trials and
tribulations of going through their warm market and spending money on
things that just don’t work. You saw that within weeks that you knew you
needed other things.
So, the second question is, what did you hear me say in the training that
made you realize that you needed to learn LinkedIn
®
?
Zilah:
 It was about the quality of the people I reached out to. While I love
and appreciate my Facebook
®
 friends who have joined me in my business,
the people I am meeting on LinkedIn
®
 have different dreams and desires.I talk to my friends on Facebook
®
 because I want to help them get to the
same point I am at—the way I feel physically, mentally, and emotionally.
That's what I'm helping and coaching my friends with.
But a friend on LinkedIn
®
 is talking to me because they are also
experiencing the same business experiences I've had. They may be working
for themselves, or they trade time for money and are looking for another way,
and I can say I have another solution. If I can help you add a little more
vacation time each year, that would be a huge deal.
Scott:
 If we break that down, you were connecting to their need. You saw
right away that two types of people come into a business. There are the
customers who are just happy investing in a product or service that they love.
There's no desire or need because the average income of someone on
Facebook
®
 is about $30,000 a year, and they're not really on here to build a
business. They're here to be social, connect, and show their life, pets, food,
family, and everything else.
Then you also saw the need for the other side of online marketing, which
is building a team because everyone is so used to pulling down that slot
machine—seeing the three cherries pop up and spit out a bonus.
You think, “I'm making money in online marketing!” but that next week,
if you don't close a new client, you're not earning because you haven't built
the leveraged income side. Remember, a customer or consumer will order
when they feel like it. However, when making and expanding a team, you
want to spend time on a platform where those opportunities lie.
Zilah:
 Right. I just sat down with my husband last night, and we figured out
where I wanted to be in a year and two years—how many people does that
mean—and the magic number that we came up with for me is 2,700 people. I
don't know if I can find 2,700 people on Facebook
®
, but with what you
taught me on LinkedIn
®
, I know that it is beyond possible following your
system.
Scott:
 So, the big question is this. We just did our 6-week training. You
started before our first session with the training videos I sent you. Explain
how quickly this does happen, just from my step-by-step training videos.
We're going to get to the closing of the sales side in a bit as far as getting
traction, building your network, and having people willing to get on thephone with you. Paint a realistic picture and tell us how long it took you to
implement my strategy to start getting results.
Zilah:
 Three weeks ago, I listened to the first video on my phone and
realized I could do this! I had 109 LinkedIn
®
 contacts in the last ten years of
my life. As a result of your training, today, I have 1083 contacts.
Scott:
 So, you've added almost 1000 contacts.
Zilah:
 Right, and it's not 1000 random friends. These are targeted. There's a
reason for me to talk to them, whether it turns into a business relationship
through online marketing or not. I just started reaching out, and the response
was tremendous. I'm almost unable to keep up with the response.
Scott:
 That's more leads than time, which is every business owner's dream.
Before you and I spoke, you had between zero and five weekly calls. So,
implementing my LinkedIn
®
 strategies, how many calls per week are you
having now?
Zilah:
 I'm probably doing 10 to 20 a day.
Scott:
 That's an average of 15 calls a day. If you're doing that maybe four
days a week, that's around 60 calls. This is normal; this is how LinkedIn
®
works.
Zilah:
 I don't even have enough hours to put in all the calls because I have a
baby at home. If I am reaching people and have an entire conversation with
someone, that means that every 15 minutes, I can schedule a call.
I ask myself, “How can I reach out to all of these people?” My baby must
nap, so I'm forced to be at home, and I have reached out on the phone and
through the Internet.
Scott:
 That's the key because I told you that you could have 5,000 friends on
Facebook
®
, but if you have 30,000 friends on LinkedIn
®
, that's a whole
different network of people you're building relationships with.
And again, just so you guys know, Zilah owns a business. She's a wife,
and she's a mother of three kids. She has a baby at home. Zilah came to me
because she needed efficiency and immediate effectiveness. Zilah, youstarted getting calls right away. How many days did it take you to get your
first sale from what I taught you to see a return on your investment?
Zilah:
 It was about seven days.
Scott:
 For anyone out there, if you haven't used LinkedIn
®
 before, your
entire business can change quickly if you do this correctly. That new sale
could be the diamond in the rough that she would have never been able to
connect with if it wasn't for what she's doing on LinkedIn
®
.
And here's the more significant thing. Zilah didn't want to wait to hit that
wall where the warm market started to dry up. She wants to create more leads
than time now.
You've gotten phenomenal results. For anyone sitting on the fence and
thinking about not just working with me but implementing LinkedIn
®
strategies—what is the biggest takeaway, you were impacted by concerning
what I taught you and what you are implementing into your business?
Zillah:
 As I mentioned, I'm reaching a different type of person for my
business. My closest friends are on Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
, and talking
about business can get awkward. But on LinkedIn
®
, business is already the
first thing we talk about.
I tell people I have a business and discover if they want to join me. That's
a much faster way to get where I'm trying to go. I'm doing everything with
integrity, still sharing what I love and having the joy of everything that I'm
experiencing.
And Scott, I just want to say I've had a few people reach out to me and
ask, “Could you have learned what you're learning on your own instead of
hiring a coach? Maybe if I had plenty of hours to fiddle around and research a
little bit about how people decide to do things. But I don't have that kind of
time to invest in something where there's already an expert, and Scott already
knows, and you're going to get it.
Don't spend the next six months researching best practices on LinkedIn
®
,
what you should write, and how the conversations should go. Scotts got it all
there for you.
I didn't have to think about what to do; it's done for you. Invest in yourself;
invest in the training. All I need to do is close one more sale, and I've justmade a return on investment for what I put into myself with LinkedIn
®
. It's
amazing. It's a no-brainer.
Scott:
 Success leaves clues. I use this example: You go to a restaurant and
taste the food and try to figure out the exact ingredients. Then you go home,
try to make it, and it comes out completely wrong. Instead, you can just
knock on the chef's door and say, “Hey, listen, would you mind sharing the
recipe with me? How much would it cost me to learn how to make that right
now?”
Last question: How do you feel now about being a professional business
owner on the platform of LinkedIn
®
?
Zilah:
 For me, this is the dream. I understand how to reach out to somebody
from a business perspective, and it feels like I'm making the most of my time.
I'm not sitting here waiting for someone to reach out to me on Facebook
®
 and
say, “Great, tell me more,” and then we go through a series of conversations.
This is me getting to take proactive steps toward changing my family's
financial future, and that feels good.
I get to make phone calls every day. That doesn't scare me when I say my
goal is to have 2,700 people by 2023. But if I had said that before I met you,
Scott, I didn't know how I would do that. But now I do.
Scott:
 Within the first week of working with me, you had an average of 20 to
40 calls a day in your first week and got your first sale within seven days,
with more on the way.
This is a game changer. I'm grateful for you and the opportunity to work
with you. Thank you for what you're doing, and I already see you are a leader
in action. Even though you're only a few weeks in, I can already see your
confidence now that you have the tools in your tool belt to continue to be a
successful business owner.
Thanks for being here today!
Case Study #2: Luna H.
At the time of this interview, I had known Luna for several months. She had
increased her income following my system and looking to go even further.Scott:
 Luna, you and I connected several months ago, and you heard me on a
call about LinkedIn
®
 lead generation and creating more sales in your
business.
So, for people to better understand you and what led you to reach out to
me, tell us about your journey before growing your business online using
LinkedIn
®
.
Luna:
 Absolutely. For those of you who don't know, my name is Luna
Hernandez. I'm now a nutritional coach and have a background in nursing.
I'm a massage therapist and a personal trainer. I'm also a single mom of a
beautiful eight-year-old boy. What led me to want to grow a business using
LinkedIn
®
 was that I was tired of being tired like many people are, and I was
looking for a solution to feel better. I always felt like a businessperson. I
never liked being in a cubicle from nine to five. That was never me. I'm a
very creative person, so I did telecommunications for a while. It was the
wrong industry for me, and I bombed.
I thought that decision was stupid, so I went back to working a regular job
like everyone else. Then in 2017, I got the bug to grow a business online. I
just wanted to take back control of my life and time.
Since I had previous experience using the online space to expand a
business, I knew my warm market would run out very quickly. I had the
advantage that I was a massage therapist, and I would come across people. I
was very serious about building income online, but then I plateaued. I didn't
know where to go because Facebook
®
 was not giving me any results.
Everyone was doing the same thing, and I'm the type of person that says if
everyone's going this way, I'm going to go that way instead. I wanted to do
something different. I realized that I needed to think outside the box, and
that's when I contacted you.
Scott:
 Thank you for that. I like sharing this analogy with my clients. I teach
people to be salmon, not the rest of the fish. All the other fish in the sea swim
with the current, but salmon go against the current upstream. What I loved
about you when we first connected is that you shared some of the things you
were struggling with. I always ask people, “How many conversations are you
having daily?” And they say, “Well, not a day. I would say zero to five
conversations per WEEK. However, the one thing you and I spoke about is
whether you want to trade time for dollars as an in-person contractor or havethe flexibility to use LinkedIn
®
 to grow your business online.
So, in our first conversation, Luna, before you said yes to working with
me, what were some things you and I talked about that struck a chord with
you?
Luna:
 I had so many a-ha moments that I said, “Why was I never aware of
this?” First, I was unaware of the social media change since I last used it to
grow a business. It's a massive difference because social media continues to
change.
Instagram
®
 and Facebook
®
 are platforms for the attraction market. You're
going to have people come to you for products. However, if you're growing a
professional business and are serious about it, you need to be more visible on
a platform like LinkedIn
®
.
My issue when I first started was that I was signing up anyone that had a
pulse and was breathing. I wasn't qualifying. I just accepted anyone who
wanted what I was offering. That's not how to build a good business. You
want to work with people who genuinely see the value of what you provide
and could most benefit from what you do for a business.
But I didn't know where to find them. What struck a chord was that
everything you said was exactly what was happening to me. I wasn't getting
serious clients; I was getting people who weren’t a good fit for my business.
When you talked about LinkedIn
®
 and the potential of connecting with
like-minded people, I didn't know anyone. I'm a single mom, and I didn't
know how to find the money to invest in you, but I was going to look for it
and find it—and I invested in you not just once but twice because you were
that good.
Scott:
 Thank you. You started to see that there are two sides to this. Some
use Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
 to sell a product. However, at the same time,
you have business-minded people spending time on the #1 social media
platform for business connecting and networking, LinkedIn
®
!
It's funny because if you're not getting results from Facebook
®
 or
Instagram
®
, you'll get frustrated. Why wouldn't you want to add something to
your plate that will get you results? You realized that if you wanted
something to change in your business, you had to change some things you do
with your business.We jumped in right away and started working together. How quickly did
you see a return on what I showed you concerning how to use LinkedIn
®
 for
building your business?
Luna:
 I'm going to be raw and honest. I was scared for the first few months
because it was something I was not used to. I'm used to people coming to me
instead of me going up to people, but I had to get out of my comfort zone. I
had just to do those first few calls. Some of them said no, some of them said
maybe, and a lot of them were open to the idea. I've been amazed and made
some tremendous authentic connections with like-minded people. Every day
I'm growing, I'm getting more competent, and I'm talking to people I would
usually never talk to if it wasn't for the training you offer.
If you're just on Facebook
®
 and you're saying you’re a business owner—
news flash, you're not! To be a business professional, you must have many
conversations, and I can communicate with 100 people daily on LinkedIn
®
.
Scott:
 You said something interesting. You were having a lot of great
conversations. Here is one of the most significant differences between
Facebook
®
 and LinkedIn
®
. With Facebook
®
, you must wait for people to
reach out to you when they're ready to talk, but on LinkedIn
®
, it's the
opposite. I showed you how easy it is to connect with the mirror image of
yourself and start having conversations.
People always tell me that LinkedIn
®
 isn't their warm market, and they
don't know anyone there, so they don't know what to say to them. Let me ask,
how easy was it for you to implement the strategy of how I taught you how to
reach out to people and have conversations? How open are these people, and
how quickly are they responding to you to set up a call?
Luna:
 It's like night and day, to be honest. On Facebook
®
, when people are
ready, it's okay. You must meet people where they're at, but on LinkedIn
®
,
people mean business. They're in there to network, to collaborate, and they're
ready to do business. I message them, I get their number, and we're on the
phone, maybe even the same day.
Scott: Before
 implementing LinkedIn
®
 into your business strategy seven
months ago, when you were doing Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
, how manytotal calls per week would you have on average?
Luna:
 Oh my gosh, maybe four calls a week.
Scott:
 And how many of those were with unqualified people?
Luna:
 All of them.
Scott:
 You're still doing Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
 because I told you
straight up, don't leave those platforms. How many calls do you have per
week since implementing LinkedIn
®
 as well?
Luna:
 About 25.
Scott:
 So, you've increased the number of calls per week.
Luna:
 Yeah. Sometimes I would keep going until late at night.
Scott:
 It's so funny because everyone still uses Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
,
whether it works or not. When people learn LinkedIn
®
, they quickly give up
if they do not see a return immediately. Let's fast forward from when you
started with me to where you are. Share some of the successes that you've had
with implementing LinkedIn
®
 in your business.
Luna:
 I've gotten in touch with many people in the same industry as me:
trainers, registered dietitians, and people who just want to do business with
me. They see the opportunity, and the great thing about that is I'm getting
someone who falls in love with what I am doing and who needs what I am
offering.
Many people need what I have, and the vision of my business is to help as
many people as possible. I can run a lot faster carrying a wagon if I have five
horses with me than just me pulling everything by myself. That's what
LinkedIn
®
 has done for me. It has allowed me to use the power of the internet
and connect with people.
Scott:
 One of my old business coaches, Todd Falcone, taught me something
early on. He said, “Instead of dragging the thousands, run with the few,” and
the few people are the ones that have a great consciousness about money that
they're prosperous. They want to do more.I want to ask you some rapid-fire questions. Have you increased your
network since you started implementing LinkedIn
®
?
Luna:
 Absolutely.
Scott:
 Have you increased your sales with all platforms that you're using
since you started implementing my LinkedIn
®
 strategy?
Luna:
 Absolutely, yes.
Scott:
 Great. Has your business personally grown since implementing
LinkedIn
®
?
Luna:
 To all of this, yes.
Scott:
 And most importantly, have you seen a more significant return
monetarily into your bank account for all the hard work that you have been
doing, implementing LinkedIn
®
 into your business?
Luna:
 Yes. It's a big difference.
Scott:
 To summarize, for those who are thinking about implementing
LinkedIn
®
 but they're on the fence about whether it's the investment or the
time, what has been the biggest takeaway that you've had? What's the one
thing you can leave everybody with to push them over the edge to finally
implement this into their business?
Luna:
 I think they must look at what they're doing and how well that's
working for them. Social media is changing, and if you're serious about
growing your business, you must start reaching out on different platforms and
doing other things. I'm not the most intelligent person, I was an average
student all my life, but I'm creative with my ideas.
You need to start being creative. Do things that are different. Look at the
types of business owners on LinkedIn
®
—people with $100,000 or more
annual income. They take massive action.
If you're serious about this business—which is what I was—I found the
money, I found time, and I just made it happen. Invest in what works. I
follow people who leave clues to success.If you're serious and want to be a professional, go where the professionals
are because you're never going to make it just selling to those who aren’t
qualified with what you are offering. You must be proficient in what you're
doing.
Scott:
 Yes, 100%. So, if you guys are not following Luna on social media,
you can follow her at Luna Hernandez on Facebook
®
, or Luna Hernandez
Coach, which is her Facebook
®
 business page. She also has a beautiful
website where you can learn more about her other services, and it's
www.lunahernandezcoach.com. Again, you want to link arms and connect
with the right people.
Again, I want to say that it's an honor and a privilege not only to have you
as a client but also to call you a friend and to know that we can bounce ideas
off each other. Thank you for your time today sharing your heart, your
results, and what you've learned from this.
Luna:
 Thank you so much. I know in my heart it works. If you're thinking
twice about it, I would say just dive in, and I appreciate everything you've
done for me. This has helped me grow, and I'm forever grateful.
Scott:
 Thank you so much for your time here today.
Case Study #3: Kelli C.
I have had the pleasure of working with Kelli, who has tons of experience in
the fitness industry. She is the perfect example of someone who knows a lot
already and is willing to learn even more because she is humble and
coachable.
Here is her story.
Scott:
 Kelly and I connected on LinkedIn
®
 about six months ago. We both
have wellness backgrounds, and I wanted to communicate with her. I knew a
bit of her experience, and we talked very quickly and started working
together.
I want people to meet the fantastic clients whom I've worked with and
have them tell their stories. This time, I have the amazing Kelli Calabrese;
she's a 32-year fitness nutrition and lifestyle professional. She's a clinicalexercise physiologist with 27 certifications, including medical exercise
specialist, clinical exercise, post-rehab, and nutrition. She's owned and
operated a chain of health clubs in New Jersey, managed corporate fitness
centers for companies like Calvin Klein, and founded a school that prepared
over 3000 people to be certified fitness professionals, which means she
knows what she's doing. She was the lead fitness expert for E-diets, launched
the online training program for fitness, and was the fitness expert for Montel
Williams.
So, if anyone knows who Montel Williams is, he was one of the prominent
talk show hosts in the late 1990s into the 2000s. Kelly was the international
master trainer for Adventure Bootcamp, appeared on all the major networks
as a lifestyle expert, and is on a TV show that will launch in the fall for
entrepreneurial women. She's also getting ready to launch an APP that will
change the country's safety.
So, Kelli, you have a very extensive background, and that's where we
connected. I have over 20 years of experience, we've touched many lives, and
you are a multiple six-figure income earner in your business.
Many people would say, “Well, Kelli, what kind of help do you need?”
You've written books, appeared on TV and helped Montel Williams. Why
would you need to do anything else? You and I both live in the same
headspace; as servant leaders, we are always looking to teach and show
people how to do more and not to get comfortable where we are always
looking to grow.
If someone asks, “Kelli, why did you work with Scott? You're already
making a six-figure income. Why Scott, why LinkedIn
®
, and why his
program?”
Kelli:
 That's a great question. Well, my heart has always been fitness first
and to help people be healthy, so it all fits together. I also love that you are a
fitness pro and were crushing it using LinkedIn
®
. There are results and much
evidence as to why you are so good at what you teach on LinkedIn
®
. Why
would I not want to find someone more prosperous and just model and
duplicate what they do?
I wasn't using LinkedIn
®
, and even in my mind, I knew it was the
professional place to go. I was still doing much hanging out on other social
networks.I just wanted to see what was possible on a more professional level like
LinkedIn
®
, and you had a system that works. I am a system person. If you
give me something that works, I've learned enough to duplicate and model
someone who's ahead of me and someone who's successful. I wanted to
simplify because there's only so much of me to go around.
Scott:
 Exactly! When we connected, you had 13,000 connections, but you
had no idea what to do with them. And I said, “Oh my God. Kelli, you have
so much potential here. There's so much room for you to grow.
After our first session, I remember that you texted me and said that you
sent 20 messages, and ten people replied and wanted to connect with you—
plus, you closed two sales that week, both via LinkedIn
®
. They were your old
neighbors that you reconnected with, but they weren't on Facebook
®
, and
boom—you had ten appointments booked with two sales. You and I are both
into simplicity and duplication. We're both into not reinventing the wheel,
and let's not change something that's not broken. With those kinds of results,
after just one session together, what did that tell you about LinkedIn
®
, but
how powerful is this, and what did it tell you about what I was doing with it?
Kelli:
 Right. Our first conversation was short. It was maybe 10 or 15
minutes, and I said, “Yes.” I knew you had what I needed and made that
commitment financially to your coaching. There's no buyer's remorse for me.
I knew it was what I needed in the first week. I earned back what I spent on
your training.
Scott:
 That's the idea: learning more to get more back times, however much
you invested.
Kelli:
 Yes, that's correct. That makes things so much easier for them and me
because when you get something that works, that's when the breakthrough
and momentum happen. That's when lives change—and that's cool.
Scott:
 What's been the biggest takeaway for you regarding the difference
between the caliber of the people that we typically connect with on
Facebook
®
 compared to the caliber of people that we now associate with on
LinkedIn
®
? What's been the most significant difference for you?Kelli:
 Well, the people on LinkedIn
®
 are professionals, and you could tell
right away; they're owners of companies, they're CEOs and high-level
management. Money is not going to be an issue for these people. They want
to better themselves and their businesses. They're willing to invest in doing
that, so the money objection has not been there, which is a beautiful,
incredible thing.
Instead, they're saying, “What do I need to do? How can I work with you?
Can you help others I know too? That's nice; how much does it cost?”
Talking to true professionals is just so much nicer. The income is there. One
of the only objections we get is money, which takes that away because they're
business professionals.
Scott:
 The other thing I realized in doing this is that there are many more
open people on LinkedIn
®
. This platform is for networking, and because you
and I come from very similar backgrounds, we were so used to waiting for
people to reach out to us. But when we are on LinkedIn
®
, we can simply
reach out, have conversations, and book appointments.
Eric Worre said it best: "The scariest aspect about building your business
is when you look at your appointment book, and nothing is written down.”
How much has this helped you, and now helping your team?
Kelli:
 Oh, it's tremendous. If I open my calendar and there's nothing for the
next day, I can spend 30 minutes on LinkedIn
®
 and book up my calendar for
the next day, and it doesn't matter what time it is. The beauty of it is that I
almost can't keep up, and now that my network is nearly 20,000, I can't keep
up with all the opportunities there. If I stopped right now, I would have a
lifetime of people to connect with, so I can look at all the people who've
messaged me. I send messages to people to wish them “Happy birthday,”
“Congratulations,” or “Happy Anniversary.” Then they wrote back, and I
took a few minutes to use the most straightforward script you gave me. It is
so simple you won't even believe it. It's effortless, and it works.
One more thing: don't change it!
I was tempted to personalize it, but I just do it exactly as you said. Before I
know it, people set up appointments with me and hop on the phone. I block
30 minutes times, I can fill my calendar, and I can show it to my team.
Scott:
 Just to reiterate, when Kelli and I started working together about sixmonths ago, she had 13,000 connections, and she has close to 20,000 now.
So, in about six months, she's added 7,000 new connections to her network,
which is normal. I went from having 500 connections to just under 25,000;
here's a big difference: we're limited to only 5,000 friends on Facebook
®
, but
on LinkedIn
®
, your limit is 30,000 connections, so you can grow a network
six times as large and 20 times as fast.
That's so critical. I teach everyone how to be crab fishermen; if you have
seen “The Deadliest Catch, " you're a deep-sea fisherman. You're throwing
pods out into the ocean, and then the following day, you circle back around
and have crabs in there.
This is the same principle.
As you said, you wake up and have people wanting to talk because the
money objection is gone. The average income of someone on LinkedIn
®
 is
$100,000 a year. Another big thing is that everyone has an avatar, and there's
a demographic that we need to play in. I showed you that the demographic of
people on Instagram and Facebook
®
 is 18 to 29—and you and I are not 18 to
29, although we feel that way. Then I expressed to you that the age
demographic of someone on LinkedIn
®
 is 30 to 55, which is more of a
seasoned professional. You realized that it made sense.
I don't want to say LinkedIn
®
 is not for the faint of heart because it is
necessary. You will have a flat-line business for people struggling with
booking appointments, having conversations, and closing sales.
What would you say to that person who says, “I need to do something
else”? Tell him that he needs to invest in his business. I'm tired of waiting for
people to reach out to me. What would you say is the most important thing
they should focus on and why? LinkedIn
®
 is an excellent key for them
achieving that.
Kelli:
 One of the cool things with LinkedIn
®
, as you mentioned, is the
search. Let's say you're a musician and want to search for “musicians” in
Miami. You can connect with them and create a community. You can build
locally to go globally, and there's so much power to that. Perhaps you're in
the military and want to connect with military people. For me, it's fitness. I
love talking to gym owners, and I know their pain, and I know their hearts. I
know what the solution could be for them. You get to talk to people like youwhom you want to attract to your business. If you're a mom and you want to
talk to other moms who are CEOs, you can search for that in your
neighborhood as well. Those are some great examples.
It's not like you've got this list and are unsure what the connection is. You
get to search for what you love, choose whom to connect with, and pick
specific niches, whether it's martial arts or whatever you are interested in.
Scott:
 That's the beauty of what you just said. Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
 are
a representation of where you currently live, where you lived, and whom you
went to college and high school with. The search feature you mentioned is
one of the significant components people forget about LinkedIn
®
. You can
search by city, state, province, and company. Kelli, we were both personal
trainers, and there are personal trainers all over the world—in the UK,
Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, Spain, and wherever we are, there are
people like us. But for you to connect with those people, you need an
international social media platform like LinkedIn
®
.
I always like bringing people successful people like Kelli so you can hear
it from them directly.
You have multiple six-figure businesses. You're getting personal results
with this. It led to sales in my first week of showing you what to do.
If you could break down and summarize one key that you have taken away
from LinkedIn
®
 that has been an essential tool in your tool belt now, and why
everyone else should use that as well, what would that be?
Kelli:
 It's to follow precisely what you say, Scott. We did a call about the
profile. Then we had a call about what it looks like when you connect and
how specifically you connect. Then we had a call about identifying your
network and how you use messaging. You gave the exact formula. If you just
follow it, don't try, and change it. Don't get creative. Just follow what he says.
I'll be honest, I first asked myself, “Is this a business I want to be in? Do I
want to log on and wish these people happy birthday, and is this fun for me?”
But when you start seeing the connection, feel the energy coming in, and
people are thanking you—it's so worth it!
It's a simple system. Don't change it, do it the way Scott teaches. The
analytics are excellent, too, because you can look at what you're doing and
see where your contacts are coming from— whether it's from specific areas
of the country, specific companies, or even which particular topics are gettingmuch activity. It's a great way to get feedback about what's working, and
you'll know by the result.
Scott:
 Absolutely. Success leaves clues. I always tell people that you could
have the recipe for chicken parmesan, but if you try to figure it out on your
own and leave the cheese out, you just have a piece of chicken with some
sauce. So, you need all the ingredients to get the right results.
Kelli, thank you for joining me today and sharing your takeaways. If you
haven't connected with Kelli, follow her. She's amazing.
There are footprints on the beach right now waiting for all of us to walk in,
so just start following them. Kelli, thank you again for being here; so grateful
for you.W
Summary
hat I want you to take away from this is how amazing LinkedIn
®
 can
be for any business owner, entrepreneur, and especially those looking
for more qualified leads, sales, and business visibility.
Here are some key things to understand:
1
. 
LinkedIn
®
 is 277% more effective for lead generation than Facebook
®
.
2
. 
On LinkedIn
®
, you are allowed six times more connections than on
Facebook
®
. You have 30,000 connections on LinkedIn
®
, compared to
only 5000 on Facebook
®
.
3
. 
The average income of someone on Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
 is
$30,000 per year or less, while the average income of someone on
LinkedIn
®
 is $100,000 per year or more.
4
. 
You must look at the age demographics. The primary age demographic
for someone on Facebook
®
 and Instagram
®
 is 18-29 years old, while
LinkedIn
®
 users tend to be 30-55 years old. This also happens to be the
exact age demographic of a seasoned business owner.
5
. 
For me, the most significant advantage of LinkedIn
®
 is that it allows you
to search, connect, message, and communicate with people globally—
not just locally, which is the way most people are using Facebook.
If you are someone who wants to up-level your business this year and
forever, then you must use a platform that is built for networking with others,
speaking to like-minded individuals, and to others who are interested in whatyou have to offer.
And as a gift from me to you, please go to 
www.scottaaron.net
 and claim
your FREE infographic about the best way to set up your profile on
LinkedIn
®
 so you can hit the ground running.
If you are a business owner or professional looking to become an expert in
your space, please check out 
https://www.thetimetogrow.com/expertauthority
to learn more about joining our incredible group coaching program.
And lastly, always remember this, my friends:
Your failures will always open the doors to your successes.
Cheers, and I will see you all at the top!I
About the Author
nternationally acclaimed and award-winning online marketer, 3x best-
selling author, top podcaster, and speaker, Scott Aaron, is the go-to
specialist in converting traffic, establishing connections, generating leads,
creating sales, and building personal brands using LinkedIn
®
.
Fully immersing himself in learning LinkedIn
®
 and social media
strategies, Scott quickly gained traction as a leader in generating significant
results for other entrepreneurs, online business owners, and business
coaches.
Scott is passionate about helping fellow entrepreneurs succeed while
organically building their network without complicated and costly marketing
tactics.
His program has helped thousands experience explosive growth following
his proven system and strategies.
People-focused and result-driven, Scott's strategic approach to teaching
others how to create wealth online and organic traffic is the game changer
when competing in a saturated digital world.
To learn more about how to work with Scott, visit him at
www.scottaaron.net
 anytime.