The Mesa Method: An Outsider’s
Perspective
By
Tiago Forte
Copyright © 2019
Forte Labs, LLCTable of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: What is the Mesa Method?
The premise
The structure
The experience
The context
Chapter 2: The Principles of Mesa
Mesa’s 3 Core Principles
Balancing principles
Indulgence vs. minimalism
Obsession vs. improvisation
Conflict vs. conviction
Pleasure vs. responsibility
Thinking vs. doing
Tuning the environment
Chapter 3: The Art of Unlocking People’s Creative Potential
Full commitment
Limited collaboration
Intensity
Prototypes
Chapter 4: The Origins of Mesa
The journalistic instinct
Learning by doing
It’s no use waiting for certainty
Making decisions is essential
Listen before talking
The problem is always about the whole business
You MUST work with the problem owner
To work is to create
Independent Mesas
Never use the word “collaboration”
Results over processThe bigger the challenge, the better the Mesa
Anyone can take part in a Mesa
A new view of diversity
Chapter 5: The Future of Work That Mesa Envisions
The era of the briefing is over
We believe in doing
Social responsibility will be part of every product
The conviction of the maker
The power of feminine leadership
TransformationIntroduction
It is the end of day 3 of the most challenging project I’ve ever worked on.
It’s like no conference room I have ever been in. The light pours in through
12-foot windows that look out over the city skyline of Belo Horizonte, in
Southern Brazil. Sitting in luxurious chairs, with staff attending to my every
need, and delicious food laid out on a table nearby, I should be totally at ease.
But I’m terrified of what I know I have to say.
15 of us are seated around a long table running the length of the room. We’re
having an intense conversation about the project we’re working on –
developing a new multimedia system for the vehicles produced by the Italian
automaker Fiat.
On either side of me are experts in every aspect of vehicle design and
manufacture. There are policy experts, marketing directors, and operations
managers who work for Fiat all over Brazil. There are Fiat executives who
have flown in from Europe to oversee the work. At the head of the table is a
world-renowned expert in auto design and branding who flew in from Tokyo
to lead the project.
I’m certain that I am the least qualified person in the room. I have little
experience in anything related to automotive vehicles. Portuguese is not my
native language, and I’m still jet-lagged from my flight just a couple days
before.
But as the conversation unfolds, I realize that I have the key piece of
information needed to move forward: the theory of the consumerization of
IT. It’s an obscure theory I read about on a blog somewhere. I never
imagined it might be useful.
I cleared my throat and announced tentatively, “I have something to say.”
And suddenly, the room was mine. Someone found a poster and gave me a
marker. Chairs were rearranged, and all eyes were on me.I drew a simple graph and explained what I knew. That there was a
predictable pattern to how new technologies entered the marketplace, starting
as expensive custom solutions and moving over time toward standardized,
consumer products. It took me all of five minutes to explain, but before I was
even finished, mental lightbulbs were turning on all over the room.
The entire project pivoted around what I had presented, and we began using it
as a lens to understand each aspect of the product we were developing.
Because we had every skill and every piece of knowledge we needed in the
room, it took only moments for our new approach to be translated into the
language of operations, finance, marketing, and design.
Within minutes, these insights turned into action.
The group divided into working teams that tackled the technical
specifications, started crafting the presentation to the board, and began
brainstorming ways of explaining the new product to customers. There were
still tough moments, when we encountered new constraints and had to find
our way through.
But as the five-day project wrapped up on Friday, I knew I had made a
difference. An obscure piece of knowledge I was uniquely positioned to
contribute turned out to be a critical piece of the puzzle.
All this was possible because this was not your typical project. It was a Mesa,
a five-day intensive work experience designed and executed by the Brazilian
company of the same name.
How often do you have something to say in a meeting, but you don’t say it,
because you’re sure it won’t be taken into account? How often do you
contribute something you know is valuable, but then see it stagnate in the
bureaucracy of the organization? How often do politics prevent the best idea
from rising to the surface in your team’s work?
Mesa is more than a company – it has now become a Method that anyone
anywhere can use to solve complex challenges on a vastly accelerated
timetable. Developed by Founder and CEO Bárbara Soalheiro and her team
over seven years and more than 140 Mesas, it is a revolutionary new way of
bringing together in one place and one time all the skills, knowledge, andtalent needed to solve a difficult problem.
In an era of distributed work, Mesa is local and concentrated. In a time when
everything is becoming digital, Mesa takes place live and in person. Instead
of working anywhere and anytime, which translates to working everywhere
and all the time, Mesa puts a strict limit on the time allowed, and challenges
us to do something extraordinary with it.
The splintering of work into a million tiny pieces distributed throughout the
day and night has made us stressed out and distracted. It has robbed us of
many of the inherent pleasures of work: the bliss of deep concentration, the
satisfaction of starting and finishing something in one sitting, and the
fulfillment of working shoulder to shoulder with peers.
Many are seeking a return to what was lost: concentrated, intensive,
experiential work environments that drive to completion and give us the
satisfaction and fun of working closely alongside others.
We are witnessing the rise of a generation of  “Accelerated Work
Experiences,” or AWEs for short, to address this need. AWEs include any
work format that compresses productive activity to deliver a result much
faster than would otherwise be possible. Often known as a “sprint,” an
Accelerated Work Experience can come in many shapes and sizes.
I’ve participated in dozens of AWEs of various kinds over the years, and
have reliably found them to be among the most gratifying, exciting, effective,
and insightful experiences I’ve ever had, professional or otherwise. In this
book I want to take a closer look at the one that has stood out the most: 
the
Mesa Method
.
By bending nearly every rule about when and where and why and how work
should be performed, Mesa is calling into question every assumption we have
about modern productivity. By producing results that defy expectations while
helping people unlock their creative potential, it is pointing the way forward
to a radical new vision for the future of work.Chapter 1: What is the Mesa Method?
A Mesa is a five-day, intensive work sprint delivered on behalf of a client,
usually a large company or other organization. I will call the company Mesa
Co. and the method itself simply “Mesa.” Mesa Co. gathers 12-16
participants in beautiful, often exotic locations around the world, seeking to
create the ideal environment to focus on and solve a complex problem that
the organization is facing. The participants are split more or less evenly
between employees of the client company, and outside experts and makers,
who offer outside perspectives and hands-on skills.
I participated in my first Mesa about four years ago, and have been a part of
three others in Brazil and the U.S. since then. I’ve also borrowed some of
their practices for my own workshops. I can say unequivocally that they are
among the most rewarding work experiences I’ve had. I’ve been collecting
notes and ideas since that first experience to try to understand why.
In September 2018, the Mesa Co. team gathered 32 of their closest
collaborators at a beautifully designed eco-retreat center in the jungles of
Southern Brazil, near the resort town of Paraty. But this was not a typical
client Mesa – it was the first-ever Mesa Leader Session. For the first time,
they pulled back the curtains, and for three very full days told us everything
they had learned from running more than 130 Mesas over 8 years, for clients
including Google, Coca-Cola, Unilever, Samsung, Nestle, and many others.
And I’m finally ready to tell you how they do it.
Photos from the first Mesa leader session in Paraty, Brazil:The premise
Here is the basic premise: the world is only getting more complex. This
means there will be fewer and fewer proven solutions to problems. What we
need is not a new and better solution, but a 
method
 for creating solutions
quickly, in response to changing conditions.
At the same time, the most talented people are increasingly mobile and in
demand. It is going to be increasingly more difficult to tie them down with
full-time employment.
The only way to solve the world’s most complex challenges is by working
with the best in the world. And the only way to do that is to keep the timecommitment short, remove every obstacle to them creating value, and create
an environment and a team where they can do the best work of their lives.
It was in pursuit of this vision that Mesa was born.
The goal is to create a time-limited, but very intense working environment
where a small group of carefully chosen participants can build something
tangible to advance a mission or cause that they care about. The method takes
advantage of rapid prototyping tools, software-as-a-service, and modular
templates to build a functional prototype that embodies the knowledge and
experience of everyone at the table. This prototype is often used not just to
demonstrate the viability of a particular solution, but to build consensus
around a new direction for the company.
The client is a “problem owner” responsible for an important challenge that
they can’t solve on their own. Perhaps their main product is no longer
resonating with a younger generation of consumers. Maybe their marketing
channels are outdated and obsolete, but they are afraid to cannibalize them
with new ones. They could be tasked with revitalizing a product line in the
face of major technological shifts. Or it could be a social mission, meeting
the needs of an underserved population under tight budgetary constraints.
Whatever the problem, Mesa is unique in that it is not primarily a service
provided at arms’ length to a paying client. The Mesa Co. team works 
with
the client, not 
for
 the client. The problem owner and their team are the central
participants in the process, which generates a level of trust and
communication between clients and Mesa leaders unlike anything I have seen
with typical agencies or consultancies. In our three days together, they had to
repeat this again and again because it is so contrary to conventional thinking:
take the client at their word, instead of assuming or insisting that there 
must
be a deeper problem that they aren’t aware of.
The structure
The overall structure of the five days is fairly straightforward, and similar to
other sprint methodologies.
Day 1 is a “download day” dedicated to getting all the relevant information
inside everyone’s heads “out on the table.” This includes the externalparticipants, who are chosen for their specialized expertise in the industries,
markets, and technologies thought to be most relevant to the challenge.
On Day 2, the carefully worded “mission” is unveiled, drawing on the
discoveries from the day before to frame the client’s problem as an inspiring,
yet feasible challenge. The second half of the day is spent generating a small
set of ideas to prototype.
All photos are from the official 
Mesa Instagram account
Day 3 is for prototyping, which includes small groups writing copy, making
mockups or landing pages, building demos, or producing short videos or
presentations to demonstrate the viability of the ideas from the day before. Itis on Day 3, once people have to start making real tradeoffs in the making of
prototypes, that the real constraints are revealed.
Day 4 is focused on more advanced prototyping, taking the most viable
prototypes to a basic level of functionality. The leader pushes to bring the
fidelity of the prototype as close to reality as possible, including real code
and functional backends whenever possible. The further toward reality it
moves, the more hidden constraints and priorities will come to the surface.
Day 5, the final day, is focused on wrapping up loose ends and preparing the
final presentation. Mesa Co. is adamant that the final deliverable cannot be
just
 a presentation (or a report or briefing). The presentation is a vehicle for
delivering and explaining the prototype that was created. The presentation is
ideally made to senior leaders of the company, or other stakeholders who will
demand a high level of rigor. This is what creates a real sense of urgency and
meaning around the deadline, and brings out the “productivity magic” of the
last two days.
But where Mesa shines is not in the explicit – the rules, structures, schedule,
checklists – but in the tacit, the subtle, and the sublime. They have found a
way to use these subtle touches not just to create a memorable experience,
but to produce results that more heavy-handed methods can only dream of.
The experience
Why “Mesa” (which means “table” in Portuguese)?Because the table represents the intersection of pleasure and commitment.
The pleasure of family and friends sitting together and sharing a meal in the
evening. And the commitment of getting down to business, of giving
everything you have to the task at hand.
Tables and the meals we eat on them are enveloped in rituals. From the way
the table is set, to how the food is served, to how people sit and prepare
themselves for eating, to how the food is actually eaten. Hundreds of these
small rituals give us prescribed behaviors that we know will lead to the
outcome we’re after – getting fed. They ensure we don’t disturb the
experience of others, that we respect the host and the household, and that the
food remains sanitary.
But there is a deeper purpose to these rituals that is easy to miss: they imbue
the entire experience with significance. They make the process of getting
calories into our bodies much more than the sum of its parts: an affirmation
of our values, a time of connection with the people we love most, a reminder
of what really matters at the end of a hectic day.
Mesa seeks to reintroduce and translate some of these rituals to the world of
work. But not just for nostalgic purposes. It recreates them from the ground
up, focusing them like a laser beam on one thing: producing results. It is areinvention of the rituals that once bound us together in a shared purpose and
working toward a common cause, but adapted to the modern context.
The experience begins with the venue. Mesa Co. very carefully chooses
locations that support the results they are trying to produce. The venues
almost always have a “wow factor” to inspire the participants with an
environment that stimulates all the senses. Entering the venue as a group and
seeing the meticulously laid out table gives you a sense of the gravity and
importance of the mission you are about to undertake.
The table is, of course, central. It is laid out with precise measurements down
to the centimeter, in order to put people just close enough to work together,
while giving them enough space to get messy. Each place at the table has a
name on it, like a wedding where every seating assignment is carefully
chosen. The setting includes just the essential materials needed for the week,
often including a notebook, pen, and bag. Even the color scheme is chosen
with intention, often purposefully clashing with the client’s official colors to
avoid the “business as usual” attitude.Every element in the space is chosen with intention: the chairs are
comfortable for long hours of sitting and working; bags are collected in a
central location so they don’t get in the way; the food is prepared simply and
to avoid afternoon crashes; there are no clocks, giving the experience a sense
of timelessness. My favorite touch is the “Leave Me Alone” wall – a grid of
pockets with participants’ names on them, where everyone is asked to leave
their phones to remove the temptation.The real purpose of all these decisions and rituals is to change participants’
behavior, away from the counterproductive habits we so often tolerate, and
toward a more focused way of working that is rarely possible in a distraction-
filled workplace. Mesa changes behavior not with rigid rules, but by
changing the context
.
As you find yourself in an environment purposefully free of the usual triggers
and hooks, with a full staff dedicated to protecting you from every distraction
or discomfort, your creativity is unleashed. People respect rituals more than
rules, because rituals give us something meaningful in return for our
compliance.
The context
Coming back to the everyday world, I’ve begun to notice a phenomenon
everywhere: as soon as one person in a group takes out their phone or
computer, everyone else is much more likely to do so as well. It only takes
one person to check out for the atmosphere of human presence to start being
sucked out of the room, like an airplane cabin with a punctured window. And
once that air is gone, it’s very hard to bring people back.
A quick glance at your notifications seems so harmless, but it communicates
something unmistakable to others: there is somewhere you’d rather be,
mentally if not physically. Check your phone, and an invisible cocoon
suddenly springs up around you. It is this cocoon that makes it hard to
connect with the people around us, even after the phones are put away.
I believe that people naturally 
want
 to focus, but only if that focus will be
protected and respected. They want to give their best, but only if that effort
will be put to good use. As the idealism of wanting to do a good job collides
with the fragmented reality of modern schedules, we become resigned,
gradually coming to resent the environment that seemingly won’t allow us to
excel.
What I see with Mesa participants is a sigh of relief, followed by an
unbelievable explosion of creative energy. Every signal tells them that this is
a place for focus, that their contributions are valued. When the internal andthe external conditions align, it feels like anything is possible.
Now that you have the overall picture of what a Mesa looks like, in Chapter 2
I’ll dive into what I believe are the underlying principles, and later we’ll look
at how you can apply them to your own work.
If you want to dive right in, Mesa Co. offers a 
comprehensive online course
that trains leaders to apply Mesa principles to their own work. Click the link
above to visit the course and watch the first couple videos for free.Chapter 2: The Principles of Mesa
In Chapter 1, I described the basics of the team-based work sprint
methodology known as Mesa. Now let’s take a closer look at the underlying
principles that make Mesa work.
Mesa’s 3 Core Principles
The team at Mesa Co. has identified three principles they believe lie at the
heart of their method: vulnerability, intention, and presence.
Vulnerability
 appears when the Leader takes the head of the table, stepping
into a role that is part master of ceremonies, part inspirational visionary, part
herder of cats, and part group therapist. If vulnerability is “the courage to be
seen when you have no control over the outcome,” (according to Brené
Brown), then the job of Mesa Leader squarely fits.
Intention
 is about knowing 
exactly
 why you’re doing something. Every pen
and paper clip is set on the table with intention, each one subtly
communicating, “We put this much intention into each pen – will you be as
intentional about the work you do here?”
Presence
 is perhaps the most fundamental of the three. It includes doing just
one thing at a time, and doing it well. But it goes far beyond focus. Being
present as a Leader means making your personality 100% available to the
people you are working with. It requires pulling all the various selves
dwelling on the past and future, into the present where discomfort, but also
opportunity, reigns.
Balancing principles
As important as these three principles are, I believe they are only the tip of
the iceberg of what is happening during a Mesa.
I’ve identified 10 others that I believe are at work. These extra principles
come in pairs, each balancing the other. The job of the Leader is to choose
which one manifests at any given moment.Indulgence vs. minimalism
There is undoubtedly a “WOW Factor” that is an important part of the Mesa
experience. The venues are often jaw-dropping, creating an atmosphere of
indulgence and luxury so different from the bland offices or cramped cafes
where so much of modern work is performed.
But this indulgence is counterbalanced against a stark, practical minimalism.
The experience design team repeats “only the essentials” like a mantra,
looking for any opportunity to strip away what isn’t needed. They will
remove paintings from the walls if they are distracting, or count the number
of pages in the notebooks to ensure there is no excess.
Obsession vs. improvisation
There is an unmistakable attitude of obsession in everything that Mesa Co.
does. From the precision of the place settings, to the unyielding commitment
to tangible results, it is a culture that leaves room for the perfectionism of the
creative people who participate as experts and makers. They are encouraged
to fulfill the high standards that they often don’t have the chance to reach
doing commercial work.
But the drive for excellence is balanced against a willingness to improvise at
a moment’s notice. Leaders are even discouraged from researching too much
about the client or their problem beforehand, because their learning in real
time is an opportunity for everyone to learn along with them. Especially after
Day 2, improvisation to changing circumstances is the art of leading a Mesa.
Conflict vs. conviction
The Mesa approach to conflict is very different from what I’ve witnessed in
most corporate environments. Everyone is encouraged to “bring everything to
the table,” 
especially 
their reservations and concerns about the progress of the
Mesa. There are no side conversations, no backchannels, and no hidden
agendas entertained. The whole point of bringing everyone together in one
place is to force the problems to emerge out into the open, where they can be
addressed.
But it is towards the end of the Mesa that the purpose of this conflict becomesclear. It is only by getting everyone’s doubts and fears out into the open, and
showing them that they’ll be seen and heard, that you have the opportunity to
build real conviction. Not just lukewarm 
consensus
, but a 
conviction
 that they
know exactly what to do when they get home. The Problem Owner must go
through every up and down of the experience to have the confidence to stand
in front of an audience during the final presentation and say, “This is the
solution I believe in.” Not because it went through many months of analysis,
but because it emerged from a meeting of great minds working at their full
capacity.
Pleasure vs. responsibility
One of Mesa Co’s strongest beliefs is that work is inherently pleasurable.
They don’t believe in adding games and gimmicks to make work “engaging.”
Instead, they amplify natural rewards: the camaraderie of working late into
the night with peers you respect, the satisfaction of seeing something you
created immediately put to use, and the pure euphoria of completing the
mission on the last day, with no follow-up work required. Mesa Co.
sometimes speaks of their job as “seducing” participants into giving them
their best work.
This seduction is balanced against responsibility. The role of the Leader is
quite different from a typical facilitator on this point. The Leader is “110%
responsible” for the results of the Mesa, in the words of founder Bárbara
Soalheiro. She insists that the Leader must be committed to greatness, not
just delivering something to specifications. She is fond of telling people NOT
to “trust the process.” Instead of blindly trusting the process, the Leader has
to make a decision that will produce results.
Thinking vs. doing
The Mesa experience is extremely intellectually challenging. As a participant,
you are expected to integrate new knowledge and turn it into action at a
stunning pace. The problems that are worthy of a Mesa are often thorny and
multidimensional. They often involve shaping complex systems impacting
many thousands of people. Thinking through the implications is essential.
But thinking also has its limits. While in debate mode, people’s minds are setto criticize. And they can always find something to criticize. By switching
everyone into maker mode when they get stuck, suddenly their minds begin
looking for solutions. By asking them to demonstrate instead of elaborate,
any decisions that are made are more grounded in reality.
Tuning the environment
Each of the pairs of principles above is like a dial on a control panel,
allowing the Mesa Leader to fine tune how the group is working.  By holding
time as the only fixed constraint, explicitly meeting the needs of everyone
present, and placing them all around the same table with access to the same
information, the playing field is leveled.
On this level playing field, it is the responsibility and the burden of the Mesa
Leader to enable everyone to do the best work of their lives.
In Chapter 3, I’ll look at other key elements of the Mesa Method, and how
they help unlock the creative potential of the people who participate.
If you’re ready to get your hands dirty, 
click here
 to visit Mesa Co’s
comprehensive online course on how to deploy the Mesa Method in your
team or organization.Chapter 3: The Art of Unlocking People’s Creative
Potential
In Chapter 3, I laid out the underlying principles that Mesa Co. uses to fine-
tune the working environment.
But what are they fine-tuning the environment 
for
? To unlock people’s
creative potential.
The open secret of Mesa (and other Accelerated Work Experiences) is that,
beyond the rules and guidelines and structures, their true purpose is to unlock
people’s potential to achieve more than they imagined was possible. And
critically, to unleash that potential in the direction of a single, focused
mission for five days.
This isn’t easy when working with a diverse group of people, most of whom
have never worked together. About half of the 12-16 participants are external
to the client organization, split evenly between “experts” (subject matter
experts in topics relevant to the problem) and “makers” (designers, coders,
video makers, illustrators, or others with specialized skills).
How do you get 12-16 people from a wide variety of backgrounds to all
commit to one mission for five days?
With a precise mix of three ingredients: 
full commitment, limited
collaboration, and intensity
. Full commitment provides the raw energy,
limited collaboration provides the channel, and intensity focuses it on
tangible results.
Full commitment
The selling point for full commitment is different for each of the groups
present.
For experts and makers, who are being hired as contractors, a big selling
point for a Mesa is that there is zero pre-work or post-work. There are no pre-
planning calls, follow-up meetings, feature requests, or client presentationsonce the five days are finished. All that’s asked of them is to be present. This
is so rare and cherished in the life of a freelancer, that they tend to jump at the
opportunity.
For participants who work full time at organizations or for other reasons can’t
join long-term projects, a strictly fixed timeline allows them to know exactly
how much time is required. The time-limited format allows more people to
work on these projects besides self-employed freelancers.
For employees of the client organization, their commitment comes from the
chance to work on a unique project that takes them far beyond their normal
routine. They are often very grateful to have the chance to work with skilled
experts and makers. They gain experience working in a faster-paced, more
improvisational way than they’re used to at a large company.
Beyond these considerations, one of the key jobs of the Mesa team is to
choose a framing that attracts people to the problem, instead of making it a
chore. They will often invite experts and makers with a personal or
professional connection to the problem, such as inviting an influencer who
advocates for healthy eating to a Mesa about changing baby food recipes, or a
sustainability advocate to a Mesa about making product packaging more eco-
friendly.
Limited collaboration
Bárbara Soalheiro, the founder of Mesa, often criticizes collaboration as “an
invitation to work without responsibility.” Although the Mesa Method is
obviously highly collaborative, she is highlighting the lack of individual
responsibility that often accompanies so-called “collaborations.”
How do you get each participant to take ownership of their knowledge and
skills, and advocate for their point of view? By assigning each person a
“pillar of knowledge.”
A big part of the preparation by the Mesa team is to break down the problem
into “pillars of knowledge,” each one representing a key capability they
believe will be needed. This might include “an expert in global supply chains
for eco-friendly products,” or “a specialist in the production of affordable
baby foods.” These pillars are often framed as intersections or combinationsof traditionally defined specialties.
There is usually only one expert invited for each pillar, which means they are
the sole representative for that domain. And this person is always a “doer” –
someone who has produced real results in this area, not just studied it or
talked about it. This kind of individual assignment produces a remarkable
level of ownership that is missing from collaborative projects where no one is
responsible for anything in particular.
Intensity
Once the environment has been optimized for productivity, everyone is
totally committed, and an appropriate level of collaboration has been
established, it’s time for intensity. Like a laser that only activates when all the
parameters are just right, this is the point where Mesa really begins to shine.
What allows for such intensity is that all the necessary knowledge and skills
to make progress are present, all in one place and all at one time. Five days
might not seem like a lot of time, but if you think about it, that’s 40
continuous hours spent on one mission, by one group of people. It might take
months in the “real world” to reach 40 hours of time spent on a problem. And
that will likely occur as a long series of 2-hour stints, which don’t build the
same momentum or conviction as one focused time period.
The Problem Owner has no reason to delay a choice – there will never be a
better time or place to make the decisive decisions that determine the fate of
their project. With all the conversations and objections and concerns and
reservations out on the table, with everyone on the same page, with every
facet and angle considered, the only thing left to do is to act.
And act they do.
Unlike other workshops or meetings, the goal of a Mesa is not “alignment,”
“learnings,” or “clarity.” The goal is to deliver published results. The end
result of a Mesa is to deliver a working prototype that embodies all the
constraints (budget, time, brand image, etc.) the organization is facing, and all
the decisions made during the week.Prototypes
The prototype is, in many ways, the most important and unique element of
the Mesa Method. Without a tangible working prototype delivered on the
final day, the week amounts to a very exhausting brainstorming session.
Getting a bunch of smart people together, it’s very easy to spend endless
hours debating. People like to talk as a way of postponing a decision, but that
doesn’t make the decision any easier. Switching people from criticizing to
making turns off the fault-finding lens, and activates the solution-finding
lens. Debates focus on specific, visible features of the prototype, instead of
abstract concepts that everyone interprets differently.
The goals of the prototype are many-fold:
●
   
To see if the solution will work, or is just a pipe dream
●
   
To make better decisions, by grounding them in reality
●
   
To build a common vocabulary, which requires specificity
●
   
To lock in the most important strategic decisions, and embody them in
something practical
●
   
To demonstrate the solution, instead of describing it
●
   
To make people fight for and challenge the solution, instead of arriving
at a lukewarm consensus that no one feels particularly proud of
There are a number of guidelines that Mesa Co. has developed to fulfill on
these goals. For example:
●
   
The prototype should be as high-fidelity as possible (i.e. as close to a
real working product as possible), including functional back-ends or
other technical components whenever feasible
●
   
Stay away from “could be” or “might be” – make firm decisions, make
tradeoffs, kill options
●
   
Don’t do user testing (which only leads to diverging opinions and
delays the timeline) – trust that the experts, makers, and client
employees know their audience and their market, and launch the
prototype as-is to accelerate the learning process
The entire prototyping process is massively convergent, raising concerns and
either addressing them or eliminating them at a furious pace. It takes a high-
fidelity prototype to force the real issues to the surface: can we actually builda product using technology this sophisticated? Can we actually open this new
sales channel without damaging existing ones? Will our executives appreciate
the importance of this message for our customers?
I believe that the trends of just the last few years have made high-fidelity
prototyping possible. Developers can spin up cloud computing instances in
minutes with free trials. Designers can use front-end web frameworks to
build full-featured web applications in hours. The modularization and SaaS-
ification of everything has drastically shortened the time horizon required to
build things. That horizon has shrunk to fit within a single week.
Some examples of what these prototypes look like include:
●
   
A retail stand for smartphones that translated what was on the screen
into various visual, audio, and tactile experiences, adopted almost as-is
by a major consumer electronics brand in their stores
●
   
A beautifully shot video introducing a new ad campaign and strategic
direction for a major international food brand, with a final product that
adopted almost all of the major elements of the prototype video
●
   
A new recipe for more eco-friendly baby food, produced in an actual
commercial kitchen during the Mesa, which strongly influenced the
final product
●
   
A completely new sales channel for a major makeup brand that might
have directly threatened their primary channel; a quick launch and test
showed that it complemented, instead of threatened, their existing
channels
There seems to be a kind of inversion at work as the horizon of action shrinks
ever smaller. The movement around human-centered design in recent years
has introduced us to “user testing” as a crucial part of product development.
But in many cases user testing has just added a whole new layer of
bureaucracy and delay. It has in some cases made us distrust our intuition and
our insights, in favor of “validated learning.”
Perhaps we’ve reached an inflection point, in that we can reach consensus
and produce a prototype so quickly, that we can use it as the point of
reference for our user testing. Instead of starting from “everything is
possible,” and taking months to slowly converge on something tangible, we
start with something tangible that takes into account the real constraints thatwe know the organization will have to face no matter what.
What if instead of seeing user testing as an initial, anticipatory phase of
product development, we saw product development as an initial, anticipatory
phase of user testing? Maybe “making” could become so compact and
efficient that we could make three things in the time it used to take to plan for
one.
But this new approach is not just another bureaucratic process to institute.
Because a Mesa is not a predictable event that can be optimized. It relies on
the spontaneity and improvisation of a diverse mix of people. It seems to
allow for, if not call for, heroic feats of courage. It is an eminently human
phenomenon. The most complex problems have a life of their own, and
perhaps they can only be addressed with an equally complex group of
humans.
Check out 
Mesa.School
, the self-paced online course that includes everything
you need to assemble and lead powerful teams to solve complex problems in
five days.Chapter 4: The Origins of Mesa
The Mesa Method is full of firmly held beliefs and sharp distinctions. To
understand why they’re so important, you have to understand where they
came from. I sat down with Bárbara Soalheiro, the founder and CEO of Mesa
Co., and Lígia Giatti, her number 2, to try and understand the origins of this
new way of working.
The journalistic instinct
Bárbara traces the beginnings of Mesa all the way back to her first job. After
graduating from college, she entered the New Talents program at Editora
Abril, the biggest publishing house in Latin America. She worked on a
magazine called 
Superinteressante 
(meaning “Superinteresting”), which
involved diving deep into topics such as mental health or prostitution or
alternative medicine for 3 to 4 months at a time, before turning it into a
feature piece.
This was the beginning of her fascination with immersive deep dives into
interesting topics.
By the time she was 26, Bárbara became one of the youngest ever editor-in-
chiefs at Editora Abril. She was charged with a major restructuring of the
teen brand 
Capricho
, which included a magazine, a website, a range of
licensed products, and events. Her approach was a radical change from the
magazine’s past: to treat young girls and their concerns as legitimate and
worthy of attention, instead of as trivial and silly.
In 2006 they launched a new edition, and the only story related to beauty was
a serious inquiry into why frizzy hair was automatically assumed to be bad.
Bárbara recalls thinking hard about why the magazine had been such an
important part of her teenage years. She realized that it was the one place that
took her concerns seriously. She remarks, “Hair 
is
 actually the most
important problem in the life of a 13-year old girl!”
Working at these magazines formed the foundation of Bárbara’s career and
professional outlook. Her experience as a journalist taught her how to seekout the best person to help her answer a question or solve a problem. It gave
her experience in creating products targeted to a very specific audience. And
critically, to deliver those tangible products on a regular basis.
Learning by doing
In 2008, Bárbara was invited to work at Fabrica, the communications
research center for the Italian clothing brand Benetton. There Bárbarta
became editor-in-chief of 
Colors
, a magazine founded in 1991 by
photographer Oliviero Toscani and art director Tibor Kalman to “show the
world to the world.” The magazine looks at social issues through the lens of
first-person interviews and attention-grabbing photography.
Colors 
gave Bárbara’s her first in-depth experience with technology. She
worked on the digital transformation of the magazine, turning their website
into an early collaborative platform and launching one of the first ever
augmented reality issues in the world.
Working on these projects, Bárbara fell in love with an open-ended,
improvisational style of working that favored learning by doing. She says:
“At Fabrica, this really unique place which I’m really in love with, I had the
happiest two years of my life. It was working in an environment that was
super chaotic, dramatic and intense. There were no rules. There isn’t a really
clear idea why you are there. Some people hate it. It made some people leave
because they couldn’t function in an environment like that. But it gave me the
opportunity to just do whatever I wanted. And by doing whatever I wanted, to
learn how to do it.”
It was during her two years at Fabrica that the idea of Mesa was born. She
used as her starting point the atmosphere she wanted to create – home-cooked
dinners with family and friends seated around a table. She recalls: “It is really
important to me, this idea of sharing the same table. So Mesa is born from
that: sharing the same table, and picking carefully the people who are sitting
around this table. And we will make sure that in every group there are all
these skills we need to deliver that specific project. And, we make sure that
the people come from as different backgrounds as possible. That
automatically makes the experience really interesting for everyone.”A short description of the first Mesa in 2011
A sketch showing the assigned seats for Mesa #1
One of the early prototypes, a “survival kit” for the city of São Paulo
Announcement for the final presentation at the end of an independent Mesa
In a 74-page Google Doc called “The school,” Bárbara poured out her core
beliefs about the best way to work in creative fields, which had emerged from
her experience as a journalist, researcher, editor-in-chief, and creativedirector:
It’s no use waiting for certainty
People want one more study or one more survey to confirm that they are
going in the right direction. But nothing is 100% certain today. Everything is
changing rapidly, and we need to learn to take action anyway.
Making decisions is essential
Decisive decisions carry a team forward. But it takes courage to make a
decision when you’re not certain it’s the right one. But if you can’t operate
from this place of vulnerability, you’re going to feel ever more vulnerable in
this world.
Listen before talking
Thinking you already know the answer is one of the greatest impediments to
learning. The best results come from those who are the most open to new
ideas.
The problem is always about the whole business
Large organizations tend to treat problems as isolated to one specific division
or area. But the greatest problems touch every part of a business. Sometimes
the solution can be found in marketing, but sometimes you have to change
the product, or make a change in the logistics. Every problem should be
treated holistically.
You MUST work with the problem owner
It doesn’t work to “outsource” problems to someone else. The person who is
closest to the problem and owns it must be deeply involved in the creation of
the solution. If the problem owner can’t participate, there is no Mesa.
To work is to create
To work is to create things, which is one of the most fundamental human
needs. As such, work should be treated with a certain respect. But often it
becomes so procedural and so rote, that people lose touch with the finalproduct or impact it will have.
Independent Mesas
Returning to Brazil in 2010, Bárbara took on the role of Creative Director at
Cubocc, a digital ad agency in São Paulo. She found the transition from
journalism to advertising jarring: “Advertising in an agency is a completely
different thing and it didn’t make much sense to me, a journalist. One thing I
really didn’t get was why I had to solve a problem for Google without people
from Google. I used to think: no one knows more about this than my client,
why can’t I sit with him and work? It seemed not very smart to me.”
Using her Google Doc as a blueprint, Bárbara ran the first Mesas as
“independent,” in that they weren’t delivered for a corporate client. Bárbara
viewed the experience initially as a form of professional education, teaching
real-world skills through doing, rather than theory.
She started by inviting well-known professionals to “take the head of the
table,” including people like Perry Chen, the founder of Kickstarter;
advertising expert and serial entrepreneur Cindy Gallop; and “human cyborg”
Neil Harbisson. Together they chose a mission that connected to or advanced
the work of these headliner names, which is what drew them. Participants
paid for the chance to work alongside these thought leaders.
Promotional image for an independent Mesa led by the Dutch “cloud artist”
Berndnaut Smilde
The first Mesa held in Rio de Janeiro, in 2015, led by Sara Melin, the founder
of The Poundshop
Mesa led by Ju Row Farr, the founder of Blast TheoryPerry Chen, founder of Kickstarter, at the head of the table
Bárbara explains her thinking: “The first idea was that when you hear
someone speak – at a TED conference, for example – you get very inspired.
But it’s only when you work with that person – see how he/she makes
decisions, how they solve unexpected problems, where they invest energy
and where they don’t – that you really learn from them. And when you are a
professional with five or ten years’ experience what you need isn’t
inspiration, but this kind of learning.”
Mesa started out as a “school for professionals,” where a team of participants
would pay to work with someone known for their creativity, experience, or
unique perspective. Unlike any other form of professional learning, the team
had to deliver something tangible at the end of five or six days. Bárbara
tested this educational format with seven Mesas over 16 months, slowly
working up the courage and the credibility to pitch it to a paying client.
In 2013, Mesa Co. began running Mesas for paying corporate clients. Bárbara
hired her first co-leader, Lígia Giatti, who is now her right-hand woman and
head of international operations. Together they’ve delivered 140 Mesas formore than 30 clients in eight countries, for companies like Google, Fiat,
Samsung, Nestle, and Coca-Cola.
Never use the word “collaboration”
Over this period of testing and refining the Mesa method, new beliefs and
principles slowly came to the surface.
During the preparation for one early Mesa, Bárbara overheard a member of
their small team inviting an external participant to “take part in a
collaborative process.” A lightning bolt shot through her – she knew it was
wrong, but couldn’t immediately explain why.
The reason soon became clear, and has become one of Mesa’s core beliefs: to
never use the word “collaboration,” because it invites people to work without
responsibility. In the experience of Mesa Co., using that word creates an
environment where no one is responsible for anything in particular. People
will “collaborate” to produce a mediocre, middle-of-the-road solution, which
usually isn’t one they truly believe in.
Bárbara cites as an example working with Fernando Meirelles, the respected
Brazilian director of such films as 
City of God
. She needed him to show up at
the table as nothing less than “someone who knows how to tell stories with
film that reach millions of people.” He needed to own and to advance that
responsibility with all his enthusiasm and energy. Bárbara explains, “If you
give someone a territory, they will hold that territory and you will have
excellent results.”
It is this belief that inspires many aspects of the “Mesa experience.”
Invitations are made not to “participate,” but to take direct ownership of a
specific ”pillar of knowledge.” Each pillar is essential to the fulfillment of the
mission, and unique to that person’s expertise. Even the venue and the place
settings are designed to impart a sense of gravity and importance. Every
participant must feel that they are there for a reason.
Bárbara explains, “We want the best each person has to offer – when the
leader uses the word collaboration, it blocks them from understanding why
they need each person…This will make it more likely that you’ll have people
you don’t need.”Results over process
Other core beliefs developed in response to what Mesa calls the “Workshop
World.” These are default attitudes that have taken root among facilitators
over the years, slowly becoming ingrained and unquestioned.
In one early Mesa that did not fulfill its mission, Bárbara noticed that the
Leader had told participants repeatedly to “trust the process.” She realized
that this had caused them to lose focus on the final result, to proceed blindly
in the face of evidence that no progress was being made.
She tells people today to NOT trust the process. She explains that “When you
emphasize the process, you get something in the middle ground, and the
middle ground is never excellent.” The focus should instead be on the final
result, and whatever it takes to produce it.
Bárbara cites the example of a Mesa in which the participants were 11 year-
olds. The initial idea was to have them create a collaborative art project,
which would become the homepage of the client company. But then they
realized that most kids aren’t very good at drawing. They had to make a
decision: 
trust
 the process and put up with whatever it produces, or 
change
the process in order to produce the best possible results?
They chose the results, and adapted the Mesa process to produce it. A
professional illustrator was hired to turn the best of the drawings into a
homepage that met a high standard of excellence. Although there was some
disappointment on the part of the kids, in the end everyone could be proud of
the solution they contributed to, even if indirectly.
Lígia explains it this way: “Trusting the process has people think more about
the process they’ll be participating in, and less about the result.” And a Mesa
Leader is focused above all else on the result.
The bigger the challenge, the better the Mesa
In more recent years, a few lingering questions about when and where the
Mesa Method applies have been resolved through experience.
For example, “How big of a challenge can a Mesa be used for?” Afternumerous experiments with a wide range of clients, Mesa Co. have
concluded that it isn’t the size of the challenge that determines the feasibility.
Because the most talented people are driven by the greatest challenges, in
Bárbara’s words, “The more difficult the challenge we get, the better the
Mesa is.”
What does need to be calibrated is the mission and the prototype. The Leader
and her team need to determine what the team can make in a 5-7 day
timeframe that will help unlock the problem. This is a question of experience
and judgment, to thread the needle between feasibility and ambition.
Bárbara cites a Mesa with the Italian automaker Fiat as an example. The
problem was, “How can you create a connected car when everyone has a
better system in their pocket?” She knew that everyone who had anything to
do with cars was thinking hard about this problem. It is an enormous
challenge, and Mesa Co. had to think of a prototype that would meaningfully
advance a solution in just a week.
Following her instincts as a journalist, Bárbara reached for the most talented
person she could find: a well-known and respected car designer working in
Tokyo on one of the world’s biggest brands. He had never heard of Mesa and
didn’t know what to expect, but the pitch was irresistible: to fly to Brazil for
a week to work directly with the decision makers at Fiat, along with 15
people with all the relevant skills and knowledge he would need.
They knew they couldn’t prototype a car in five days, but they 
could
prototype an online store selling connected car accessories. Such a storefront
could be created in hours, and would allow for enough learning to forge a
path forward for the company.Anyone can take part in a Mesa
Another lingering question was, “Who can participate in and benefit from a
Mesa?” Internally, the team used the example of a dentist as someone who
probably wouldn’t work very well in such a free-form environment.
That is, until they actually had a dentist take part in one. The “cyborg artist
and transpecies activist” Neil Harbisson led an independent Mesa, and chose
as his mission creating a “telepathic tooth” that would allow him to
communicate with others subvocally.
They decided that they needed a dentist to advise on the feasibility and health
implications of the implant. He turned out to be an enthusiastic and critical
contributor, helping develop a hardware prototype that could be tested within
one week. Bárbara reports that he had a transformational experience, and has
become one of their most ardent supporters.
A new view of diversity
One question I had for Bárbara about the multidisciplinary team that makes
up a Mesa was, “How do you mitigate the friction between different
disciplines?” Working across so many different fields sounds great in theory,
but I wanted to know how such a diverse team could work together
effectively.Mesa held on a factory floor, to put the team in the manufacturing context
that they would be working on
A Mesa for “Creatives at School,” a non-profit program that teaches young
kids how to use design to change their livesAn early corporate Mesa in 2015, for the major Brazilian beverage brand
Brahma
An early corporate Mesa in which the prototype involved turning LEGOs into
walking sticks for the blind
It turns out that it is this very friction that is essential to Mesa’s success.
Finding themselves in a room of non-specialists, each participant is forced to
put aside the jargon, shortcuts, and conventions that are commonly used in
their profession, but that can often hide what needs to be revealed. They haveto set aside the built-in assumptions of their discipline, introducing what they
know in a new way.
One of Mesa Co’s most loyal clients is Coca-Cola, and they have done
numerous Mesas together. Each and every time, their employees are asked to
introduce themselves and their product anew. “But everyone knows what
Coke is…” they say, but it is in these re-explanations that new insights are
found. Instead of assuming that “everyone knows,” they have to explain it as
if no one does.
“Having diversity forces you to go back to the essentials,” Bárbara explains.
Each participant begins to see the people around the table as resources,
instead of narrow specialists. This view of diversity is not about keeping up
appearances or meeting an artificial quota. It is about producing the best
possible results. The Mesa Co. team has found again and again that the
greater the diversity of the team, the more relevant the solution is to the
world. The diversity of the team needs to match the complexity of the
challenge.
Five people with the same knowledge and same experience arguing around a
table simply do not produce breakthroughs. It is the sixth person, with their
new angle and new lens, that can see what no one else can see. This leads
Lígia to identify diversity as key to the speed and effectiveness of a Mesa: “I
don’t believe you can reach the result in five days without a diverse group.”
The Mesa Method of today is the product of a long journey, including both
breakthroughs and breakdowns. It borrows from journalism, advertising,
research, branding, and technology to accomplish the seemingly impossible:
to “conceive, develop, and prototype something in less than five days.”
This requires recruiting the most talented people in the world. As Bárbara
describes it, “We look for people who are running some of the most
innovative and forward thinking businesses of our time. Real doers who can
share their mistakes and learnings and, therefore, accelerate decision-making.
We are not talking about a specific pool of professionals that we fish from.
We are talking about finding the best person – whoever they are, wherever
they are – for that specific challenge. In that sense, Mesas resemble good
journalism: go and find who can best help you.”Mesa.School
 offers 18 lessons with the tools and principles they’ve
developed over seven years to enable this new way of working. Click the link
above to watch the first two lessons for free.Chapter 5: The Future of Work That Mesa Envisions
Mesa Co. considers their method not just a problem-solving tool, but an
entirely new way of working. As their ambitions have grown, they’ve begun
looking toward a future in which this way of conducting work is nothing
more than common sense.
In this chapter, I’ll outline a vision for what the future of work might look
like if Mesa has its way.
The era of the briefing is over
Central to the work of so many creative agencies and consulting firms is “the
brief.” It is the starting point of every gig. The bible that guides the project to
completion. But Mesa believes that the era of briefs is over, for several
reasons.
First, because the assumption underlying briefs has become outdated: that a
problem can be fully communicated in a written document. In fact, there is no
way for the problem owner to ever convey everything they know. They don’t
even know everything they know. So how can you?
Second, because briefs are a formal, bureaucratic process designed to satisfy
the needs of administrators, not doers. No one ever writes “I don’t know” in a
brief. They fill in some kind of answer, or omit that section altogether. It is
much easier, on the other hand, to say “I don’t know” in a group setting. This
“not knowing” is the opening a maker needs to start exploring. Filling out
forms only postpones the learning.
And third, because briefs do not get people excited to work on a project.
Especially when working across silos or companies, it is critical to get
everyone excited and eager to jump in. Handing them a long, dry document is
just about the worst way to do so. Mesa doesn’t allow clients to give
participants a brief at any point. It would defeat the very energy they are
trying to create.
What will replace the venerable brief? A mission. But it’s not enough to justchange what you call it. A mission brings with it a certain context. Missions
are completed by small, dedicated teams focusing completely on an objective.
Missions strive for important and strategic outcomes under uncertain
circumstances. There is an element of risk in completing a mission.
The future of work that Mesa envisions is one in which boring briefs are
replaced by challenging, but meaningful missions targeting the world’s most
pressing issues.
We believe in doing
One of Mesa’s favorite slogans is “We believe in doing.” The unspoken
subtext continues, “…rather than debating.” This imperative runs deep in
their culture – that it is doing that produces progress, not talking.
Their standard of success is not any of the typical ones used by most agencies
or consultants: meeting the deadline, on-time and on-budget performance,
customer satisfaction, or complying with the letter of the brief. A successful
Mesa is one in which the prototype becomes real.
It is a punishing standard, since so much of what makes a prototype into a
real product is outside Mesa’s control. No agency would touch such a
standard with a ten-foot pole. But it is essential to Mesa’s outlook on what
they are working for: something real in the hands of real people, not a
prototype on a shelf. Large companies now have the talent to do the hard
thinking. What they hire Mesa for is to help them take the next step into
action.
Founder and CEO Bárbara explains that, without holding themselves to such
a standard, it would be too easy to fall back into the “workshop world.” She
recounts that out of 140 Mesas, only seven didn’t produce a successful
prototype. She counts these as failures, even though the client found value in
the experience.
The future of work that Mesa envisions is one in which consultants,
contractors, agencies, and employees take responsibility for the ultimate
results of their work, instead of just fulfilling their own narrow function.Social responsibility will be part of every product
Looking at Mesa Co’s client list sometimes inspires a raised eyebrow – they
work frequently with companies like Coca-Cola, Dow Agro, Nestle, and
McDonald’s that have been criticized in an era of corporate responsibility.
Mesa Co’s mindset is one of positive engagement. By working closely with
these companies, they have found that they are able to shift how the company
thinks about their impact on the world. When first formulating the mission
and inviting external participants, it quickly becomes clear that the product
has to have a connection to a worthy cause or important problem. Otherwise,
experts and makers just won’t be interested in helping. The Mesa process
reveals that making socially responsible products is not just a marketing
strategy anymore. It is essential for attracting the best talent.
This is a different approach to corporate responsibility. Instead of shaming or
isolating companies and their products, they are invited to excel and to
innovate beyond the constraints that currently lead them into questionable
behavior. This makes them the source and the owner of their corporate
responsibility, instead of just minimally complying.
The future of work that Mesa envisions is one in which companies do good
while doing well, not because it looks good, but because it delivers the best
possible results.
The conviction of the maker
We are living in the midst of the “Maker Movement.” Around the globe,
garage hobbyists and weekend warriors are making software, hardware, and
content for side income, for fun and learning, or to solve a problem in their
community
But in the future, everyone will need to have the attitude of a maker. They’ll
need to know how to make things of high quality, even if that’s just a
webpage, a text document, or a well-crafted email. They will need to have
ownership over what they make, advocating for it in their organizations. They
will need a spirit of curiosity and constant learning, to stay abreast of the
changes rocking every profession and industry.As Bárbara says, “Part of what we do is trying to understand how things are
made. And that breaks this idea that there is a certain path that you have to
follow. Participants get a better understanding that it can be easier than they
thought, more in their hands than they thought. They get a better
understanding that everything there is has been created. And if everything
there is, is created, then I can create something that is completely new. Or
that someone hasn’t told me to do before.”
Makers know how things work, or they know how to figure it out. They
know that anything can be hacked. They understand that anything can be
modified, enhanced, or adapted if you open the cover and tweak things. This
“hacker” mindset is often totally foreign to people working in large
companies, who are used to relying on a process for everything they need.
Working with the Mesa Co. staff and external experts and makers, they
quickly learn that there is no prescribed path you have to follow to make
most things. If you leave out what isn’t essential, you can often create a
prototype in a matter of hours that gives you most of the learnings of the full-
fledged version.
Working on concrete, functional prototypes has a final benefit: it is very clear
what everyone needs to do after the Mesa ends. There is a jerry-rigged but
coherent thing sitting on someone’s desk, not just a pile of “takeaways” to
decipher. In many cases, this prototype can be taken directly into production,
instead of spending months in deliberations.
The future of work that Mesa envisions is one in which people work out of
personal conviction, not obligation. This conviction comes from personal
involvement in the nitty gritty details, and seeing how every detail determines
the final impact on someone with a need.
The power of feminine leadership
It’s hard to ignore that Mesa Co. is a company founded and led almost
exclusively by women. Although this was not an explicit intention, it also
wasn’t an accident.
Bárbara explains the connection to Mesa’s founding metaphor: “A Mesa is
always better when it closely resembles one of those long lunches, where youenjoy yourself, but also have a conversation and argue. There’s something
powerful in receiving someone well, in taking care of whoever shows up.
And that seems very feminine to me.”
One of the key roles in every Mesa is “Experience Leader.” This person takes
care of every little detail, from the place settings to the interior decoration to
the food. The job of the Experience Leader is to make sure that everyone
feels comfortable and at home. And this role has always been filled by a
woman.
Contrasting feminine leadership with the masculine version that is so often
the default, Bárbara says, “I think men really feel a pressure to be at the
center of attention…Women tend to be more comfortable with the number 2
position. And there’s something very cool about that, in being okay with
doing good work alongside someone you consider incredible…It would be a
problem if everyone had to always be #1.”
For Mesa Co., feminine leadership is about realizing that the more people
shine, the better the Mesa will be. It is about realizing that it doesn’t take
away your power to give power to others. Power is multiplicative – the more
you give away, the more you have. The Mesa experience naturally tends to
loosen the grip that people have on protecting their egos.
As Bárbara puts it, “It is about involving them in the situation that we all
need to do this, we only have a couple of days, so you don’t really have time
to bullshit, to be very ego-centric. It was very interesting when we started
working with companies, bringing decisionmakers like presidents, owners of
companies to the table, how the format didn’t allow them the space for their
egos…That causes people to finally understand what collaboration is about. It
is not about being nice, it is not about doing good to the world, it is about
finding the perfect match between your self-motivation and a collective,
shared motivation.”
The future of work that Mesa envisions is one in which the viewpoints and
the opinions of a talented group of professionals can become subsumed into a
collective mission. Not against their will, and not forever, but for one week,
in service of a mission that is greater than any single person.Transformation
The Mesa Co. team doesn’t often talk about it, but there is a transformation
that happens during the week, sometimes and for some people.
Creative, talented people, sequestered in a room and pushed to the edge of
their capabilities, find themselves amazed at how much can be accomplished
in how little time. For the first time, they see something through from
beginning to end, and show it to the world as their own creation.
Bárbara describes this epiphany: “It is the same feeling you get when you
bake a cake for the first time. The cake wasn’t there. You just have flour,
eggs, and sugar. And then you take it out of the oven and then it’s a cake. If
you have ever baked a cake, you know that feeling. It is really powerful.”
The transformation is conceiving of oneself as a creator. As the source of
everything that could be. The future of work that Mesa envisions is a future
of our own creation.
Mesa Method is reinventing the way organizations around the globe work.
Take the course at 
Mesa.School
 and join the movement. You can also visit
the official 
website
 to find out more about Mesa Co’s work, or email
hello@mesa.do
 to get in touch.About the Author
Tiago Forte is a writer, speaker, teacher, and researcher exploring the future
of work. In a previous life, he worked in microfinance, served in the Peace
Corps, and consulted for large companies on product development.
He currently runs 
Forte Labs
, an online productivity training firm, from his
home base in Mexico City. Forte Labs is dedicated to helping knowledge
workers transform their productivity using technology, primarily via the
online course 
Building a Second Brain
. Forte Labs also offers 
live
workshops
, other 
online courses
, 
1-on-1 coaching
, 
ebooks
, and 
organizational
consulting
. Past 
clients
 include Genentech, Toyota, Nestle, and the Inter-
American Development Bank, as well as startups, incubators, universities,
and nonprofits around the world.
Tiago writes for and manages 
Praxis
, a members-only subscription blog,
where he writes about topics relevant to the future of work, including
workflow design, behavior change, design thinking, and personal knowledge
management. His work has been featured in 
The New York Times
, 
Inc.
Magazine
, the Harvard Business Review, 
Lifehacker
, and others.
Drop us a line at 
hello@fortelabs.co
.About Praxis
Praxis
 is a members-only, subscription-based blog dedicated to exploring and
creating the future of work. Written and curated by 
Tiago Forte
, its mission is
to provide a private forum for smart people to learn about and discuss some
of the most insightful productivity ideas, frameworks, and practical methods
in the world today, as well as how to implement them.
For 
$10 per month
 (or $100 per year), members get access to:
1–3 exclusive articles per month, written or curated by Tiago
Members-only comments and responses
Early access to new online courses, ebooks, and events
A monthly Town Hall, hosted by Tiago and conducted via live
videoconference, to discuss that month’s articles or interview guest
experts
Topics we will explore include:
Personal knowledge management and 
Building a Second Brain
Workflow design and 
Getting Things Done
Habit formation and behavior change
Futurism and science-fiction prototyping
Design thinking and design principles for productivity
Self-tracking, data analysis, and technology tools
Organizational design and culture
Creativity and emergence
Theory of Constraints and applications to knowledge work
Mindfulness, alternative states of mind, and the inner game
and many more…
I know the time you have to invest in improving your productivity is limited,
and my goal is to help dramatically increase the signal-to-noise ratio of the
information you consume. My role will be to provide seeds of insight —
thought pieces, implementation guides, interviews, case studies, experiments,
audio and video, guest articles— to help discussions get started.
I believe that human productivity is fundamentally unbounded, that it doesn’trequire sacrificing health and happiness, and that work can be a vehicle for
personal growth and self-expression. If you believe the same, and are tired of
the same productivity advice endlessly recycled, join me below.
Click here for more information
, and to become a member. Email questions
to 
praxis@fortelabs.co
.