C
OPYRIGHTS
Copyright @Growth Media.AI, 2021
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods,
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission
requests, write to the publisher, addressed “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the address below.
parul@parulagrawal.com
info@growthmedia.ai
Ordering Information: Quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases by
corporations, associations, and others. For details, contact the publisher at the address above.
Ebook ISBN
: 978-1-7364412-0-6
Paperback ISBN:
 978-1-7364412-1-3
Formatted by
Vanzzsolutions (weformat)
Get Your 46-page Complimentary Ebook along with the purchase of The Growth Hacking Book
2 here:
https://growthmedia.ai/freeD
ISCLAIMER
The entire content of 
The
 
Growth Hacking Book 2
, must be considered as
exclusively informative and cannot in any way be understood as a substitute,
alternative or supplementary of professional opinions.
Despite the scrupulous care used in the preparation of 
The
 
Growth Hacking
Book 2
, drawn up with the utmost accuracy and diligence, it is not possible
ensure that the information contained within it is free from errors, omissions
or inaccuracies. The Publisher GrowthMedia.ai, Parul Agrawal, Rohan
Chaubey, Associate Partners Sourabh Goyal and Pia Singh, authors of the
book disclaim any liability, direct and indirect, towards readers, regarding
inaccuracies, errors, omissions, damages, deriving from the aforementioned
contents.
The authors of 
The
 
Growth Hacking Book 2 c
annot guarantee the users of the
book to obtain the same results of personal, character growth, psychological,
motivational, physical or any other nature or denomination on a par with as
set out in this work.
Within 
The
 
Growth Hacking Book 2 
the ideas of consultants and experts are
cited and hosted which in an absolutely free form, not constituting what they
affirmed an opinion of a professional or similar nature, offered their
contribution for information purposes only, without any presumption or
willingness to place oneself above the recognized traditional system. 
This
book is an anthology, and not the reflection of the knowledge of the
publisher GrowthMedia.AI and its employees. 
It is at the free discretion of
the user of 
The
 
Growth Hacking Book 2 
and its absolute responsibility for
any willingness to follow or replicate some of the advice proposed therein or
to contact other competent personnel, according to your own beliefs,
knowledge, habits and wills.Everything included within 
The
 
Growth Hacking Book 2 
must always be
understood as the subjective opinion of the author, given that these
considerations can also run counter to the precepts of knowledge taught in
universities and / or in the scientific world and therefore go there considered
as simple expressions or controversies of a personal and in any case non-
professional nature, having to make exclusive reference to/and reliance solely
on traditional and recognized fields of knowledge.
Publisher, Growth Media.AIH
ELLO
 F
ROM
 T
HE
 P
UBLISHER
’
S
 D
ESK
Facebook friends are not your real friends!
How many times have you heard this statement, believed in it and then
shunned away from engaging in establishing a connection with your social
space circle?
In December 2016, I had the golden opportunity of moving back to India
after living in the United States for almost 14 years. Me and my family
(husband and son) moved back with mixed feelings. On one hand we were
excited to be back in our mother country and live closer to our families while
on the other hand we were worried about starting afresh leaving the place we
had called home for over a decade.
Even amidst all this uncertainty one thing I was positive about was my stay in
India, no matter how short will be a cherished phase in my life because this
would give me an opportunity to meet some of my social media friends in
person.
And then finally in December 2017 just a few months short of my return back
to the US, I met some of the best digital marketers, growth hackers, social
media genies, podcasters and young entrepreneurs I had been in touch with
online at a network meeting that I co-hosted in Bangalore, India.
I had been following the work and even stalking most of these amazing
entrepreneurs online but when I met them in person my jaw literally dropped.
I had not anticipated that the average age of some of these talented
entrepreneurs would be 20 years.
A new wave of inspiration dawned at me after this meeting. Collaboration
and not competition has always been my business mantra and I started
thinking of ways that I could collaborate with these amazing entrepreneurs.That’s when I reached to Rohan Chaubey, India’s most followed Growth
Hacker whom I had also met at that network meeting and proposed him the
idea of doing a collaborative book as a way to give a platform to the talent
taking internet world by storm not only in India but other parts of the World
as well.
Being an established author and publisher I had the book publishing and
marketing knowledge whereas being the community leader Rohan had the
right network and contacts who could share their expertise in the book.
We spoke about this idea back and forth for about a year and then around
December 2018 we started reaching out to contributors to be part of The
Growth Hacking Book 1. After months of hard work, patience and sleepless
nights we released The Growth hacking Book 1 on July 13, 2019 both online
and at an in-person event in Delhi. The book was very well accepted by both
the growth hacking and internet marketing fraternity as well as by the people
who wanted to learn more about scaling their business using the power of
new ways of marketing. We also received tons of support from the
Government of India with Amitabh Kant, CEO of Niti Aayog, the policy
making division of India, personally endorsing the book.
This was truly unexpected! When we have the right intentions, the Universe
gives us back multifold. We started with the sole mission of giving a platform
to the young and upcoming digital marketers, content writers, social media
geniuses and growth hackers to share their expertise and received the support
and appreciation from all sectors including the Government of India.
After the success of The Growth Hacking Book 1 our circle expanded and
people started asking us about The Growth Hacking Book 2. In December
2019 we decided to make an open call for the second series and within 2
weeks we had 50 contributors enthusiastic to be part of the book. Writing,
publishing, marketing a book and that too a collaborative book is hard work
and takes lots of effort, planning, coordination and cooperation so Rohan and
I had no plans of doing The Growth Hacking Book 2. But the love and
support we received from the community gave us the motivation to publish
The Growth Hacking Book 2.
We started reaching out to the contributors of this book in February 2020 and
after a year of continuous labor, communication, collaboration and dedication
we are proud to present you THE GROWTH HACKING BOOK 2.Within the pages of this book you will find 100+ battle-tested growth
strategies categorized under the concept of GrowthSet (Acquire the 
SkillSet
+ 
Install the 
MindSet + 
Employ the
 ToolSet
) that will help you grow
professionally and personally in the new decade.
It’s our sincere hope that you will find at least one strategy that will help you
achieve new heights through the information provided in The Growth
Hacking Book 2.
Yes, Facebook friends can be real support and allies so do not shun away
from reaching out to them just like we did which gave way to The Growth
Hacking Book Series and community.
Thank you for your support and welcome to the 
World of Growth!
Cordially,
Parul Agrawal
Author & Publisher
www.parulagrawal.com
www.growthmedia.aiD
EDICATION
Dedicated to all our readers who work 
passionately crafting their dreams, building their 
empire and leaving a legacy...A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to express our deep and sincere gratitude to all our authors
who believed in 
The Growth Hacking Book
. Thanks to all our contributors for
authentically sharing their invaluable insights and growth recipes in their
chapters.
The completion of this resourceful book could not have been possible without
the efforts of all the wonderful people whose names may not all be
enumerated but their assistance is greatly appreciated.
We would especially like to thank the following friends who have been
working tirelessly behind the curtains:
Sourabh Goyal and Pia Singh: 
Our associate partners who were as
involved as us and went out of their way generously investing their
efforts and time to bring this project to successful completion.
Angela B. Spragg: 
For her enthusiasm, her encouragement, her
positive vibes and interviews with the contributors of the book.
Anu Bansal: 
For helping with content writing and beta reading.
Abishiekh Jain
: For helping with content writing.
Anitha Ghantasala
: For helping us with valuable administration work
and for providing another set of eyes to the edited chapters.
Deepak Gupta:
 For helping with the formatting of the manuscript.
Dhanur Sehgal: 
For building the Facebook chrome extension 
FB
Toolset
 as a lead magnet for The Growth Hacking Book.
Hardik Lashkari: 
For helping with his legal advice and copywriting
skills.
Haswata Prasanna: 
For helping with graphic designing.
Kunal Aggarwal
: For graphic designing and marketing lead magnets.
Raghavendra Devadiga: 
For social content, chapter formatting and
admin tasks.
Rahul Chavan: 
For designing the website.Vagisha Arora: 
For helping us edit a significant set of first drafts.
Yash Fatnani
: For initial social media graphics design.
Kushagra Sharma, Piyush Kukreja, Ruchi G. Kalra, Ruchi Singh
& Tameka Chapman: 
For interviewing the authors and helping them
shine in the online space.
Invincible Winners: 
our online family of high achievers for their
constant support, feedback and encouragement.
We would also like to thank our parents and family members for their
support, patience and dealing with our crazy schedules as we burnt the
midnight oil while working on this book.
Above all, thanks to the Great Almighty, the author of knowledge and
wisdom for showering his love and countless blessings.
To the “Growth Hacking and Marketing” community for their moral,
financial and emotional support - thank you!
“It truly takes a village to build a dream, raise an empire.”
Sincerely,
Parul Agrawal & Rohan Chaubey
Compilers of 
The Growth Hacking Book Series
Founders, Growth Media AI
www.growthmedia.aiT
HE
 G
ROWTH
 H
ACKING
 B
OOK
 2 I
NTRODUCTION
By Rohan Chaubey
Imagine how it would feel if every time you launched a product, published
content, or offered services, you get an overwhelming response from your
target audience.
Everything you touch turns to gold. You built an engine to achieve product-
market fit.
You get overbooked even before the launch — no questions asked.
This book will show you how.
Prerequisite for Growth Hacking:
The prerequisite to hack growth is to understand that growth hacking is not a
pipedream or a silver bullet.
Aren’t we tired of hearing so-called “experts” telling us:
A one-trick pony that can make everything better.
If you do this one thing your startup will become a billion dollar
company.
No time or effort required, acquire paying customers while you’re
sleeping.
I don’t believe it. Growth Hacking requires hard work. Instead of asking,
“Will this work?”, ask yourself, “Are you willing to put in the work to make
it work?”
Growth Hacking is not magic. There are no shortcuts. Growth Hackers do
things that maybe traditional marketers wouldn’t think about doing.
If you’re reading this, I bet you are someone who thinks differently; you’re
not afraid to take the unconventional path to growth.All that’s required of you is a willingness to think about growth and
marketing in a different way than you’re probably used to.
Since the launch of The Growth Hacking Book 1, I have been invited to
hundreds of events, podcasts and YouTube shows to talk about Growth
Hacking. In this introduction chapter, I have answered the most commonly
asked questions about Growth Hacking.
If you’re able to consume and retain the knowledge and the information
presented in this introduction chapter, you will be counted in that small
section of the professionals who truly understand Growth Hacking.
If you say I know everything, that process blocks you from learning. And
even if you know something, you can recap. And after reading this chapter, if
you say you didn’t learn anything that means you weren’t reading attentively.
Because if you are attentive while reading, you will learn at least one new
thing. So be open when you consume this book.
If you don’t use it, you lose it. So keep using and sharing the golden nuggets
you find in this chapter and the book.
Everybody is looking for hacks but sometimes simplicity beats any hacks as
per this quote by Sir Richard Branson: 
“Complexity is your enemy. Any fool
can make something complicated. It is hard to make something simple.”
In this intro chapter, I have tried my best to explain Growth Hacking in the
simplest terms.
What is Growth Hacking?
Growth Hacking is conducting fast-track marketing experiments to uncover
unconventional or underexploited marketing strategies to acquire and retain
customers/users/followers using data and minimum resources (time, team and
money).
With marketing budgets shrinking and channels saturating, Growth Hacking
is the need of the hour.
It can be anything - viral marketing, publicity stunts, leveraging trends or
other people’s audience, inbound/outbound/automated, copywriting,
gamification, etc. The possibilities are infinite.A growth hacker is someone that operates at the intersection of product,
marketing, and technology to methodically acquire, activate and retain
users/followers/clients.
Marketing:
 Growth Hacker uses inbound and outbound strategies to attract
traffic.
Technology: 
Sometimes, growth is achieved by building growth tools, APIs
or no-code tech solutions. It is not necessary for growth hackers to be coders,
but a growth hacker should be able to write pseudocode to implement code-
heavy solutions and they should be able to figure out the technical
possibilities and limitations of the platforms.
Product: 
Growth Hackers should also be able to suggest or discuss product
level decisions that can be used to activate and retain users. Example -
UI/UX, gamification, copywriting, referral system within the product, etc.A growth hack is an unconventional + creative approach to marketing a
startup.
A growth hacker is someone that operates at the intersection of product,
marketing, and technology to methodically acquire, activate and retain
users/followers/clients.
Growth Hackers are in demand. Growth Hacking is among the top 15
emerging jobs by LinkedIn. And it is among the highest paying marketing /
digital skills.
What’s the difference between Growth Hacking and Growth Marketing?
There is no legal definition of “Growth Hacking” or “Growth Marketing”.
Don’t let others hypnotize you into thinking that you do not have the power
to define Growth Hacking or Growth Marketing. There are no boundaries.
Don’t let them box you into their idea of what Growth Hacking should be.
Sometimes Growth Hacking is also referred to as Growth Marketing.
However, some marketers may want to convince you that Growth Hacking is
short-term tactics and Growth Marketing is long-term strategies. That’s their
point of view.
In my opinion, Growth Hacks can be short-term or long-term. Ideally, they
should be repeatable, measurable and scalable.
Sean Ellis coined the term “Growth Hacking” a decade ago (in 2010) and
here’s what he published in one of his LinkedIn articles:
“Ultimately I care most about how to drive rapid, sustainable growth for
great products that provide real value. In my experience, breakout growth
happens when you experiment across all growth levers and this requires
close coordination between marketing, product, engineering, UX, data,
design teams…. When you call something growth marketing, it leads many
teams to add roles for growth product management, growth engineering, etc.
This is OK as long as people are working effectively cross-functionally to
experiment and accelerate value delivery (critical for sustainable growth).
But for many companies, cross-functionally working to drive growth has been
a huge challenge.”
Is Growth Hacking Illegal?There is a negative connotation to the word “Hacking” because we all hate
hackers that steal our private data, money or identity. However, Growth
Hacking is different.
Growth Hackers are not black hat hackers. Growth Hacking is not hacking in
a literal sense.
Growth Hackers do not adopt fraudulent means to grow a business. Growth
Hackers can find three types of growth hacks:
1
. 
Creative, innovative or novel marketing strategies.
2
. 
Pushing the boundaries or going to the edge or finding loopholes on
platforms, APIs, etc. But they will stay within legal boundaries.
3
. 
Leveraging technology (scripts, codes, APIs, softwares, etc.) to achieve
growth goals.
Difference between Growth Hackers and Digital Marketers?
The main differences between Growth Hacking and Digital Marketing:
Growth Hackers / Growth
Hacking
Digital Marketers / Digital Marketing
Growth Hackers are platform
specialists, yet platform
agnostic.
Digital Marketers are platform specialists.
Growth Hackers focus on full-
funnel marketing
Majority of the Digital Marketers focus on
top-of-the-funnel.
Growth hacking teams are
cross-functional built on
GrowthSet™ (Skillset +
Mindset + Toolset).
Digital marketing teams are usually
composed of non-technical people who rely
on developers, designers and data scientists
to implement their ideas.
Growth Hackers are data-
driven.
Digital Marketers may take decisions based
on their instincts.
Growth Hacking works best
for companies that have
achieved the product-market
Digital Marketing works to get your
product marketing off the ground.fit / must-have products.
All Growth Hackers are
digital marketers.
Not all Digital Marketers are Growth
Hackers. Digital Marketing is a subset of
Growth Hacking.
How Digital Marketers can become Growth Hackers?
Growth Hackers are Digital Marketers with strong analytical and technical
skills.
Digital marketers can become growth hackers if they relentlessly work on
developing their GrowthSet™.
What is GrowthSet™?
GrowthSet™ is represented with a mathematical formula.
GrowthSet™ = Skillset + Mindset + Toolset
GrowthSet™ will fuel your rise to stand out in a crowded marketplace and
become one of the finest growth hackers of the industry.Acquire the 
SkillSet
. Install the 
MindSet
. Employ the 
ToolSet.
One of the top three reasons startups fail is they do not have the right team
with members having mutually exclusive traits.
GrowthSet™ is a recipe for startup success. GrowthSet™ is the foundational
principle on which successful cross-functional teams are built.
Expanding the GrowthSet
™
 Formula:Skillset: 
Copywriting, SEO, Content Writing, Content Marketing, Design,
Conversion Optimization, Email Marketing, Outreach, Social Media,
Analytics, Marketing Automation, etc.
Mindset:
 Behavioral psychology, lean startup methodology, agile marketing,
data-driven decision making, experimental mindset, resourcefulness -
achieving growth with optimal usage of resources (time, money and team).
Toolset:
 Leveraging the latest technologies and employing the right tools and
APIs to automate or systemize or optimize functions for fast-paced
experimentation.
What is the job of a Growth Hacker?
Your job as a Growth Hacker is to discover / ideate and experiment
“measurable + scalable + repeatable” processes to grow an important metric
(North Star Metric) for a business.
Once you find a proven process that delivers predictable results, you either
try to automate it or systemize it by creating a SOP (Standard Operating
Procedure).
Growth Hacking Funnel
Difference between a growth hacker and a digital marketer is that the growth
hackers work at all stages of the AARRR (Acquisition, Activation, Retention,
Referral, Revenue) funnel.
The goal of the growth hacker is to move the website visitors down the
funnel.
Acquisition - Generating awareness and targeted traffic to your website.
Activation - Turning casual visitors into users.
Retention - Making users come back and keep them as long-term users.
Referral - Users recommending your product to others.
Revenue - Turning users into paid customers.
The revenue stage can come before or after the referral stage.Funnel
Stage
Growth TacticsAcquisition
1: Inbound (Pull Tactics)
1.1 Your Audience: Blogging, SEO, Podcasting, Social Media,
E-Books, Webinars, Guides, Whitepaper, Infographics,
Videos/YouTube, Slide Decks, Contests
1.2 Leveraged Audience: Guest Blogging, Guest Podcasting,
Speaking at Conferences, Guest Hosting Webinars, Deal Sites,
Marketplaces
2. Outbound (Push Tactics) - Affiliates, Direct Sales, Paid Ads,
Promotional Swaps
3. Automation - Network Invitations (Phone Contacts, Email
Contacts, Social Contacts), Social Sharing, API Integrations
Activation
Landing Pages, CTA, Copywriting, OnBoarding, Gamification,
Social Proof, Pricing (Tiers, Freemium, Discounts)
Retention
Email, Alerts & Notifications, UI/UX, Exit Interviews,
Community Building Email, Increase Value
*The above list is suggestive, not exhaustive.
How to become a Growth Hacker? How to learn Growth Hacking?
In 2016, I got my first (remote) job with a SF-based SaaS startup.
The founder and CEO called himself a Growth Hacker. He rarely spoke to us,
most of the time his wife (CMO) conveyed important information. So I
started Google searching and self-educating myself.
Being an autodidact it wasn’t difficult for me to understand the fundamentals
through the limited information on the internet. It can be difficult for the
newcomers who are keen to learn Growth Hacking, but can’t find a definite
path.
I’m sharing my learning path with an intention that it might help those who
are just starting out.
1. Spend time consuming content about Growth Hacking as much as you
can!
Take notes. Record the best ideas you have read.Put knowledge into action. Everything you do should be repeatable,
measurable and scalable.
I consume blog posts, videos, podcasts, books, webinars, event replays,
social media posts, etc.
2. Find someone who has “been there and done that.”
Look for mentors. If need be, hire them or work with them to learn
from them.
Growth Hacking is methodical. Learn about their lesser-known
strategies, tools, tactics, framework, processes, etc.
3. Cultivate Growth Hacking Mindset.
Leverage other people’s time, money, talents and network.
Leverage the power of scalable tools.
Look for trends, patterns and ways to systemize, optimize and
automate.
As they say, “The ‘secret’ is the mindset, not the toolset.”
4. Experiment and find your own Growth Hacks.
Come up with your original growth tools and tactics.
Sharing a few examples:
Twitter - I built a SaaS platform that helped my clients boost their
organic reach using Twitter influencers by automating cross
promotions via Twitter API.
LinkedIn - A client wanted to onboard 1000+ beta users for their
SaaS platform. I created a high-quality lead magnet, posted it on
my LinkedIn profile and it went viral receiving 330,000 views and
1000+ comments. We invited all the commenters to join our beta
platform.
Instagram - Instagram doesn’t have a friendly web interface to
access the contact information of your followers or influencers. So
we developed an in-house tool that helps you get the email and
phone numbers of Instagram accounts on scale.5. Understand marketing and analytics.
Know the rules to bend them to your will.
Harness the power of analytics.
Conclude based on data, not instinct.
Always be learning.
It doesn’t require any special qualifications to be a growth hacker. All you
need is a growth mindset. Anyone can learn growth marketing.
Learn from people who are better than you.
Collaborate with your peers.
Teach those who are new and need your help.
When to use Growth Hacking?
Identify if your product is a must-have or nice-to-have. Must-have products
are pain-killers and nice-to-have products are vitamins.
Growth Hacking works best for companies that have achieved the product-
market fit with their must-have products.
As Matt Brocchini, Co-Founder of Tinkering Labs defines:
“Product Market Fit is a magnetic force that attracts and binds customers to
products. The better the fit, the higher the market share, the more loyal
customers tend to be, and the more difficult it is for a competitor to lure
customers away. High fit means low customer acquisition cost, high loyalty,
and high lifetime customer value. Low fit means high customer churn, high
customer acquisition costs, and low loyalty.”
Growth Hacking Process
The 3-step simplest Growth Hacking process:
1
. 
Know your customers (Customer Profiling)
2
. 
What channels you can find your customers online (not restricted to
social media, it can be an off-beat or non-mainstream channel too)
3
. 
How you are going to reach out to them on scale (growth experiments
to systemize your outreach / marketing)Growth Engine (Distribution Channel and Tactics) -> Traffic -> Sign ups
(Funnel) -> Sales / Customers -> Engagement / Retention -> Referral / Word-
of-mouth (Repeat)
Architecture of a Growth Engine
1
. 
Come up with ideas / experiments (based on hypothesis)
2
. 
Prioritize growth experiments
3
. 
Run / Execute / Test
4
. 
Collect data
5
. 
Makes sense out of the data and analytics
6
. 
Iterate, scale / double-down, optimize, eliminate
Prioritization Frameworks to Prioritize Your Experiments Backlog
In case you have a ton of ideas and practically not everything can be executed
simultaneously, you use following popular prioritization frameworks:
1
. 
ICE = Impact (impact on the key metric) * Confidence (how sure you
are about the impact) * Ease (how easy it is to implement the
experiment)
2
. 
PIES = Potential (potential to impact the key metric) + Importance
(how important is this experiment at this given time) + Ease (how easy
it is to implement the experiment) = S (Average Sum or Score)
3
. 
RICE = Reach (how many people you estimate your experiment will
reach in a given time period) * Impact (impact on the key metric) *
Confidence (how sure you are about the impact) / Effort (how easy it is
to implement the experiment)
Skills of a Growth Hacker
What to look for in your growth hire or growth team:Image Credit: Scott Tousley // Reforge
The above points are suggestive, not exhaustive.
The 5-Step Framework for Growth Hacking Success
Step 1: 
Pin down your North Star metric (NSM)
Definition of NSM: The North Star Metric is the single metric that best
captures the core value that your product delivers to customers. - Sean Ellis.
Example of an NSM (North Star Metric): Quora (Online Community)
Core value = Facilitate the sharing of knowledge in the world.
North Star Metric = Number of questions answered.
Step 2: 
Build a Growth Model. Build apps/products/services so valuable that
businesses have no choice but to buy your solution!
Product (Value Creation) + Marketing (Value Communication and
Distribution) = Growth (Value Delivery)Step 3:
 Produce a strategy. Formulate action steps (tactics) building mini
models. Tactics are short-term; the strategy is long-term. A list of growth
tactics for each stage of the Growth Hacking funnel is shared earlier in this
chapter.
Step 4: 
Implement in a timely, regular scheduled way before you monitor.
Pay keen attention to your progress and adjust until you get what you want.
Iteration is the key.
Step 5: 
Focus on benefiting and serving others (Check Step 2 - Value
Delivery)
If you follow the above five steps, the world is your oyster.
How to use this book?
Knowledge is a commodity. It’s all about execution.
I encourage you to take action on the information in this book if you truly
want to unlock explosive, exponential and long-term growth.
This book is for:
 Founders, Entrepreneurs, CMOs, Growth Hackers, Growth
Marketers, Growth Engineers, Growth Leads, Product Marketers, Data
Scientists, or anyone working to grow a startup or a business brand or a
personal brand.
This book is an anthology. So the following chapters may or may not be
directly related to Growth Hacking, but they will surely help you propel
your career and business forward.
The book has four sections (SkillSet, MindSet, ToolSet and Bonus Chapters).
Each chapter is self-contained and addresses a topic that the contributor is an
expert in. Feel free to read any chapter you find interesting – this isn’t a book
you need to read front-to-back.
The book serves as a package of ideas, suggestions and lessons from over
100+ contributors and companies from 20+ countries. In the times of divide
and polarity, this is our humble attempt to stand in unity.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Rohan Chaubey is a celebrated Growth Hacker, multiple best-selling author
and publisher of The Growth Hacking Book series and host of
RohanChaubey.TV.
Rohan’s growth strategies and SaaS products have helped notable
organizations including UBER, RedBull, Candere by Kalyan Jewellers,
Freshworks, CelebritySchool, InVideo, upGrad, etc. and many SaaS startups
from the NYC, DC and Bay Area. He helps startups acquire their first 100 to
100K+ users/customers/followers through consulting and done-for-you
growth services.
Rohan is featured in media outlets including Forbes, Entrepreneur, HuffPost,
The Next Web and more. He is one of the most watched WordCamp speakers
in the world. He grew his social following to 300,000+ in record time.
He routinely empowers audiences of entrepreneurs, marketers, thought
leaders and students through his keynote addresses and breakout sessions on
Startup Growth Hacking that garner top praise from attendees and organizers.
Connect Here:
www.RohanChaubey.com
www.GrowthMedia.AiT
ABLE
 O
F
 C
ONTENTS
Skillset
A/B Testing To Enhance User Experience
By Aditya Ghosh
Creating A Hypnotic Lead Magnet To 10x Your Lead-Gen
By Piyush Agarwal
Creating Conversational Content Through Storytelling
By Hardik Lashkari
Setup Automatic Linkedin Alerts To Find Ideal Prospect
By Daniel Alfon
How To Make Your Copy And Content Convert
By Lain Ehmann
Maximize Influencer Marketing ROI By Sponsoring Content Production
By Satish Kushwaha
Marketing Strategies To Promote Your New Podcast
By Piyush Kukreja
Make Your Customers Your Sales Reps Through Referral Marketing
By Sarthok Siingh
Unbeatable SEO Tips For Your Personal Brand
By DP Vishwakarma
5-Step Framework To Build Your Personal Brand From Scratch
By Priyank Jain
How To Write Content That Achieves Marketing Objectives
By Sasidhar Kareti
Content Marketing Strategy: Questions To Answer
By Novnish Ramesh
Building A Brand Community Fueled By UGC
By Aneesh MalhotraSHY Content Strategy For Instagram
By Akash Anand
Pursuing Organic And Inorganic Strategies Simultaneously To Boost
Sales
By Yash Fatnani
Four Effective Marketing Channels To Acquire Your First 1000
Customers
By Abishiekh Jain
Best Practices To Become A Successful Affiliate Marketer
By Jitendra Vaswani
How To Position Yourself As A Real Estate Influencer
By Nitin Sachdeva
Leverage Facebook Live Feature To Attract Clients
By Durga Mamidipalli
Organic Marketing Strategies For Small Businesses
By Pawan Rai
The SEO Blueprint
By Charmis Pala
Writing Your First Book In 60 Days
By Aahana Mulla
The Ultimate Checklist For Compiling An Anthology
By Monica Kunzekweguta
Find Your Idea Worth Spreading
By Marie Incontrera
Master The VIP [Video-Impact-Profits] Code
By Kashesh Chhabbria
How To Craft A United Nations Worthy Speech
By Ruchi Singh
Become Top 1% Highest Earning Content Writer
By Vagisha Arora
MindsetBuild Profitable Marketplace With Zero Investment
By Avirup Mondal
D100 For Instant Authority
By Tanmay Nijhawan
Hacking Your Finances And Lifestyle
By Shlomo Freund
Virtual Age: The New Normal
By Haswata Sunil Harlalka
Unleash Your Book By Cultivating Effective Writing Habits
By Danielle Perlin Good
Engage, Educate & Evolve
By Rishabh Vij
The Cheese In The Pizza Pie
By Dr. Saumya Badgayan
Marketing With Authenticity
By Ruchi G. Kalra
Growing Business In A 3rd World Country
By Priya Kalra
Magic Hack For Super Memory
By Akshat Khandal
Critical Strategic Steps For Success
By Kamla Dasrath
Real Business Setup For Remarkable Business Success
By Tavis C. Taylor
Follow Your Calling
By Ananyaa Chhabria
Unleash The Business Warrior Within You
By Mirav Tarkka
The Laser Effect
By Robert Heath, Sr.
Six-Figure Business With Multiple Streams Of Income
By Tameka ChapmanHow To Hack Your Mindset For Growth
By Sourabh Goyal
Strong Foundation For Your Business
By Dr. Sheetal Karnik
Mind Mastery
By Rayson Choo
Entrepreneur As A Coach
By Saloni Kaul
Eight Acts To Achieve Umbra Clarity
By Angela B. Spragg
Think Product - Think Ecosystem
By Ajay R Gawali, Ph.D
Emotional Intelligence In Leadership
By Vibha Soni
How To Optimize Decision Making Based On Financial Statements
By Pia Singh
Turning Hate Into Love For Exponential Growth
By Noam Kostucki
Empowerment With Dignity – One Woman At A Time
By Ashwini Ashok Boraste, M.Phil, Ph.D.
Due Diligence – For One Life
By Sanjay R Gawali, Ph.D
Neuro-Marketing
By Evita Ramparte
Building A Master Mindset Plan: The 7 Steps To Success
By Dulce Nallely Vera
Growth Hacking Mindset
By Kamila Behrens
Slowly, Slowly Gets You There Faster
By Stephen O’Neill
ToolsetSafest LinkedIn Automated Cold Outreach Using Hyper Personalized
GIFs
By Stefan Smulders
How To Get First 100 Paying Customers For Your SaaS Product By
Email Outreach
By Will Cannon
Agile Martech To Growth Hack Sales With Neuro Linguistic
Programming (NLP): A Customer Centric Ai Approach For Data Driven
Sales And B2B Marketing
By Kushagra Sharma
How Superconnectors’ Use The Right Toolset To Win Big In Business
By ADitya Kandari and Rohan Chaubey
Build Your Own Digital Asset
By Raghavendra Devadiga
Using Memes For NUA (New User Acquisition) On Facebook
By Sindhu Biswal
Using The Psychology Of Your Customer To Implement Right ABM
Strategy
By Nitish Mathur
Leverage Other Well-Performing Youtube Videos To Get Free Or Low-
Cost Traffic
By Nader Sabry
Email Marketing: Experience Framework
By Ishaan Shakunt
Engineering As Marketing
By Charlie Patel
Setup And Grow A Radio Station To Increase Brand Presence
By Charlie Childs Jr.
5-Step Approach To Getting Media Coverage
By Niki Papaioannou
Be An Internationally Renowned Documentary Filmmaker
By Shruti Sharma
Driving Sales And Increasing Visibility For Your E-Commerce WebsiteBy Badr Berrada
Grow Your Brand On YouTube On A Shoestring Budget
By Aadesh Chauhan
Make Your First $100 Online In 100 Days With Freelancing & Blogging
By Om Thoke
Turn Your Website Visitors Into Paying Clients
By Rahul Chavan
Bonus Chapters
Complex Product Innovation Is The New Growth Engineering
By Dhanur Sehgal
How To Create A Million-Dollar Business
Featuring Noah Kagan
The Simplest Hack To Sell More Paperback Copies Of Your Book
By Parul Agrawal
Mantra To Grow The Business For Service Based Companies
By Surbhi Jindal
How To Start Your YouTube Channel As A Third Grader
By Kanha Agrawal
Khe Hy On Productivity, Finance And Blogging
Featuring Khe Hy
Networking - Make People Your Biggest Asset
By Sachin Raturi
Prevent Illegal Distribution Of Courses To Increase Long-Term Sales
Revenue
By Rohan Chaubey and Kunal Aggarwal
Word-By-Word Script To Avoid Ghosting From Potential Customers
[Sales Hack]
How To Build An Army Of Ambassadors For Sales
By Aahan Malhotra
Podcasts For Businesses
By Souniya KhuranaA Day In The Life Of A Content Marketing Manager
By Issac Thomas
Ways To Secure Your Digital Accounts As A Remote Team
By Jyotishman Nath
How To Make A Video Go Viral
By Rohan Chaubey
How To Recruit Affiliates For Your SaaS On Scale
By Rohan Chaubey
Ultimate SEO Checklist
By SEMrush
Grow A Targeted Following On Social Media By Engaging With Your
Competitor’s Or Niche Influencers’ Followers
By TexAu
Boost Your Sales By Recruiting Top Instagram Influencers
By Abhinav Rai
How To Find That 1% That Drives Over 50% Of Extra Revenue
Featuring Chris Out & Marlies VD Brekel
Success Of The Growth Hacking Book 1
Success Of The Growth Hacking Book 2
About GrowthMedia.AIA/B T
ESTING
 T
O
 E
NHANCE
 U
SER
 E
XPERIENCE
By Aditya Ghosh
Short Description: 
Replacing intuition with certainty using A/B testing.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 The goal of A/B testing is to find the best website variant to achieve a
specific goal and to learn which changes can push website users towards a
desired action.
Time to Implement:
 4 - 5 Hours
What You’ll Need:
Third-party tools like Optimizely, VWO, and Omniconvert to create
A/B tests. With their point-and-click tools, you can create variations of
a page and change elements to test your website. No coding knowledge
required.
Deploying Application as a Variant: You can host the variants behind a
proxy and deploy them as individual applications. NginX, Akamai,
Varnish, etc can act like a proxy and distribute the load among variants
.
Description/Overview:
Figure 1: 
Credits: Dilbert.comLaunching a website, a landing page, a product feature, or even a minor
change in a product involves three most important things:
Time
Resource
Money
The A/B Testing comes into play to help you figure what elements would be
the best to help us achieve the aim of getting better user experience, click-
through rate, conversion rates, retention and revenue every single day.
Benefits of A/B Testing:
Kills off the HIPPOs (That’s an acronym for the Highest Paid Person’s
Opinion)
More ideas can be practically tested, instead of being killed off on
whiteboards
Team members feel motivated because they get to see their ideas live in
the real world
Saves time and money
Limits bad experience to a small user base
Helps you gain confidenc
e
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
 
Identify the problem and figure out what you’d like to test
For example, let’s say you were to test the following two pages against one
another:
Version A: “Headline A” and a red CTA button
Version B: “Headline B” and a gray CTA button
So, develop your hypothesis (“I think changing the color from gray to red
will increase conversions”) and test one change at a time.
The important thing is to be clear on what you’re testing and why.
Step 2: Define your specific goal and how you will measure itSay you’ve to test the colour of your CTA (Call-To-Action) button. You need
to be clear on your goal and how you will measure this.
For example, it may tempt you to measure your results in actual sales or
conversions, but get more granular. You can measure the number of clicks on
the CTA itself to see which version performs better. Remember, the goal of
your analysis is to determine which of your two CTA variations generate the
most clicks.
Step 3: Set up your control and variation
Your “control” in testing-language is your “A” or status quo. Your
“treatment” is the “B,” the variation that includes the change you’re going to
test.
In the example, “A” has our CTA in dark gray; version “B” is red.
The only visible difference should be the element you are actively testing; all
other elements on the page should remain the same.
Step 4: Split your sample groups randomly and equally
There are several tools you can use such as Optimizely, Google 
Content
Experiments or Convert. These tools can easily split your audience, making
your task a lot easier.
Step 5: Start your testing and make your experiment live
Step 6: Drive traffic to your test
To get enough results for your test to be statistically significant, you need a
lot of action on your page during the test. The side benefit of A/B testing is
that you can use it to simultaneously test methods for driving website traffic.
Step 7: Gather data
Marketers attempting A/B testing for the first time often question how long
the test needs to be run.
Unfortunately, there’s no straightforward answer. It’s a waiting game. Put
your promotion into hyper-drive until you have statistically significant
results.
It can take as much as a month for your site traffic to yield significant results.
Or, you may find that what you’re testing doesn’t make enough difference to
measure.Maybe you’ll find that the red button and the gray button deliver the same
results.
Step 8: Analyze your funnel
Step 9: Promote the winner to be the next control
Step 10: Wrapping up
There are many variables that impact conversions. The time of year, the time
of the month and even the time of day.
As you wrap up your first A/B test, consider what you want to examine next.
Keep track of your data and results from A/B tests. By doing this, you can
develop a robust testing program to improve your user experience and
conversions
.
Conclusion:
A/B testing allows you to test value propositions on real web users within the
context of their actual interactions with your site.
A/B testing is an important technique for validating ideas. When used
alongside a coherent statistical method, it can provide robust information
about how to optimize a website.
However, to run tests successfully, your sample size must be sufficient.
“Test fast, fail fast, adjust fast”.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Aditya Ghosh is a speaker, trainer and startup professional with years of
experience and cross-functional expertise in product management, business
development and digital marketing. He has worked with acclaimed startups
like Urban Company, FabHotels, PlanetSpark, TechJockey and more.
He completed his masters from Management Development Institute (among
Top 10 B-Schools in India). Aditya had the honor of being featured by
LinkedIn in their article series “Professionals Of LinkedIn”.
Aditya is also the founder of LearningToShare, a platform that offers
speakers, professional trainers for academic and professional purposes, and
job placement assistance for students. He has given guest lectures at IIT
Delhi, MDI and various IIMs on topics like Data Visualization, Digital
Marketing, Product Management, and Personal Branding.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/ghoshaditya19
www.learningtoshare.net
“A/B testing kills off the HIPPOs (Highest Paid Person’s Opinion) and
inspires rational thinking.” - Aditya GhoshC
REATING
 A H
YPNOTIC
 L
EAD
 M
AGNET
 T
O
 10
X
 Y
OUR
L
EAD
-G
EN
By Piyush Agarwal
Short Description: 
Get 2x to 10x more leads at a fraction of the cost.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Create an irresistible lead magnet that offers massive value and quickly
turns complete strangers into buyers like clockwork.
Time to Implement:
 6 - 8 Hours
What You’ll Need:
PowerPoint, Keynote / Google Slides (videos, templates etc)
MS Word / Canva.com (e-book, checklist)
Fiverr (cover art, illustrations, editing, formatting etc)
MindMup.com (mind maps)
Description/Overview:
Lead magnet being the first part of your funnel is arguably the most critical
for your marketing success, because you cannot close a prospect that you
never acquired.
This growth recipe will teach you how to create high converting, irresistible
lead magnets that will help you capture attention of your ideal prospects
.
Step-by-Step Process:
A lead-magnet aims to solve a specific pain point that your target audience
has in a short span of time. If a lead magnet takes longer than 5-10 mins to
consume, it will lose its effectiveness.
Ideally, your lead magnet should be a fragment of your signature solution.
Step 1: Plan your contentDecide which step of your signature solution (core offer) you are going to
fragment out to give for free as your lead magnet.
Let’s take an example of a relationship coach who teaches men how to find
their right partner.
There is a multi-step process (signature solution) that a man needs to undergo
to transform from a single-guy in the basement who fears women to be a
confident, cool-person who has a girlfriend.
This coach can create and offer a lead magnet “5 Easy Ways To Small Talk
With Anyone” which is a fragment from his signature solution.
Action step: Draw a doodle on paper that shows your prospects’ journey from
PAIN (problem that you solve) to PLEASURE (your signature solution).
Then decide which step you want to fragment, and that will immediately
solve a small part of their big problem in 5 to 10 minutes
.
Step 2: Choose your modality
The next step is to decide which medium you are going to use to convey your
message and solve the problem.Choose a highly desirable and easy to consume format from the upper-right
quadrant.
Action step: Based on your topic from the previous exercise, pick your
modality for the lead magnet and write it under your doodle diagram.
Step 3: Craft a killer headline
You need to be ultra-specific while crafting your headline. Use your strongest
benefit to trigger powerful emotions and arouse curiosity. Invalidate your
competition and make a promise in a genuine and sincere manner
.For Example: How This Aztec Warrior Mindset Practice Helps Reboot Your
Mindset to 97% Clarity In 17 minutes (don’t trust anyone who claims you
can achieve 100%)
Notice how:
Aztec Warrior Mindset (arouses curiosity and triggers a positive
expectancy)
Reboot Your Brain to 95% Clarity (states the strongest benefit)
Don’t trust anyone (invalidates the competition)
17 minutes (increases perceived value by promising to save time)
Use power words to create an impact. Words like; never seen before, for a
limited time, little known, irresistible, etc. can make all the difference.
Action step: Write 10 power-packed and attention-grabbing headlines for
your lead magnet under your doodle from Step 1. Spend adequate time in
selecting a captivating headline which could help you with getting more
leads.
Step 4: Gather your content
You made a big claim in your headline. Now it’s time for you to keep your
promise.
Grab a notepad and write everything related to the topic. Collate all the
information at one place. You need not possess all the knowledge, you can
take help from Google to do your research.
Once you have written (or collected) all the information, start organizing into
the logical flow of steps. Remember, your lead-magnet should be consumable
in 5-10 minutes at max.
Action step: Create, curate and stack (logical order) all the information on a
sheet of paper
.
Step 5: Create a hypnotic lead magnet
Now it is time to give your lead magnet the final touch it needs to look
presentable.
You need not be a design genius to do this. You can use black and white text
with background, margins and images wherever appropriate.Add a strong call to action at the end of your lead magnet to inform the
prospects how the shared information fits into your signature solution. Drive
them to the action you want them to take to turn them from a lead to a paying
customer.
Action Step:
 
You can outsource this step on Fiverr to create your cover art
and format your hypnotic lead magnet.
Conclusion:
In a nutshell, this is exactly the lead magnet framework which is used by top
companies to generate leads for their businesses.
Once you get a lead magnet working for you, you can then create more such
lead magnets as an additional gateway to drive high-quality leads for your
business.
A lead-magnet should aim to solve one big problem that your target audience
is facing.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Piyush Agarwal is a business mentor, Owner of SEO ORB, Co-founder of
Offer Hacking Mastery, Director at Rangoli Ayurved and author of Easily
Create Hypnotic Offers for Anything.
He is an accomplished consultant in marketing strategy and automation with
specialization in seo, paid traffic acquisition and sales funnel audits.
Content Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/agarwal-piyush
www.offerhackingmastery.com
“Lead magnet being the first part of your funnel is arguably the most
critical for your marketing success, because you cannot close a prospect
that you never acquired.” - Piyush AgarwalC
REATING
 C
ONVERSATIONAL
 C
ONTENT
 T
HROUGH
S
TORYTELLING
By Hardik Lashkari
Short Description: 
Create high-quality content on any topic in a
conversational tone with a tinge of storytelling.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 Double the interest of the readers for your content and get more
engagement and leads.
Time to implement:
 1 - 2 months
What You’ll Need:
 Creative Mindset, Hemingway Editor or ProWritingAid
to proofread the content.
Description/Overview:
Who would you prefer to talk to? Humans or robots?
Humans, right? Because that’s an obvious choice. As against a robot, a
human can understand you, empathize with your problems and value your
emotions and feelings.
In the business world too, people like to interact and transact with people, not
the companies.
They prefer to work with those brands who have a human element involved
in them
.
Content is the gateway through which you talk with your prospects. If your
content doesn’t seem human, how will people connect with you or your
brand?
That’s where conversational content and storytelling come into the play.
While SEO is important to bring traffic to the website, only conversational
content with a shade of storytelling can captivate the attention, especially
today, when the attention span is merely 8 seconds.Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Speak to one even if you are writing to many
While speaking to 50 people at once, will you say, “If you are one of those
listening to me patiently”? Or rather you’ll say, “If you are listening to me
patiently”?
The second option makes your listeners feel that you’re talking to them
personally.
The same rule applies to writing too. You might be creating content for
thousands of people. But, write it in a way so it feels you are speaking to a
person personally.
How to do it? Use a second pronoun - YOU or YOUR.
Make your readers feel special. You can’t personalise the content, but
definitely make the tone more personal.
Step 2: Create stories around your daily experiences and conversations
Keep your ears and eyes open while talking to the people around you.
Everyone has a story to share and a perspective / information to add.
Pick up a few ideas from those stories and create content around them. Keep
people (real characters) at the centre of your story
.
They might be your customers, employees, vendors, friends, parents or even
strangers.
We all love to read stories - whether they inspire us, make us laugh or leave
us emotional. We are naturally wired to remember stories.
That’s where, towards the end, you can connect that story to an underlying
promotional message or Call-to-Action.
Step 3: Write short sentences
You’re writing something to educate, entertain or inspire your audience. It’s
not a detailed essay to score good marks in your high school.
Write short, crisp sentences and combine them together to form several
paragraphs of 2-3 lines each.
Sometimes, especially while describing a conversation between two or more
people, even one-liners or two-three words work well.Step 4: Ditch old-school Grammar for a moment, please
Old school English teaches you not to end your sentence with a preposition or
start a sentence with a conjunction, either.
You can ditch some of the old-school grammar rules safely because they
have become obsolete now.
Conclusion:
With the advent of voice search and reduction in attention span,
conversational content will not be a luxury, rather it will turn into a necessity.
Right now, it’s your best chance to begin writing content in a conversational
tone for your readers and clients.
Whether you write a 1,000 words article for your website or a 200 words post
for LinkedIn, conversational tone will help you stand out.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Hardik is a human content writer, a conceptual storyteller, and the founder of
Content Flavour. He helps startups, companies, CXOs, founders, and
entrepreneurs build a credible online presence through information-oriented
content writing and action-oriented copywriting.
Hardik has a penchant for creating conversational content and stories to
educate and inform the audience and call them to action. According to him,
“One should never create content for their clients or the company. Instead,
they should focus on the client’s clients or the company’s customers. That’s
where the magic unfolds.”
With 55,000+ followers on LinkedIn, he is featured among the top 1% in the
“Writing & Editing” Industry as per LinkedIn Social Selling Index. Besides,
his articles have been featured numerous times on the front page of Youth Ki
Awaaz: a media platform in India. He has also been a guest columnist in
numerous publications including BBN Times, Thrive Global, Inc42,
YourStory, etc.
Content Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/hardiklashkari
www.hardiklashkari.com
“Conversational content allows you to connect with your readers and
gain trust quickly - which then becomes a base for forming long-term
relationships.” - Hardik LashkariS
ETUP
 A
UTOMATIC
 L
INKEDIN
 A
LERTS
 T
O
 F
IND
 I
DEAL
P
ROSPECT
By Daniel Alfon
Short Description: 
Get notified by LinkedIn when people become your ideal
prospects.
Difficulty Level: Easy
Goal:
 Automatically generate leads (5-10 ideal prospects every week).
Time to Implement:
 10 minutes
What You’ll Need:
 A free LinkedIn account
.
Description/Overview: 
Are you struggling to limit the time you spend
finding prospects? Would you like to be notified whenever someone gets
promoted and becomes your ideal client?
Use a little-known feature I’m about to share with you. You can make
LinkedIn email you when a member becomes a new VP of a Saas company
based in San Francisco (or anything else you like)!
You don’t need a LinkedIn premium account. It’s like Google Alerts on
Steroids
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Define 5-10 terms that will make a LinkedIn profile an ideal
target for you
Example 1 (media/Influencer): Podcast, Radio Show, TV Host, Syndicated,
Forbes, NYT, Author, Guest, Bestselling, Million.
Example 2 (technical prospect): CISO, Startup, AWS, Vulnerability,
Security, Intrusion Detection, Computer Forensics, CISA, CISSP, San
Francisco.
Step 2: Create an alertGo to LinkedIn’s homepage (available on desktop-view only, not on mobile
app). In the top-left search bar, enter at least 6 of the terms in a row, ignore
what LinkedIn suggests and hit enter.
In the page results, click “People” (top left)
Select the desired Location - a metro area works often best (Greater
NYC, San Francisco Bay Area)
Examine the first 10 results. Would you stop everything you do to
research/reach out to them?
Keep improving your search until you do:
1
. 
Too many irrelevant results? Use different terms, narrowing it down by
using better and narrower terms.
2
. 
Great but not enough results? Remove one narrow term and run the
search again.
Examine the number of results mentioned at the top left.
If your bandwidth/product means you’ll be happy to get only 1-5 new leads a
month
,
 shoot for 350-500 results.
If your bandwidth/product means you’ll be happy to get 1-5 new leads a
week, shoot for 800-2000 results
.
Note: Don’t aim for more than a few thousands. LinkedIn might stop sending
you new alerts if you don’t open alerts for some time.
Ready to create the alert?
Look for the “Create search alert” bar on the right of the search results
page
Select/confirm “Weekly” and “by email”.
That’s it!
LinkedIn will only alert you about new people, which means they have just
updated their profiles.
Why could this be the perfect timing to reach out?Answer lies in understanding, what is it that often sets many new managers
apart:
a
. 
A fresh perspective about the way to move ahead
b
. 
An ability to look at suppliers in a less emotional way than incumbents
c
. 
A desire to make an impact fast
d
. 
A will to bring an external force that’ll help them deliver and position
themselves in the new organization
Step 3: In the coming weeks, LinkedIn will start sending you emails from
searchalerts@linkedin.com
“Sam: 7 new people found for CEOs in Vancouver!”
“John: 11 new people found for co-founders in Austin!
“Sarah: 29 new people found for Community Managers in Greater London!”
You’re one click away from accessing those people’s LinkedIn profiles. Then
it’s up to you
!
For best results:
1
. 
Always visit those profiles with a “Public” setting
2
. 
Your profile should be stellar.
3
. 
Whenever possible, leverage your network to obtain a meaningful
introduction.
4
. 
Watch Rohan Chaubey’s LinkedIn
1 
tips and start taking LinkedIn more
seriously.
Conclusion:
If you know the exact clients you’re looking for, this hack will enable you to
get fresh leads on a daily or weekly basis, delivered courtesy of LinkedIn, for
free.
You can create three alerts for free. Create alerts for
Different types of targets: clients, partners and Influencers
Specific/general (larger metro area, omitting specific terms)One search for your next manager (e.g. new online startup CMOs in
your metro area)!
To your success!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Daniel Alfon is the author of 
Build a LinkedIn Profile for Business Success
.
Daniel joined LinkedIn in early 2004 and publishes articles and exclusive
content about advanced LinkedIn strategies. Daniel is based in Israel,
keynotes online summits and helps teams from all over the world leverage
advanced LinkedIn strategies. Look out for Daniel’s online course.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/alfon
www.danielalfon.com
References:
https://youtu.be/aIH5RzVXoc4
“A little-known feature on LinkedIn is creating search alerts which can
automatically deliver fresh leads to your inbox weekly.”- Daniel AlfonH
OW
 T
O
 M
AKE
 Y
OUR
 C
OPY
 A
ND
 C
ONTENT
 C
ONVERT
By Lain Ehmann
Short Description
: Understand the importance of “C3” copywriting formula
to create content that converts.
Difficulty Level
: Intermediate
Goal
: Create powerful content that sells using the C3 formula.
Description/Overview:
You can’t sell more if people aren’t moved by your Content.
The best content and copy adheres to an approach, I call “C3” which stands
for Clear, Compelling and Creative. If you can nail all three of these
elements, you are going to blow away your audience.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Be clear
People need to be told what to do.
Whether it’s a Video, Facebook Live or Email, What is it that you are trying
to tell people?
If you had to sum it up in one sentence, what would it be? Get very very clear
on what that is
.
Step 2: Be compelling
You have to issue some kind of invitation for them to take the next step and
move them to action. That’s how when something is compelling, it moves
them along.
Step 3: Be creative
Create something that’s out of the ordinary, that’s unexpected.It doesn’t have to be funny or wacky. It just needs to be a little bit different.
This is where you can infuse your copy with Personality and make it unique
to you.
Step 4: Let’s Break It Down
When you sit down to create content, start with Clarity. Before you write an
Email, before you record a Facebook Live, before you record a Podcast
Episode ask yourself, “What is it that I really want to say to people?”
Whatever it is, start with a clear sense of what you’re trying to accomplish.
The next step is to make it Compelling. The question I want you to ask
yourself for this step is, “What do you really want them to do as a result of
listening, watching, or reading your content?” Whatever it is, know what that
is. Remember, these two questions are before you even start to create your
content.
Once you answer those first two questions, you can start sketching out your
content. For instance, if you’re recording a video, sketch out the outline. If
you’re writing an email, do a first draft.
When you have an outline or first draft of your content, you can now ask
yourself, “How can I say this in a unique way? How can I share an
unexpected example? What kind of stories can I tell to make this really come
alive for people?”
This is where you weave in your unique stories. You’ve got stories. You’ve
got anecdotes. You’ve got lessons that only you have lived through. Share
those. Keep a list of those. Keep a list of your Clients’ or Customers’ stories,
too. You’ve got to dig a little 
deep, but think of how you can demonstrate
things in an unusual or unique way.
Conclusion:
So to recap, start with the first question, “What do I want to say?” Be very
clear on what it is you want to convey. Second, ask, “What it is that I want
them to do?” Once you answer those two questions, you can add in the fun,
creative stuff. That’s what will make you really stand out and make your
content and copy come alive.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Lain Ehmann is a communication strategist, copywriter, and coach who has
worked with some of the largest names on the internet as well as numerous
New York Times best-selling authors. A Stanford graduate and the author of
several books, Lain shares her strategies and tips through her website and on
Facebook through her group, The Simple Truth: Insider Strategies for Your
Six-Figure Business.
Connect Here:
www.fastlain.com
www.facebook.com/groups/565730323944869
“Use the “C3” copywriting formula to create content that converts.
“C3” stands for Clear, Compelling and Creative. If you can nail all three
of these elements, you are going to blow away your audience.” - Lain
EhmannM
AXIMIZE
 I
NFLUENCER
 M
ARKETING
 ROI B
Y
S
PONSORING
 C
ONTENT
 P
RODUCTION
By Satish Kushwaha
Short Description: 
To maximize influencer marketing brands can sponsor
the production of the videos for creators instead of sponsoring a particular
video.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 5X ROI on your influencer marketing spend.
Time to Implement:
 Within 2 weeks (finding influencers and striking a deal)
What You’ll Need:
Prospective list of influencers
Capital to sponsor video production or a studio or gifting shooting
equipments
Description/Overview: 
With millions of passionate fans hungry for good
content, YouTube influencers are becoming attractive partners for brand
collaborations.
With many brands jumping on the influencer marketing bandwagon, it is
important to maximize ROI.
Whenever someone says YouTube influencer marketing, the first thing that
comes to mind is paying money to YouTube influencers 
for creating videos
or sending your brand products to them for an honest review.
But there are loopholes here: Paying on a per-video basis is expensive.
Having one or two videos made by the creators won’t have much impact as
the audience would tend to forget your brand very soon and move on to the
next video created by the influencer.Therefore the key to maximize the ROI of your influencer marketing lies in
repetition. Everytime someone sees their favourite influencer’s video, your
brand is talked about for a minute or so.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Identify creators that can represent your brand.
This is one of the most important steps - finding influencers that can
responsibly represent your brand.
Shortlist the creators with an audience base most likely to be your target
audience. For example, if you are a beauty brand, then you must go for
creators who create make-up tutorials.
Step 2: Invest in a long-term partnership.
Instead of paying them per video basis, try striking a long term partnership
deal.
Sponsor a studio space or send them a gear that might help them in the video
production. It could be a good quality camera, lights or backdrop, etc.
This would cost you more than you would have paid for a single video, but
here’s how you can maximize the ROI - The partnership terms could be, the
creator will add a 30-60 secs ad about your brand in every alternate video for
6 months or a year.
Step 3: Partner in terms of time versus videos.
Partner in terms of time and not the number of videos. For example, the
influencer can mention your brand in every video or alternate 
video
irrespective of the content they create and mention the gear or studio space is
sponsored. Then they can talk about your brand for 30-60 secs.
Pros
Long-lasting marketing:
 This will create an element of repetition and
therefore will have a long-lasting impression on your potential consumer
base.
Win-win for everyone involved:
 This would reap direct benefits to the
content creators without any third parties (agencies) taking a cut.
Cost-effective:
 This approach is cost-effective and can drastically maximize
the ROI of your influencer marketing campaigns.Cons
Limitations in terms of number of influencers:
 You obviously can’t send
expensive gear to everyone or offer a studio for shooting to a lot of creators.
So you would have to fixate on the number of creators.
Limited Scope:
 An influencer with millions of audience might already have
invested in an expensive gear, but they might still appreciate the studio space.
Conclusion:
This strategy of sponsoring video production makes the creators want to stay
associated with your brand for long-term.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Satish Kushwaha is an Entrepreneur, Keynote Speaker, Blogger and
celebrated Indian YouTuber who has received 5 YouTube awards. He has
more than 500K+ subscribers on YouTube.
Connect Here:
SatishKushwaha.com
www.youtube.com/satishkvideos
“The key is making a lasting impression on your audience’s hearts and
minds through repetition and long-term association with influencers.”-
Satish KushwahaM
ARKETING
 S
TRATEGIES
 T
O
 P
ROMOTE
 Y
OUR
 N
EW
P
ODCAST
By Piyush Kukreja
Short Description: 
Easy exquisite marketing tips to promote your new
podcast.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Gain your first 100+ listeners for your new podcast show.
Time to Implement:
 One week (depends on other variables such as the size
of your existing audience and the engagement across your social profiles).
What You’ll Need: 
You can launch your podcast for free using anchor.fm. It
also supports distribution across social channels and across 10+ popular
podcast listening platforms like itunes, Spotify and Google podcast.
Description/Overview: 
Podcast is a great way to build your authority and
increase visibility among new audiences.
Imagine starting your YouTube channel in 2008, when the competition
between creators was far less versus right now.
Similarly, now is the best time to start a podcast. When there is more supply
than demand, that’s when the saturation starts. Seize the opportunity before it
gets competitive
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Generate buzz before you record each episode
Intimate your audience that you are going to record a Podcast episode with
“X” guest who would be talking on the “Y” topic on your social profiles.
In case you are planning a solo episode, ensure that you keep your audience
engaged by encouraging them to ask questions related to the topic you’re
going to talk about.
Ideally, you can do this 1-2 days prior to recording the episode.The easiest way to make your podcast popular is to start conversations about
it to drive engagement through curiosity.
You can create polls, conduct surveys, use Instagram question stickers, or let
your audience ask you a question on Twitter using a hashtag (Example:
#AskPiyush).
This pre-recording promotion will help you generate buzz and curiosity for
the upcoming episode.
Step 2: After recording the episode, publish a precap on social media
While you’re recording the podcast episode, ask your guest to answer the
questions of your followers which you collected at Step 1. If you are
recording a solo episode, you can address the questions of your followers.
This will make your followers stay tuned to your podcast as they will be keen
to know if their questions were on the show.
After you have recorded the video, publish on social channels with creative
copy tagging the guest, their details and the topic you discussed. It is
advisable you post a captivating graphic/episode cover image.
You can encourage your audience to comment “Notify” if they 
wish to be
notified when the episode goes live. You can share the episode link with all
the followers who engage with your promo / precap post.
You can use the Instagram Story “Countdown” sticker to build the hype for
the episode.
Step 3: Distribution strategy after publishing the podcast episode
If you do interview-style podcasts, create an eye-catching creative and email
it to your guests. Express your gratitude for being on the show and send the
live episode link. Encourage them to share the episode with their audience.
Here’s a short checklist for podcast promotion:
1
. 
Write a compelling summary of your episode highlighting the key
points discussed. Have cliffhangers to entine readers into listening to
the full episode.
2
. 
Post about the new episode across all social media platforms tagging
the guest (if any). Share bite-sized clips from the episode.3
. 
Run Facebook/Instagram ads by retargeting people who
visited/engaged with your Instagram or Facebook page. Show them an
ad of your podcast episode with “Listen Now” as the call to action.
4
. 
Reply everyone who engaged with your posts and send them a direct
link to the episode.
5
. 
Notify your email
 
subscribers and chatbot subscribers. Mention the key
points, authority of the guest, takeaways and actionable insights for the
listeners.
6
. 
Add a podcast banner on your blog/website to convert your website
visitors to listeners.
7
. 
Transcribe the podcast and share it as a blog post on your website
and/or Medium or LinkedIn article.
8
. 
Create Infographic and Carousel for Instagram and LinkedIn post
sharing the main takeaways from the episode. In the last slide, add a
CTA to listen to the entire episode.
Conclusion/Summary:
Rather than focusing on expensive equipment and editing tools in the
beginning, focus on providing a consistent stream of value to your listeners.
Initially it might be hard to build the audience for your podcast, but focus on
distribution consistently and the flywheel effect will kick in.
Take a #90Days90PodcastEpisodes challenge to stay consistent. It will
definitely build a sizable audience for your podcast show.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Piyush Kukreja is Digital Marketing Practitioner, Podcaster, and International
Best Selling Author of The Growth Hacking Book 2. He helps
coaches/trainers launch, grow and scale their online training business to 6-7
Figures.
Piyush is the host of the #1 Hindi Digital Marketing Podcast “The Piyush
Kukreja Show” where he shares his digital marketing journey and also
interviews digital marketing experts, Neil Patel, James Smiley, Parul
Agrawal, Rohan Chaubey, and the likes. Piyush’s work is recommended by
India’s digital leaders, like Jitendra Vaswani, Viraj Kalra, and more.
Connect Here:
www.piyushkukreja.com
www.piyushkukreja.com/podcast
“When there is more supply than demand, that’s when the saturation
starts. Seize the opportunity before it gets competitive. Now is the best
time to start a podcast.” - Piyush KukrejaM
AKE
 Y
OUR
 C
USTOMERS
 Y
OUR
 S
ALES
 R
EPS
 T
HROUGH
R
EFERRAL
 M
ARKETING
By Sarthok Siingh
Short Description:
 Make your customers your 24/7 sales representatives.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal: 
Increase 30% of your annual sales using simple referral strategies.
Time to implement: A week.
What You’ll Need:
 Field tested scripts
Description/Overview:
Generating referrals has always been considered as just a matter of luck. It is
considered synonymous to hope rather than possibility on-demand by
implementing strategic steps.
Furthermore, business owners are afraid of asking for referrals because they
feel that it might sound pushy.
In this chapter I will be sharing with you simple referral strategies using
which any business can exponentially increase their referral sales by 30%.
Step-by-Step Process:
Referral Hack 1: Don’t ask for a referral
What I actually mean is that the word ‘refer’ or ‘referral’ is a cliched 
term. It
is like using the word ‘sales’.
It is always advisable to use sophisticated terminology to convey certain
meanings. For instance, the word “business” or “business development” is
more respected than the word “sales”.
It is more desirable to use the word “introduce” than saying that you want a
“referral”. Example, “Do you know someone who you can ‘introduce’ to
me?”Referral Hack 2: Condition to do business
You can set referral as a condition for your client if they wish to do business
with you. Here’s a field tested script.
Hypothetical example -
“
Mr. Akash, I have been in this business for the past 5 years and 70% of my
new clients come through recommendations by my existing clients. It happens
because I deliver proven results. Similarly, I intend to offer great services
and deliver amazing results for your business. And if you are satisfied on
your end, I would want you to introduce me to two people. Is that okay with
you?”
So, in this way you have set up a condition for your client and prepared them
well in advance that you are going to ask for referrals.
Referral Hack 3: Respond to ‘no’ to improvements
When your client says they don’t know anyone or can’t think of anyone or
just politely says ‘no’ to you.
You: Mr. Naresh, I want to be the person whom you are comfortable
introducing your friends to. So what do you recommend that we can improve
so that you can introduce people to us?
Client: I feel you can improve x,y,z and, in fact, while working with me, I
didn’t like a,b,c. I think you should have done it differently.
You: Mr. Naresh, if we do x,y,z and a,b,c that you recommended 
will you be
more comfortable introducing people to us?
Client: Sure, that can be done.
Referral Hack 4: Build referral ventures
Referral ventures to be precise are collaborations with entities or individuals
to form an alliance to help you get high quality leads.
Let me share a simple framework that you can use to find a referral venture.
You have to ask three questions to yourself-
What does my customer buy before my product/service?
What does my customer buy during my product/service?What does my customer buy after my product/service?
You have to find a product or service that is complementary in nature to your
product or service.
Example: A copywriter needs copywriting projects. What does a client buy
before or after a copywriting service? A client will opt for a digital marketing
service provider. Similarly a digital marketer also requires a good copywriter.
In this case, both the services are complementary in nature and not
competing. Thus a copywriter can collaborate with a digital marketing
service provider.
Conclusion/Summary:
Using these field tested scripts, you can get more clients from your current
list of clients. If you truly deliver value to your customers, they will be happy
to recommend you to others.
Word of mouth marketing can do wonders for your business. It is one of the
best underutilized organic marketing strategies.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Sarthok Siingh is India’s first and only referral marketing consultant. Apart
from giving himself a fancy title he feels more happy by making business
owners aware about how they can generate sales organically in their business
through referral marketing.
He helps business owners add a referral system to their businesses so their
existing customers start generating high quality referrals becoming voluntary
sales reps.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/sarthok-siingh-96b42a63
“It’s great to get client referrals, but you must also reciprocate to return
the favor. This will make referrers continue to refer business to you.” -
Sarthok SiinghU
NBEATABLE
 SEO T
IPS
 F
OR
 Y
OUR
 P
ERSONAL
 B
RAND
By DP Vishwakarma
Short Description
: Best personal SEO practices to ensure high ranking on
Google for your personal brand.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal
: Visibility up to 3-4 Google SERPs (30-40 indexed web pages with
positive content about your personal brand).
Time to Implement
: SEO is a time-consuming process. If your personal
brand (keyword you choose) is unique, you can rank within six months or
less.
What You’ll Need
: Your personal website.
Description/Overview:
Your personal brand defines who you are and what you do. Personal branding
is much more than just a name and a logo.
Rand Fishkin, Gary Vaynerchuk, Neil Patel and likes have built their
business empire through consistent personal branding. When you search their
names on Google, you see all the SERPs (Search Engine Results Page) about
them and their work. That immediately gives you a perception that they are
well-known in their industry.
Similarly, when someone searches for you, they should find all the search
results about you. You may want to control your online reputation by having
positive news, content and mentions about your personal brand, at least up to
3-4 pages of Google search results
.
Your personal brand is a getaway to your online reputation and how your
audience perceives you.
This step-by-step guide will help you build your personal brand on Google.
Step-by-Step Process:Step 1: Know yourself
Before you start building your brand, spend time with yourself. Chart the
areas of your interests, expertise, achievements, etc.
Do a thorough analysis considering your niche:
Who are you? What do you do?
What do you want to be known for?
What is your USP?
What is your core expertise?
This simple exercise will help you figure a niche in which you can build your
online visibility.
Step 2: Book your domain name and grow your online presence
Having your personal website with your name as the domain name is an
essential component of building your brand since:
Google indexes websites faster when you have a website with your
name in it.
It gives a professional approach to your name and business.
When your target audience visits your personal website, they should be able
to immediately understand who you are and how you can help them.
Step 3: Find the potential keywords for your personal brand
Well, having a set of powerful keywords matching your niche is a must to
rank your blog/personal website. Here is a set of keywords for my personal
site:
In building a personal brand, your goal is to stand out among others in your
industry and you can do this by taking reference of someone who has been
there and done that.
Find the influencers of your niche. Search for their blogs or publications they
have contributed online. Analyze what took them to reach where they are,
what they have done or what they are doing. Imitate them, and then do better.
Step 4: Set up your blog
Blogging helps with SEO. And you can write blog posts using the keywords
you identified for your personal brand thereby improving your chances of
ranking for the terms.
A blog helps with meeting a number of Google search ranking factors. A
regularly updated blog with high quality content can help your website
perform better on search engines.
Step 5: Find guest posting opportunities
Guest blogging is a great tool to enhance your online reputation and also
build backlinks for your personal site.
Implement these practical strategies to find guest blogging opportunities:
Network with fellow bloggers with similar target audiences through
social sites (Youtube, Instagram, Twitter and Facebook) and request
them to publish your guest posts.
Join platforms that support publishing content: Medium, YourStory,
Quora, Pondr, LinkedIn, Reddit, etc.
Reach out to high-authority blogs in your niche and submit a guest
post.Searching for “your niche + blogs” is the quickest way to find relevant
blogs within your niche. Once you find such websites, check if they
allow guest posting or contact them through the about us or contact
page.
Using the above search strings, you can easily find the websites that allow
guest posting.
Bonus Step:
 Write books, launch courses, build products and grow your
social following. This will help you gain visibility and trust among your
audience.
Conclusion/Summary:
Personal branding can play an instrumental role in making you stand out in
the crowd among your competitors. It is the first step to climb the ladder of
online business success.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
DP Vishwakarma is an author, speaker and leading Digital Marketing
consultant and SEO expert in India, having helped hundreds of startups,
businesses, and professionals across the globe to raise and lift their identity
on Google.
He is the founder of KeywordsFly Technology Pvt. Ltd., Marketing Head of
CodexFly Technology Pvt Ltd., and co-founder at Intellect Apes LLP. Apart
from this, DP has started BloggerWlogger (a platform for all content
enthusiasts), KeywordsFly Tool (Digital Marketing tools), and FitApes
(Fitness and health platform that helps users achieve their fitness goals via
online programs).
Vishwakarma has been interviewed by some of the prominent Digital
Marketing Institutes like DSIM, PIMS, Digital Vidya and EduPristine. He is
also featured in Hindi and English newspapers including New Indian
Express, Patrika and Financial Express.
Connect Here:
www.dpvishwakarma.com
www.linkedin.com/in/dp-vishwakarma
“Your personal brand is a getaway to your online reputation. Make
your name a brand people confidently invest into.” - DP Vishwakarma5-S
TEP
 F
RAMEWORK
 T
O
 B
UILD
 Y
OUR
 P
ERSONAL
 B
RAND
F
ROM
 S
CRATCH
By Priyank Jain
Short Description: 
This 5-step framework can help entrepreneurs and
professionals to grow their income, impact, and influence on social media.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Time To Implement
: It’s an ongoing process as your personal brand evolves
over a period of time.
What You’ll Need:
Social media accounts
Charismatic personality
Overview/Description:
Building a personal brand is about following timeless principles and
fundamentals of human psychology, marketing, and branding that are not
based on the nuances of “trending” social media platforms.
A personal brand can be defined as building credibility and authority among
the one’s target audience. It is your online portfolio as it puts your reputation
at stake. Hence, building a personal brand is indispensable for any business to
thrive
.
Building your personal brand can help you with the following five attributes:
Building your authority
Building trust with your target audience
Building your credibility in the marketplace
Giving you a massive competitive edge
Making your process of selling very simpleWith the help of social media, you can reach out to thousands to millions of
people with a click of a button. Hence, social media has enabled
professionals to build their personal brands and reach opportunities that were
previously inaccessible.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Identify your brand
When you show up online you need to show up as your most authentic
version that inspires your audience to know, like, and trust
 
you. Hence, you
need to have clarity in communicating these points:
What are your strengths and passions?
What is your
 
purpose of doing what you are doing?
What is the
 
problem that you’re solving for your audience?
What makes you unique?
Step 2: Identify your Ideal Client Avatar (ICA)
Personal Brand is not about YOU it is completely in service to your ideal
client avatar.
Knowing your ICA is crucial as all your messaging, content, and audio
visuals are going to be targeted towards them.
You need to take a survey with your ICA to find their pain points, desires,
mindset, habits, etc. The better you know them, the more influential you
become by leveraging the known information
.
Step 3: Launch your brand online
You need to build your online presence so your target audience can find your
content and connect with you. Figure the right platforms according to your
business. It can be Facebook, Instagram, Youtube, LinkedIn or TikTok that
your ICA uses the most.
Build your personal website. You don’t have to be present on every platform
but experiment with platforms and double down your efforts on those that are
working for you.It is advisable that you start out by focussing 80% on one platform and its
growth and the remaining 20% in the distribution of content on others
initially.
Step 4: Create a content strategy
Content is the key ingredient for building your personal brand.
Your content (text, graphics, video, or audio) needs to be relevant, helpful,
and problem-solving to resonate with your target audience.
You can focus on creating broad content that focuses on building your
persona and relationship with the audience (motivational and personal stories,
beliefs, mindset, life experiences, etc.). Also, you can focus on creating niche
content that positions you as an expert of a particular niche (marketing,
branding, health and fitness, business expert, etc.)
Step 5: Monetization strategy
There are many ways of monetizing your personal brand. It can be done by
promoting your products, services or other people’s products or services
(affiliate marketing).
You can sell through content marketing or media buying, organic or
inorganic ways and inbound or outbound methods
.
Conclusion/Summary:
This 5-step framework will help you launch, build and monetize your
personal brand. It makes you stand out in this noisy marketplace and
positions you as the go-to expert in your industry.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Priyank Jain is a proud Jain entrepreneur, a passionate public speaker and
host of ‘The Edutainment Show’. He started his journey as a Youtuber and
now has expertise in personal branding and founded a marketing agency. He
helps millennials, business owners and professionals grow their brand and
attract targeted clients online with the help of his proven strategies.
Connect Here:
www.priyank-jain.com
www.instagram.com/priyank.jain_
“Building a personal brand is about following timeless principles and
fundamentals of human psychology, marketing, and branding.” -
Priyank JainH
OW
 T
O
 W
RITE
 C
ONTENT
 T
HAT
 A
CHIEVES
 M
ARKETING
O
BJECTIVES
By Sasidhar Kareti
Short Description: 
Writing human-centric content to increase session
duration on your website.
Difficulty Level:
 Intermediate
Goal: 
To improve conversion rate, build a loyal readers base and make
search engines fall in love with your content.
Time to Implement:
 A year to learn how the digital content philosophy
intersects the humans as well as the search engine giants.
What You’ll need: 
No specific tools other than a basic word processor and
internet browsing habit.
Description/Overview: 
Content is for humans. The content creation is done
with an attempt to communicate about the product/service with the readers.
The chances of turning casual readers into customers are more when you
write in a human tone rather than delivering it into monotonous robotic form
by incorporating the traditional SEO practices.
Some SEO experts still think keywords alone can do better SEO. Of course,
keywords were SEO back in the last decade where people used to stuff
keywords at the bottom of the page or in meta tags. It doesn’t work now.
Keywords may give exposure to search bots but they have become more
sophisticated and intelligent. The implementation of Artificial 
Intelligence
into search engines started learning the writing styles and intention of the
author of the content.If the content is to be created, it should incline more towards the user’s
understanding. This will improve the session times which are still a signal for
better content. Example., 70 out of 100 visitors bouncing off a website within
a minute or two will not weigh more than 5 out of 20 visitors doing the same.
This means, 70% bounce rate with 5 times more traffic is not equally
qualitative with 25% of bounce rate with 1/4th of it.
Step-by-Step Process:
How to achieve higher session duration on your content with human-centric
content?
Step 1: Define the purpose of the content
Any content you create must have a purpose. Creating content just because it
is a high volume keyword may not necessarily help you achieve your
marketing objectives. You must define your purpose while creating content
for top, middle and bottom of the funnel.
Step 2: Address the pain points
Research the pain points and problems of your readers and address them.
When a reader finds you acknowledging their problem, they are likely to
stick and read the rest of the content thereby increasing the session time.
Step 3: Focus on smart SEO
Don’t worry about keyword density, instead focus on covering the topics and
related sub-topics as naturally as you can. It doesn’t help to use the old
keyword targeting strategy, it helps to ignore keyword research completely.
The key is to find a balanced approach.
Step 4: Proofread the tonality
Your content should be conversational. You must write as you 
would speak.
Write as if you were speaking to your reader. Even though you are writing for
a crowd, write it as if you are speaking to one person.
Conclusion/Summary: 
Though the name is artificial intelligence, it is meant
to serve humans better. They are coded to learn human behavior and favor
human-centric content. Search engines demote over optimized web pages.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Sasidhar Kareti is a jack of all trades. He is an author, content writer, digital
marketer, programmer, and project architect. He runs a tech blog where he
has contributed over 1500+ articles so far. His blend of technology and
digital marketing knowledge makes him a MarTech enthusiast that
companies love to work with.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/sasidharkareti
www.sasidharkareti.com
“Search engines themselves favor human-centric content rather than
robotic (over SEO optimized content).” - Sasidhar KaretiC
ONTENT
 M
ARKETING
 S
TRATEGY
: Q
UESTIONS
 T
O
A
NSWER
By Novnish Ramesh
Short Description
: A blueprint to creating a powerful content marketing
strategy.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
Establishing an effective content marketing strategy that will help you
generate leads and bring in conversions for any content.
Time to Implement: 
1 – 2 hours
Description/Overview:
Having a working streamlined content marketing strategy can help you grow
your business without wasting your resources and time. You can ensure that
your content marketing efforts bring you success. This will in turn grow your
traffic and increase conversions for your business.
Step-by-Step Process:
In order to create a powerful content marketing strategy you need to answer a
set of questions to ensure a system that works even without you even in the
long term. Let me give you a process whereby you can create your content
strategy within an hour. You can use these questions and steps even outside
of content marketing
.
Step 1: Create a vision
What is your content about when it reaches its full potential?
You need to be clear on the end game to make a content marketing strategy.
Have that unique vision for your content because it’s going to play a huge
role in every decision you make about your content and this will be the hook
that will attract attention.
Step 2: Define goalsWhat are the key goals of your content?
Some examples can be:
Generating Traffic
Improving Revenue
Engagement
Step 3: Map the metrics and KPI’s
How will you know if your content is successful?
Make them specific and measurable. Put a number behind each of your goals
and have a time frame.
I want to increase my revenue by 1000 euros within the next month.
Step 4: Determine who is your audience
Who are you creating your content for? What problem are you trying to
solve?
When you create content you need to have a target audience that will benefit
from your content.
What groups of people are you creating content for, and where do they hang
out?
Create buyer personas
.
Step 5: Take inspiration
Where do you look for inspiration?
Sometimes even if you have all the information you need, your mind can go
blank because you need that inspiration or starting point. Maybe you have
come across some ad that you liked, or an article that you read.
Make sure you have a swipe file where you can store everything that
inspires you so that you can get back to it for ideas.
Note down the list of places that your audience are present in and be
there to get inspired.List down the blogs and online websites where you can find
information.
Step 6: Outline your differentiators
How will this content be different from what is already available?
Do you know what content you have already created?
How do you store your content?
What is the competition creating?
Are there any content gaps that I can utilize ?
Step 7: Find your unfair advantage
What about you, your business, your style, your team, etc. what is it
that gives you an advantage?
Step 8: Find the suitable content formats
What are all the types of content that you are going to create?
What type of content best works at each buying stage of the consumer?
What are the successful types of content that currently work?
Step 9: Gather the resources
Who will produce the content
What resources and tools are required
What about your publishing workflow and content scheduling?
Step 10: Maintain a content calendar
Do you know when you are going to publish your content on each of
the platforms you have targeted?
Do you have a content calendar set up for a period of time?
Step 11: Create contentFrom the research that you have done in the previous steps you should have a
clear idea of creating the content and the value you will be providing to your
audience.
Step 12: Distribute and promote the content
Do you have the list of channels you will be distributing your content
on?
Do you have promotion tools in place for these multiple channels?
Key Relationships – Who are the big influencers capable of boosting
your content if you get them on board?
Lead Magnets and CTAs – What items can you use to encourage
people to opt in, and what will your CTA be?
Step 13: Repurpose your content
You need to get your content in front of the consumers eyes at least 7 times
before they take an action.
Do you have a plan on repurposing your content in different ways
across channels?
Conclusion/Summary:
Rinse, Results and Repeat.
Of course once this is all done, you will be measuring your results to see
what has worked and what hasn’t and how you can do better for the next
time.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Novnish Ramesh is a Content & Campaign Marketing Manager EMEA -
helping companies and brands generate results with marketing activities.
He is a passionate, cross-functional, creative and result driven marketing
specialist with almost 8 years of marketing experience across product
marketing, digital marketing, project management, content and campaigns.
He is also the Author of “The Use of Sensory Marketing and its impact on
Consumer Behavior”, which brings an innovative aspect and a different
perspective to strategic marketing.
Content Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/novnishramesh
“Content Marketing isn’t just about creating content. Spend 20% of the
efforts in creating content and 80% into distributing content.” - Novnish
RameshB
UILDING
 A B
RAND
 C
OMMUNITY
 F
UELED
 B
Y
 UGC
By Aneesh Malhotra
Short Description: 
Build and grow a community fueled by user-generated
content.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 Build an engaged community of brand enthusiasts.
Time to Implement:
 150 - 200 hours
What You’ll Need:
Dedicated UGC Website/Microsite
Community Lead
Description/Overview: 
Contribution of content from end user for end user,
acts as the strongest marketing content for a brand. It can be a product
testimonial, use case or an outreach message to the audience so as to
influence and persuade the buyer behaviour.
Strong UGC community (online forum) can only be built if the user content
pertains to any emotion and gratification.
You need a website or microsite where users can come to publish and
consume content.
UGC community needs to be constructed on two pillars:
Emotion involved while posting UGC content
Constant gratification for posting content
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Encouraging participation and provoking an emotionIn order to cause members to publish user generated content, you need to
plan a campaign or contest or activity that encourages them to get involved.
The activity should make the members passionate about integrating the brand
or community values in their content.
Step 2: Deliver gratification for posting content
To build a strong UGC community we will need the emotional content from
the users and brands need to provide gratification.
There are three types of gratification:
Immediate
Regular
Grand
Immediate Gratification
Whenever users post any content in the community they need to be gratified
then and there, so that they are motivated to do the same again.
For instance, when users submit content in the community, we can reward
them with points for sharing the content which can be redeemed against
future purchase from the brand.
Regular Gratification
To build a strong community we need to identify moderators / influencers /
community drivers.
Moderators would be allowed to share content, start conversations to build
the rapport among community members and become community influencers.
These moderators are likely to motivate and influence more members to join
and share quality content in the community
.
Grand Gratification
It could act as the biggest motivator for members to share content and engage
in the community.
Grand gratification must be planned periodically to keep them excited. It
could be released on special days or festivals to motivate members to publish
more content thereby bringing more traffic to the community.Conclusion/Summary:
UGC content helps in creating content for marketing the brand, collecting
social proof, influencing buying behavior and building an army of loyal
customers who will vouch for the brand.
Some brands that have employed this strategy successfully: Maggi, Starbucks
and Coke.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Aneesh Malhotra is a marketer, strategist, community builder and personal
branding expert. Aneesh runs a personal branding agency that serves top-tier
celebrities, thought leaders and visionaries. He has worked as a sales expert
for various brands in multiple niches.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/aneesh-malhotra-5bb71289
“Business is all about building a community, adding value, offering
services and making revenues. Community is the foundation of every
business.” - Aneesh MalhotraSHY C
ONTENT
 S
TRATEGY
 F
OR
 I
NSTAGRAM
By Akash Anand
Short Description: 
Increase visibility on Instagram using a timeless
Instagram content strategy that doesn’t flop.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Increase reach and engagement on Instagram.
Time To Implement:
 1-2 hours weekly
What You’ll Need:
1
. 
Design tools: Canva / Venngage / Photoshop / InVideo / Crello
2
. 
TopNine.co for finding best performing posts
3
. 
Instagram business profile for in-app analytics
Description/Overview:
In 2020, Instagram turned 10. It still confuses creators and businesses on
Instagram how to grow organically on the platform. Instagram has kept
evolving throughout these 10 years. The platform has become more
sophisticated than any other social media website.
Instagram has made it harder to grow organically. What worked for others in
the past may not work for you now
.
In this growth recipe, I will be sharing with you a timeless Instagram content
strategy framework. It’s a three-step framework and I call it the SHY strategy
so it’s easy to remember:
Step 1: 
S
earch large accounts in your niche and find their best performing
posts.
Step 2: 
H
ashtag stacking for greater visibility.
Step 3: 
Y
our analytics data should guide your content strategy.Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Search large accounts in your niche and find their best
performing posts
Find similar accounts in your niche. There are two ways to search:
1
. 
Input keywords related to your niche in the search bar on the app and
discover the accounts.
2
. 
Search hashtags related to your niche, and most likely one of the
trending posts from the top nine might be from a large niche account.
Once you have found the large accounts in your niche, head over to
TopNine.co to find the best performing posts on those profiles. Take
inspiration from the top performing posts in your niche and create similar
content.
Experiment with all formats: videos, quotes, IGTV, infographics, lifestyle
pictures, stories, guides, engagement bait posts (double tap, swipe, comment,
network in comments, questions), etc.
Use Photoshop or freemium design tools like Canva, Venngage, InVideo or
Crello to create scroll-stopping content on scale.
Step 2: Hashtag stacking for greater visibility
Research three tiers of hashtags:
1
. 
Popular niche hashtags are widely searched and used.
2
. 
Less-competitive hashtags are easier to rank on.
3
. 
Branded hashtags are unique to your brand.
Instagram allows you to use up to 30 hashtags.
Step 3: Your analytics data should guide your content strategy
After a few weeks of experimentation with different formats of content, use
Instagram’s in-app analytics to see which posts produce better engagement
and reach. Double-down on the topics and format of content that are
consistently outperforming.
Conclusion:Using this three-step Instagram content strategy framework, you are surely
uncovering insights that you never had before. It involves competitor and
audience research, content creation on scale and adjusting strategy based on
analytics.
In a few months from now, when your profile will attract hundreds to
thousands of followers and brand advocates, you’ll be thankful that you put
in the work.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Akash Anand is a lead generation strategist and funnel hacker via paid
advertising. He helps organization and startups with his expertise in building
funnels, Instagram and LinkedIn marketing. In the past 3 years, he has served
over 50 clients from India, US and Australia.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/akashanandgrowthhacking
www.askakashanand.com
“You’ll see an uptick in engagement if you use hashtags naturally in
your sentences instead of adding a bunch at the end of your caption.” -
Akash AnandP
URSUING
 O
RGANIC
 A
ND
 I
NORGANIC
 S
TRATEGIES
S
IMULTANEOUSLY
 T
O
 B
OOST
 S
ALES
By Yash Fatnani
Short Description: 
Leveraging the power of social media and micro
influencers (influencer marketing).
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Generating brand awareness and leads.
Time to Implement: 2 weeks.
What You’ll Need:
Expertise in running Facebook ads
An Instagram account
List of micro-Influencers of your niche
Description/Overview:
Facebook ads and influencer marketing independently work well. The
combination of running ads and leveraging the potential of micro influencers
is what makes them work extraordinarily well.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Create Facebook ads
With a clear objective, prepare multiple creatives for your ads. The creatives
should be per the brand aesthetics and the ad copy should be simple yet
compelling
.
Identify a broad set of audience to aim at, and further narrow it down to a
more specific audience for your ad.The broader set of audience is determined by their Interests & Behaviour.
Audience Affinity is something that you need to know, based on your
industry and campaign objective.
To further narrow it down, you need to use Detailed Targeting to emphasise
on those audiences who can potentially buy your product or service.
After publishing your ads, keep monitoring results to keep track of responses.
Step 2: Identify and hire micro influencers
Analyze the right influencers based on the need of the campaign. The aim is
to reach out to niche influencers.
Here’s one method to find influencers:
1
. 
Follow an account that is making decent content similar to the niche of
your campaign.
2
. 
Using Instagram suggestions (Suggested Profiles feature), you will be
able to find other profiles in the similar niche.
3
. 
Shortlist influencers based on their audience size, engagement, content
and creativity.
Influencer outreach plan:
1
. 
Direct Message – Reach out to all the shortlisted influencers. Request
them to send their audience insights, weekly or month reach statistics.
2
. 
If their statistics look acceptable, propose a barter or paid partnership.
Exchange ideas and provide guidance to the influencers; encourage their
inputs as well because they will know what kind of content their audience is
likely to appreciate more
.
My Case Study Based on the Above Growth Recipe
The following results are from one of our FMCG clients. We used a mix of
Facebook advertising and influencer marketing with micro influencers.
Total Clicks = 1,513
Leads = 1,200
Total Outreach = 1,53,343Conversions = 3000+
Conclusion/Summary:
The ideal mix of both, organic and inorganic marketing strategies is the
perfect recipe to drive successful awareness and lead generation campaigns.
Here, the conversions were greater than the number of leads because the
leads placed multiple orders or referred their contacts which didn’t get
tracked.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Yash Fatnani is an entrepreneur and marketing consultant with vast
experience of working in industries such as F&B, Real Estate, Fashion &
Lifestyle, Health & Wellness and Events & Entertainment. He has a proven
record of driving revenue gains and brand awareness through social media.
He offers his marketing services for startups who are transitioning to growth
stage.
Connect Here:
www.linkedIn.com/yashfatnani
www.medeacup.com
“Instead of sticking to one, a combination of organic and inorganic
marketing strategies can deliver unexpected results.” - Yash FatnaniF
OUR
 E
FFECTIVE
 M
ARKETING
 C
HANNELS
 T
O
 A
CQUIRE
Y
OUR
 F
IRST
 1000 C
USTOMERS
By Abishiekh Jain
Short Description:
 Leveraging online and offline marketing channels to gain
your first 1000 customers.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 1000 customers
Time to Implement:
 3 - 12 months (depending on your execution speed and
effectiveness)
What You’ll Need:
1
. 
A product or service
2
. 
Social accounts
3
. 
List of industry events
Description/Overview:
A lot of founders think “If you build it, they will come”. With the
competitive landscape, that doesn’t hold true.
Building the perfect product or having a useful service is great, but without
marketing /distribution your prospects can never discover it. What doesn’t get
discovered, can’t be bought.
It is not the best product, but the best known product that wins
.
Coca Cola, Pepsi and Thumbs Up; all three taste almost the same. However,
as of 2015 Coca-Cola had a market share of 48.6% whereas Pepsico had a
market share of 20.5% and others at 30.9%. Coca-Cola single-handedly beats
all the other carbonated drinks. If all three tastes similar, then why does one
product beat all others? The answer is… marketing.Quoting Rohan Chaubey from The Growth Hacking Book 1, “Marketing is
an infinite game. Great products can fail because of poor marketing.”
In this chapter, I’m sharing the top four inbound marketing channels that time
and again work for me.
Step-by-Step Process:
Your Contact / Email List
Most of the times when we launch a new product or service, we overlook the
audience that is closest to us - our personal contacts.
The easiest way to get your first 100 customers to validate your business idea
is by reaching to people you are already connected to. Start by reaching out to
your friends, family, Facebook friends, Instagram followers, LinkedIn
connections, your phone contacts, etc.
You don’t need to mass market your startup right from the beginning. Start
by validating your product / service by reaching out to your contacts that are
likely to find your product / service useful.
You can broadcast your message on WhatsApp or write emails or call your
contacts. Ask for their honest feedback and encourage them to generate
word-of-mouth. In return, you can offer them an extended free trial, free
credits, premium version of your product, etc.
If you are not someone who has a lot of contacts, then the next channel I’m
about to share will help you become well connected
.
Networking Events
Networking or entrepreneurship events are perfect for gathering new
connections and prospects.
But don’t portray yourself as a needy salesman who is just pitching his
product and not really having a conversation. Real networking is when you
go to an event, you are able to network with five people and you are in touch
with all five or even three, then you have won. Focus on quality versus
quantity.
Talking to a hundred people and then not following up or keeping in touch
later, makes the event a wasted opportunity.
Here are some tips that will help you network well:Interact with full interest
Don’t try to sell anything at the first meeting
Have a casual conversation
Build trust and rapport
Connect over social media after the conversation
Follow up, propose collaboration or how you can help them
Quora Marketing
Pick a niche related to your product or service or personal brand. Answer
questions related to the niche topics.
Here are a few tips for writing better answers on Quora:
Instead of writing lengthy answers, make them crisp.
Format your answers well with bold, italics and bullets.
Include examples and anecdotes.
End the answer with a Call to Action.
Add relevant eye-catching images and videos in your answers.
Make the first sentence of your answer interesting.
Back your claims by citing credible sources.
Whenever your answer is shared by someone, upvote that share, by
doing this you are indirectly promoting your answer to your followers.
Emotional and inspirational stories work amazingly well on Quora.
Facebook Groups
The organic reach on Facebook for pages seems dead, but Facebook groups
are gaining a good momentum.
Here are some best practices for leveraging Facebook groups:
Join relevant Facebook groups
Provide value before you plug your promotion
Engage with the posts to become known in the community
Always be helpful and supportive
Ask for helpStart conversations
Befriend the admins and find co-marketing opportunities
Case study:
As a part of the promotion of The Growth Hacking Book 2, GrowthMedia.AI
launched a Chrome Extension for Facebook marketing - FB Toolset. The
extension acquired 1000+ installs within 17 days via WhatsApp and
Facebook groups alone.
Conclusion:
The first step to selling is getting in front of your ideal prospects. If you are
marketing yourself where your audience hangs out, it is inevitable you will
acquire your dream customers.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Abishiekh Jain is a businessman, writer, speaker, online marketer, trader,
investor but not an entrepreneur. He is a college dropout and a 2 time TEDx
Speaker. He is the founder of 
Hackers Den
, which is a technology blog
which explains technology in simple English and Co-Founder of
BLENDnLend
 which equips youngsters, entrepreneurs, working
professionals and startup founders with new ways of career building.
In addition to that he has worked with several startups and is running many
online blogs, online businesses and ventures and making a living out of it.
He is featured on various online and offline outlets including The Huffington
Post, Harvard University, Entrepreneur, Deccan Chronicle, USA blog talk
radio show and Red FM 93.5. He was invited to Google’s office and as a
speaker at BlogX conference where he was awarded as the Blogger of The
Year.
Connect Here:
www.abishiekhjain.net
www.linkedin.com/in/abishiekhjain
“Networking is not about selling to each other, it is about knowing
each other.” - Abishiekh JainB
EST
 P
RACTICES
 T
O
 B
ECOME
 A S
UCCESSFUL
 A
FFILIATE
M
ARKETER
By Jitendra Vaswani
Short Description: 
Become a successful affiliate marketer by following the
best practices.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Make six figure income by earning commissions as an affiliate
marketer.
Time to Implement:
 12 hours daily
What You’ll Need:
Blog (Domain)
SEO strategy
Tools (Google Analytics, Ahrefs, Google Search Console, and
Copyscape)
Description/Overview:
Affiliate marketing is about networking with people from diverse fields. You
need the trust of our audience to be able to build a promising career as an
affiliate marketer. Make the most out of your network by following this
guide
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Build meaningful relationships on social media
Define your target audience based on the products you promote.
Find your target audience through social media groups or search
features.
Engage with your audience regularly and build relationships.Create a great profile that makes your audience trust you as a niche
expert.
Join facebook groups or paid communities like STMForum to find top
affiliates in your industry. This forum is goldmine for newbies and
seasoned affiliates.
Step 2: Share valuable content on your blog or YouTube channel or both
Grow your blog and YouTube subscribers.
Promote yourself as an affiliate consultant. Get special commissions to
promote products and services of other affiliate marketers.
Venture into podcasting to network with experts in your industry. You
can monetize as your podcast becomes popular.
Step 3: Go to industry events and interview top experts
Plan visits to popular conferences and meet industry folks who can help
you and collaborate with you.
Interview renowned speakers at the conferences to get speaking gigs
for yourself.
Step 4: Provide consistent stream of value and keep in touch with top
connections
Regularly publish content and offer value to your customers and
audience.
Follow up and keep in touch with people you meet at the conferences.
Building great relationships will always convert to business.
Step 5: Promote high ticket offers
Share product reviews on your blog and YouTube channel.
Some topics around which you can create content include how to make
money through affiliate marketing, how to promote your products and
services, etc.
Promote high ticket offers such as hosting services, e-commerce
courses, etc.Conclusion/Summary:
You can become an affiliate marketer without much investment. It is possible
to make six figure income if you learn the nitty-gritties of affiliate industry
and follow the best practices.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Jitendra Vaswani is a Digital Marketer, trainer, consultant, international
keynote speaker and a digital nomad. He is the founder of a popular blog
BloggersIdeas.com where he interviews marketing legends like Neil Patel,
Grant Cardone and Rand Fishkin.
He has authored a book “Inside A Hustler’s Brain: In Pursuit of Financial
Freedom” which has sold over 20,000 copies, worldwide. He has trained
3000+ digital marketing professionals till date and has conducted Digital
marketing workshops across the globe from more than 5 years. He routinely
speaks at events and podcasts on Digital Marketing, starting a business
online, personal branding and how to be a digital nomad.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/jitendravaswaniseo
www.bloggersideas.com
“If you are an expert in your niche, truly believe in the value of the
products you’re promoting, then you can make money through affiliate
marketing by simply recommending best products to your audience.” -
Jitendra VaswaniH
OW
 T
O
 P
OSITION
 Y
OURSELF
 A
S
 A R
EAL
 E
STATE
I
NFLUENCER
By Nitin Sachdeva
Short Description: 
How to leverage digital channels to become a successful
real estate marketer.
Difficulty Level: Easy
Goal: 
To become a real estate influencer and generate leads online.
Time to Implement: On-going
What You’ll Need:
Social media accounts
Digital presence (website, local SEO, etc.)
Description/Overview: 
The internet is the most preferred medium of home
search and majority of the total real estate transactions are influenced by the
internet.
Being one of the most important decisions in anyone’s life, many tend to turn
to a trusted resource on the internet before coming down to a final
conclusion.
Real Estate influencers are thus playing in an important role in the real estate
market.
This chapter gives you a low-down on how to become a successful real estate
influencer
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Niche downMany agents are experts in many phases of real estate, while others
specialize in niche markets. Some highly successful real estate agents and
brokers have narrowed their marketing niche focusing on specific
geographical areas, types of property, or even a category of consumers.
You can pick any one area of the real estate market - single-family houses,
multi-family houses, commercial malls, co-working spaces, co-living spaces,
hotels, or restaurants.
Narrow down your services to a particular market to become undisputed
authority in those markets.
Step 2: Use digital platforms to build authority
99% of the time, realtors use Social Media Platforms like Classifieds to show
the available properties they have, either for rent, sale, or purchase. Rather
they must focus on showing their knowledge to prospective customers.
As a realtor, you must realize that the client wants to make the best decision
of life because home is one of the biggest dreams of someone’s life and they
want it to be the best in their defined budget.
So you must focus on showing your expertise and experience through social
media platforms to build trust in the eyes of your potential clients. Use social
media platforms to create a digital presence for YOURSELF, not the deals
you have.
Step 3: Become a trusted advisor and resource
An average person buys or renovates their house at least 5 times in their
lifetime. Your client relationships will be short-lived if you’re dishonest.
Clients are informed and they’re smart; they know when they’re being
manipulated. So, build a long-lasting relationship with your 
customer and
help them make the most informed decision by showing your expertise in
the niche and calculate your profits not based on one deal but the 5 deals
that you’ll help them close.
Step 4: Generate passive leads
I have come across so many realtors in my journey of the last 4 years but
everyone is focused on generating active leads through Facebook ads,
Google ads, or local advertising. But rarely realtors focus on building a
relationship and generate passive leads.Passive leads are the leads we generate as referrals from present clients or
customers.
In my real estate niche of co-living spaces, passive leads generate more than
30% of the business that too without any extra dime. All we do is treat the
customers as our life-time customers and ask them just once, before they
finish their present stay, to refer us to someone if they loved our service. So,
focus on generating the maximum revenue through each loyal connection.
Conclusion/Summary:
Expand your reach beyond brick and mortar and become a digital boss in real
estate.
Pick a niche you want to work in and then start building your brand by
generating valuable content for your potential customers. Gain the trust of
your customer and generate business by being a transparent source of
knowledge.
In addition to this, create a good experience for your customers. This will not
only fetch you loyal customers who will come back to you for more business
and refer new prospects.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Nitin Sachdeva is a Realtor and Hotelier turned Digital Marketeer with over 5
years of experience.
He is on a mission to educate the world about the power of their
subconscious mind and train more brains with the set of Real estate quirks he
has got to help people create the life they desire.
He used his ”I CAN Create My Destiny” approach in his hotel industry to
build an empire of 80 Crores, and now with his marketing agency is helping
other coaches and entrepreneurs.
Connect Here:
www.instagram.com/winwithnitin
www.9t9media.com
“The internet is the most preferred medium of home search and majority
of the total real estate transactions are influenced by the internet. Hence,
being a real estate influencer is an underutilized opportunity.” - Nitin
SachdevaL
EVERAGE
 F
ACEBOOK
 L
IVE
 F
EATURE
 T
O
 A
TTRACT
C
LIENTS
By Durga Mamidipalli
Short Description: 
Effectively using live feature on facebook to find the
right prospects.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Increase your followers and sell your service via Facebook LIVE
show.
Time to Implement: 
15-30 minutes daily or weekly.
What You’ll Need:
Facebook profile
Mic and camera
Canva for designing posters
Description/Overview:
Hosting a live show on Facebook or any other social media platform will help
you find your voice, build your tribe, drive that audience to your email list
and convert them to clients.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Craft your service package
Figure out what you want to offer as a service. Write a compelling
description of the deliverables and keep them ready along with your story and
credentials
.
Step 2: Decide the theme of your live showOnce your service package is ready, figure on what topics you can regularly
deliver content to your audience through live videos. You should be able to
place your offer so pick topics that are related to the services you want to
propose. This decision should not solely be based on your passion, but also a
monetizable skill.
Step 3: Prepare a schedule and promote your show
Finalize the schedule of your live shows; whether you want to do it daily or
weekly or biweekly. Share the date and time a few days before you go live.
You can use tools like Canva to create appealing posters for your show.
Create a buzz about your live event on various social media platforms. You
can also simultaneously stream on multiple platforms using tools like
ReStream or OneStream.
Step 4: Deliver an engaging live video and direct them to your landing
page
Organise an engaging and interactive live free demo to keep your audience
involved throughout the session. You can also start building your email list
by directing the live viewers to your landing page.
Step 5: Subtly promote your offer on the live videos
Go live and talk confidently on the chosen topic. Always remember that your
end goal has to be to provide value to your audience. Share the information
authentically and don’t nudge your target audience to buy your package
services. However, subtle promotion or encouraging them to sign up to your
email list is effective.
Step 6: Stay consistent and invite credible guests to expand your reach
You have to consistently keep showing up so as to get noticed. To encourage
your audience to binge watch your content, you can make your live videos
episodic
.
You can also invite other experts on your live show to leverage their existing
audience to grow your show.
Conclusion/Summary:You can leverage the free Facebook live feature to convert your live audience
to clients. Doing regular live videos will help you position yourself as an
expert in your niche and gain the trust of your audience. You will start
attracting inbound clients and email list subscribers if you stay consistent.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Durga Mamidipalli is the founder of Be Free Now LLC, peace ambassador,
international bestselling author and publisher, spiritual coach, certified yoga
and meditation instructor, Reiki Master, motivational speaker, podcast host
with over two decades of experience.
She has been featured on publications like Thrive Global, BBN Times and
Good Men Project. Durga has held over 20,000 hours of coaching and over
1000 programs and much more through her volunteering and LLC. She was
an invited speaker in the World Voice League for 2019 and 2020, a virtual
summit happens in 6 continents simultaneously. She offers retreats, group
workshops, and spiritual study classes.
Connect Here:
www.befreecoaching.com
www.linkedin.com/in/durgamamidipalli
“Hosting a live show will help you find your voice, build your tribe,
grow an email list and convert them to clients.”- Durga MamidipalliO
RGANIC
 M
ARKETING
 S
TRATEGIES
 F
OR
 S
MALL
B
USINESSES
By Pawan Rai
Short Description: 
Small business marketing strategies using inbound
tactics.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 To market your small business without spending money on paid ads.
Time to implement: 
3 - 6 Months
What you’ll need:
1
. 
Website
2
. 
Marketing Assets / Content
Description/Overview:
The traditional way of marketing was swept away by digital marketing in the
past two decades.
Digital Marketing can get you results through organic or inorganic strategies.
Organic strategies are pull tactics or Inbound marketing. Inorganic strategies
are push tactics or outbound marketing. Inbound marketing involves
strategies that attract prospects to you. Outbound marketing refers to the
strategies that require you to reach out to your ideal prospects.
Paid marketing works as long as you are burning money into ads. On the
other hand, organic marketing strategies are evergreen
.
Step-by-Step Process:
You can drive organic traffic to your business website through two kinds of
audiences:
1
. 
Your own audience2
. 
Leveraged audience (other people’s audience)
You can build your own audience through:
Blogging
SEO
Podcasting
Social Media
E-Books
Webinars
Guides
Whitepaper
Infographics,
Videos/YouTube
Slide Decks
Contests
Leveraging other people’s networks is also a growth hack! It is easier to
hijack other people’s audience than to build yours from scratch.
Sources to tap into other people’s audience:
Guest Blogging
Guest Podcasting
Speaking at Conferences
Guest Hosting Webinars
Deal Sites
Marketplaces
Conclusion/Summary:
Rome was not built in a day, and neither success can be achieved by organic
marketing strategies in a day. Patience, consistent efforts in the right direction
and marketing to the right audience will yield best results.
Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Pawan Rai is an entrepreneur and engineer. He is an SEO expert and he has a
portfolio of around 100+ websites, that includes news websites, viral content
websites, SaaS products and affiliate websites. He also helps startups and
brands through organic marketing.
Connect Here:
www.facebook.com/pawanrai24
www.pawanrai.co
“Paid marketing campaigns work as long as you are burning money
into ads. On the other hand, organic marketing strategies are
evergreen.” - Pawan Rai.T
HE
 SEO B
LUEPRINT
By Charmis Pala
Short Description: 
Get more organic traffic through a successful SEO
strategy.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
Forecast, plan and execute a fail-proof SEO strategy.
Time to Implement: 
6 months to lifetime (on-going)
What You’ll Need:
SEMrush
Screaming Frog
Google Sheet
Description/Overview:
“Let your plans be dark and impenetrable as night, and when you move, fall
like a thunderbolt.” ― Sun Tzu, The Art of War.
SEO, as we all know, is one of the powerful mediums to get “sustainable”,
“high conversion potential” and “cost effective” traffic, it needs patience
though.
From a business standpoint, SEO has played a key role in scaling various
giants like – Flipkart, Canva and Amazon.
Step-by-Step Process:
The “Art of Optimization” if managed swiftly by “Artist’s” helps debunk
uncharted business terrains. How do we reach there? How 
to identify the true
potential of SEO? – The answer is “
Forecasting”
Benefits of opportunity forecasting
It influences an approach to work in a processed mannerIt acts as a blueprint for everyone to follow
Helps strategize, structure and design – funds, resource ~ channel
Helps scale – product features, funnels and flow management
Most important – This process utilizes “Time ~ Cost”
How do we do it? – one metric – “search volume”
Understand and benchmark – Search volume (industry, category &
competition)
Categorize the above generated list ~ your offerings/categories
Estimate ranking projections on volume ~ CTR, est. traffic and
conversion
Map the above with business metrics – leads, revenue, ROI ~
profitability
Allocate – resources, funds & time.
Carve blueprint & set KRAs & KPIs for the team
Doing the above mentioned activity will lead to better understanding of the
business and it’ll also help channelize energies.
A few key tips:
Add a tastier element called keyword difficulty – it helps pluck the low
hanging fruits.
Add realistic conversion rates estimates, don’t be overly optimistic
Jot down your competition in parallel – features, content, UX, etc.
Limit the aspirations – Plan and achieve what you can, don’t aim the
whole pie in phase 1
Let the tools work for you – SEMrush and Screaming Frog are great
tools!
Get a taste of the overall model and then automate it
Conclusion/Summary:
SEO can act as a backbone of any online brand that understands it’s potential.
It is not limited to traffic it also dictates roadmap for - Product, CRM,
engagement and overall online presence.If implemented right, SEO helps organizations structure their utilization of
funds, resources and maintain a positive EBITDA too.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Charmis Pala is a result-oriented online marketing professional with over a
decade of experience with SEO. He audits, analyzes, forecasts and delivers
growth via different channels of marketing. He is passionate about building
automated systems that help businesses scale.
Charmis has worked with organizations such as Games24x7, Cleartrip
(global), Hotstar, Housing.com and Craftsvilla to scale their marketing efforts
via numerous SEO and technically crafted products that enhanced traffic,
reduced manual dependencies and assisted conversions.
He is a delegated speaker at SEMrush and a mentor at upGrad. He regularly
conducts online and offline workshops to mentor the startup community.
Charmis is recognized and awarded as one of the Top 25 Content Leaders in
India (Apex Awards by InkSpell Media).
Connect Here:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/charmispala
SEO is one of the most powerful mediums to get sustainable, high
converting and cost effective traffic; it needs patience though. - Charmis
PalaW
RITING
 Y
OUR
 F
IRST
 B
OOK
 I
N
 60 D
AYS
By Aahana Mulla
Short Description: 
Workflow to complete writing your first book in 60 days.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Writing a book in 60 days or less.
Time to Implement: 60 days
What You’ll Need:
1
. 
Your key idea
2
. 
Writing tools: Microsoft Word, Google Doc, etc.
3
. 
Editing tools: Grammarly, ProWritingAid, etc.
Description/Overview: 
We all have ideas, thoughts, emotions, experiences
and opinions that we want to get out there. We want our stories to reach the
world, to make an impact and to be some beacon of change. Writing and
publishing a book is not only one of the most effective and meaningful ways
to do this, but is also a timeless medium of communication.
This growth recipe helps you navigate all the perils of procrastination and its
friends to get you to jump over the finish line of your book.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Zero down on a concept
Do this after spending 2/3 weeks brainstorming a few ideas (this time is not
counted in your 60 days)
.
Avoid getting lost in the maze of the next best idea. When you have zeroed in
on a concept after spending your time brainstorming, stick with it and do not
waver. New, better ideas will always come up. You can address them later.
Step 2: Having a writing routineStart the clock of 60 days. Allocate X amount of time every single day to
research and write.
Harmonise your structure. Balance the research and writing to create a
rhythm of inspiration and action.
Pick your best hours. Depending on your genre of writing (self-help, poetry,
fiction, novella), choose the hours you allocate. This is because genres like
fiction or fantasy may require quiet time like early mornings or late nights
versus self-help or poetry, which allows for a few distractions.
Step 3: Share pockets of your work on Social Media
This has 3 main benefits…..
1
. 
It keeps you motivated to continue with your 60 day timeline structure.
2
. 
Engagement & interaction on what you post will spark new
perspectives on what you are writing & possibly help you flow with it
better. (you do not have to give it all away at all–just snippets of
whatever you feel might resonate with an audience.)
3
. 
You start marketing your work and more importantly yourself as an
author even before the book is ready. Your reach and target audience
will increase on social media, which will be very handy when your
book is out there, since this is one of the most imperative spaces of
digital marketing
.
Step 4:
1
. 
Stick through the schedule.
DO NOT compromise on the timeline structure you have set up for
yourself, unless there is an emergency. Make it like a creative self-
discipline challenge for yourself. Another way to stay on track would
be to get one of your loved ones to show you some tough love and be
your accountability partner. You can pay them some of your royalties
when you hit the bestseller list. ;)
2
. 
Acknowledge.
Once you accomplish getting your book done in 60 days, take a week
off to celebrate. You have done an outstanding job and should be very
proud of yourself.3
. 
Editing & Publishing
After celebration week, don’t let complacency set in. We do not want
to lose momentum. In order to make sure we stay on track, keep the
celebration week to a maximum of 10 days.
Then pick your publishing route and get in touch with them. There are 3 ways
to get your book published.
1
. 
Self-Publishing route
2
. 
Self-publishing house route
3
. 
Traditional publishing route
All 3 have their own pros and cons, so do your research and make a decision
based on a mix of information and intuition. Again, spend no more than 10
days at the most making this decision and executing it.
The time for each is different, so patience needs to be your new best friend,
but know that the hardest part is now done and very soon you will be a
published author and share your story with the world!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Aahana is a multipreneur. She aligns and realigns herself to the roles of being
an author, a content writer, an emotional wellness guide, a poet, a
generational marketing consultant and a spoken word artist. She is an all-
round human enthusiast, which serves to be the driving force for all that she
does and experiences.
Connect Here:
www.instagram.com/aahanamulla
Writing & Publishing a book is not only one of the most effective and
meaningful ways to make an everlasting impact in the world but is also a
timeless medium of communication.”- Aahana MullaT
HE
 U
LTIMATE
 C
HECKLIST
 F
OR
 C
OMPILING
 A
N
A
NTHOLOGY
By Monica Kunzekweguta
Short Description: 
Compiling an anthology can be very challenging. This
chapter gives a clear path and checklist right from prospecting to publishing.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 To write and publish an anthology with multiple contributors.
Time To Implement: 6 months
What You’ll Need:
Editor / Proofreader
Graphics designer
Marketing materials (Banners, Mockup covers, Videos)
Publishing platforms (Amazon, Ingram Sparks, Lulu, etc.)
Description/Overview: 
Compiling an anthology is a great way to help
authors start their writing journey. It provides a safe platform for new
writing, which may be looking for that extra support.
Most people have got unpublished books, which could be helping other
people heal, inspire, motivate, and educate, but are too afraid to fail or be
criticized. Being published in a group with others helps to provide the
courage and the community to share their concerns with
.
There are tangible and intangible benefits of publishing an anthology. You
get good at prospecting and your leadership skills are also sharpened.
This chapter gives you a step-by-step checklist for compiling an anthology.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Get the basics rightFind a title and theme for the book
Identify your target audience and what kind of contributors can do
justice to serve the audience
Create a defined timeline
Set up folders (first drafts, revised, edited and final), headshots and bios
Create a private Facebook/ WhatsApp group for easy communication
Create a checklist and process for every activity
Throughout the process, do not forget self-care
Step 2: Prospecting for contributors
Start prospecting to find ideal contributors
Constant follow-ups are important to get the writers onboard
Create a video pitch or PDF explaining them the the responsibilities,
benefits, and expectations
Step 3: Coach contributors and help them complete the manuscript
Receive chapters and suggest edits or give feedback to your
contributors
Get the revised copy based on your evaluation. Allow time for revision
wherever it is necessary
Send the manuscript copy to the editor
Choose the book size and book cover
Organize masterminds for contributors to brainstorm writing and
marketing ideas
Step 4: Start the Campaign
Social media
Word of mouth marketing
Making phone calls
Sending emails
Ensure tagging one another on social media platforms - teamwork is
keyPromote using video, images, audio and text (YouTube, podcast, blog,
etc.)
Step 5: Clicklist for publishing the book
Get an ISBN number
Apply for copyright certificate
Write Foreword, Preface, Disclaimer, Table of Content, etc.
Proofread the chapters
Format the book for Kindle and Paperback
Choose your publishing platforms:
Amazon.com/.co.uk/.ca
Lulu.com
Ingramsparks.com
Barnes&Noble
Kobu
iBook
Create social media accounts for the book
Step 6: Promote through collaborations
Collaborate with contributors via their YouTube channels, blogs or
podcasts
Schedule a launch event (offline or online)
Celebrate your achievements
Conclusion/Summary:
Compiling an anthology can be challenging, but also a rewarding experience.
Anthologies are a great way to collaborate and leverage the collective
audience to make the book bestsellers.
Apart from earning the credibility of being bestselling authors, you also
create a community and gain lifelong relationships. You get to contribute
positively to someone’s personal and professional growth, not to mention
your own growth as a person.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Monica Kunzekweguta is a resilient coach, author, compiler, and speaker.
Monica is also co-founder of Authors Without Boundaries, a publishing
company uniquely developed to encourage creative personal development,
international community relations, and the healing power of the written word.
A Sociology graduate, she completed her training in understanding
Consciousness, Creativity, and Connections through the Proctor and
Gallagher Institute.
She has also appeared on the Nikki Clarke Show and several radio stations
and the Global News. She was Emcee for a fundraising event for the United
Conservative Party and Women Talk Africa Classics; both events were
celebrating Black History Month 2020 in Alberta, Canada. She is an award
winner for the Zimbabwe Achievers Award 2020 in recognition of her
contribution to literature.
Monica is Project Founder of Inspiration for Kids International, a charity that
provides library books to children living in rural Zimbabwe.
Connect Here:
www.authorswithoutboundaries.net
www.facebook.com/monica.kunzekweguta
“Compiling an anthology gives you an opportunity to be good at
prospecting and sales, and your leadership skills are also sharpened in
the process.” - Monica KunzekwegutaF
IND
 Y
OUR
 I
DEA
 W
ORTH
 S
PREADING
By Marie Incontrera
Short Description: 
Hack your way to finding your big TEDx-worthy idea so
you’re ready to take the stage.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 To prove that anyone can give a TEDx talk - as long as they have a
great idea.
Time to implement: 1 day
What You’ll need:
 Something to write with, a notebook, and any references.
Description/Overview:
“Oh, you’ve given a TEDx talk! I want to… one day. It’s on my bucket list.”
This is what I hear from entrepreneurs, creatives, and brilliant people all the
time. Standing on that red circle is a coveted moment in the lives of those of
us with something to share. And it’s within your reach.
The mission of TED (and TEDx) is Ideas Worth Spreading. An Idea Worth
Spreading, according to TED’s mission, is something that is global,
actionable, and has clear takeaways. No proselytizing, no pseudo-science, no
political agenda. Just ideas - because ideas can make the world a better place.
“But I’m not famous,” many argue
.
Neither were Simon Sinek, Mel Robbins, or Brene Brown before they gave
their TEDx talks. They were just regular people with an idea before they
stepped onto their stage - and their lives were changed.
If you work with ideas for a living - whether you’re an entrepreneur, a
creative, a writer, or a scholar - chances are that you have an Idea Worth
Spreading just waiting to be shared. I know this because I’ve been on every
side of the table when it comes to TEDx - I’ve helped place speakers, I’ve
coached speakers, I’ve been a speaker, and I’ve been an organizer. I know the
process inside and out.My own TEDx journey starts when I was working as a virtual assistant years
ago, and a potential client came to me and asked if I’d pitch him for TEDx
events. I was willing to try, but I made no guarantees. He hired me, and by
the end of our first month together, he was accepted at two events. He went
on to garner over 100,000 views, and to be featured on TED main website
(www.TED.com).
The credibility that you gain as a TEDx speaker is magnanimous - it’s like
writing a book, but people will most likely watch your 15 minute talk sooner
than they’ll buy your book.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Mind Map
Mind mapping is a great way to come up with your first idea quickly, 
and 
it
works every time you use it. It’ll get you started. And it’s a great way to get
unstuck at any point during the process. Stuck on a specific point in your
talk? Mind map about it.
First things first: What are you passionate about? Make a list. What are you
always talking about? Add that to the list. Now ask your friends and family:
what are you good at? Add those things to the list.
You’ll probably start to see a common thread or two, and you’ll probably
have a few topics to work with
.
Pick the one that’s the lowest hanging fruit: the one you know the most about
(so that doing research for your talk will be easier).
I’d like to plant this seed in your mind early: the more thought provoking,
unexpected, and unique your idea, the more likely it is that your video will be
clicked on when it’s up on the TED or TEDx YouTube channel or website.
There are thousands of TED and TEDx talks - you want yours to stand out.
So if something seems unexpected, start there.
Step 2: Your Idea Worth Spreading
Free-write the heart of your idea. Don’t worry too much about grammar or
syntax. Write until you’re satisfied that you have an idea that’s absolutely
clear and explainable in a sentence. If you can’t explain it in a sentence, keep
working.Now take your 
Idea Worth Spreading 
and distill it down to a few words - one
sentence at the most. The “grabbier” you can make your idea, the better. With
the thousands of TED-style talks out there, you need to distinguish yourself.
This begins with the title of your talk.
Conclusion:
Once you have your Idea Worth Spreading, it’s time to get pitching. Be ready
to talk to event organizers about your idea. The pitch process can be long and
arduous, but it’s worth it. And who knows? You just might end up like Mel
Robbins, Simon Sinek, and Brene Brown - each of them stepped onto a red
circle and changed the world.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Marie Incontrera is the CEO and Founder of Incontrera Consulting, a thought
leadership consulting agency; author; avant garde musician; and fitness
enthusiast.
Incontrera Consulting’s social media clients have included national best-
selling business authors, coaches, contributors to high-profile publications,
medical professionals, wellness experts, podcast hosts, a popular science-
based gaming app, political candidates, orchestras, and more. She has a 100%
success rate getting her clients placed for TEDx talks. Her media clients have
been booked on popular podcasts and radio stations.
Marie is the author of the Amazon best-sellers, Social Your Book Launch and
Spread Your Idea. She has spoken at TEDxSevilleSq and TEDxBeaconStreet.
She has been the organizer of TEDxBayRidgeWomen.
Connect Here:
www.incontrera.com
www.linkedin.com/in/marieincontrera
“The more thought provoking, unexpected, and unique your idea, the
more likely it is that your video will be clicked on when it’s up on the
TED or TEDx video page.” - Marie IncontreraM
ASTER
 T
HE
 VIP [V
IDEO
-I
MPACT
-P
ROFITS
] C
ODE
By Kashesh Chhabbria
Short Description: 
Learn how to make an impact and generate profits with
the help of video marketing with just your smart phone.
Difficulty Level: Easy
Goal:
 Create marketing videos to generate leads for your business.
Time to Implement:
 Approximately 1 hour a day for 5 days [time may vary
depending on the individual]
What You’ll Need:
Smart phone
Tripod
Natural light or ring light
An external mic for audio,
Content script or outline
Your presentable appearance
Description/Overview:
It is said that a picture speaks a thousand words. Imagine what a video could
do!
The best way to connect with people is through the medium of videos as it is
more effective marketing tool than print and direct mail combined
.
People often feel camera conscious or may get intimidated about what
“others” may think or say about them. They also have a tendency to forget
their script and go blank once they face the camera.
A student shared with me, “It feels like someone has pointed a gun to my
forehead!”The face becomes dramatically serious, fists become clenched, eyes go static,
and the body becomes stiff. These are some of the experiences prior to
learning to face the camera confidently.
You can learn how to face the camera confidently and make videos to
generate leads for your business and grow your personal brand. In this
chapter, I have outlined some of the steps that will help you achieve the
same.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Relax, the world is going to judge anyway
Ask yourself why you want to create a video in the first place. Is it for the
fame or popularity, influence or impact, for the money or simply for the fun
of it. Know your why and then do it anyway.
Breathe deeply for a few minutes prior to you begin shooting, compose and
calm yourself.
Step 2: Write down on a piece of paper
Writing is therapeutic. When you write your thoughts on paper, it becomes
clearer for you to frame it into words in order for you to deliver it on camera.
Mention the benefits of your products or services and share real life
experiences or testimonials of your clients to make your video interesting and
relatable.
Step 3: Look on the top of the the camera lens
While shooting from your mobile, in the selfie camera mode, avoid looking
at yourself on the screen. It might cause you to feel 
intimidated. Similarly
looking at the selfie lens might make you feel conscious.
Instead, look at a point just above the lens, on the top surface of your mobile,
while shooting. The viewers will not be able to make out the difference as the
distance between the selfie lens and the point above the lens is negligible.
Step 4: Practice, practice, and practice
You cannot expect to become a skilled camera-ready personality overnight.
My first video had seven retakes and the eight one, which I was happy with,
turned out to be a hilarious disaster as I had forgotten to press the record
button.Over the time, with willingness, failing forward and practicing with
consistency, every skill is learnable.
Step 5: Cultivate a growth mindset
No skill, no achievement, no relationship can ever progress and succeed if
one does not have the mental agility and flexibility to try “one more time”.
You need to first believe that “it” is doable and achievable by you. Nothing
worth having comes easy.
But, every bit of effort is worth the try and takes you toward mastery.
Conclusion/Summary:
Pick up that camera or mobile, put on the shoot mode, smile and begin to
create your lasting legacy. The world awaits your message. Maybe your
message could bring about a much needed shift in someone’s life. Don’t
delay the goodness. Shine on.
Say Cheese!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Kashesh Chhabbria is a mental health counselor, a mindset transformation
strategist, and India’s first Impact and Profits Video Coach.
She is the recipient of the REX Karmaveer Chakra and Global Fellowship
Award in Association with the United Nations for her contribution to the
society in the form of videos on mental health, self help and personal
development. She has received the Award for the Best Use of Technology for
impacting and inspiring lives.
She has provided her services for reputed MNCs like GlaxoSmithKline,
Castrol India, BG India, FICCI, Piramal, Asian Oils India etc. and
educational institutions like Narsee Monjee College, Podar School, JBCN
International, City Montessori School, etc.
She has been featured in leading newspapers like Times of India, Mumbai
Mirror, Pune Mirror, Bangalore Mirror, Asian Age, Mid Day, Deccan
Chronicle, etc.
Connect Here:
www.instagram.com/kasheshchhabbria
www.kasheshchhabbria.com
“No skill, no achievement, no relationship can ever progress and
succeed if one does not have the mental agility and flexibility to try “one
more time.” - Kashesh ChhabbriaH
OW
 T
O
 C
RAFT
 A U
NITED
 N
ATIONS
 W
ORTHY
 S
PEECH
By Ruchi Singh
Short Description:
 Become world class speaker by following the best
practices of the great speakers.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 Highly effective and actionable techniques to master speech.
Time to Implement:
 It’s a lifelong process. However, it will take a minimum
of 3 to 6 months.
What You’ll Need:
YouTube to watch top speeches of world class orators
Good command over the language
Tool to write your speech (Word doc, Google Doc, paper, etc.)
Video recorder (eg. Phone, DSLR) to record your speech to see the
areas of improvement
Description/Overview: 
Whether developing original ideas, improving on an
existing idea, pitching for your promotion, asking for seed money from
investors, selling your product; in short for anything; one needs to be a
master communicator to get a competitive edge in an increasingly disruptive
world to lead, influence and impact
.
I had the privilege to speak at the United Nations, Bangkok and got a
standing ovation. This was no ordinary stage and no ordinary crowd.
In this chapter, I’m sharing how you can too give a United Nations worthy
speech by following the best practices and principles.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
 
Key factors of crafting a great speechEthos, Logos, Pathos are three pillars of persuasive communication as
relevant today as it was 2300 years ago when Aristotle shared it for the first
time.
Ethos is credibility. We tend to agree with people whom we respect for
their achievements, title, experience, etc.
Logos means persuasion through logic, data, and statistics.
Pathos is the act of appealing to emotions.
Every great communicator uses these pillars to persuade and lead.
Step 2:
 
The secret ingredient of every impactful speaker - Passion
To inspire others, you have to be inspired yourself.
Think about your favourite speakers. One of the reasons they stand out in
your mind is the authentic passion they have for their topic.
Every technical detail of a great speech will fall flat if the speaker is not
passionate about that topic. Your audience has the innate wisdom of spotting
a phony.
So, ask yourself, “What are you deeply passionate about?”
Once you have the answer, you are ready to move to the next stage.
Step 3: Express a ‘Big Idea’ in a ‘Simple, Clear and Concise’ way
“1,000 songs in your pocket” - The iconic slogan by which Jobs introduced
iPod in 2001. It is Simple, Clear, and Concise. And it passes the tweet test
.
Does your message pass this test?
Once you have zeroed in your key message, break the speech into supporting
messages. Limit it to three or maximum four. Otherwise the key message will
be lost in the clutter.
For example, I broke my speech in three parts.
World Peace starts with us and four ways to achieve it.
First part
For a peaceful world, we have to be peaceful within.Second part
My journey from a domestic violence survivor to a leader.
Third part
Four techniques for the audience, which I have personally used to find
inner peace and strength, that helped me reclaim my life and be a
leader.
At a glance, the speech seems to lack a unifying theme.
This brings me to another key element of a speech. The “BIG IDEA”.
The “Big Idea” is the unifying theme that captures the audience interest,
influences their emotional response and inspires them to take action.
My Big Idea was Courage. It was the unifying theme. The idea, that peace
takes courage, captured audience attention.
Step 4: This brings me to the ultimate tool of persuasion - Storytelling
“How many of you have heard of the legendary 11-word pitch which
changed the world?
”
You are intrigued and want to know more. This is called a hook.
Every powerful story has a hook which reels in the audience and holds them
captive. Tell your stories in a way that makes the audience lean in and
wonder what is coming next.
A powerful speaker uses it to create empathy with the audience so that they
end up cheering for whatever the speaker wants them to cheer for.
Step 5: Another powerful tool which makes people more receptive of
your ideas is Humour
If you can make people laugh, they will be receptive to your ideas. Just
ensure that is weaved in the speech naturally and doesn’t sound forced.
Step 6: Now that we have crafted a UN worthy speech it is time to bring
it to life
This leads me to 3R’s. Rehearse, Rehearse, and Rehearse
Practice so much that you internalise your speech. Remember Ethos.It is very difficult to be taken as an authority on a subject if you sound
unsure, artificial, keep checking your notes and look nervous.
Your speech should feel like a conversation.
Let’s practice our presence
Verbal delivery. Two P’s, R and V: Pitch, Pauses, Rate and Volume.
Verbal delivery is central to how your audience experiences what you
say.
Body language
“I speak two languages: Body and English” - Mae West, Hollywood star
.
We have something in common with a Hollywood star.
We all speak through our body. Trick is to speak it well.
Our body language adds a layer to the picture we are painting verbally.
All masters of public speaking use their body language to reinforce
their message.
Learn from these greats but have your own style which is authentic to your
personality and style.
Step 7: End strong with a memorable summary
“A speech is like a love affair: Any fool can start one but to end it requires
considerable skill.” - Lord Mancroft.
So, let’s get you the standing ovation that you deserve.
Finish strong so that it lives in the memory of your audience. Summarize it
and end with a clear call to action. Smile and say thank you.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Ruchi Singh is an International Keynote Speaker, Bestselling Author,
Communication and Leadership Mentor, Award-Winning HR Professional
and Talk Show Host at RuchiSinghTalks, a YouTube show that features
inspirational videos and interviews of Generals of the Indian Army, Thought
Leaders and Experts.
Ruchi holds a Masters in Business Administration. She has been awarded in
the name of Former President of India, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Award,
2020 and she has also received Leadership Excellence award as a Head of
Talent Management. She is the recipient of Powerhouse Global Award 2019
and was featured as "Heroes Among Us" by Wonderful Woman.
Ruchi also creates awareness about domestic violence. She was featured in an
award-winning documentary "Till Death Do Us Part”. She has been
published in publications like Thrive Global, BBN Times, Femina and Sakal
Times. Her latest Keynote was at the United Nations summit, Bangkok.
Connect Here:
www.youtube.com/RuchiSinghTalks
www.ruchisinghtalks.com
“A good speech is about the audience. Always ensure that it is useful
to them.” - Ruchi SinghB
ECOME
 T
OP
 1% H
IGHEST
 E
ARNING
 C
ONTENT
 W
RITER
By Vagisha Arora
Short Description: 
Making a successful career as a freelance writer
leveraging your writing skills, personal brand and your network.
Difficulty Level: Medium
Goal:
 Attract top-tier clients in the shortest possible time.
Time to Implement:
 6 to 8 months
What You’ll Need:
Good writing and social media marketing skills
Description/Overview: 
Freelance writing is considered to be a low paying
profession since it is increasingly getting competitive. Various challenges of
working as a freelance writer include uncertain payments, irregular flow of
work, inconsistent client base and more. Making a career in writing can turn
out to be an exhausting process if you lack the right direction.
Possessing great writing skills is just one side of the coin. What makes you
stand out in the crowd among thousands of other writers is your personal
brand which helps you build your credibility in the marketplace.
Enlisted below are some of the things which I have done religiously to be
able to attract high paying clients in the shortest possible time
.
Step-by-Step Process:
These tips will help you kickstart your career as a freelance writer. If you’re
just starting out, this is exactly what you need to do to become a successful
freelance content writer.
Step 1: Identify your niche and build credibility
Identify your niche in writing based on your expertise and research skills.You can be a versatile writer who can write for different niches (health,
education, travel, lifestyle, tech, etc.) and formats (website content,
brochures, blog posts, press releases, whitepapers, and more).
To build credibility and gain trust, become a columnist or contributor to
popular media publications in your niche. Start by connecting and pitching
your articles to editors of renowned publishing platforms like Medium,
Thrive Global, YourStory, Entrepreneur, Forbes, etc. Publishing on popular
blogs and media publications will help you get in front of their audience.
Step 2: Enhance your social media presence
Building a personal brand tops the list if you wish to get high paying clients.
Some of the social media platforms which you can be leveraged for building
your personal brand as a writer - Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter,
Quora, Medium, etc.
Consistently post content and grow your profiles on the social platforms.
Start a YouTube channel or podcast or publish blogs depending on what
format you like - video, audio or text.
Step 3: Attend workshops and seminars to network with other
professionals
Networking is the key to standing out in the crowd and establishing your
personal brand
.
As a content writer, your network should consist of marketing professionals,
website developers, startup founders and thought leaders as they are likely to
need your help.
Striking collaborations and learning from the successful professionals should
be your areas of focus when you attend any offline or online events.
Word-of-mouth or referrals will help you rise up the ladder of success if you
have credible associations.
Conclusion/Summary:
Becoming a successful freelance content writer is not only about improving
your writing skills, but also your online presence so that the right clients can
find you.Your long-term success as a freelancer depends on your goodwill and
reputation in the industry.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Vagisha worked as an editor of The Growth Hacking Book 2. She has been
featured on publications like Hackernoon, Thrive Global, Medium, BBN
Times, etc. Engineerbabu ranked her as one of the Top 10 Content Writers of
India (2019).
She helps startups and businesses enhance their online visibility through user-
friendly, interactive, engaging blog posts and articles. She has worked on
2000+ writing projects in versatile niches like health, education, travel, tech,
e-commerce, etc.
Vagisha has been associated with renowned brands like HT, Bonobology,
Shiksha, Myntra, Amazon, etc. As a speaker and trainer she has conducted
seminars and webinars related to freelance writing in universities and
colleges (SRCC, DTU, Northcap University, Fuzia to name a few).
Connect Here:
www.facebook.com/vagisha.arora.3
www.linkedin.com/in/vagishaarora
“Possessing great writing skills is just one side of the coin. What makes
you stand out in the crowd among thousands of other writers is your
personal brand which helps you build your credibility in the
marketplace.” - Vagisha AroraB
UILD
 P
ROFITABLE
 M
ARKETPLACE
 W
ITH
 Z
ERO
I
NVESTMENT
By Avirup Mondal
Short Description: 
A step-by-step approach to build a marketplace business.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 Build a profitable marketplace business by mitigating risk and go cash-
flow positive in 6 months.
Time to Implement: 6 Months
What You’ll Need:
Community:
 Engagement with your service providers
Infrastructure:
 An online marketplace
Quality control:
 Design a vetting process
Business Development:
 Demand generation activities
Overview:
Marketplace business models or circular business models are the toughest to
build because of the classic chicken and egg problem.
“Shall I aggregate the demand first, shall I aggregate the supply or shall I do
both simultaneously?”
If you have the following questions in your mind, continue reading my tested
framework, which applies to any marketplace business
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Reasoning From the First Principles
The art of breaking down complicated problems into basic elements and
reassembling them to come up with a solution.Before you take an action, build a strategy and a long term vision. Write
down the answers to the following questions.
Identify and comprehend the situation (What? Why? Who?):
Identify and define the problem you are trying to solve.
Understand the market that you want to aggregate.
Primary research - Talk to various stakeholders of the business
Secondary research - Read and summarise the industry reports,
articles, and news
Understand the competitive landscape:
Who are the major players in the market?
How are your competitors solving the problem?
What are the features of their product or service loved by the
users?
What are the features of their product or service hated by the
users?
What is that particular feature that a user wants but it is not there?
Step 2: Talk to Users (Month 1)
As a founder, you might have a lot of activities to keep you busy, but for the
first month, focus only on talking to potential users.
Customers are users who pay for your services/ products. For you, your
customers are the service-providers on your platform, as they are the ones
who pay you the platform fee”
Identify who is your Ideal Customer Profile (ICP).
Reach out to your potential customers and conduct user research.
Make a list of users’ pain-points that you have accumulated from user-
research. Rank the pain-points according to the impact and priority
(from high to low).
Make a list of all possible existing solutions in the current market.
Identify the white space (A high-impact problem that is not being
addressed properly).List down possible solutions and evaluate tradeoffs (Variables to
consider here: Resources, Time, Capital).
Make the chosen solution as your Unique Selling Point (USP).
Step 3: Build Your Community (Month 2 to Month 4)
Next, you need to focus on aggregating your supply (service-providers).
Don’t just build a community, build a cult!
In the first month, your objective was to identify and prioritize the pain-
points of your customers (service providers). Now, it’s the time to create
value through your community and make an attempt to solve those pain-
points.
You can build a community on slack for FREE! Doing that will immediately
start adding value!
Objectives
Goals
1. Business
Goals
Create a community to add value to your users
Award the service providers with projects matching their
skill sets and experience.
2. Marketing
Goals
Enhance awareness
Create brand advocates
3. Product
Goals
Educate potential users on product adoption
Product testing and feedback
Key Performance Indices:
Community Growth
Total members
Community Engagement
Number of User Generated Content
Number of Conversations
Number of Reactions
Brand Love
No. of positive testimonials on social mediaStep 4: Plan the Funnel
4.1 Acquisition
Acquire your potential customers by identifying the most effective key
acquisition channels and inviting them to your invite-only community (You
would not want an unwanted crowd!).
Identify where your potential customers hang-out, both online and
offline.
Reach out to them and send them a FREE invite with a strong message
about the vision of the community and list down the pain-points that
you are aiming to solve.
Conduct podcasts and host guest speakers who portray a great influence
among your community members.
4.2 Activation
Ensure that your users are having a great first experience in your community.
Make sure that the goals and purpose of the Community are clearly
articulated for every new member who joins.
Share a tutorial on “How to engage with the community”,
 
to help them
get the most out of the Community.
Conduct an introductory call with new members.
Encourage them to introduce themselves in the community.
4.3 Retention
Welcome and encourage new community members:
One-to-one contact with the community moderator.
Encourage them to share their brief introduction and past work.
Encourage them to share content that they find valuable and
relevant.
Make it easy to participate:
Use multiple entry points (Email, Newsletter, Social Media
handles).Make the community a regular part of their normal
communication.
Encourage peers to respond to new content that is posted, particularly if
a newer member of the community posts it.
Encourage members to share their success stories.
If a new member is added,
 
introduce him/her to others of the same
niche in the group.
Conduct polls and collect opinions.
Invite them to conduct guest speakers for Webinars in their niche.
Ask questions to the community.
Create spaces for engagement, with clear purpose and topic. Some of
the examples are listed below:
Space
Purpose
Topic
1. Job Posting
Post earning opportunities for
community members
Find new job/ gigs and be the first one to be notified
about any new project that suits your profile
2. Peer
Feedback
Post freelancing gigs for
feedbacks and reviews,
feedback of products of
GrowthMart
Get feedback and reviews on your work or on any
idea you want, from your peers and learn from people
who are more experienced to upskill yourself
3. Events
Post important and good
webinars, AMAs, and events
across the internet
Post any valuable events going on across your
network or happening online that you think is worth
sharing
4.
Introduction
Community members will
post their introduction
Introduce yourself to the community. Discover and
get discovered more easily
5.
Announcement
Post important
announcements related to the
community
Instructions on how to use the channel, important
activities that matter to community management and
members
6.
Watercooler
Talks
Initiate Casual discussion for
networking and fun
Share something new you read about, a cool podcast,
get started with discussions of your interest
7. Market-
trends
Share market insights, blogs,
and discussion on marketing
Stay updated with market insights, blogs, and
discussion on a 
particular niche
4.4 Referral
Make your users the brand advocates of your platform
Take feedback from your community members about their experience.Ask the active members to share their experience on social media
platforms to attract like-minded people in the community.
4.5: Revenue (Month 5 to Month 6)
Unlock wealth when you have successfully provided disproportionate value.
To start earning money, you need two things: an infrastructure (online
marketplace) and a vetting process in place (to ensure the quality of your
service providers).
Step 5: Building an Online Marketplace
You can either build a custom online marketplace if you know how to code.
If you are not tech-savvy, then you can use WordPress marketplace
templates.
Features an online marketplace should have:
1
. 
Buyer and seller login
2
. 
Profile builder for the seller
3
. 
Sellers should be able to bid for projects
4
. 
Buyers should be able to host projects
5
. 
Integrated payment gateway with escrow system
6
. 
Service provider listing page
7
. 
Active project listing
8
. 
Integrated email triggers
9
. 
Live chat support
You can customize your online marketplace as per requirement but don’t
forget to have these mandatory features to semi-automate your business
.
Step 6: Design a Vetting Process
To ensure quality delivery of projects in your online marketplace, you need to
ensure quality control of your service providers, one example of a vetting
process is:
Round 1:
1
. 
Communication check2
. 
Past client testimonials
3
. 
Background check
Round 2:
1
. 
Dispute management skills
2
. 
Project management skills
3
. 
Collaboration skills
4
. 
Entrepreneurial acumen
5
. 
Problem-solving skills
Round 3:
1
. 
Skills-based conceptual questions
2
. 
On-screen tests
3
. 
Portfolio verification
The vetting process depends on business to business but the objective is to
identify and on-board only the best service providers in your marketplace.
Step 7: Demand Generation
If you have done all the above steps correctly, you have set the right
foundation for business. It’s time to unlock wealth and drive business.
Identify Key Sales Strategies:
1
. 
LinkedIn: 
It is a great tool to find clients using the right hashtags,
boolean search, comments, and direct messages.
2
. 
Partnerships: 
Partner with agencies that provide the same or
complementary services but do not have the bandwidth to serve the
customers. Let them generate demand and you can deploy your service
providers on a contract basis.
3
. 
Enterprise Model: 
Standardise the listed services in your marketplace
and take ownership of the delivery of the service, this will help you
increase the lifetime value of your customers.You are eligible to charge 20%-30% on every project engagement from your
service providers in your platform.
Conclusion:
The aim is to build an online marketplace by investing 6 months of your time
to build a long-term business that can be your passive source of revenue
stream.
For this, you need resilience, dedication, and conviction for your business. By
building this you are creating opportunities for your everyone involved
service providers, their customers, and yourself.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Avirup Mondal is a freelance product consultant, helping early-stage startups
design product roadmaps and launch their 0-1 Product. He also helps
businesses build efficient remote teams of designers, developers, and digital
marketers.
He is an alumnus of the Indian Institute of Technology. Avirup co-founded
GrowthMart, a platform that aims to create, manage, and promote quality
freelancers in India, with a vision to empower 15 Million+ freelancers to
network, learn, and earn.
Back in college, he co-founded Square Meals, a social enterprise that
provides meaningful employment to orphaned youth in India. He and his
team had represented India at HULT Prize, South-East-Asia Regional Finals.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/avirup-mondal
www.avirupmondal.com
“Your product is valuable only when you have an online marketplace
with a vetted pool of engaged service-providers that keeps your end
users satisfied.” - Avirup MondalD100 F
OR
 I
NSTANT
 A
UTHORITY
By Tanmay Nijhawan
Short Description: 
The fastest way to build your personal brand and
credibility.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
To form partnerships with influential leaders in your niche.
Time to Implement:
 4 to 6 months, but it depends on the kind of relationship
you have with your D100 list.
What You’ll Need:
 The only thing you need is absolute clarity on what your
D100 partner wants.
Overview
: D100 is about how you go after your most ideal clients, your
dream business partner. Think about what you do and think of what would
happen if that person promoted you, emailed, went on a FB live, got you on
their podcast, you got a partnership with them.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Market selection
Pick a niche you want to dominate.
Step 2: Market research
Learn everything you can about that market: How the market behaves?
What’s hot and trendy in that market? Who are the top influencers in the
niche you selected
?
Step 3: Shortlist your D100 Influencers
The next thing you want to do is figure out the key people who have an
influence inside that market or industry. Shortlist all of them and figure out
what they want, where their business is going, how you can make them
money, etc.
Step 4: Reading the influencerYou need to consume their content and understand: What are their beliefs,
Where is their business moving and How do they operate?
Step 5: Network with their network
I can’t stress this point enough. If you don’t do this the chances of you
getting the attention of your D100 partner gets reduced by 90%.
Think of this, what are the chances of you talking directly with your dream
partner unless you’re in their mentoring program? Very less right. And this is
where 95% fail. They try to interact with the influencer which is not
impossible but what are your chances of convincing them to do business with
you in 2-3 minutes, and I’ve seen very few professionals doing it.
Step 6: Add value to their network
When you’re talking to them don’t just go with the attitude of “hey, can you
please introduce me to him” because that’s what everyone else is doing.
Remember when I told you, you have to research the influencers. Guess
what, these are the key people who are going to answer your questions,
they’ll talk to you about what they’re working on, where they need help, and
much more.
Step 7: 
Now that you’ve done this, it’ll get your D100s attention and they’ll
value you more than ever. Now, whatever it is that you were looking for in
the beginning, the chances of you getting it are more than 95% unless it’s
something very unreasonable.
This is the 7-Point System to nail your D100
.
Conclusion:
One relationship can change your business. You can do it alone and work for
the same thing for 5 years or you can follow this 7-point D100 system and do
what you can do in 5 years in 5 months, that’s how powerful it is.
Don’t get disappointed if you fail to do it in the first attempt. Not every
relationship will last a lifetime. Top professionals have mastered failure.
Business is a sport. Just think as if you are playing soccer - if it was the
perfect pass, the perfect shot, the perfect save there will be a goal in every
move. The same happens when we do business we don’t launch perfectly the
first time, we tweak a few things and launch again and fail again but still, we
work on the same stuff tweaking every ad, every funnel and making it work.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Tanmay Nijhawan is the Co-Founder 
of Mentor Lab India along with Kevin
Harrington, the Original Shark from Shark Tank, James Smiley (The B2B
poster boy of Clickfunnels), and Rajni Jaipaul.
Mentor Lab India has helped a lot of top Personal Brands build info.
Products. Recently they have entered the Fashion world working with some
of the top fashion brands like Shantanu & Nikhil and The Glutton & the Owl.
Tanmay specializes in building businesses online and getting them their first
set of customers. He has also helped a few personal brands grow their
Instagram following to 100K and beyond.
Connect Here:
www.mymentorlabindia.com
www.linkedin.com/in/tanmay-nijhawan-211388b8
“Partnerships and association with those who have been there and done
that will help you grow your business faster versus you doing it alone.” -
Tanmay NijhawanH
ACKING
 Y
OUR
 F
INANCES
 A
ND
 L
IFESTYLE
By Shlomo Freund
Short Description: 
How to align your finances and lifestyle to be happier
and reach your life goals.
Difficulty Level:
 Intermediate
Goal:
 Be clear about your life goals then build a financial system to execute
your strategy and reach those goals.
Time to Implement:
 3-4 months creating a strategy. Lifetime optimizing
What You’ll Need:
3 months bank and credit card transaction lists.
A tool to calculate your net worth.
Excel or google sheets
Optional: App/online tool that connects to all your banks and financial
institutions to automate it all.
Overview: 
Many people and entrepreneurs in particular are stressed about
money. They are also not clear about their life goals and future finances. The
following road map I developed can help with achieving your life goals and
getting clarity about your finances.
Step-by-Step Process:
 Here is a 4-step roadmap to get clear about your life
goals and finances
.
Step 1: Design Your Future Lifestyle
Do you know where you wish to go? If not, how can you plan for it? The
point here is that thinking long term about what you wish in your life can
help tremendously. We all don’t think about it in detail as it always seems far
for us. But the sooner we do that the better.
Try to answer these questions:1
. 
What are the things that you like to do most?
2
. 
How does a perfect day look for you?
3
. 
Where do you want to move (if at all) to live the majority of your life?
4
. 
What are your major life expenses coming up through your life? Think
about the bigger things first and then the smaller ones. An example of a
big thing can be: Buying a house. Small thing: a yearly vacation costing
5K USD.
5
. 
Try to think how much money you need in total that you’d be able to
say: “That’s enough”. It’s a hard question.
Step 2: Enhance Your Financial Knowledge
Personal finance is something that most schools don’t teach, unfortunately.
This makes people financially illiterate, making them think that finance is
rocket science. Well, it’s not!
With only a few basic terms, you’d be able to do and understand so much
more. Only this step is worth tens to hundreds of thousands of USD
throughout your lifetime.
So take the time to get yourself familiar.
Step 3: Control your numbers
In this part, you need to collect all your financial data in one place. You need
to do two things:
1
. 
Calculate how much you are worth and track it monthly.
2
. 
Put all your income and expenses for the past 3 months in a single
spreadsheet, to understand what you are spending on and how much
you are making. This will show you your cash flow.
Analyze the data and check:
Is your cash flow positive every month?
Is your net worth on a growth trajectory?
If you are cashflow positive every month, can you optimize your
spending?
Do you NEED everything that you buy?Can you borrow things or buy 2nd hand to save money?
Step 4: Create Your Grand Plan and strategy
Take all the data you’ve gathered and create a google spreadsheet table: Put
all your future spending on that spreadsheet and set a target date you’d
like/need to spend that. (eg. I need 100K USD in 5 years for a house
downpayment)
Calculate how much you’d need to spend, invest, and in what return to reach
that goal.
After you’ve put all your goals in a single spreadsheet. Voila! You now have
a monthly plan to work according to.
Do you have enough excess cash flow every month to support all these goals?
If not, try to see where you cut more spending or think for yourself if this
goal is really important enough for you to sacrifice other goals.
Conclusion:
 Now it’s your turn. This roadmap I just showed you will make
the difference between a life full of happiness or continued money stress and
lack of clarity. Following the four steps listed above can lead you to the life
you want.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Shlomo Freund has been a location-independent entrepreneur for the past 15+
years. His lifelong passions for finance, investing, and travel led to the
creation of his current business, Free Financial Self, which helps online
business owners and remote workers to organize their money to reach
financial freedom faster.
Shlomo is a financial coach, spoke at 100+ events, and is a frequent podcast
guest. Shlomo believes that people who are intentional about their money can
have an enjoyable, fulfilling, and happier life by building their desired
lifestyle.
Along with his family, he travels on 2-3 months’ workstations to explore new
destinations. He is married +1 (going on +2) and homeschooling his 5-year-
old daughter.
Connect Here:
www.freefinancialself.com/ghb2
https://www.linkedin.com/in/shlomofreund
“Want to become a nomad? Plan for it to make it happen. Want to retire
on an island in 5 years. Plan for it and make it happen. Want to settle
down, buy a house, and send your kids to college. Plan for it to make it
happen.” - Shlomo FreundV
IRTUAL
 A
GE
: T
HE
 N
EW
 N
ORMAL
By Haswata Sunil Harlalka
Short Description: 
Take the post-Covid world by storm with these five
effective techniques towards building a powerful presence online.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 Five easy steps to launch your business online amidst the pandemic
and increase your sales.
Time to Implement:
 2–4 weeks for setup.
What You’ll Need:
 A clear goal, purpose, and vision based on the SMART
principle, a brand name and logo, your curated list of products and services, a
call to action, and time investment to reach your daily goals.
Overview: 
Follow this checklist to grow your business and access clients
nationally as well as internationally, while building an impressive brand
online. In this era of the virtual age, where everything is available to you at
the click of a button, you simply need to utilize the power of working
virtually in an effective way.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Setup basic SEO
Make sure your brand name stands out and is easily searchable on
Google.
Maintain the same brand name, color, font, and tone.
Create a verified google business page.
Set up your website SEO, custom domain, integrated Whatsapp.
Link all your social media channels and embed all your videos and
podcasts.
Register your business in different directories to get more visibility.
Business listing is another way to build authority.Step 2: Use Online Portals to Aid Your Growth
Whatsapp business catalog.
Provide your customers with multiple payment options including
PayPal, Google Pay, UPI, Paytm, etc.
Use apps like Canva for free designing.
Get free stock images on websites such as Unsplash, Pexels, or
Pixabay.
Replace your paperwork with online procedures such as invoices,
contracts, and deliverables.
Conduct zoom or Google Meet meetings.
Have a unique free opt-in offer Register on relevant apps, such as
Doordash for food delivery or AirBnB for rentals.
Step 3: Virtual Support
Take your products/services online.
Invest in building your brand name. If you are a founder, focus on
building your credibility in your niche.
Study your competitors and conduct market research.
Provide free resources so that the audience keeps coming back to you.
Create your email list to target your customers and sign up for the
GSuite Business 
account.
Use software such as TeamViewer, AnyDesk, etc to ease work
processes.
Step 4: Social Media Hacks
Choose your favorite portal.
Use Pinterest and Behance to display your creative work.
Create your social media pages, preferably all with the same name or
handle (especially for LinkedIn, Instagram, Facebook, Twitter).
Use impressive graphics and appealing images.
Find the trending yet most relevant hashtags.Keep your captions concise and meaningful in terms of the current
trends.
Cross-promote across various channels to build your authority.
Look for multiple collaborations in the form of webinars, IGTV live
events, etc.
Write an impressive introduction to your brand.
Update all your pages with your contact details and bio.
Run ads with analytics and reports.
Step 5: Creating and Using Your Network of Contacts
Referrals: Word of mouth marketing can do wonders for your business.
This is a successful hack for any business.
Create an email list and start sending newsletters regularly.
Create a Whatsapp broadcast list.
Post on all social media platforms regularly.
Join new networking groups of your niche and start sharing your work
.
Conclusion:
Use this checklist to create a successful business that meets the demands and
trends of the new normal. This is only the beginning of a new journey that
will 
redefine your relationship with technology and make you accessible to
the world.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Haswata is an Author, Speaker, Coach and Entrepreneur. She is also the Co-
Founder and CMO at Seobal Business Solutions. Her work has been
published with esteemed media outlets such as Women’s Web, Thrive, and
others.
She has been striving to build an equalized platform for women and often
works with budding professionals to help them realize their goals. She is
regularly called upon to provide transformational and change leadership to
guide business divisions through the deregulation of markets, particularly in
community services, the health industry, and F&B sectors.
Haswata has been invited as a Guest Speaker with LinkedIn Local Jaipur,
Startup Talks, Genuses Edutainers, and Milestone Special School. As a
Keynote Speaker, she has hosted virtual events with The Business Press,
Udaan, and many more valued enterprises. Haswata received the honor of
being crowned as Mrs India 2020, She Is India, First Princess on November
19th.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/haswata
www.seobal.com
“In this era of the virtual age, where everything is available to you at the
click of a button, you need to utilize the power of working virtually in an
effective way.” - Haswata Sunil HarlalkaU
NLEASH
 Y
OUR
 B
OOK
 B
Y
 C
ULTIVATING
 E
FFECTIVE
W
RITING
 H
ABITS
By Danielle Perlin Good
Short Description: 
Three ways to elevate your writing mindset.
Difficulty Level:
 Intermediate
Goal:
 Possess the confidence and authority to finish your manuscript with
ease.
Time to Implement: Six weeks
What You’ll Need:
 Laptop and Wi-Fi access.
Overview: 
This chapter encompasses everything you need to know to write
your book from scratch. As an author, you need to be efficient in managing
your time, conquering your limiting beliefs, and negating your fears to stay
consistent in your approach. You’ll learn how you can finally write your non-
fiction business book, connect with your target audience, and overcome
obstacles.
Step-by-Step Process:
The Writing Mindset will allow you to uplevel and shift your belief system.
Step 1: Conquer Your Fear
Critics often feel that the reason for writer’s block is fear—the fear of failing,
the fear of being judged, and the fear of success. A huge aspect of fear is
linked to limiting beliefs, which are based 
on fear of the unknown and having
a victim mindset. You’re not only telling yourself that you can’t achieve your
goals—but you’re also telling the world around you. You’re making an
excuse for yourself.Before you can overcome your limiting beliefs, you must first acknowledge
that you have them. This could be why you feel stuck or why you are not
allowing your soul’s story to be unearthed. Next, identify your limiting
beliefs. Our choices can dictate what kind of person we will become. You can
change how you think about your life and what you want to accomplish. Take
responsibility for your life and your actions instead. Say out loud, “I can
become a better writer. I will publish my book! I have a lot of
responsibilities, but I know I can make time for my writing
.
” Ask yourself
what you can do today to alter your limiting beliefs.
Step 2
: 
Gain Confidence
Being confident can truly bend your mindset. On the other hand, a lack of
confidence can break your mindset. You can showcase your confidence
inside out. You can then make up your mind that you will no longer be
trapped in thoughts that leave you feeling fearful. Once you discover how
you can own your confidence, then you will surely be able to tell your story,
know your worth, and measure your confidence.
Visualize what your future looks like. Are you letting fear get in the way of
your dreams? Are you allowing confidence to seep into your daily decisions?
Is your inner critic preventing you from achieving your dream of becoming a
published author? You can increase your overall confidence level by
following a daily affirmation practice, telling your inner critic to back off,
and not letting fear dictate your every move. Help yourself share your story
by exuding confidence daily.
Step 3: Prioritize Your GoalsWe often say to ourselves, “I don’t have time.” However, we each have 24
hours gifted to us every day. The way you spend your 
time is a reflection of
how you prioritize yourself. Think about three to five major goals you wish
to achieve. To make time to accomplish your goals, you need to plan,
eliminate distractions, prioritize tasks, and track your time. Take five minutes
to write down how you spend your time on a given day. How many hours do
you sleep, work, exercise, eat, take care of others, etc.? When you tell
yourself that you don’t have the time to write, reframe the question and ask
yourself, “Am I not making enough time in my schedule to achieve my goal
of becoming an author?” Figure out the time of day when you enjoy writing.
Learn more about your behavior towards writing, setting goals, and managing
your time well.
Conclusion:
Every individual has a different take on an idea. But ideas recirculate. Your
idea can be told in only your way. You have the power, tenacity, time, and
energy to finish your manuscript. Once you tackle your limiting beliefs, gain
confidence, and realize the importance of spending your time judiciously,
then you will be ten steps ahead of those planning to write a book.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Danielle Perlin-Good is The Written Legacy Coach, a prominent ghostwriter,
and a professional editor. She works with emerging leaders to unleash their
memoirs, self-help, and personal growth non-fiction books so they can share
their powerful legacies. Since 2008, Danielle has edited hundreds of articles,
books, social media content, e-newsletters, and more. She went from working
overnight shifts at the Tribune Company to corporate digital marketing gigs,
one of which was at Albert Whitman & Co., an esteemed children’s
publishing house. Danielle uses mindset techniques, exceptional editing
skills, and quantum healing modalities to ensure her clients develop a
beautifully crafted and publishable book that they will forever cherish. In her
free time, Danielle enjoys swimming, practicing yoga, being outside, and
spending time with her husband and their son.
Connect Here:
www.danielleperlingood.com
https://www.linkedin.com/in/daniellebperlingood
“Take responsibility for your life and your actions. Say out loud, ‘I can
become a better writer. I will publish my book! I have a lot of
responsibilities, but I know I can make time for my writing.” - Danielle
Perlin GoodE
NGAGE
, E
DUCATE
 & E
VOLVE
By Rishabh Vij
Short Description: 
Develop skills among engineering students to make them
job-ready.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
Reach out to 100K+ engineering students distributed among 1000+
colleges/universities across the nation and help them carve out a strong career
path.
Time to Implement: 300 days
What You’ll Need: 
Even though strong conviction and a desire to achieve
something at such a large scale drives you, the smaller nitty gritty matters
much more whenever you are executing a long duration plan. We were ready
with a website, dedicated team of 3 self driven professionals and had our
expectations precisely put out.
Overview: 
The motive was to reach out to engineering students and help
them develop programming skills; for these are the only universal skills
which also comes with the highest job security. With the arrival of Industry
4.0 and automation becoming a part of our daily lives, learning programming
not only gets you placed easily into companies but also provides with better
problem-solving skills.
Step-by-Step Process: 
The focus was on increasing awareness among
Engineering students and thus this growth activity was “Of the Students, By
the Students & For the Students”
.
Step 1: 
Hire Passionate Campus Ambassadors from Engineering Colleges.
Make sure that a strong core team of students from at least 50 colleges is
formed. Establishing Transparent processes are the key to achieve this.Step 2: 
With a strong core team, use the strong “Inter-College” network
effect to hire good quality Campus Ambassadors from the nearby colleges of
those 50 colleges. This referral effect helped shoot up the number from 50 to
around 400 colleges within the next 3 weeks.
Step 3: 
“What you learn is What you teach; What you feel is What you
preach.” Create a growth curve for all these campus ambassadors within the
company. The key is to treat them like your own employees and not
freelancers.
Step 4: 
Once their growth curve is defined, start providing them activities
which, on the one hand, increase the awareness about the importance of
Programming among their peers and, on the other hand, sets them on a
learning path.
Step 5: 
All activities should be created locally. Something which works in
IIT Bombay may not work in IIT Madras at all. Since the program was “For
the Students”, it would make sense if we created customised informational
activities “By the Students” only.
Step 6: 
Create a 2-way communication channel with your campus
ambassadors. This makes sure that you get to know the needs of every
college / university almost daily and customised strategies can be devised
accordingly. It creates a strong brand presence without having to deploy
offline sales and marketing teams.
Step 7: 
More than 900+ activities were conducted including offline
workshops, online coding events, Interview preparation test series, industrial
webinars, alumni sessions and many more and saw a participation of more
than 120K+ Students
.
Conclusion/Summary:
We were able to reach out to 120K+ Students from 1100+ Colleges /
Universities as all the activities were customised as per their specific college
needs. Even though we never tried making money out of it; we were
confident of the positive impact it will have on our business in the long term.
Students from Engineering colleges throughout India started buying our paid
online courses and we were able to achieve 250% growth in revenues.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Rishabh Vij is an alumnus of IIT Bombay. He has done Bachelor’s in
Computer Science and pursued a Masters in Industrial Engineering &
Operations Research which provides him with a very broad perspective and a
sense of what is needed in various Industries. Rishabh is Programmer,
Manager, Marketer, Strategist, Product Builder.
An experienced strategist and entrepreneur with a passion for building
businesses, he has been involved in more than 20+ product launches across
multiple companies, making an impact both as an Entrepreneur and as a
Mentor to various startups which includes some of the names like Relocatte
(Premium Furnished Housing), Royalent Nutrition (Healthy Snacking and
Protein Bars), Innoarm Tech Labs (Fitness Trackers) and many more. He has
experience working in Real Estate, Urban Transportation, Road Logistics,
Professional Education to name a few.
He helps businesses communicate, concisely, and accurately by devising
relevant strategies, uncovering the latest technologies, and then integrating all
this into a Product that adds value for the customer and brings revenue to the
overall Industry.
Connect Here:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/rishabhiitb
“Sometimes Business is all about doing something good and the dollar
will eventually follow”: Rishabh VijT
HE
 C
HEESE
 I
N
 T
HE
 P
IZZA
 P
IE
By Dr. Saumya Badgayan
Short Description: 
The Blurring lines between the Brick & Mortar model
vis-a-vis the Ether World of Luxury Goods.
Difficulty Level: Moderate
Goal
: Transcending the same experience from Physical to Webspace.
Time to Implement
: The strategy takes about a year from conception to
implementation.
What You’ll Need:
1
. 
A Business Plan, which should include
a
. 
Strategy
b
. 
Finance & buffer for the Rainy Day
c
. 
Luxury goods have a high shelf life but lower turns at counters so,
be prepared
2
. 
A clear understanding of
a
. 
Consumer-scape-their demography, social patterns, behavioral
patterns
b
. 
What Problem are you trying to solve? Experience, buying, after-
sales service.
c
. 
Return policy: often confused with customer 
service
3
. 
Transition Strategy
a
. 
How will you create the HOOK/ Latch On?
4
. 
Web understandinga
. 
Developing the website that is your showroom
b
. 
Keeping the website updated with products
c
. 
Tracking the faster-moving inventory
d
. 
Creating the tab of the web stats
e
. 
Photography teams, photoshop technicians, and web uploader
Overview:
 Changing Consumer behavior creates a NEED for the move from
the traditional way to a more Relatable way. With geographies opening up
and space dilution happening, the world has truly become one melting pot for
all DESIRES & DESIRES-MET. This chapter deals specifically with the
challenges faced by luxury goods and remedies for the same.
Problem 1: Proposal
Scenario
: Larry was in a live-in with his partner for a couple of years. With
the intent of solemnizing the relationship, he wanted to have a seal of Forever
Love. But with snow & restriction on movement, he was lost.
Problem 2: Remembrances
Loss of a Loved One whether a spouse, parent, sibling, or GrandParent, or
even a pet takes a huge toll on human emotions, wish these could be
ETERNALISED in some ways.
Problem 3: Milestone celebration
Graduation days, Anniversaries, Birthdays, Valentine’s Day, Mother’s Day,
Father’s Day, and all the festivals in between that transcend the geographies
.
Solution: 
The Jewellers know the market potential which stands at USD
480.5 billion out of which sales on ether constitutes to 5 billion with an AOV
of $274/-. This is slated to double in the coming years & triple by 2025.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Create an Experience
Looking at the market potential, the Experience becomes the driver
1
. 
Create an Experience on the web world: Unless the Customers don’t
feel the HOOK to the LOOK, they will not spend time on your website.
The website is a showroom for your products.2
. 
Entice the Clients/suspects & prospects: Do you have an online catalog,
a browsing gallery, products that have a scale to measure & have a 3 D
view.
3
. 
Excite the Customer-by Creating the Experience- Can the clients create
a customized product by creating an interplay of various components.
Do they have the freedom of choosing materials & dimensions?
4
. 
Invite-the customers on your platform to showcase the product breadth-
Create a database of customers & send them at an opportune time
ahead of any major events so that they have the option to buy from the
catalogs or the customizable solutions.
5
. 
The PULL STRATEGY is the panacea to PUSH STRATEGY
Step 2: Create Relevance
1
. 
Put products that resonate with the client base-The products need to be
tailored appealing to the markets today’s taste. There should be product
categories that transcend time and hold RELEVANCE always.
2
. 
BROWSABILITY 
∝
 SHOWCASABILITY 
∝
 SALEABILITY-
There
should be sections created which should easily captivate and provide
solutions to client’s needs such as the reason & occasion mix.
Step 3: Create Sustenance
1
. 
Is the model lasting: What are the features that promise TO GO TO
websites for the client base.
2
. 
The Model shall have the ease of creation ROI platform for the growth
as well as potential investors to invest during the scale-up.
3
. 
The Inventory at the WIP level & the warehouse needs to be closely
monitored to avoid capital flow block.
4
. 
Is the pricing model appealing to the perceived value of the product?
As long as the perceived value is higher, the buying potential of the
product increases.
5
. 
The stock inventory along with various sizes of regular demand should
be kept in the warehouse.
6
. 
A separate call center that answers any pricing queries / sizing queries,
change in the raw material & specific design needs should be created.Step 4: Create Top of Mind Awareness
1
. 
Any Brand whether in the physical world or at the Ether level starts
with being UNKNOWN.
2
. 
From being Unknown, it gets into the BRAND RECOGNITION
STAGE- logos, symbols, colors become easily identifiable.
3
. 
Post this stage BRAND RECALL HAPPENS – When you can easily
associate sports with say Nike or Adidas or Puma.
4
. 
Then the Brand graduates to being the TOP OF THE MIND RECALL.
This is when we start substituting actions by Brand names like I need a
Xerox of this paper or Google this for me.
5
. 
Any ether brand needs to identify its space, personality, what it stands
out for & what it resonates with. This is of prime importance.
Step 5: Refurbishing
The steps to create a Strong ONLINE PRESENCE are:
a
. 
Defined Goals
: what is to be attained through this website-answer can
be sales, image building, or just a marketplace
b
. 
Identify the Client Base
: specific target base, Empty Nesters, baby
boomers, gen X, gen Y & now the gen Z. All is it a generic all
appealing website.
c
. 
Identify Your Competitors
: Who are vying for the same space &
chunk of the pie of the market share & share of the pocket.
d
. 
SEM
: Search Engine Marketing would entail listing & embedded
keywords that would always put your website in the first/ landing page
e
. 
Social Media Marketing
: keep the ether world alive & reverberating
with your website, product details & all your efforts should be directed
towards driving the traffic to your website.
f
. 
Email Marketing
: The emails should, as stated above, have relevant
information on new products launched/ introduced. Any promotions &
offers alongside any on-line contests to keep the target audience
interested.
g
. 
Mobile Marketing
: SMS & WhatsApp are coming up as strong
mediums of being IN THE EYE of the POTENTIAL CLIENT.h
. 
Measuring Result
s: What cannot be Measured Cannot Be Managed.
Thus one needs to constantly keep looking at the stats like
i
. 
Maximum eyeball attention 
at what page.
ii
. 
Maximum searched product.
iii
. 
The product that gets into the buying cart but the sale does not
happen.
iv
. 
Most customer complaints- nature of the complaints. Time taken to
address the complaint. Remedies used to rectify the defects.
e
. 
Constant Updation
: This part is very important to keep the entire
website FRESH & APPEALING.
Step 6: Creating the TRUST
a
. 
Most consumers are skeptical of buying online as there are examples
galore of frauds, creating a web experience also means creating an
environment that fosters trust between the platform & the business.
b
. 
The payment gateways need to be secure & authenticated by the third
party as Verisign, razor pay, citrus & payU are often the most secure
interphase between the platform & the banks.
c
. 
Confirmation of the payment with an invoice & shipment details shall
be sent immediately post-payment/order confirmation.
d
. 
In case of a product return or late delivery, the information should be
transmitted to the purchase party listing details & seeking clarification
on whether to continue with the order or giving the customer the option
to cancel the shipment.
e
. 
In case of cancellation & refund, a similar message/email detailing the
invoice value should be sent to the customer with the probable timeline
on the payment reversal.
Conclusion:
Developing the website or an e-commerce platform is perceivably the easiest
of tasks, but creating a lasting impression is the crux of the business. Like is
said, people will forget what you said to them, but they never forget HOW
YOU MADE THEM FEEL.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Dr. Saumya Badgayan has over 2 decades of experience in the field of Sales,
Marketing, Corporate Strategy, and HR expertise about all the segments of
the various markets in the field of Luxury products, jewelry, human behavior,
and their countless interplays and ramifications.
Apart from being a corporate professional and a certified in-house trainer,
Saumya is an ardent teacher who loves teaching. She teaches subjects like
Product & Brand Management, Strategic Marketing Management, Strategic
Management, and International Marketing. She’s been a visiting faculty at
various institutions and an empanelled professor at INDIAN INSTITUTE OF
MANAGEMENT, INDIA.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/dr-saumya-badgayan-phd-mgmt-70b4b114
“Any Brand whether in the physical world or at the Ether level starts
with being UNKNOWN.” - Dr. Saumya BadgayanM
ARKETING
 W
ITH
 A
UTHENTICITY
By Ruchi G. Kalra
Short Description:
 Marketing with authenticity is doing marketing where it
doesn’t feel you are marketing at all.
Difficulty Level:
 This depends on how real and honest you can be as a
Person.
Goal:
 To show that the marketplace is changing and the generation of today
wants more transparency and vulnerability when it comes to them relating or
doing business with them.
Time to Implement:
 Work on learning to empathize and everything else will
fall into place.
Overview:
 Learning different traditional marketing with authentic marketing
techniques.
What does Authentic mean? Webster defines it as, “true to one’s own
personality, spirit, or character.”
What is Marketing with Authenticity? It is a business storyteller that wants to
Inform, Inspire, and genuinely help others to change the world while growing
their business.
In the years past, traditional marketing has crumbled and given way to
authentic marketing. From enterprises to entrepreneurs to personal brand
storytellers, businesses have come to learn that they need to be real to attract,
gain, and build loyal followers/customers
.
Don’t Fake It:
“Fake It till you make it” is not a philosophy I have ever subscribed to. With
close to 3 billion social media users, it is very easy to think one can blend in
and no one will notice the fakeness. I believe eventually, people pick up on
unauthentic exchanges.Today’s generations consider themselves more intelligent and frankly more
informed about the world. We perceive salespeople pushing their product
agenda with traditional pitches as inauthentic. Customers want transparency
and want to understand the story, the passion, and the why behind the
business rather than a company out to make a fast buck.
If you are trying to build a personal brand/be a storyteller/bring a product to
market, do it by being honest and authentic. When done authentically, you
will attract and retain real and loyal customers. They may not always love
your content or even the product, but they will fall in love with your realness
and your courage to be vulnerable to put yourself out there. This fuels their
passion for support.
Authentic Businesses On The Path To Success:
I am sharing simple strategies through examples of businesses who in my
opinion have been authentic in their approach from their vision, their product,
and their message.
PATHWATER 
came about because two people had a vision of making a
difference in the world. Shadi Bakour (CEO) and Amer Orabi (President and
COO) share a common goal to phase out single-use plastic water bottles.
They are partnering with companies to help bring about this change at a
global level. Are there other companies doing this? Yes, there are, so why is
PATHWATER leaps and bounds above their competitors? This quote by
Shadi summarizes it well “what makes our company stand out is that we are a
group of people that are dedicated to a mission to save the planet. We are not
driven by profits — of course as a business, we 
have to make money, but it is
only a means for us to make a huge impact on the planet”. They have
embraced a meaningful mission; which is doing the right thing, for the
people, for the planet before profits.FITBANKER
 started as a personal journey by Ronak Sampat. It all started
when he was working at JP Morgan and was significantly overweight and a
health scare had him hospitalized. That day he and his wife Dr. Ambika
Sampat decided it was time to turn this setback into an opportunity and
change his health and lifestyle. They began exploring exercise regimes, diets,
and mindset coaching. He eventually nailed down a system that worked for
his body/lifestyle and went on to win a body transformation challenge that
created an online frenzy. They decided they wanted to help others that were
living a similar lifestyle and to do this, took classes in nutrition, exercise, and
coaching. They started this journey quite by accident, but once they set off on
this path; they knew they had to help others transform into a healthier version
of themselves and enable people to bank on their fitness. Now they lead and
coach people on leadership through their annual Kilimanjaro Leadership
Summit. Their passion to help others came from focusing outward and from
something real and self-education to do it responsibly.
Live Tinted
 began when Deepica Mutyala went viral with a red lipstick hack
video. This sparked the onset of a digital multicultural storytelling
community that offered a place to discuss inclusivity, diverse beauty, and
culture. Through this movement women of color frequently reported that they
struggled with hyperpigmentation, dark spots, and dark circles that they wish
they could cover. This launched Huestick – the first-ever multistick and color
corrector made by and for people of color. In Deepica’s words, “I built it to
create a much-needed change in the beauty industry and to build a stronger
future for my industry”. She shares the journey of her culture, loud and
proud, and encourages everyone to celebrate diversity. Her product came
about not because she wanted to get rich, but from her desire to bring about a
cultural change. She also shares the viewpoints of her customers who bring
real voices to the business
.
Summary:
In summary, here are five ways to build authenticity with your brand:
Know what your audience is searching for and add value.
Be real about your message, product, and yourself.
Communicate with integrity and trustworthiness.
Build through empathy rather than pushing an agenda.Humanize with your followers/customers so they can relate.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Ruchi was born in India and grew up in Africa and moved to the US for
college. She’s always been a people person and spends a lot of time on
relationship building and employs the same philosophies in her life and
marketing approaches. She has a BS in Math and Computer Science and an
MBA in Marketing.
Over the years she’s worked in various roles in Revenue Accounting/Sales
Planning and Analysis to Marketing for an Orthodontist. Ruchi has her own
consulting and growth marketing firm, Dancing Raindrops Inc. to help small
businesses tell their stories and grow their businesses.
Connect Here:
www.ruchikalra.com
www.linkedin.com/in/ruchigkalra
“Remember authenticity marketing is not just a buzz term, but a way
of growing relationships and business.”
- Ruchi G. KalraG
ROWING
 B
USINESS
 I
N
 A 3
RD
 
W
ORLD
 C
OUNTRY
By Priya Kalra
Short Description:
 Growth hacking strategies for scaling a business in a
third world country.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Understanding marketing strategies effective in a unique working
environment where technology is still not as effective as other places in the
world.
Time to Implement: 6 months
What You’ll Need: 
Names of competitive and ideal client companies in the
Industry.
Overview: 
Starting a business from scratch in a country like Zambia, Africa
has its fair share of challenges. Zambia is a landlocked country, and one of
the biggest exporters in minerals, mainly copper, has mines that need to get
their products to ports in neighboring countries. The security of these highly
valuable products while being transported is very vital. Along with products
being stolen, there is also a lot of fuel siphoning that occurs. To take care of
these issues put together a solution to provide GPS Tracking for these
vehicles, which gives owners peace of mind ensuring no pilferage takes
place. Enlisted below are the steps we took to successfully launch and scale
this business in Zambia
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1
: The first step was to analyze what kind of solution was already
available in the market.
There were already some players in the market, but the solution they offered
was very basic.Step 2:
 Finding the right tools that could integrate with each other was the
next step. Finding an existing out of the box tool was easy but that would not
solve the problem that was at hand. Researching a couple of open-source
tools was key.
Step 3:
 After extensive research and numerous trials, the solution that was
most viable and cost-effective was sourced from different parts of the World.
The software we currently use is from Sweden, the hardware is sourced from
Lithuania and Belarus.
Step 4:
 Finding Clients by reaching out to business owners personally. The
most challenging part of the business was to find clients. In a country like
Zambia, where digital marketing was and is still not a thing, face-to-face
interaction is the only way to get business.
Step 6
: Inviting potential clients to meet and greet. During these informal
lunches, we get to know our clients better and vice-versa. Herein, we can
demonstrate our unique features and customization capabilities based on the
client’s needs. These meetings are a great way of starting a conversation with
a client for any business.
Step 7:
 The thing that made us stand out was our 24/7 support. We are
always present to answer our client’s questions and cater to their needs. Top-
notch customer service and personalized support are very necessary to earn
the trust of clients in any business especially while running a successful
business in a third World country
.
Conclusion:
Keeping the focus on volume rather than margins allowed us to keep our
prices affordable for the solution we were offering our clients initially. By
really paying attention to clients’ needs and offering a top-notch, hands-on
approach for the after-sale support, we were able to win the client’s trust and
future business.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Priya Kalra, is a global entrepreneur, mother, wife, and cancer survivor. After
selling her business in Arizona, she is now using her experience to brand
herself and help Cancer Survivors tell their story on her YouTube Channel-
Conquering Cancer and Beyond.
She is now focused on her business in Africa and is working on becoming a
Public Speaker and Advocate for Cancer Survivors.
Born in India and raised in Zambia, Africa. Priya feels everyone she meets,
influences her life, but her mother is the author of her lifelong mantra,
“Everything happens for a reason.”
Connect Here:
www.priyakal.com
www.instagram.com/kal.priya
“There is no marketing better than word of mouth marketing.”-
Priya KalraM
AGIC
 H
ACK
 F
OR
 S
UPER
 M
EMORY
By Akshat Khandal
Short Description: 
This growth hack will give you some of the best memory
improvement techniques which will help you to have superb memory and
eventually it will lead you to make better relations and business is all about
relations.
Difficulty Level: Easy
Goal
: To improve your memory so that you can memorize any data in a very
short time and retain it for a very long time.
Time to Implement:
 Start Immediately, Implement for Lifetime.
What You’ll Need:
 So, you don’t need any materialistic thing because it is
related to your inner dimension, not the outer atmosphere but you need the
most important qualities that most of you already have i.e. Patience, Practice,
Confidence, and Curiosity.
Overview:
 If you are a business person you may ask this question “What is
the use of memory techniques for us when we have a lot of computers and
secretaries to help us out?”
But think of all the benefits of having names and faces of all your clients and
your business transition at your fingertips. An accurate and retentive memory
is the basis of all business success. If you are a marketing executive imagine
a situation where you can give a presentation in front of your client without
the use of any notes or technology. And if you are a professional you also
need to memorize a lot of information despite whatever your profession is.
So, there is no learning without memorization, and without 
learning you are
dead so if you want to grow in your life you should have great memorization
skills and in this chapter, you are going to learn how to improve your
memory and how your great memory skills will help you to grow your
business.
Step-by-Step Process:Step 1:
For improving your memory or any other skill you first have to believe in
yourself that you can do it, you should have strong faith in yourself that you
have the power to do it. So, for creating strong faith and belief there is a
technique called COMMANDING PROCESS. To apply this you should
follow the following steps:
1
. 
Sit in a relaxed position, take a deep breath 2-3 times, and relax.
2
. 
Close your eyes and start affirming this – “I am having the greatest
brain of all times, I have the greatest memory power a human can ever
have.”
3
. 
Affirm this for 5 min. when you wake up and afterward whenever you
get time to do so for 5 min.
This will create your strong belief after practice and will also give you
positive energy and now your warm-up for improving memory is done. Let’s
move on to the next step.
Step 2: (Visualization Technique)
The 5 basic elements of memory ‘
PANCHTATVA OF MEMORY’ are:
1
. 
Interest:
 If you want to memorize any data effectively you have to
create interest in it because your brain doesn’t process data in which
you are not interested. If you want to remember the names, faces,
speeches, presentations, etc or any other data you should be interested
in it or if you are not interested you have to associate that data with the
data in which you are interested or to simplify it you have to use a
holistic approach to create interest.
2
. 
Image:
 Now this factor is very important because your brain works in
images, not in words or digits. So, if you want to improve your
memorization skills, start using images of the data to memorize instead
of using words or digits.
3
. 
Imagination:
 We already know the importance of image in improving
memory so imagination is nothing but just images in motion so from
next time if you need to memorize any data please use your
imagination in it and see the difference.4
. 
Creativity:
 It is the most important factor because this not only
improves your memory but also enhances your intelligence, innovation
power, thinking ability, and all the logical abilities. It also enhances the
other elements of memory like interest, image, imagination, and
curiosity.
5
. 
Curiosity:
 Most of the time we are not curious about others, we just
listen to them partially just because we want to reply. But if you
attentively and curiously listen to that person, 90% of data will
automatically be remembered by your brain.
For example, Assume, your client’s name is Tom Cruise. His wife’s name is
Elizabeth Cruise. He is a marketing executive in an ice cream manufacturing
company named Goldie Ice Creams. He is 32 years old and lives in Mumbai,
India. Now if you want to remember this information you have to follow the
following steps:
1
. 
First, actively read the data with curiosity.
2
. 
Now apply some creativity to it and take key words out of it like Tom
Cruise, Wife Elizabeth Cruise, Marketing Executive, Ice Cream
manufacturing company Goldie Ice creams, 32 years old, lives in
Mumbai India.
3
. 
Now you have to see if these keywords have relevant images in your
brain or not. If yes, then make an imaginary story using these images. If
not, associate these words with some associative images. For instance,
consider the image 
of Hollywood actor Tom Cruise and Britain’s
Queen Elizabeth. To memorize his job as a marketing executive, you
can relate the image of a marketing executive or a person who is into
marketing. To remember Goldie ice cream, you can imagine an ice
cream of gold. Age 32 years can be imagined as heart and swan, as 3
looks like the top of the heart and 2 looks like the head of the swan and
for remembering Mumbai, you can use the image of Marine Drive
which is located in Mumbai or any other associative image according to
you.4
. 
Now create a small story out of these images, like Queen Elizabeth
married Actor Tom Cruise as he is a good marketing executive and also
knows how to make ice creams out of gold and heart with the help of
the head of a swan. After knowing this story about him, you invited
him to live at Marine drive which is in Mumbai.
By this example, I hope that you have understood the whole concept of 
how
to improve memory
. You just have to work on the above 5 factors to improve
your memory. Now you may have this question in your mind about how to
memorize presentations, speeches, and any other data. For this, you have to
follow the same procedure of creating stories using keywords.
Conclusion:
Initially you may find it hard to make stories but if you have the 4 qualities
mentioned earlier i.e. patience, practice, confidence, and curiosity to learn
new and more, it will give you a great memory. If you practice this technique
of visualization and imagination, you are going to have a great memory and
you will be able to memorize any data in seconds.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Akshat Khandal who is well known by the name Memory Booster is a 16-
year young schoolboy, but his vision is much higher than his age. He is the
youngest inspirational speaker, memory trainer, world record holder, and
Entrepreneur at a very young age. Holds a place in the Esteemed Golden
Books of World Records as well as E-World Ranking List in memorization
by memorizing 10,000 decimal places of e (Euler constant) and reciting it
with 100% accuracy in 1hr 38min 39sec. Awarded with The Incredible
Indian Icon Award and many more reputed Indian Institutions also awarded
Akshat Khandal for his great initiative towards the welfare of today’s youth.
Akshat Khandal with his team holds a great vision to transform the lives of
other students by providing them creative training so that they can memorize
anything in a very short time and retain it for a very long period and also help
them to develop their interest in their work and inspire them to achieve their
goals effectively.
Connect Here:
www.akshatkhandal.com
www.facebook.com/akshatkhandalofficial
“To memorize any data effectively you have to create interest in it
because your brain doesn’t process the data in which you are not
interested.”- Akshat KhandalC
RITICAL
 S
TRATEGIC
 S
TEPS
 F
OR
 S
UCCESS
By Kamla Dasrath
Short Description:
 As an Entrepreneur, you have the advantage of being in
the driver’s seat. You have the control and power to create the life you
choose.
Difficulty Level:
 Beginner-Advanced
Goal:
 To own a business, offer your service and make a difference in this
world. Think about the work you enjoy doing, and cannot imagine living
your life without it. Whatever your dreams are, no matter how big or small,
you have the power to fulfill them.
Time to Implement:
 6 to 12 months
What You’ll Need:
 Finance, Education, Market Research, Experience,
Licenses or Permits, Email list, Websites, and an Attorney. The key to note is
you don’t need to reinvent the wheel. Make adjustments to an existing
service, add your style, and stand out from the crowd.
Overview
: Do you want to start a business and gain financial stability?
Recruiting investors for your new venture.
Securing a loan.
Looking at potential partnerships or collaborations.
Starting small as a side hustle and then expanding your business.
are ways that can help you grow leaps and bounds
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Find out if there is a need for your services.
Step 2: Come up with a written plan.
Step 3: Study and make changes to your ideas and read them every day.
Step 4: Due diligence means doing your research.Step 5: Check out your competition.
Step 6: Educate yourself, get the required training, take courses/classes.
Step 7: Find mentors or support groups.
Step 8: Test your products and services.
Step 9: Offer your services for feedback to your potential customers.
Step 10: Decide which mode, offline or online, would be most beneficial for
you to offer your services.
Step 11: Master your craft, invest a specific amount of time in learning
about your products, offering, and services.
Conclusion:
The brain doesn’t understand the difference between real and imaginary
excitement. So turn your passion into your excitement and don’t let anyone
prevent you from manifesting your dreams. You don’t want to be on your
deathbed with regrets about your life. Follow your passion and live it!
The eleven steps listed above, coupled with marketing and in-depth
knowledge details about your ideal client, products, and services will help
you lay a sound foundation for your business
.
Finally, as a reminder:
Believe in yourself.
Meditate or use other mindfulness techniques to stay focused on your
goals
Take the necessary steps to achieve success.
You got this, make it happen, all the best to you!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Kamla Dasrath is a published Author, Mom, Mentor, and a Co-Owner of a
Heavy Equipment Construction company. She is a Certified Holistic Health
Coach, Relationship and Business Mentor, presently working with Dr. Teri
Stokes, a Naturopath Doctor in North Georgia, USA. Kamla was born in the
beautiful British ruled twin Island of Trinidad and Tobago in the Caribbean.
She and her family moved to New York City approximately fifty years ago.
Kamla went from working on the Wall Street Stock Exchange with CitiBank
to being an Entrepreneur. Today, she contributes to her community friends
and family by offering alternative solutions to living a prosperous, happy, and
healthy lifestyle.
Connect Here:
www.kamladasrath.com
www.facebook.com/IntuitiveWomenWellnessSpiritualAstrology
“The best way to accomplish your goals is to break it into small bite-
size pieces.” - Kamla DasrathR
EAL
 B
USINESS
 S
ETUP
 F
OR
 R
EMARKABLE
 B
USINESS
S
UCCESS
By Tavis C. Taylor
Short Description: 
Create a rock 
SOLID 
business that will retire YOU!
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Learn how to create a successful online business that will replace your
income, retiring you from the 9-to-5 rat race!
Time to Implement: 2-4 weeks
What You’ll Need:
Laptop/PC
Passion/Drive/Patience.
Market Researcher/Local Small Business Office/Business Coach, if
needed.
Description: 
By the year 2040, it’s estimated that 95% of all purchases will
be through eCommerce 
(
Nasdaq
). There has never been a better time to start
a business from the comfort of your home! With the rapid changes in
technology, and billions of consumers ready to spend money, right now is the
time to act upon your dreams of having your business replace your 9-to-5
income. With technological advances, access to digital marketing experts &
business coaches, and your desire to have time and money freedom, you can
start your online business today
.
To have a successful business, you must ensure your foundation is 
SOLID
!
This 
5-Step SOLID Business Formula 
will teach you the proper way to
create a 
SOLID 
foundation to create a profitable online business.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Start With Your (Mindset)The worst thing you can do for your business is not to believe that it will
succeed. 
Address all concerns, self-limiting thoughts, and surround yourself
with others who are successful entrepreneurs. They will hold you accountable
and keep you motivated!
Three ways to address your mindset:
1
. 
Get clear on your vision.
2
. 
Trust your instincts.
3
. 
Know your worth.
Addressing your mindset will always be the catalyst that keeps you going
during hard and trying times.
Step 2: Objectively Know Who You Serve & W.H.Y.
There are two components to business, vital to its success: knowing who
you efficiently serve, and knowing why you have decided they are the
customers for you.
The online world is full of business, but not 
every 
business is for 
every
person. Market research is the most important, although strenuous task for
new businesses. It will help identify not only who your target audience is, but
vital information 
about 
them, such as behaviors, shopping habits, desires, etc.
The market research also helps you identify the competition and the gaps
your business should fill
.
W.H.Y. Niche?
W
ork your way to collaborations, not competitions.
H
one your skills to become an expert in this specific niche.
Y
our increased focus will help reduce burnout.
Step 3: Legalize Your Business
Naming your business can be tricky, but it doesn’t have to be hard. The name
of your business should center around the vision and mission.
Examples:
A virtual assistant creates a business; names it At Your Virtual Service, LLC.A plumber creates a business; names it The Drain Doctor, LLC.
A jewelry maker creates a business; the names it Beauty In You, LLC.
Your business name should tell people what you do, with no guessing.
Once you have chosen a name, visit the Secretary of State’s Office in your
state or your business-filing entity, and register your business name.
Step 4: Identify as a Business and Open a Business Bank Account
Opening a business bank account allows you to separate personal funds from
income. Besides, it allows you to effectively track the progression of your
business, as well as, accurately monitor your expenses and have great records
for tax purposes.
Step 5: Deliver The Goods
This is the reason for using the 
5-Step SOLID Business Formula
! It’s now
time to either create a website or eCommerce account, place your goods for
sale, and market it to the world
.
Conclusion:
The 
5-Step SOLID Business Formula 
was created with new and aspiring
entrepreneurs in mind. Instead of winging it or faking it until you make it, set
your business on a solid foundation at the beginning so it will return the
favor, allowing you to live your greatest life doing what you love!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Tavis C. Taylor has been a successful administrative entrepreneur for over 25
years. Utilizing her administrative skills and warfare prayer tactics, she has
been able to assist clients with receiving over $35 Million in loans and
acquisitions. She is the founder of Tailored Connection Staffing and Training
Center, a staffing agency that focuses on “work from home” jobs and
professional development, including training in the following areas,
Emotional Intelligence, Customer Service, Time Management, and Stress
Management. She is a passionate author and motivational speaker who has
quickly earned a reputation as an ambassador of positive thinking and a
compassionate leader. Widely known for her personable, consultative, and
down-to-earth approach, her inspirational work—both in written and spoken
form—has an immediate transformative ripple effect on each participant and
reader.
Tavis has a Bachelor of Science and Master of Public Administration from
Georgia State University. She is the proud mother of two sons, Tyler and
Adrian.
Connect Here:
www.tcscallcenterstaffing.com
Facebook: Tailored Connection Staffing and Training Center
“Knowing who you efficiently serve and knowing why you have decided
that they are the customers for you are vital steps to business success.” -
Tavis C. TaylorF
OLLOW
 Y
OUR
 C
ALLING
By Ananyaa Chhabria
Short Description: 
Follow your passion no matter the number of storms that
come your way.
Offer an irresistible product/service that people would incorporate into their
daily lives.
Difficulty Level
: Beginner
Goal:
 Starting a successful business and earning profits.
Time to Implement:
 Depends on the individual’s research work, budgeting,
brainstorming of ideas, and their potential and marketing efforts.
What You’ll Need:
 Dedication to work towards what you want to achieve
and never give up attitude and the willingness to serve.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
A business is more like a baby than a job. If you aren’t responsible enough
for it, you will lose it. You cannot start a business based on something that
you aren’t passionate about, because eventually, you will get bored of it. So,
according to me, step number one should be finding something that’s going
to keep you invested in it for a long time. You might have a lot of professions
in your life and there’s nothing wrong with that, trial and error is a way of
finding yourself and your calling. My first experience with entrepreneurship
was when I sold loombands. It took me several 
days to make my first
successful loom band. After a few weeks, I sold my first loom band for a
social cause, at the age of nine years. I was elated and felt on top of the
world.
Step 2:Do your research. It is one of the most important parts of any successful
business. Do your complete research on product sourcing, the market,
trending products or services, costs of the materials you require, your
packaging, logo designing, marketing, etc. all this research is necessary to
help you to give you an idea of how you want your business to be taken
ahead.
Step 3:
Begin setting up with whatever resources you have. Think creative. Put
forward irresistible products and services. You can begin or gather your
audience by putting your brand on all social media platforms like Youtube,
Instagram, etc. Initially, give out a few free samples or extend discount codes
with every order that can be used for a future purchase. Collect testimonials
from these customers and ask them to write reviews about the
product/service. Collect and manage the data. Receive criticism as a means of
improving your product. Never take any criticism personally.
When I started making soaps, many people told me that my products were
too simple and were easily available in the market at a cheaper price. That is
when I decided to upgrade my designs. After I did, I sold all of my 50 of my
designed soaps, at a local farmer’s market. I was known as the youngest
entrepreneur in the market at the age of 11 years.
Step 4:
Never stop improving. Keep learning. There is scope for improvement
everywhere and remember to do only what you want to. Don’t do something
because someone else is forcing it upon you. I have now begun with my lip
glosses and beauty cosmetics which are homemade. The name of my brand is
Me So Sassy
. I love makeup and I see it as a part of my present and future
.
Conclusion:
People might see failure as a bad thing but failure is one of the greatest
teachers someone could have. It’s not always sunshine everywhere. There are
ups and downs in everyone’s life. If there are dark clouds on one day, there
will be sunshine the other day.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Ananyaa Chhabria is a fourteen years old entrepreneur from Mumbai, India.
She is the founder and owner of the brand, 
Me So Sassy
. She loves singing
and dancing. One might even say she is good at makeup!
“A complete market research is the most important part of setting a
new business” - Ananyaa ChhabriaU
NLEASH
 T
HE
 B
USINESS
 W
ARRIOR
 W
ITHIN
 Y
OU
By Mirav Tarkka
Short Description: 
How to use your warrior power for business growth.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goals:
1
. 
Maximize your business creative time and your workout to save time
and energy.
2
. 
Obtain levels of creativity in your business you haven’t before.
3
. 
Create more “power hours” during your busy day and manage your
energy and time better.
4
. 
Be able to do more, in less time.
5
. 
Achieve a laser-focused mind when working on your business.
6
. 
Improve your memory.
7
. 
Exercise your determination, will power and “no-mercy” approach
(essential for high achievers).
8
. 
Get into good shape, a good mood, and a great vibe!
9
. 
Get more determined with your goals and clearer with your vision.
Time to Implement:
 10 minutes to begin wit
h
You’ll Need:
* Earphones
* Music player device with appropriate audio (see step 1)
* Pen & paper (or pen and palm)
Overview: 
When you have a busy professional and personal life, finding
time to work out is not always easy.At some point, you might find yourself completely exhausted from your day-
to-day life, bored with your routine, lacking determination and you might be
unable to focus on your business or create anything new. At that point, a way
to “inject” some fresh energy into your life and revamp your business and
mind, is through your physical body.
Your body and mind work together, always. Usually, your body follows your
mind. In this chapter, I will give you tools to “reverse” the process, and let
your mind follow your body. So when your body gets stronger, your mind
will get sharper, and your “business-mind” will follow.
This is how I do it and you can too.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: 
Use 10-15 minutes every morning to prime your mind through body
movement.
Prepare an audio file that is energetic and inspires you to achieve your goals.
It can be ready audio for go-getters, it can be a recording of affirmations, you
can make yourself a guided “active meditation”, it has to have a good beat to
it (at least 120 bpm). Start with a brisk walk or some “shadow boxing”
(boxing in front of a mirror or your shadow). The movement has to be
automatic so your mind can follow the audio. Let your body move while you
listen to that audio. Start with some deep breaths and some light body
movements (arm swings, leg swings, etc.) but do not finish 
in a calm,
stretching way. No! You want to end this audio with the feeling of
adrenaline, ready to smash the day.
The physical activity to the beat of 120+bpm will raise your heartbeat and
blood circulation, bringing more oxygen to your brain- which will absorb the
information of the audio. The body will start releasing adrenaline and
dopamine to help with the activity-both very “positive” hormones, which will
improve your creativity and help you focus, think, problem-solve, and create.
You want to stay on that “high” for your work time.
(If you need any ideas or inspiration for the guided meditation, please contact
me and I will send you my “Power Of Warrior” meditation, a gift for this
book’s readers).Step 2: 
Once the audio is over (or even during), grab a pen and write
business-related ideas you are having. Just brainstorm. Take 10-15 minutes to
brainstorm on your desired subject.
Step 3:
 When you feel you can do more after the 10-15 minutes of activity, it
is time to add on to your routine.
* Add strength exercises to increase your will power and determination.
*Add resilience exercises to increase your mental resilience as well.
* Add flexibility and balance to your physical and mental routine.
Do all that while you are constantly focusing on your business, on your
vision, on your goals. Constantly writing down what comes to your mind,
creating a workout that WORKS for you and your business.
Conclusion:
Every business needs creative time to grow, focussed power hours to clear
your ideas, goals, and vision, a “getaway” to get rid of frustrations and
pitfalls, and a balanced time for your body to 
have that overall wellness,
strength, sharpness, and “glow” which makes you the winner you are.
When you learn to combine your workout with your work time, you bring
that unstoppable energy into your work and therefore become- unstoppable.
Just for today, do some kind of activity to raise your heartbeat a little, and
listen to the audio you chose. 10 minutes a day, before you start working.
And yes, dancing counts.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Mirav Tarkka is a Power Coach, a former IDF Operational Sergeant & self-
defense expert, the bestselling author of 3 books at this date, founder of
Pepper Coaching, and a very proud single mother to two.
Throughout her life, Mirav has had her fair share of breakdown moments.
She had to rebuild her life from scratch many times while dealing with a
roller coaster of emotions, wars, challenges, and pain, but she kept going - no
matter what. Through her profound personal journey, she discovered that the
power of the mind was no less important than that of the body.
Mirav then created a method that combines strengthening the body and
sharpening the mind while creating at the same time, to help people around
the world find their “Power Of Warrior” and use it to create an unstoppable
life in all areas.
Connect Here:
www.facebook.com/mirav.tarkka
www.peppercoaching.online
“A Healthy body leads to a wealthy mind!” - Mirav
TarkkaT
HE
 L
ASER
 E
FFECT
By Robert Heath, Sr.
Short Description:
 By Aligning Your Goals and Priorities, you can focus
like a laser and get things done in a fraction of the time.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 How to increase your productivity by 50%.
Time to Implement:
 6 weeks (1 week to understand, 5 more to master).
What you’ll Need:
 Vision Board, Yearly Goals, 5 and 10 Year Goals,
Personal SWOT Analysis.
Overview: 
The average person in a managerial or supervisory role works
approximately 
72 hours per week
. Daily, these leaders are dealing with time
and budgetary constraints that leave them feeling like their only hope is to
simply 
manage 
the chaos and 
survive 
another day. Gallup has found that
over 50% of front line leaders are disengaged
, every day moving closer to
burnout. It’s not a question of “if”, but rather, “when” they will burnout...and
they know it. What many don’t fully appreciate is the effect that continuing
this way has on their productivity; and the productivity and profitability of
the teams they lead.
Step-by-Step Process:This growth hack is step 2 of a 5 step process designed to help you Master
Your Time and it is based on the word FOCUS. Many enterprising people
believe that if they just work harder then they 
will achieve their goals. And
yes, hard work has its place, however, we want to work smarter rather than
harder. For example, while the sun does tons of work and puts out trillions of
kilowatts of energy each day, it can never cut through a 1-inch steel rod no
matter how long it tried. A laser, on the other hand, can do that job in a
matter of seconds while only using a few hundred watts of energy. What’s
the difference? Focus. Aligning Your Goals and Priorities allows you to
focus each day into a consolidated beam of energy that will help you to
quickly knock out those tasks that are most important to reaching your goals
and finally achieving the growth you are looking for.
There are three steps to Aligning Your Priorities, and I will outline them here
in 
order of frequency:
1
. 
Aligning your Yearly, Quarterly, and Monthly Goals (4 times per year).
2
. 
Determining your Monthly and Weekly Priorities (4-5 times per
month).
3
. 
Focusing your Days (Daily).
True North
: Aligning your Yearly, Quarterly, and Monthly Goals
Many times high achievers are left feeling like their efforts are for no gain.
This is because we lose sight of the bigger picture and oftentimes move the
goalposts as we reach for our big goals. Looking at your Quarterly priorities
from the lens of your Yearly goal allows you to not lose sight of the forest for
the trees. The question that should govern everything that you do is this,
“What is the goal that I can accomplish this year that will make all of the
efforts I am putting in worth it?” Once you have the answer to that question it
is to be the driving factor for all of your decisions going forward. Quarterly
you will break that big goal down into sections to accomplish. During these
sessions, you want to truly develop a focus for the quarter and for each month
of that quarter. You can then break each quarterly goal down into the things
that must happen sequentially and the things that can happen concurrently.
This will help you to determine the order of importance for things 
that may
seem mundane on their face but are in reality necessary for the
accomplishment of your goals.How do you eat an elephant?
: Aligning Your Weekly Priorities with your
Monthly Goals.
Once you have developed your Quarterly and Monthly goals, it is time to
figure out how to get it all done in manageable doses and figure out what
should get done first. The 80/20 principle, also known as the Pareto Principle,
says that 80 percent of the results of your work will come from 20% of the
inputs. In other words, the work you do on Monday will likely accomplish as
much as the work you do Tuesday through Friday. While this may be
difficult to hear, it is a truth that all-time maximizers understand and utilize.
To benefit from this principle, each week you must make a list of the 3-5
things that are the most important things to move your monthly goal forward.
Make sure this list becomes the priority for your week and plan to accomplish
those things toward the beginning of the week if possible.
What is your One Thing?
: Focusing your Days and Maximizing your time.
Each day you should ask the question that Gary Keller made famous in his
book, The One Thing. That question is, “What is the one thing I can
accomplish today such that by doing it everything else becomes easier or
unnecessary?” You must ask this question in the context of your Yearly,
Quarterly, Monthly, and Weekly Goals. Once you find that answer then you
focus your day on making that thing happen. Lastly, make sure that you keep
a record of your goals, your priorities, and the tasks you accomplish. Figure
out which method works best for you. Some people like a journal, others like
a planner, or an app on the phone. The key is that it must be something that
you will use every day. You must develop this habit
.
Doing so will help you in two ways:
1
. 
It will keep you honest about what you already determined was
important when you are faced with another task competing for your
time and attention; and
2
. 
It will keep you honest about how much of what you thought was
important gets done.
Conclusion:While your goals may seem overwhelming at first, the beauty of focusing like
a laser is that you can accomplish so much in a very short amount of time.
Couple that with the compounding effect of consistently marching toward
your goals and those huge goals become manageable and comparatively
effortless. The key is to remain focused on your North Star and make sure
that all of your efforts remain in that direction. To put the Laser Effect into
perspective, even if you can only improve your current position by 1% per
day, in 1 year you would be 37 times better than you were at the beginning of
the year. That is a 3700% improvement, that’s the Laser Effect. So, what are
you going to laser in on this year?A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Robert Heath, Sr. is an engaging communicator and leading expert in
Empowering Leadership. He began his career as a Spanish teacher and
Basketball Coach where he inspired his students and his players to award-
winning success. He then focused on sharpening his leadership skills by
becoming an attorney and serving his country as an Officer in the United
States Marine Corps.
Over the next 8 years, Robert earned a Dean’s Fellowship at the University of
Illinois College of Law and received his Law Degree with honors. He went
on to set acquittal records as a Defense attorney in one of the busiest Defense
Services Offices in the Marine Corps, and he was awarded the Navy/Marine
Corps Commendation Medal for his leadership as Company Commander of
one of the largest companies in the Marine Corps.
He is also a decorated martial artist, having earned his black belt in the
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program, his blue belt in Gracie Jiu Jitsu, and
becoming a Gracie Jiu Jitsu Academy Certified Instructor. He is a serial
entrepreneur and has started multiple businesses during his career. He is
currently the CEO of Legacy Leadership Consulting and the Legacy
Empowerment Academy Companies.
As proud as he is of his professional accomplishments, what is most fulfilling
to him is being a loving husband to his wife and father to his two children
.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/robertheathsr007
legacyleadershipmastery.com
“Each week you make a list of the 3-5 things that are the most
important things to move your monthly goal forward.” - Robert Heath,
Sr.S
IX
-F
IGURE
 B
USINESS
 W
ITH
 M
ULTIPLE
 S
TREAMS
 O
F
I
NCOME
By Tameka Chapman
Short Description:
 Easily create and implement streams of income in your
business to live your best, stress-free life!
Difficulty Level:
 Intermediate
Goal:
 Learn how to immediately create 
profitable
 streams of income in your
business.
Time to Implement: 2-3 hours
What You’ll Need:
Know your target audience!
Laptop/PC
Creativity
Overview:
 
Having a 6-figure business is possible and it can happen in less
than a year for your business!
 It is time out for frustration, wasting money,
and no plan! The only requirements for having the business of your dreams
are that you MUST know your target audience, create the right strategy, and
possess the ability, desire, and drive to fully implement the strategy.
This 
4-Step G.R.O.W. Growth Hack
 will teach you the blueprint to create
profitable streams of income
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Get Intimate With Your Target Audience
You must know who 
your
 target audience is and what they need to move
forward in life and business. When you narrow down who you serve, it
becomes easy to directly target your marketing to them. To better understand
who your target audience is, answer these questions:Who is it that I love to serve?
What are they doing in business?
What problems are they experiencing?
What steps are they missing?
Tip!
 Do not try to cater to everyone; be specific on who you serve and they
will be drawn to you. Work to fill in the gaps!
Step 2: Reflect on What You Already Know!
What type of experience do you possess in your niche?
What are the topics and lessons that you love to teach?
How does your teaching help your target audience solve their
problems?
Do This!
 Grab your journal and list the 
top 10 strategies to _________ (in
your niche).
Strategy: 
With this list, you can now create at least FIVE different streams of
income in your business!
Step 3:
 
Outline What Your Audience Needs From What You Know
Right Now
It is now time to create the product to offer to your target audience. Most
people use Canva to create their digital products as Canva has many
templates to help and can easily be found by searching for what you are
creating, i.e., eBook, checklist, guide, template, etc
.
Using the 
Top 10 Strategies to _________ (in your niche)
 that you created in
step two, use one of the templates and plugin your information. Change the
colors to match your brand and add your name and logo. You can even go as
far as writing an intro and including your headshot.
Step 4: Wrap It Up, Attach the Bow and Deliver the Goods to Your
Target Audience
Now that you have created your new fabulous product, it is time to market
your completed product to your target audience.
What are the pain points of your target audience?What have you included in your product that will help relieve your
target audience’s pain?
Using these answers, create a post and speak directly to your target
audience’s pain and then offer your product as the direct solution to that pain.
Strategy Session:
 Use these 
top 10 strategies 
to create additional streams of
income – Webinar, Multi-Video Course, Audio Course, YouTube Channel
(
each of the 10 strategies become individual videos
), a full book, or a
coaching program teaching these exact strategies.
Conclusion:
Using this 
4-Step G.R.O.W. growth hack
, you can create the life you desire
and a 6-figure business with multiple streams of income and no stress.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Tameka Chapman is a woman who knows what it means to persevere for
your life goals. After 18 years of persevering through her infertility journey,
She finally manifested her life goal of becoming a mother and gave birth to
two beautiful children.
Tameka then realized that the same level of perseverance she implemented in
her journey towards her life goal was needed by women globally who want to
achieve their own life and business goals and, thus, she launched her
company, Mogul Media, LLC.
In her company, She serves as a digital business growth strategist that
provides tools and strategies to help women develop the skills, confidence,
and mindset shift needed to achieve their goals.
Tameka Chapman is a #1 International Bestselling Author, Award-Winning
Global Speaker, Digital Business Strategist, and Perseverance Mindset
Coach. When she is not empowering and coaching women to live a stress-
free life, She loves spending quality time with her husband, Deone, and two
children, Aspen and Arden.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/company/mogul-media-and-entertainment
www.mogulmedia.us
“You must know who your target audience is and what they need to
move forward in life and business.”- Tameka ChapmanH
OW
 T
O
 H
ACK
 Y
OUR
 M
INDSET
 F
OR
 G
ROWTH
By Sourabh Goyal
Short Description: 
Well-organized mindset is your free way to grow.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Save at least 3-4 hours a day by implementing this simple technique.
What You’ll Need:
 Pen, Notepad, and Peaceful location.
Overview: 
Have you ever seen an unorganized room? What if you had to
find something you needed urgently in such a cluttered space? It will not only
be difficult to hunt for the stuff but you might end up wasting more time
looking than actually using it. For instance, you might spend ten minutes
searching for the stapler and put it back in a few seconds.
Now let’s use this analogy towards life. Our mind is also like a room. It can
either be organized or disorganized. A decluttered mind can complete a task
in a few minutes, whereas a cluttered mind might take a few hours. Hence, a
cluttered mind is your biggest block to growth.
Take out a few minutes to introspect the above situation before you read
further. Jot down your experiences of overthinking. Now, imagine how
amazing it will be if you can save just 30 minutes a day by utilizing this
energy in the right direction. For instance, 30 
minutes/day = 15 hours/month
= 180 hours/year = 7.5 days/year
Now, you must be thinking that 7.5 days in a year doesn’t make a huge
difference. But, 7.5 days is almost a week of your precious time. You just
saved a week from your year.
Now let’s extrapolate this and do simple mathematics with 3 hours per day.
For instance, 3 hours/day = 90 hours/month = 1080 hours/year = 45 days/year
= 1.5 months.
Where are these 3 hours? You waste them in thinking and doing unplanned
things.1
. 
What to wear
2
. 
Binge-watching videos
3
. 
Extending a quick call for a longer duration
4
. 
Attending unscheduled calls
5
. 
Scrolling social media
6
. 
Worrying about things not happening in life rather than focusing on
actions that are in your control.
7
. 
Discussing stuff about what other people are doing in life.
8
. 
Trying to make decisions without any clarity or expert guidance.
Studies say that individuals waste 3-4 hours a day just doing random
things and regretting the same in the latter part.
The inference can be drawn easily. This highly productive time of 1.5 months
can be used to transform your entire life. Invest your energies in the best
possible manner to meet your personal and professional goals.
Strategy to Achieve This:
 Use the 
K-O-R-A strategy
 for 30 days for
everything you do and feel the difference in your mindset. Lack of proper
execution is the aspect where 90% of people fail and give up. Hence,
consistency is the key to maintaining the right mindset
.
Step-by-Step Process :
Step 1: Know
Knowing is the first step
What is your intention to execute a task?
“If there is no specific intention to do a task, please save your time”
What outcome do you want from execution?
“If you are not looking for any outcome, do save your time”
What would be the consequences of not executing properly?
“Our mind still works to execute at Godspeed in fear of losing something”
What benefits of doing it properly are?
“Mind also goes to a great processing speed if it knows the benefits”
Step 2: OrganizeOrganize with minutest possible details
When are you doing the task?
“People procrastinate, just because they never dedicated a specific time for a
particular task. ”
With whom are you doing the task?
“A lazy guy can’t be a good gym partner”
Where will you do the task?
“Reading a book in a pub won’t give you understanding”
Why are you doing the task?
“If it doesn’t matter in 5 years, it doesn’t matter at all
”
Step 3: Result Oriented
Understand where your actions will lead you
Questions you can ask yourself :
Is it helping me grow my skill?
Is it helping me improve my knowledge?
Is it helping me grow my network?
Is it helping me earn more money?
Track your screen time and be honest with yourself. Knowing how much
time you are spending doing result-oriented tasks v/s wasting time on social
media will help you plan well and achieve goals faster.
Step 4: Attention
Energy Flows where attention goes.
Putting your 100% attention on one thing at a time will reduce your execution
time significantly. Hence, staying focused on doing one task is key.
The Science Behind This:The human mind is like a hard disk that has certain retention power at a given
point in time. If your mind is flooded with thoughts and too many apps
(multitasking) are open at the same time, then the processing time is bound to
increase. In such a scenario, the mind will hang just like a computer hangs
and lose its critical thinking capability.
Put your thoughts on paper to free your mind space. The more time you
spend asking questions and writing the answers down, the better will be the
processing speed of your brain’s CPU
.
Conclusion:
Follow the above techniques for the next 30 days and experience a massive
change in your life. Your mind is full of amazing ideas that will help you
grow in business, profession, and life. All you need to do is declutter the
mind, create space, and start executing your life’s vision & mission for a
better tomorrow.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Sourabh is the Founder of 
The Goalchy Club Community
. A Global
community focused on the personal and professional growth of an individual
using real-life experiential education as a tool.
Also, he is known as a connector in his inner circle for his ability to build
human connections with ease.
He is passionate about personal growth (Mind, Body, and Soul) and Ancient
Indian knowledge that he will soon bring for the world in Modern Language.
Sourabh is also an author of an upcoming bestselling book that will help you
understand the Imagination, Design, and Execution of each aspect of life.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/consultsourabh
“Lack of proper execution is the aspect where 90% of people fail and
give up. Hence, consistency is the key to maintaining the right
mindset.”- Sourabh GoyalS
TRONG
 F
OUNDATION
 F
OR
 Y
OUR
 B
USINESS
By Dr. Sheetal Karnik
Short Description:
 Three pillars essential for your business growth
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal
: Three important tried and tested foundation concepts that can elevate
your business
Time to Implement: 
Time to implement: Before starting your business or
during the early stages of business.
Step-by-Step Process:
As a business owner, you have a dream and leap to achieve that dream. But
then why is it that 20% of businesses fail in the first year and 50% of
businesses fold in their fifth year? If your business is not set up on a strong
foundation, it will be difficult to make it a profitable business. Here are the
three pillars which you can follow to flourish in the long term.
Step 1: Are You Willing to Embrace the Changes to Sustain?Being flexible is one of your biggest assets as a business owner. Are you
open to constructive criticism and feedback? You might start your business
with a lot of market research and be thoroughly convinced that you are doing
what the market demands. However, there are going to be times when you
find out you were wrong. During such scenarios, you will have to re-examine
changing your 
products and services with slight or big modifications. PIVOT
is the keyword here. Having a vision can play an instrumental role in setting
the right business goals. You might be at the top of your game, but if you fail
to adapt to the changes according to the new demand, you might have to fold
up. While you are busy keeping up with the daily challenges of the business,
carve out a few hours each month to reevaluate and modify if needed based
on market research and changing technology. As a business, you need to be
well prepared to handle difficult situations and should have the willingness to
adapt according to the changing situations to sustain itself in the market.
Hence, it won’t be wrong to say that it is extremely crucial to do these reality
checks often to monitor the competition. Bottom line is to remember that
“Dynamism is the key to success”.
Step 2: Do You Have Plan B?
Most business owners start with the mindset that if their venture doesn’t
work, they can always go back to a job or a backup- PLAN B. Having a Plan
B in the place gives them the leverage to go back to play safe. It allows them
the space to rely on Plan B if Plan A doesn’t work. Many businesses fail to
realize that Plan B is the biggest hurdle for the growth of the business. When
it comes to business it should be like a race that tests the best runners mettle.
Plan B can stop you from taking bigger risks that can give you bigger
paybacks.
There is No PLAN B- THIS IS IT!
 A positive mindset is going to help you
grow your business and work diligently on the only plan you have- your
PLAN A. It was a brilliant plan and that’s why you started it. You might not
have fleshed out all details for PLAN A, you might need to change directions
within your business and change courses as per the market pull. But, your
flexibility and readiness to take in constructive criticism from your peers and
customers are going to help you mold your business according to the
changing times. You are going to be in a dominant position if you have a lot
of strategies for your PLAN A.
Step 3: Are You a Business Owner or An Entrepreneur?It’s important to realize the difference between a business owner 
and an
entrepreneur. Many business owners call themselves entrepreneurs without
realizing that they are trapped in the mindset of a small business owner. This
defines your business growth. This is the first question you should ask
yourself when you start a business. Who do you want to be? You will take
steps to grow your business accordingly.
A small business owner is always caught up with making sure that their
business is serving the needs of their community. The business owner toils
hard to fit into all the roles that their business demands from becoming a
marketing specialist, development strategist, HR manager, finance specialist,
all while building intellectual property for the business. On the other hand, an
entrepreneur dreams big.
Their dreams are almost impossible to achieve and might sound crazy and
unfathomable. It might not be very clear to them how they are going to
achieve their goals but dreaming big and not having a PLAN B is going to
make them achieve it and look for solutions to make it happen. They are
visionaries and end up finding the right mix of people and experts in the field
who will make your idea grow.
Conclusion:
Ask yourself- do you want to be a business owner or an Entrepreneur?
Start assessing as to how much time you are spending ‘ON’ your business
than ‘IN’ your business. Carve out at least 1-2 hr a day to work ‘ON’ the
business and don’t overburden yourself with mundane tasks required ‘IN’ the
business. Get your business growing!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Dr. Sheetal Karnik is a business owner of New Edge Science Academy
(NESA) and Karnik Patent Services LLC. She has a Ph.D. in Molecular and
Cellular Biology from Arizona State University, a Masters in Biochemistry,
and has been a Post Doctoral Research Fellow at the Veterans Affairs
Research facility.
She is an accomplished scientist with multiple publications in international
science journals and has been invited to present research at various
international conferences. Her passion for teaching and mentoring students
has shown amazing results where her students have been admitted to some
top-notch colleges in the US. Within six years her business has expanded
globally and she has students getting coaching from NESA from different
countries. She also practices patent law and works with innovators on
patenting cutting edge technology and research. Besides teaching and
research, she enjoys dancing and loves to cook heart-healthy meals.
Connect Here:
www.newedgescience.com
www.facebook.com/NewEdgeScienceAcademy
“It’s important to realize the difference between a business owner and an
entrepreneur. Many business owners call themselves entrepreneurs
without realizing that they are trapped in the mindset of a small business
owner. This is what defines your business growth.”- Dr. Sheetal KarnikM
IND
 M
ASTERY
By Rayson Choo
Short Description:
 Art of mastering your mind to master your life.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Gaining self-awareness to achieve success.
Time to Implement: 1-2 hours
What You’ll Need: 
Pen, highlighters, and notebook.
Overview:
 We are accustomed to what society, our parents and others want
for us that we tend to forget what we want. Just like 99% of the people in this
world, you are finding it hard to love what you are doing because you are so
busy helping others to achieve their goals.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Clarity is King
Now, my question to you would be Who are you? What thoughts are
constantly troubling you? What questions do you ask yourself regularly?
What answers do you hear? How do you talk to yourself? Do you consider
yourself a success or a failure?
You need to do this simple exercise to figure out what you want in life. Many
of the people are clueless because they are so used to their comfort zones and
routines that the mere thought of designing life according to their wishes
seems alien to them. Each of us can exercise freedom of choice to become
what we wish to be
.
Write down the things that you want, not the things that you think you can
get or achieve. It doesn’t matter how crazy or unrealistic the goal is. Just
write it down!
Most Important Questions
1) Who Do You Want To Be?2) What Do You Want To Experience?
3) How Do You Want To Grow?
Step 2: Creating Your Vision
Vision Statement
Vision Statement refers to how successful people and companies have been
using vision boards to achieve their goals and dreams in life. It is a clear and
inspiring long-term desired goal that the individual set for himself. The vision
statement helps to answer the question “Where do you want to go?”.
Now, don’t get confused with a vision statement and a road map to your
success. The vision statement is not tied to the details of how to make it
happen. While a vision statement doesn’t tell you how you are going to get
there, it does set the direction for you to strategize and plan for your success.
Now, here’s a simple exercise for you to do. I need you to write out your
vision statement which encompasses what you want to achieve in life
.
MY VISION:
Visualization
Have you ever heard of the statement “What You Think About, You Bring
About”? Many people aren’t aware of how powerful visualization is. Many
of us are doing this very simple exercise every single day without our
knowledge.
How do you Visualize?
1) 
Use all your senses
The most effective way to visualize is to use all your five senses. What are
you seeing, smelling, hearing, tasting, or feeling? You need to be immersed
in the present moment.
2) 
Be the star of the visualization
Imagine yourself performing that activity, anything that you’ve always
wanted to do. Don’t watch yourself as if you are in the 
audience seat
watching a movie. Remember, you are the star of your life and not the
bystander.
3) 
Focus on the positiveImagine things that are positive and you’ll be more than ready to take action
towards your goals and dreams.
4) 
Be specific & feel it
Imagine every step of how you want to get towards your goals and dreams.
It’s not just about the steps and process of getting there. Imagine if you are
living your perfect life right now, how would it look?
Vision Board
What is a vision board? Well, it is a visualization tool that uses a board to
build a collage of positive words and pictures of your goals and desires.
Let’s look at these four quadrants of your life (Health, Wealth, Relationships,
Personal Development) and see how you want them to be for this year.
Find pictures that symbolize the experiences, feelings, and things that you
want to attract into your life and place them onto the board based on the four
quadrants. Now, trick your brain into believing that you have reached those
goals already and that will motivate you even more to accomplish them.
Step 3: Setting Goals
Why Should You Set Goals?
The reason is simple. Because you want to make a change in how you feel.
Setting goals give you long-term vision and short-term motivation. Setting
goals allow you to turn your mission and vision into reality. Focus on
DUMB-T goals to understand this
.
D: Dream- Focused
Start focusing on your dreams. What’s that one thing that you’ve been
dreaming of becoming or having? What will be the most ideal or perfect life
that you want to have? Think of something that you are excited to
accomplish. Start with the dream and how it will come later.
U: Up-beating
Remember how we normally set goals for ourselves and we used to dread it
as we need to meet a deadline? Shouldn’t we be upbeat about our goals and
feel inspired to achieve them within or before the deadline? Hence, we should
be setting a goal that is so inspiring, positive so it makes us feel motivated.
M: Method- FriendlyNo one would like to have the methods so complicated that will dishearten
them to achieve what they want. Right? Everyone in life has methods.
Therefore, we need to model someone else whom we look up to as role
models and reverse engineer how they became where they want to be.
B: Behavior Triggered
When we are setting ourselves a goal, we should form behavior triggered
habits to constantly prompt us to chase it, or else, it will never happen.
T- Time-Framed
Last but not least, you need to give yourself a time frame on when you want
to accomplish it, or else, it’ll take you forever to complete it.
Things To Do
When
Conclusion:
Remember you only have one life to live. Now, my question to you is
“Would you live your life full of regrets or rather do anything that you love
and desire. The choice is yours. It’s not anyone else’s except you. So 
which
one would you choose?A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Rayson Choo is a Transformation Catalyst. What he does for a living is, “ to
pick the brains of the best entrepreneurs we have in this world such as Gary
Vee, Grant Cardone, etc to find out what are some of the simple and effective
steps that millennials like myself can take to experience success most swiftly
and effectively possible.”
He does that through podcasting. The millennials who have listened to the
podcast have experienced personal transformation because they have gotten
the tips they need to move forward.
Connect Here:
Instagram: 
www.instagram.com/raygacy
Podcasts: 
https://apple.co/3422gwc
“Just like 99% of the people in this world, you are finding it hard to love
what you are doing because you are busy helping others to achieve their
goals.” - Rayson ChooE
NTREPRENEUR
 A
S
 A C
OACH
By Saloni Kaul
Short Description: 
How should entrepreneurs and business owners practice
and leverage their coaching skills to engage their employees in a creative
manner? What steps should they follow that inspires them to maximize their
personal and professional potential?
Difficulty Level: Medium
Goal:
 Learn how to hold high impact coaching conversations and help your
employees enhance their decision and problem-solving skills.
Time to Implement:
 One Coaching session should ideally be 45-60 minutes.
What You’ll Need:
 Mindset of a Coach and an Inspirational Leader.
Overview: 
Studies show that only setting mere goals or receiving feedback
or neither (total control) doesn’t make a difference to productivity. However,
a perfect blend of goal setting and constructive feedback can have a
multiplying effect on the performance. And this is where coaching can play
an instrumental role in learning and development, inspiring and supporting
another person to reach their potential. Coaching is an opportunity to help
employees learn and develop capabilities that can contribute to both
individual and organizational success
.
The role of a coach differs greatly from that of a manager. As a coach, your
job is to help your employees discover solutions to their own problems, and
then guide them along to the resolution. This helps you progress faster as
employees solve their own problems without seeking your guidance on trivial
matters. They learn to take more responsibilities and become their own
problem solvers.
Step-by-Step Process:The following steps outline the process that a coach can take to initiate
coaching and, in doing so, also develop his coaching skill set. You need to
remember that coaching is about asking powerful discovery questions that
can help employees unlock their hidden potential and talent.
Step 1: Focus on the Purpose and Importance of this Discussion
What is the goal of this coaching conversation? What do we wish to achieve?
You can help the employee express by asking him to reflect on the below
points:
What has been happening since we last spoke?
Which one is your top priority of all the things we discussed?
Are you willing to work on that?
What is the one thing you want to change?
Do you feel comfortable to tell me more about that?
Listen to your employee carefully and try to address his concerns as his
mentor. The employee explains his dilemma/ situation/ goal/ objectives and
establishes the purpose and focus of the problem being discussed.
Let’s call this the 
GOAL
.
Step 2: Diagnose the Situation. Explore Issues, Concerns and Agree on
the Facts
Having established the goal/destination that you wish to achieve, where do
you stand today?
The employee shares the current reality and is likely to express his fears,
anxieties and growing concerns.
As a mentor, you can motivate the employee to analyse and express by
asking him to reflect on the below points:
What are his problems or issues?
Who is impacted by them?
What does he make of it?
How would he know if the issue got resolved?
How should things be ideally?How would he like it to be?
Let’s call this the 
REALITY today.
Step 3: Seek Ideas
Now that we know where we are and where we want to go, what options do
we have?
The employee starts identifying and penning down options and alternatives.
While he is identifying the alternatives, you could ask him more intriguing
questions such as:
What have you thought about doing on this issue?
What would be the outcomes of that approach?
How has this worked in the past?
That’s one option…what’s another?
What have you observed that works for others?
What else could you do?
What are the pros and the cons of each of these approaches
?
Step 4: Decide Who Will Do What and Set a Timeline
Having identified various options that the employee chooses, agree upon
what he will move forward with. Now is the time for action.
Questions to ask:
What do you think would be the most successful approach
How could you accomplish that?
When will you do these things?
How will I know that you have accomplished that?
What support do you need from me?What steps do you need to take?
Employee defines the action plan, commits to the time he will take to do the
task and agrees on the next follow-up meeting date and time. Future follow-
up sessions play an integral part in tracking the progress as well as
formulating coping up mechanisms for the well-being of the employee and
his overall development.Conclusion:
The key to becoming a coach lies in the ability to ask meaningful questions
and not telling employees what they need to do. The more you practice
coaching with your people, the more adept you become in cultivating the
fundamental characteristics of a coach that you need. You can initiate
different development tracks for different employees so that they can derive
greater results and success.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
HR Business Coach with over 30 years of Leadership, Consulting, Coaching,
Mentoring, and Training, Saloni Kaul has held leadership responsibilities at
the finest names in the industry, Dell EMC, Tata Consultancy Services, Tata
Infotech, etc. to name a few.
Widely traveled, she has worked with people from different cultures and
countries. In 2012, she founded India Talent Services. In 2013, she was
honored with the “Best Business Plan Award” at the 10K ISB Goldman
Sachs - Women Entrepreneurship Program. For two years in a row,
Womennovator
 has honored her with the title of Influencer – HR - 2019-20-
21.
Her credibility with business houses shines through her vast Business
Management Insights and Global Leadership Experience.
During the last eight years, she has contributed to Business HR Strategic
Direction, Organization Development, Talent Engagement & Management,
Learning & Development Initiatives for client organizations, professionals,
and academia in India and overseas.
In 2019, she launched “Udaan –It’s Time to Fly”- business capability
building programs for fellow entrepreneurs.
An active member of the Startup Leadership Program, she is a Mentor with
Shaktipreneur, Core Committee Member ISB Women Entrepreneurs Group
NCR Chapter; General Secretary, Faridabad Management Association
.
Her purpose in life is to touch the lives of the people and inspire them so that
they 
CAN BE
 who they 
WANT TO BE
 and live a life of love, compassion, and
contribution.
Connect Here:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/salonikaul
saloni@indiatalentservices.com“As a coach, your job is to help your employees discover solutions to
their problems, and then guide them along to the resolution.” - Saloni
KaulE
IGHT
 A
CTS
 T
O
 A
CHIEVE
 U
MBRA
 C
LARITY
By Angela B. Spragg
Short Description:
 Entrepreneurs need clarity before planning and pursuing
their mission.
Difficulty Level:
 Beginner-Intermediate
Goal:
 Entrepreneurs need a clear vision to create and experiment with
various strategies for success. Clarity will allow them to become a focused
planner to be able to set achievable goals.
Time to Implement:
 8-16 months
What You’ll Need:
 Website |Planning System | Network | Affiliates |
Mentors | Mindset
Description:
 When you have a zest for life and a vision to achieve
everything, then you might feel distracted to pick up one sole area you feel
passionate about. In that case, how can you put all your successes under one
umbrella for product creation and monetization? Have you ever pondered
upon the fact that many people can make 10x the money you are earning?
You might be 100 times better than them but still, you are much behind them
in the race. What is stopping you from taking the right action and achieving
more?
Step-by-Step Process:
Imagine eight ribs inside the umbrella that run underneath the canopy. The
stretchers connect the ribs with the shaft of the umbrella. In the same way,
your long-term vision must be the 
canopy and the eight ribs of the umbrella
(
Umbra
) are other interesting areas that may directly associate with your
main vision (canopy). The mid-sections of the ribs contain clear strategies for
one particular interest. All your interests and strategies should support your
overall vision.
Step 1: 
U
mbra-Canopy VisionWhat is your ultimate vision that will encompass your interests, visions, and
passion? You need to visualize your end product as your canopy. Success
means different things for different individuals. Picture your ultimate success
and make that your umbra canopy.
Step 2: U
m
bra-Mindset
Your mindset is crucial for accomplishing your journey in creating your
umbra canopy, which is your ultimate vision. This will require a balance of
body, mind, and positive CAN DO attitude.
Step 3: Um
b
ra-Bravery
Your journey will take you through experiences that will test your
knowledge, savviness, courage to challenge people in authority that are in a
much higher position than you are, and know more than you do. Put on the
FOCUS face, even if you are not feeling brave, but never waver from what
feels right for you. Trust your gut feelings in everything you do. If you
cannot trust others with your outsourced task, learn it, and do it yourself.
Step 4: Umb
r
a-Robust Branding
Umbra shaft directly links to umbra ribs; the shaft is solid but ribs are
flexible. The shaft represents a platform where ribs connect and can branch
off, and expand outwards. This may be your platform in the form of your
website, brand, shop, amazon store, online marketplace, etc. Your character,
principles, work ethics, authenticity must be robust and consistent. Also,
these traits must be visible in all your actions. This will strengthen your brand
and help you build a trusted network
.
Step 5: Umbr
a
-Active Planning
List all the interests that you wish to pursue as ribs and conduct SWOT as
described in Act 6. Choose your strongest passion first and create a strategic
action plan for product creation and sale platform. Revisit this action plan
fortnightly and amend it if needed every 12 weeks. Record the results.
Step 6: Umbra-SWOTSelect three interests/visions (ribs) per annum, conduct SWOT analysis, and
create Umbra-Active per rib. This simply means, focus on the active project
(rib), and keep other ribs dormant, until you feel ready to focus your energies
on others. Focus on one rib for three months. SWOT analysis is a strategic
planning technique that will further assist you in the project and planning.
Learn to love SWOT, it is a great technique to identify strengths, weaknesses,
and opportunities. I focus less on the threat element of SWOT because if your
service is unique, authentic, and trusted, there are no fears. Build, and be part
of a trusted network. Rather than spending time on threats, use that time for
planning and re-planning.
On any one occasion, I usually have seven planners (notebooks) and the bird-
eye view of five years of planning in the Excel file. Plan for five years as an
overview, have two years of activity planners, and use weekly and daily
planners as an everyday task allocation. This process sounds complex but it is
not. Pen to paper planning is important and it is proven to work well for
achieving clarity. Always prepare to deliver completed projects, two weeks in
advance. Remember, your strongest passion will take priority in the
formation of UMBRA Canopy.
Step 7: Umbra-Passion-Rib
Each interest represents an Umbra-Passion-Rib which is flexible and wide.
Visualize the rib and remember that it can be altered, distorted, and take it in
any direction that may suit the environment. 
Conduct experiments to analyze
4-5 marketing strategies every year. Repeat and amend.
Step 8: Umbra-Expansion
Learn as you build, connect, and expand your network per rib. This
expansion will also interconnect and become a support network for other
ribs/canopy or your overall vision. Each umbra rib will have channels of
communication, social media, blog, email marketing, and so on. Hence, all
channels will be placed in the width of the rib. Maintain and manage your
umbra ribs and the associated strategies and amend where necessary. You
need to repeat the process for the next rib. Create one/two ribs per annual
quarter.
Conclusion:“Don’t leave carbon footprints, leave footprints of enlightened clarity, and
character in all your activities.” - Angela B. SpraggA
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Ms. Angela Burnham Spragg is a founder of House Of Readers, Advantage
Women Network, and Womenkind Café’ Meet and Podcast. She is also an
author, aviator, voice artist, advocate for women’s causes, toxicity coach,
fempreneur, silent influencer through digital writing, and employee rights.
She has achieved first honors in BSc Airport and Aviation Operations and
Business Management with the Dean's Award and has acquired Level 2
understanding in Behaviour that challenges. She is a certified coach and
counsel’s women who are experiencing abuse of various kinds, in her
Manage Toxicity Program.
Angela’s qualifications, experiences, and passions created a strong desire to
share her learnings through writing and speaking. Her long-term goal is to be
part of a movement to abolish child orphanage, women & child slavery,
human trafficking, and to stop toxicity against women.
Connect Here:
www.angelabspragg.com
Voice Over Artist:
https://sites.gravyforthebrain.com/website/angela-b-spragg
“Entrepreneurs need clear vision to create and experiment with
various strategies for success.”- Angela B. SpraggT
HINK
 P
RODUCT
 - T
HINK
 E
COSYSTEM
By Ajay R Gawali, Ph.D
Short Description:
 Building a product or service is easy. Building it with an
ecosystem in mind is challenging and strategically rewarding. Our company
has designed and built the product in the smart kitchen segment with holistic
health considerations baked into the design. It’s a forward-looking
architectural design that not only puts the product ahead of the competition
but also helps de-risk the future complexities earlier in the development life-
cycle.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 
During the development stages, the team worked on the most sought-
after product features earlier to build confidence. Being a mechatronics
appliance, coordinated efforts were needed to develop the MVP. The lean
product development methodology helped us to build the critical assemblies
earlier in the laboratory. Over time, the product design was improved based
on the lab findings.
Agility with An Eye for Scalability:
The nimbleness of the venture is a function of the lean as well as a smart
organizational mass. While you are focused on short term deliverables, as a
founder you must attend two VIPs:
1
. 
V
alue 
I
nflection 
P
ivots that will at least 3X the enterprise value over 2-
3 years. For example, work towards the milestones such as the MVP
market test will multiply the value faster as it reduces the overall risk;
2
. 
V
alue 
I
nflection 
P
layers that have operational maneuverability to
create that value. For example, securing a research university
association for validation, de-risking key roadmap capabilities, and
engaging with future integration partners is an ecosystem architectural
mindset that successful venture leaders and founders must invest in,
without losing sight of the tactical deliverables.Watch Out for the Tool Hindering the Traction:
To deliver a functional MVP, and demonstrate the idea or product, the team
must focus on the required goals and not the tools. The tools are meant to get
to the results and investing too much into the tools at this stage may be
expensive. Any tool acquisition should have single intent – to accelerate the
delivery of VIP – value inflection pivots & make the players efficient. Be it
an MVP development project or securing the best resource that can operate
and function independently - the founder needs to stay strategic to leverage
each value inflection pivot. The founder must develop ‘tool affinity’ with an
aspiration to leverage tool capability without letting those tools hinder the
traction.
Time to Implement:
 6-12 months
Our Timeline
: The venture took about 6 months to complete customer
validation, market & patent research. It took 3-5 months to locate and secure
the key team members that could independently sail and swim if needed.
Next, it took three years to lay down the needed foundational fabric including
but not limited to business, legal, technological, startup lab toolset with
much-needed mentorship. We are strategically associated with Arizona State
University (ASU) for our product validation and customer health benefits.
We plan to launch the product in mid-2022 in select areas
.
What You’ll Need:
 Interest List, Pre-Orders
Goal
: As a next step, we are marching towards reaching out to our first 5000
customers in the next 9 months. We are currently 
working closely with our
marketing strategists to reach these milestones. The immediate goal is to
secure the pre-orders and build the interest list. We are on track to liaison
with the product manufacturing partner in the fourth quarter of 2020.Overview: 
Gaining the complete ecosystem understanding of the product or
service roadmap is the creative founder’s mission. For example, Elon musk’s
definition of disruption when mapped to say 
disruption space
 as the kitchen,
we believe that
 
convergence of technologies in the kitchen, food, health
domain needs to be staged and pipe out in the literal ‘kitchen’ space. For that,
thinking
 bigger
 with a platform mindset becomes mandatory.
 
A business
ecosystem is defined by Gartner, as an interdependent group of actors
(people, things, enterprises) sharing standardized digital platforms to interact
with one another to fulfill some commercial or civic purpose.
The current product ‘space’ is poorly functioning, defragmented, with
sometimes divergent & disjointed industries such as food, health, appliances,
consumer & agriculture.
Given this definition of disruption, products and services must be architected
and developed. The underlying power of data and integrated pipeline to allow
the data flow is one of the building blocks for all overarching architectural
decisions that help startups to scale.
In short, invest more time in identifying the actors surrounding your product
and services. Improve the design to enable these actors to nourish the
ecosystem for customers. Think beyond your product and its direct customer
benefits.
Step-by-Step Proprietary Process (for our venture):
Step 1
: Shortlist & Define the Key fundamental principles that you value:
For example, co-location of the team, product quality.
Step 2
: Define & Refine your purposeful goals or objectives based on what
you value: For example, one of the goals may be to recruit 2 key engineers
locally or encrypt all the personally identifiable data
.
Step 3
: Intellectually power & prioritize these goals through rationalization:
For example, hiring the right skilled security engineer locally is an important
first objective before encryption of the data.
Step 4
: Rein in the focus – Act of engagement between intellectualization
and instantiation of the goals: For example, navigating through all execution
challenges to ensure the set encryption standard is enforced on the data.Step 5
: Brave the execution – Instantiate the goals (from step 2) into
actionable outcomes. For example, search, recruit, hire, train the right local
talent and execute until the data is encrypted and validated with all quality
tests as one of the many goals.
Conclusion:
Build the product or service with real benefits to future customers. Do the
market and patent research early. Find the right talent to invest in de-risking
the most complex blocks of your product or service. Build the network and
share the vision to refine and expand it. Stay away from the debt form or
capital for the startup. Maintain a sharp focus on MVP and nothing more. It’s
your MVP that will attract investment and talent and not necessarily the
business plan.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Ajay is a solution architect at a Fortune 50 company. He has extensive
domain experience in Industrial control systems, IoT solutions, and
Environment, Health, Safety (EHS). Before moving to the US in 2003, he
worked for EDS, Goldman Sachs in Japan.
Ajay is also the author of Lead with DataTude: Demystify your DataTude to
lead & succeed in a decisive decade. As a successful engineer, technology
architect, entrepreneur & inventor.
Ajay has a Bachelor’s degree in Electronics, a Master in Physics, and Ph.D.
in Applied Management & Decision Science within Information technology.
He lives in Chandler, Arizona with his wife, two boys & happily married for
the last 26 years. He has evolved his side hustle into an active startup that is
building smart kitchen appliances to improve the quality of life & health for
individuals and families.
Connect Here:
https://www.maaichef.com
www.linkedin.com/in/datatude
References:
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/ecosystems-drive-digital-
growth/
“Invest more time in identifying the actors surrounding your product and
services. Improve the design to enable these actors to nourish the
ecosystem for customers. Think beyond your product and its direct
customer benefits.” - Ajay R. GawaliE
MOTIONAL
 I
NTELLIGENCE
 I
N
 L
EADERSHIP
By Vibha Soni
Short Description: 
Secret techniques for business growth using Emotional
Intelligence.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal: 
Build a team and lead it effectively for the freelancing business. Also,
learn effective strategies to measure business progress by acquiring new
clients while working with current clients.
Time to Implement: One week
What You’ll Need:
 You do not require any specific technology or tool.
However, you need to understand the basic concept of Emotional Intelligence
and its five dimensions (Self-awareness, Self-regulation, Social-skills,
Empathy, and Motivation).
Overview: 
The success of freelancers, entrepreneurs, startups, small and
large organizations depends upon finding the right team members. For this,
communicating and integrating technologies with business strategies to
improve business performance is very crucial.
Organizations seek efficient leaders to build a positive work environment.
Thus, they are moving towards Emotional Intelligence strategies to obtain
sustainable business growth.
Emotional intelligence not only improves communication and management
within the workplace; but also supports problem-solving and helps people
make better decisions under pressure
.
Step-by-Step Process:
A leader needs to make prudent decisions and manage teams while resolving
conflicts, and responding to all constructive criticism. The following three
steps would help you to use the EI technique to form, norm, and lead a team
dynamically.Step 1:
Improve self-awareness to become an effective leader. Find out the qualities
that you need for yourself and your team members. Recognize the emotions
that influence your decision-making process. For instance, impolite demeanor
negatively impacts leadership, so it is better to avoid it. The practice of self-
regulation would help you to deal with emotional weaknesses.
Step 2:
Improve social skills to recognize the emotions of team members. Active
listening, sharing opinions, providing feedback, and non-verbal
communication helps in improving social skills. Lack of knowledge about the
needs of your clients or team members will directly impact your growth.
Thus, use these four key elements for effective communication.
Step 3:
The last step is to focus on what you like about your work as it will motivate
you to achieve your desired goals. For example, you feel good when a client
appreciates your work or when your team members complete a task
successfully. It can motivate you to take up new challenges, and further guide
the team members to complete those challenges. For this, you need to
maintain consistency and a positive attitude.
Conclusion:
In a nutshell, effective leadership skills can be learned by practicing
emotional intelligence. If you wish to accelerate your business growth, you
need to imbibe the key elements of emotional intelligence in your work to
enhance productivity and motivate your team.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Vibha Soni is a software engineer in Computer Technology by education but
by passion, she is a Freelance Writer and Online Tutor. She writes technical
content for books, blogs, and websites. She also worked in college as
Assistant Professor and acquired good teaching experience. She utilizes her
technical skills and teaching experience in academic and professional writing
to create amazing content for her clients.
In her freelancing career, she has done ghostwriting of technical books. She
is also the co-author of a third-grade academic book titled ‘Computer
Reboot’. Today, she is an Entrepreneur managing a team and providing
different types of writing services ranging from academic, content, and SEO
writing to copywriting to corporates and business owners. The consistent
writing and reading helped her make a Personal Brand on LinkedIn and today
she is considered one of the Top 10 content writers in India.
Connect Here:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/vibhasoni
“Emotional intelligence not only improves communication and
management within the workplace; but also supports problem-solving
and helps people make better decisions under pressure.” - Vibha SoniH
OW
 T
O
 O
PTIMIZE
 D
ECISION
 M
AKING
 B
ASED
 O
N
F
INANCIAL
 S
TATEMENTS
By Pia Singh
Short Description: 
Analyzing financial ratios for decision making in small
businesses.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Overview: 
Financial ratios and benchmarks are useful to decision-makers
inside and outside a business. Management uses the information to assist in
decision making, goal setting and to compare business performance to other
operations. Lenders, investors, and other creditors use the same information
to evaluate risk, return, and performance compared to a portfolio of loans or
investments. To measure progress over time, users should calculate financial
ratios regularly at similar times in the business cycle. Ratios can help identify
symptoms of underlying problems in a business and enable managers to focus
attention on key issues.
Note:
Green: Low Risk - Normal or healthy range for an industry/segment
Yellow: Moderate Risk - Slightly outside normal/ healthy range
Red: High Risk - Significantly outside normal/ healthy range
1. The current ratio measures the liquid assets available to meet all debts
falling due within one year. The higher the current ratio, the greater the
ability of the firm to pay its bills
.
Formula: 
Current Assets/Current liabilities
Higher ratio = less risk
Green: Greater than 1.50 | Yellow: 1.00 to 1.50 | Red: Less than 1.02. The working capital measures the difference (in dollars) between current
assets and current liabilities, which represents the owners’ share of
production assets. The ratio states that an operation has XX dollars of ‘liquid’
assets (current assets) over upcoming obligations in the next year (current
liabilities).
Formula: Current Assets – Current Liabilities
Higher number = less risk
3. For operations with an annual production cycle, comparing working capital
(a balance sheet measure) to total expenses (an income statement item)
enables managers to evaluate the adequacy of working capital to fund
ongoing operations and provide a cushion for risk. This measure also enables
comparison to other operations
Formula: 
Working Capital/Total Annual Expenses
Higher ratio = less risk
Green: Greater than 50% | Yellow: 20%-50% | Red: Less than 20%
4. The debt-to-asset ratio measures the level of debt held by outside sources
relative to assets. Increasing debt levels translate into higher risk as the
operation loses flexibility and more stress is placed on earnings to service
debt. As the debt-to-asset ratio increases, management flexibility decreases,
and earnings are more stressed to service debt
.
Formula: 
Total Liabilities/Total Assets
Higher ratio = more risk
Green: Greater than 30% | Yellow: 30%-55% | Red: Greater than 55%
5. It is useful to compare profits to the business resources used to generate
them. The most common ratio used to accomplish this is the return on assets
(ROA) measure, which indicates how much profit each dollar of assets
generates.
Formula: 
Net business income from operations adjusted for interest,
operator management fees and family living expenses
Total business assets
Higher ratio = more efficient asset utilizationGreen: Greater than 5% | Yellow: 1%-5% | Red: Less than 1%
Conclusion:
Understanding and interpreting financial information first require a clear
assessment of personal and business goals. Without a sense of business
direction and strategic priorities, it is very difficult to determine if the
business is positioned to achieve owners’ goals and objectives. For example,
an operation preparing for significant growth or expansion will require
significantly more cash or liquidity (for down payments and funding
additional operating expenses) than a business preparing to reduce in size or
scale. With strategies and goals in mind, managers and owners can begin to
assess financial performance and ratios.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Pia Singh is on a mission to help entrepreneurs, especially women, build and
grow a profitable business. Across Private, Government, and Multinational
sectors, she has a unique 15-year background in Media, Finance, Strategic
Planning, Human Resource Management, and Business Development which
provides her clients with unique advantages. She has personally mentored 12
Startups in the last year across North and West India. Besides being the
founder of PSBS Advisory Services and Vice President of a non-profit
organization Unnati, she is also a Mentor and Speaker in various Government
and Non-Governmental forums like Ministry of MSME, Atal Incubation
Mission, TPS World Learning, TPS Management Consultants, India SME
Forum, Nexel, Startup India, Women Economic Forum and various colleges.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/pia-singh
“Understanding and interpreting financial information first requires a
clear assessment of personal and business goals.”- Pia SinghT
URNING
 H
ATE
 I
NTO
 L
OVE
 F
OR
 E
XPONENTIAL
 G
ROWTH
By Noam Kostucki
Short Description: 
Learn how to leverage negative comments and hate into
positive comments and new followers.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 How to pass the 200k views without paying for ads.
Time to Implement:
 15 years of personal development. It can be achieved a
lot faster.
What You’ll Need:
 Time to meditate. In some cases it’ll be 30 minutes, in
others it may take a few days.
Overview: 
The bigger your social media presence, the more negative
comments / hate you will receive. Angry and offensive comments are most
often deleted by social media managers and brands. From my experience,
they’re the best opportunity to get more likes and more followers if
responded to in the right way.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
 Read the negative comment and hate.
Step 2:
 Write down the emotions it creates in you - anger, sadness, fear,
frustration, guilt, shame, etc.
Step 3:
 Write down how this comment is wrong, unfair, inaccurate,
inappropriate, etc
.
Step 4: 
Write down how this comment is; right, fair, accurate, appropriate,
etc. This step is the most difficult because it requires introspection, self-
awareness, and self-criticism. The most efficient tool for creating this level of
awareness and insights is “Judge Your Neighbor Worksheet” in the
audiobook “Loving What Is” by Byron Katie.Step 6:
 Before writing or recording your response, visualize the person
writing the negative comment/hate as a 6-year-old child who doesn’t know
better and honestly expressed their ignorance.
Step 7:
 When writing or recording your response, remember that the most
important purpose of the response is not to convert this one person but for
everyone else who is reading to get on board with you. The most useful
outcome of the response is for all your current and potential clients to
understand your values, how you work, and how to best work with you.
Step 8:
 Use this model:
a
. 
Repeat their comment (or part of the comment) to clarify what you are
responding to
i
. 
Eg 1. “Hi John, you wrote “This service is a scam. I paid them and
they didn’t finish building my website”.”
ii
. 
Eg 2. “Hi John, you wrote “You’re a *@!!! Get out of my country”
b
. 
Honor their comment and emotional state -
iii
. 
Eg 1. “I understand you feel cheated and unhappy”
iv
. 
Eg 2. “I’m sorry to see that I make you so angry and unhappy”
c
. 
Tell them where they are correct
iv
. 
Eg 1. “You are correct that we didn’t finish building the website”
v
. 
Eg 2. “I understand that you want me to leave your country”
d
. 
Tell them where they are wrong through the use of evidence. Be factual
and remove all emotions from this explanation -
v
. 
Eg 1. “In the contract you signed, it clearly says “if the photos,
videos and text content for the website isn’t sent by 7 Dec 2020, the
website will not be finished”. We sent you 7 emails between Nov
4th and Dec 7th and called you 16 times to tell you about the
deadline and you didn’t respond. On Dec 7th we sent you an email
offering you 3 extra days to send us the material, but never received
a response.” - Include screenshots in your post/video to evidence
your claimsvi
. 
Eg 2. “I moved here 7 years ago and got my residency papers. I
have many friends here and a job I love, so I don’t have any
intentions of leaving the country, except of course for vacations or
work trips.”
e
. 
Educate them on the situation. Most followers and potential clients
don’t know the in’s and outs of your industry, so what may seem
obvious to you will be interesting new information for them. It gives
them a chance to understand you better
vi
. 
Eg 1. “I understand that this may seem unfair from your
perspective. The reason is that every member of our team is
assigned to projects with a certain amount of weeks to complete.
We are fully booked so when we sign new clients we make
promises to them as to when we are going to start and complete
their projects. That’s why we have a deadline for receiving content
as stated in the contract you signed, and as we explained to you
during our initial meeting. As you didn’t respond to our messages,
our team was still dedicated to you and couldn’t take on other
projects.”
vii
. 
Eg 2. “I understand you’re unhappy about me living here, and I’m
sorry you feel that way. I understand that you may have had bad
experiences with foreigners, and not all foreigners are the same. I
mean you no harm and 
all I want is to live a happy life in this
beautiful country. I pay my taxes, I help my neighbors and I do my
best to serve my clients every day. My favorite thing about living in
this country is xxx”
f
. 
Finish with something positive
vii
. 
Eg 1. “Thanks to this situation, we have made this deadline in our
contract more clear and we will make sure that every client puts a
reminder in their calendar so that they don’t miss the deadlines. If
your life and work makes it difficult for you to keep to tight
deadlines, I recommend you work with a freelance designer who
may have more flexibility in their timelines. Thank you for taking
the time to share your experience with us.”viii
. 
Eg 2. “I hope that you can see that I’m trying to live my life as a
good human being and that you can open yourself to giving me a
chance to be a positive contribution to this country. Thank you for
making this country beautiful, and I hope your next encounter with
a foreigner is a positive one.”
Conclusion:
When you learn to respond to negative comments and hate in a way that
attracts more followers, you open yourself to exponential growth. The more
followers and views you get, the more negative comments you will receive,
giving you an endless source of great content. The people who follow you
and like your content will have their trust and their belief in you will
strengthen as they see that your responses align with their values and ideals.
The more you practice this method, the less fear you will have about negative
comments. The less fear you have of negative comments, the more impactful
will become your content. The more impactful your content, the more
interesting will become the negative comments. The more interesting is the
negative comment, the better content you will create.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Noam Kostucki believes in integrating logic and magic. He’s a serial
entrepreneur, business mentor, fine dining chef, and artist. Noam published
10 books, traveled over 40 countries, and mentored over 30,000 people. His
restaurant HiR Fine Dining became #1 of the 927 restaurants in the province
on TripAdvisor and was selected by OpenTable from their 40,000 restaurants
as “one of 25 dishes to travel around the world for”. Noam became “Tiktok
Famous” in Costa Rica in Aug 2019 for being a man with a beard wearing
skirts and heels, and responding to hate with love. As a result of his Tiktok
presence, Noam got invited on various TV shows and got published in all the
biggest national newspapers.
Connect Here:
@noamkostucki and @elmundodenoam on social media
www.elmundodenoam.com
“When you learn to respond to negative comments and hate in a way
that attracts more followers, you open yourself to exponential growth.” -
Noam KostuckiE
MPOWERMENT
 W
ITH
 D
IGNITY
 – O
NE
 W
OMAN
 A
T
 A
T
IME
By Ashwini Ashok Boraste, M.Phil, Ph.D.
Short Description:
 Starting a Nonprofit Organization with passion in the
heart is just the beginning. Every effort put into it, tests the strength of the
pillars of this passion over time. Autonomy or control that leads to self-
respect is one of the basic needs of every human. For a woman, this
autonomy also means dignity. Supporting the family with the necessary
financial skills, managing the income and expenses, savings, and generating
additional income may sound trivial in developed societies. However, in
many parts of the world, this awareness and education are missing. The
dignified earning is a fundamental right of every family, and the empowered
woman plays a crucial role in executing this right.
We present our organization’s work as a case study to reflect the changes and
growth that financial awareness can bring to families that have no hopes of
crossing the poverty line in their lifetime.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 Self-Help-Group (SHG) concept is not new in India. However, in early
2000 there were no organized initiatives that rallied the women around the
central theme of holistic financial literacy. Forming a group of women in
rural villages to understand the importance of savings, learning new skills,
securing small loans, and selling the products in regional communities are
vital activities for growth. Micro-financing these groups, continuous
education and empowerment are some critical objectives for the 
teams
overseeing the group activities. Currently, we have over 900 self-help groups
with over 17,0000 women and this network is only getting stronger with
every financial year.
Time to Implement:
 2 years for proper financial and computer literacy of
women.What You’ll Need:
 Financial Knowledge, computer knowledge, trainers,
social media presence, resources (finances, hardware, and software).
Overview:
 Our non-profit organization was started in 2005, we took three
years to promote the awareness of savings, banking, and financial literacy
concepts to families with income levels below poverty. With no consistent
income, these families were deep in debt and no hopes of educating their
children. Family relationships are often at risk because of poor financial
health. We figured it was time to educate and empower women in these
families to implement their skills to earn a better living.
To achieve this, we formed small self-help groups to educate women and
started a small bank that offered loans ranging from $500/- (Indian Rupees.
35000/-) to $1400/- (Indian Rupees. 100,000/-) with moderate interest. We
provided daily savings for existing small businesses in our bank that allowed
them to plan for uncertain times. Within a short span of two to three years,
the groups started flourishing, had an influx of customers for their products,
and could make substantial profits and pay back loans. The successful groups
(mostly led by women) then went on to become team leaders for other new
small groups in the community.
Step-by-Step Proprietary Process For Our Venture:
Step 1:
 
Connect with Every Woman in Every Family in the Identified
Community
Our Case Study
: I started our first self-help group after visiting and meeting
every aspiring woman in their homes. I listened, shared, and encouraged
them to be hopeful about improving 
their livelihood. Trust is the most
important thing to build a long-lasting relationship. Even after 15 years, I
meet every new member whenever a new self-help group is formed
somewhere in a rural village.
Step 2:
 
Assess their Financial Literacy Skills
Our Case Study
: Financial security is core to every family, and women’s
contribution after marriage may become difficult especially in a patriarchal
society. For illiterate women, entrepreneurship is unthinkable, especially with
no access to skills and capital. It’s important to understand where these
families stand in terms of their financial knowledge and move forward
accordingly.Step 3:
 
Educate and Empower with the Importance of Savings,
Entrepreneurship, and their Role in Shaping Family Success.
Our Case Study
: Sharing the vision for a better family situation with women
is the first step. We start by educating them about micro-savings, learning
new skills and then eventually share the knowledge of how they can
implement these new skills to add a potential revenue stream.
Step 4:
 
Provide Small, Short Term Loans, and Guide the Execution
through the Sale of the Products in the Regional Market
Step 5: Continue to Empower the Leaders by Imparting New Skills &
Exploring New Marketing Avenues
Our Case Study: 
As a next step, we are planning to deliver online training to
all the team leaders. The leaders will need to have access to a personal
computer and smartphone to support these goals. We also anticipate that
every self-help group will create their own social media presence to promote
their products locally
.
Conclusion:
To build a strong network of empowered women in extremely low-income
families it’s important to be empathetic to their problems. Keeping personal
connections and taking a practical approach when educating them about
financial literacy often starts with taking some bold steps. Making the
financial resources available to the right venture and educating every
businesswoman to secure the microloan is vital.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Dr. Ashwini Boraste is the founder and Chairperson of Jijau Mahila
Sevabhavi Sanstha, India – a nonprofit organization actively involved in
women empowerment and micro-finance since 2005. She has extensive field
experience in grassroots women empowerment movement, public service and
welfare, and banking.
She is a renowned public speaker, recipient of hundreds of regional, state-
level accolades, and recognitions for her women empowerment area services.
As a successful social worker through her institution, she has been a vocal
proponent of empowering underprivileged families through education and
resourcing. Today, an Open University in Maharashtra has designed a
specific curriculum based on her groundwork that lacked structural support.
Ashwini has a bachelor’s degree in commerce, a Master’s in Arts with
banking and finance as specialization, M.Phil. in ancient literature and
empowerment. She has also been awarded an honorary doctorate in 2018 for
her lifetime work in woman empowerment.
Connect Here:
https://www.ashwiniboraste.com
“It’s all about earning a dignified living for every family, and we
believe that every woman can be part of this vital quest.” - Dr. Ashwini
Ashok BorasteD
UE
 D
ILIGENCE
 – F
OR
 O
NE
 L
IFE
By Sanjay R Gawali, Ph.D
Short Description: 
Career and health are the most agreed upon two wheels
of modern life. More than ever, the human race is becoming conscious of
their health and the environment in which they live. While human life
expectancy has been steadily increasing due to modern medicinal
development, work-life balance attainment is still a global challenge. In this
context, Indian ancient science has been playing a very pivotal role –
specifically with preventative intervention.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 Yoga is not a new term for the world and India. The needed discipline
to adopt Yoga and retain it as a lifestyle, however, is a monumental
undertaking. The Ministry of Ayush, Govt. of India recently developed a
structure to promote various training programs. SVYASA (Swami
Vivekanand Yoga Anusandhan Sansthan) is a Yoga University approved by
UGC (University Grant Commission) in Yog and Science. The goal is to
extend the knowledge of Yoga to 1-million families over the next 20 years.
Time to Implement:
 2-years to establish the foundational infrastructure and
affiliations with related institutions.
What You’ll Need:
 Social media growth know-how, Outreach Partners,
Holistic Living knowledge, Good Trainers & Team.Overview: 
According to the Wellness Institute (2017)
1
, wellness is the active
pursuit of activities, choices, and lifestyles that lead to a state of holistic
health. It goes beyond mere freedom from 
disease or infirmity and
emphasizes the proactive maintenance and improvement of health and well-
being. Expressed on a continuum that extends from reactive to proactive
approaches to health, wellness falls firmly on the proactive side,
incorporating attitudes and activities that prevent disease, improve health,
enhance the quality of life, and bring a person to increasingly optimum levels
of well-being (Travis, 2012)
2.
Step-by-Step Process:
Wellness and work have a two-way relationship, and both can mutually
enhance the quality of life. Being sick at work is a global issue that costs the
World economy 10-15% in output. Keeping this in mind, Sri Adi Yoga
International Institute (SAYI) was founded in Nashik, India in 2016 with a
vision to improve the quality of life based on a scientific approach embedded
in ancient practices. The founders worked on creating an institutional
framework to promote Yoga and Sanskrit language. Within a short span of 4-
years, the institute went on offering graduate programs in holistic sciences.
Step 1: A Solid Curriculum
Our Case Study:
 
Sri Adi Yoga International Institute (SAYI) for learning and
research was formed in Nashik, India, in 2016 with a vision to improve the
quality of life based on a scientific approach embedded in ancient practices.
SAYI adopted the curriculum offered by both Ayush and SVYASA to offer
top-notch holistic education and training.
Step 2: Be Scientific
The structure of the curriculum must be designed by experts in their
respective field. The correct execution of the program is equally critical. To
offer a world-class program it’s important to have the needed resources and
instrumentation required to train and guide the students through research
.
Step 3: Be a Role Model
To be an agent of change it’s important to invest in your team. The founders
of SAYI are trained and certified in Yoga science and have a diverse
background in science, technology, and research. Most of our alumni are
recipients of gold medals in national and international Yoga competitions.These accolades have helped the institute to be recognized as the best Yoga
training center in the state of Maharashtra, India which in return has
encouraged many entrepreneurs to start their Yoga as well as Holistic
institutes all across the country.
Step 4: Have a Clear Goal
It’s important to understand where you stand and what you wish to achieve in
the next few years. The vision and mission of all the key stakeholders must
be in-line with each other. In today’s World, it’s important to tap onto the
power of online platforms even for teaching offline taught programs like
Yoga. Think outside the box to reach a global audience and create a
difference in more lives.
Conclusion:
Life needs due diligence throughout its existence. It requires discipline and
structure, and there is nothing more rewarding than having the skills and
persistence to develop skills in your chosen field.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Dr. Sanjay R. Gawali is the founder and Chairperson of Sri Adi Yoga
Institute, India – a nonprofit organization actively involved in health and
wellness since 2016. He has extensive experience in engineering project
management, human resource development, and training.
Sanjay has a bachelor’s degree in Civil Engineering, a Master’s in Urban
Design, and planning with and a Ph.D. in Human resource development. He
also has an M.A. in Psychology and is a certified practitioner of Hatha Yoga.
Dr. Sanjay is a gold medalist from Pune University with experience in project
management & training in UAE for a leading construction company for over
14 years.
He firmly believes that holistic health awareness is a must for every
individual. He also believes that every family must have at least one Yoga
teacher that can mentor everyone in the family.
Connect Here:
www.sriadiyoga.org
References:
https://globalwellnessinstitute.org/industry-research/global-wellness-
economy-monitor-2017/
Dr. John W. Travis, Illness Wellness Continuum (2017)
“Helping individuals achieve balance and bring long-lasting changes in
their personal lives is the biggest service to humanity.” - Dr. Sanjay R.
GawaliN
EURO
-M
ARKETING
By Evita Ramparte
Short Description:
 The AI Game of Desire.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 How to Biohack Sales Process.
Time to Implement:
 A Lifetime
What You’ll Need:
 Hypnotic Connection with your Client
Overview: 
The number of views on funny cat videos on You Tube, the
number of years spent on social media collecting imaginary likes, comments
and shares, and the disturbing number of searches for porn on the web,
should tell you that what we know about marketing has been missing the
point. At least, a little off. Otherwise - our stats would make us smile, sales
would be a breeze and content would go viral.
Apple, Google and Amazon are making billions, while most of us, with our
message to save the world, are busy trying to catch attention, and drive traffic
into a page or a webinar where we hope to give something, teach something
and sell something. And - let’s be honest - with little result, when compared
to the dreams of those luxury cars, yachts and villas in the videos of some
marketing gurus.
What is it that corporations know that we seem to ignore? How come they
sell effectively and we don’t? Could it be possible we have been playing with
a completely different deck of cards
?
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
‘Sell to the brain; not the people’, says Jürgen Klarić,
 a leading authority
on Neuro-Marketing, a pioneering application of Neuroscience into the realm
of Marketing and Sales. And as clever as it may sound, it turns everything we
know about marketing pretty-much upside down.We are accustomed to think marketing is a conscious, linear, and rational
process and selling is predictable based on us placing a competitive offer and
meeting the needs of the customer. Supply and demand. It would certainly be
that way, if human feelings and emotions didn’t create static and interfere
with the transparency of the process. If only they could spell to us what they
really want..
The truth is, however, that most people don’t have a clue what they want.
When asked the simple question: ‘What do you want?’ Most people answer
with a list of ‘I don’t want this, and I don’t want that’, as if driving a bicycle
trying to avoid hitting the trees along the road.
It baffles the rational mind. Indeed, because the decision-making process is
taking place in the subliminal, which is 80% of our perception. We truly feel
more than we think. The language of ancient symbols plays a vital role at
bypassing the rational mind and few are fluent in this occult communication.
Step 2:
The name of the game is Dopamine
 - the hormone of desire, anticipation
and wanting; the synonym of that itch that keeps you sleepless until you
satisfy it. The itch is there reminding you to sign up for that coaching
program that finally will make you a multi-millionaire or urging you to chase
the lover of your dreams. The game is essentially the same. The flip side is
FoMO - Fear of Missing Out. Scarcity and time remind you the train is
leaving and you either hop in or you stay behind
…
The dynamics apply to anything sold and marketed on the web: from shoes
and sunglasses, dating apps, food products, to coaching, business courses and
spiritual salvation. While humans are busy “looking for love in all the wrong
places,” AI is tediously holding the pulse on the biometrics of our dopamine
supply. Always. Chasing the next and next. Studying human fear and desire,
AI is listening for cues and generating keywords, spying on our curiosity,
monitoring our fear and pain point.Decision process has everything to do with our brain and nervous system, and
the cocktail of hormones in our body. The body never lies. Hence, the
corporations have moved to study the body and the brain-hiring an army of
neuroscience researchers, and firing an array of apps collecting our bio-
metrics. People lie in surveys, however their biological response to ads, links,
sounds, images and overall marketing campaigns spills the beans. The
process of marketing and sales is taking place in the subconscious - a realm
of thoughts, feelings and emotions that are deep, primordial and hidden from
awareness. Neuroscience is studying human attention, emotion and retention
- capacity to hold a message in memory.
Just like the Internet has dripped to us from the US military, it is no secret
everything we know about digital marketing comes from porn industry which
has from the start pioneered the research and tactics. Extremely successful
due to its targeting of the primitive animal part of the brain, porn producers
have mastered neuroscience of marketing. It was porn industry that first came
up with email catchments, aggressive retargeting campaigns, and split-testing
analysis. Today, the industry is holding billions of IP addresses for Big Data.
The process is quite primitive and triggers our limbic brain that reacts
quickly. It’s all about fight or flight. Decisions take milliseconds in the
neurons that fire together and wire together forming new habits increasing
efficiency and saving time. The premise is primitive - survival and expansion.
Women get their dopamine boost from hanging out together. Men’s
dopamine comes from dominating. Thus, advertising to male or female
customers will be different. Showing women pictures of other women
laughing and connecting, and inspiring male clients to see themselves as
being Alpha…
Conclusion:
You’ve been told it’s never about money, right? Truth! Your customer is able
to find cash in the hidden pockets or go into debt, if they believe it’s worth it.
Look at gambling.
Most people live their lives trying to look good and avoid looking bad, hence
the products or services get purchased when they make them look good, feel
good and help them to avoid looking bad. If they can’t afford your coaching,
it’s not because they don’t have money. It’s most likely because they are
afraid to fail.Your empathy, your compassion, and your ability to connect with them on a
heart-to-heart emotional level will be the tipping point of your business
growth. Far more than presenting a competitive offer and making sense
rationally, your ability to use language to calm someone’s brainwaves,
remove someone’s fear and make them feel safe, will enable you to bio-hack
all objections in the sales process.
Hypnosis, you say? It’s precisely what’s been going on in TV commercials
for the last decades. A modern-day shamanism.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Evita Ramparte is an internationally known speaker, journalist, and author of
several bestselling books. You may know her as one of the stars of the
American documentaries ‘Hungry for Change’ on Netflix, ’Plant-Powered’
featured in Cannes, and ‘Food Heals’ Podcast. She has appeared on MTV
Europe, Russia TV, Univision, Cosmopolitan, Polish Public TV,...etc.
Evita is a Karezza mystic, a spiritual sensei and a catalyst of leadership. She
holds a double MA degree in Comparative Religion, as well as a
Postgraduate degree in Journalism and Mass Communication. She is a
student of Neuroscience at Harvard University. Her multidimensional
research allows her to build a bridge between ancient wisdom, neuroscience,
technology and culture.
She is the CEO and Founder of Business Venus, a Hong Kong-based
international media group dedicated to raising, coaching, broadcasting and
publishing true leaders for the Earth.
Connect Here:
www.businessvenus.com
www.youtube.com/c/EvitaRamparte
“Your empathy, your compassion, and your ability to connect with them
on a heart-to-heart emotional level will be the tipping point of your
business growth.” - Evita RamparteB
UILDING
 A M
ASTER
 M
INDSET
 P
LAN
: T
HE
 7 S
TEPS
 T
O
S
UCCESS
By Dulce Nallely Vera
Short Description: 
Successful entrepreneurs use a process for each project.
Create the process and believe in it so much that the success appears
inevitable. Behind the creative process lies the mindset, dedication,
persistence and faith in your abilities.
Difficulty Level: 
Beginner to Intermediate
Goal:
 Engineer your thoughts to align with your passions by creating an easy
to follow blueprint.
Time to Implement:
 
Re-inventing your mindset may take between 12-18
months. Understanding your strongest passion and developing it takes around
2-3 years.
What You’ll Need: 
Trusted Mentors | Books | Social Media | Website &
Planning System | Learning Resources | Network.
Overview:
 
Most of us have heard the saying “Change your mindset, change
your life.” Over the years this is something I have truly come to appreciate.
Our thoughts are powerful and influence our reality.
Step-by-Step Process:
Most people are visual learners, and I consider myself to be one of them. I
have created a Master Mindset plan that uses the word “MINDSET” as an
acronym with each letter representing a step towards success in anything you
desire
.
Step 1: [M] ResetThe first thing you need to do is realize that there are some beliefs within
your subconscious that are not serving you any purpose. Many times we get
discouraged by our inability to change the circumstances that we constantly
see ourselves in. This can lead to frustration and loss of commitment. What
we fail to realize is that most of the time it is our mindset that needs
adjustment, not necessarily our current situation or skillset. Take a look
inside and see what needs improvement. Start by writing down a clear and
concise goal in a journal or have it posted on a wall, but make sure it’s in an
easily accessible place to where you can go and read it every day.
Step 2
:
 [I] Inspiration
Great entrepreneurs succeed because they want to change the world. Their
focus is not about making money but to make a difference. Understanding
this is going to better help in deciding who and what to listen to. Inspiration
will come to you in a book, audio, person or idea. Once you realize what your
goal is, you will need to look for trusted sources in your field. You can read
books for enjoyment and learning as well as research to study your
competition.
Step 3
: 
[N] Negotiate
In this step it is crucial for an individual to delegate their time wisely. They
must set priorities and timelines that will enable them to approach their goal
faster. This particular step is more about the willingness to actually carry out
an actual plan in order to achieve success. In this step we begin with setting
up habits such as:
reading their goals every night and morning,
exercise, meditation
reading 30 minutes to an hour each day
fixing detrimental thought patterns.
The main point here is to set an intention and a plan and start 
NOW
, whether
you are ready or not. No procrastination beyond this point!
Step 4: [D] DevelopmentA growth mindset is the belief that intelligence is not fixed and it can be
developed. This stage consists of finding effective ways to practice their new
formed habits. As Napoleon Hill says in his prominent book 
Think & Grow
Rich, 
once you determine your definite goal, you have to determine what you
are going to exchange in return. There is no such thing as “something for
nothing”.
Step 5
: 
[S] Systematic Planning
Once you figure out what you are willing to give in exchange for your
success, you need a well thought out plan that is going to help you get to your
goal faster. This is going to take dedication and imagination on your part. For
this part you are going to have to construct a very clear schedule to follow.
This can include buying a calendar to put all the important dates you need to
remember or setting reminders on your mobile device. Use a budgeting
planner to manage your finances. Track down your short term and long term
goals to determine what is working and what needs improvement.
Step 6:
 
[E] Endurance
This stage will be one of the hardest ones to overcome. This part of the
process requires persistence and confrontations with fears that you might
have in your subconscious. Getting past this step will determine if you are
mentally strong enough to not only create the life you’ve dreamed of, but also
to create a business that will succeed in the long run. Here, we come to
affront all the things that are constantly holding us back. Lack of real
purpose, procrastination, fear of criticism, excuses and alibis, compromising
with mediocrity and non-action are some of the major things most of us
struggle with. Motivation, while it is extremely important to have, runs off
after a while and this is where endurance kicks in to keep you going in times
where it becomes difficult or where 
there is a lack of wanting to continue.
Some of the greatest names in history who accumulated great wealth and
fame owe a huge amount of their success to their uncanny gift of persistence.
Step 7: [T] TransmutationThe real magic happens when you use all the principles mentioned up to this
point and convert them into a lifestyle. One undeniable truth is that all
material forces are composed of energy. Energy works in states of vibrations.
These vibrations run on a scale of polarities that form a frequency. Just as
money is a material being, so is a physical being; therefore we are energy.
We can choose to vibrate in a higher state of consciousness or at a low
frequency of auto pilot. Assuming that you do the prior steps, achieving high
consciousness will come with less effort. The art of transmutation happens
when you tune yourself to vibrate with all the things you desire.
The Law of Attraction states: 
That which is like unto itself, is drawn
, meaning
that once you vibrate in purpose, definite desire, harmony, positivity,
happiness, money consciousness and positive transformation, prosperity will
follow!
Conclusion:
Going through these 7 steps will help you attract money, health, peace, and
success.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Dulce Nallely Vera is an author, public speaker, blogger, an advocate of
mental health and spirituality as well as a social media influencer and
vlogger. Dulce has acquired many skills of persuasion and negotiation
working for companies such as Verizon Wireless, Sprint Wireless, and the
Ford Motor Company, helping to develop her people skills and passion for
understanding the way humans take in information which she uses in her
business as an online life coach. She also hosts her Monday (Mindset
Monday) and Friday (MindFit Friday) livestream sessions as a certified
Mindset Mentor through her personal Facebook page. Uniting all her interests
and hobbies under one business model has helped her develop her own brand
that has allowed her to share her knowledge with people worldwide through
the use of social media.
Connect Here:
www.instagram.com/dulce_nallely94
candyv1512.wixsite.com/website
“By resetting your mindset, following inspirations that resonate with you,
building habits, and following a concrete plan of action with persistence
you will have in your hands (and your mind) the power to transform
yourself and your life.” - Dulce Nallely VeraG
ROWTH
 H
ACKING
 M
INDSET
By Kamila Behrens
Short Description: 
Ancient Mind Protocol for the New Economy
Difficulty Level: 
Beginner to Advanced.
 
Easy to start
Goal: 
Create an amazing lifestyle in this chaotic new reality!
Time to Implement: 
Starts to work on Day 1 and changes everything when
practiced with consistency over time.
What You’ll need: 
Ability to learn, 15 minutes daily
Overview: 
Today we are living with a wealth gap not seen since the empires
of old, levels of unemployment that used to start revolutions, total electronic
surveillance and erosion of privacy, an environmental crisis, technology and
softwares performing many jobs, a global economy built on fraudulent
banking and continuous war, and many more new and chaotic things that
make it difficult to thrive.
Traditional ways of thinking like “go to college and get a good job” are
essentially worthless. This crazy world calls for a growth hacking mindset,
skillset and toolset. Human design and lifestyle businesses are the new
“normal.”
When we work with clients privately we teach hundreds of growth hacks in
all of these areas but today we will share the most foundational and ancient
one of all, growth hacking yourself. All the good things will show up when
you get on this path
.
Step-By-Step Process:
Step 1:
 Sit down each day in front of a wall.
Step 2:
 Look at the wall in mindfulness for 15 minutes.
Step 3:
 Breathe in and out.
Step 4: 
Do NoThing. Just be in the moment.Step 5:
 Repeat DAILY!
Conclusion:
Once you are able to allow and be without reactivity - congratulations. This is
when you hacked the mind and ALL things are possible. There are many
tactics and business practices that we teach to our students, from creating
bestselling books to starting companies, but nothing beats synchronicity and
awareness. We’ve seen this change thousands of people, and create incredible
“unbelievable” successes for them in all areas of life. This cannot actually be
explained; it has to be experienced, so make sure to stick with the DAILY
aspect of this growth hack. Feel free to take it up to 45 minutes a day over
time.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Kamila Behrens was born in the mountains of Czechoslovakia when the
country was a Communist regime and came to America for freedom. After
many adventures in many places, Kamila is now an author, mystic,
philanthropist, serial entrepreneur and spiritual teacher with students from all
over the world. She graduated university with the highest possible honors in
Philosophy and holds a Dr.Div. Her non-profit institute is focused on
common sense solutions to community development. Her consulting
company is focused on helping movement leaders and subject matter experts
write books and create income with their teachings, then invest the income
into real estate, nonprofits and other permanent passive income assets.
Connect Here:
www.kamilabehrens.com
www.facebook.com/kamila.behrens
“Traditional ways of thinking like are essentially worthless. Human
design and lifestyle businesses are the new “normal.”
- Kamila BehrensS
LOWLY
, S
LOWLY
 G
ETS
 Y
OU
 T
HERE
 F
ASTER
By Stephen O’Neill
Short Description:
 Taking things slowly, step by step, rushing neither in
your actions, nor in your thinking helps you achieve your goals.
Difficulty Level:
 Beginner to Advanced
Goal:
 To open the secret key to a successful business and life
Time to Implement:
 Life-long learning
What You’ll Need: 
A positive mindset and a new way of thinking
Overview:
 Do you know where the best place to hide a secret is?
Out in the open.
That is why a business tip like this one may seem either redundant, cliché or
not really effective or relevant, since people are so used to paying for best
kept secrets to success and feel their money is well spent only when they are
being revealed something that blows their mind, a thing they haven’t heard
before. Otherwise, what’s the point in paying for it, right? If it’s already out
in the open.
I’d say most of the great keys to success in life, marriage or business, are
already
out there, surrounding us. The secret is choosing one, trusting and sticking to
it. I applied patience and slow development to achieve the highest pinnacle of
success in my life and business
.
So what I’m talking about is actually ancient wisdom, mainly seen in the
Eastern culture: Taking things slowly, step by step, rushing neither in your
actions, nor in your thinking.
You might say .. ”But I’m already 40, how much slower can I take it? Life is
not that long.”I say let LIFE worry about that. Time is a man made invention, you might
have one day left or 60 years. If you keep worrying about how much you’ve
got left, you’ll lose the youngest years you still have. The faster you live, the
faster you die, so there’s no wisdom in rushing towards the finish line. We all
get there.
Some of the most amazing businessmen started after the age of 40 and they
still enjoyed so much of their successful life. Even with all the technical
progress and speeded up living, most of the essential processes in life still
take the same time they took thousands of years ago.
A human baby still takes nine months to be ready for the outside world.
Nothing you can do about it, no matter how impatient you are.
A pineapple still takes almost 2 years to become a sweet ripe fruit.
And Earth still takes 365 days to completely revolve around the mighty
Sun.
Step-by-Step Process:
Nature is actually our greatest teacher in what patience and acceptance is
concerned. So it’s not a surprise that a slow pace is the wise way to go in
most of life’s aspects. Enlisted below are few such examples.
Eating: 
Slow food, as opposed to fast food, is a culture that spreads more and
more, for its infinite benefits. And actually, it is a return to our roots.
Cooking things slowly, chewing them thoroughly, feeling grateful for a meal
and not using the TV, phone or other distractions, have proven to increase
digestion and overall health
.
The Eastern culture, especially the Japanese, hold many secrets on this, no
wonder they have been using the chopsticks and swear by small portions and
not finishing what is on your plate.
Thinking: 
A mind that takes things slowly and is non-reactive is a wise and
strong mind.
Hastiness and jumping to conclusions are typical of an immature personality
and most often leads to decisions later regretted. Taking time to think things
through allows you to decide with your heart and not your ego, allows your
mind to cool down and see things more clearly and objectively, and thus you
have far better chances of getting it right.Building: 
A slowly built house is much more durable. Taking the time to
make sure the foundation is well embedded is essential, just like raising a
child in the first 5 to 7 years.
Travelling: 
Many people rush to put as many pins on the map as possible,
without actually taking the time to understand basic things about the history
and culture of the places they visit. The truth is that only when you interact
with locals and the nature of each country you visit, you can truly say you
have travelled and became rich.
Spending: 
This is where most of us fail. These three suggestions have me
helped live the life of a multi-millionaire and will help you too.
1
. 
Try to stay away from borrowing money, as much as you can. When it
comes to buying, stick to using your own profits, and you will see you
are less reckless with spending them.
2
. 
Don’t rush to show everybody you’re doing well, when it just smells
like you’re doing well. Wait till you have really truly earned it.
3
. 
Get used to applying the 
Money Arigato
 every single time you buy
something. Japanese have this magical technique in dealing with
money. Arigato means greetings and 
appreciation. What you do is take
a minute every time you are about to pay for something or when you
receive a payment, and greet the actual money with a smile and a
feeling of gratefulness. Thank them for what they are about to offer
you. That creates a pleasant chemical reaction in your body and a
positive connection to money in your brain. The way you spend your
money and the way you welcome it matters a lot. So every time you
pay for something or you get money say “Money Arigato” in your
mind.
Conclusion:
You might have heard that the key to a successful business is taking things
slowly.
But who really listens and applies it?Surprisingly and unfortunately very few, that’s why I still see it as a “secret”.
Today, our society is all about getting THERE first. With the advancement in
technology, education, communication we are concentrating too much on
speeding up everything. However, keeping a patient wise rhythm is precious
and the key to some of the most successful business people in the World.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
A self-made, highly successful businessman, known as ”The Housing
Veteran” in Glasgow, Scotland, who made millions without ever borrowing a
penny. Stephen O’Neill is now passionate about helping women become
aware of their infinite potential in business.
He admits to having under evaluated women in business in the past, and
knows it is high time to make up for that and give back to planet VENUS
what is rightfully hers. If he learned one thing in all these years as a manager,
it is that women’s leadership is a key to success and, while this still might
seem as an overstatement to some societies, even to the most forward
thinking of them, it is definitely why he’s here, having an exclusively women
driven team behind him.
And if you ask Stephen ”Why him?” he will laugh and say he’s always been
closer to understanding the feminine side of himself, much more than most
men are, and - it took him a while to accept that. He came to be aware of how
limited the masculine energy stays and how infinite and rich the feminine
energy flows, with its deep instincts, emotional intelligence, higher pain
threshold and tons of other advantages brought to the business table.
Stephen is determined to share all his success tips and tricks with his female
audience and show them how achievable a dream life is. Some people who
know him would say he talks too much, and he would agree, but what’s
important is that his ears are equally as open as his mouth is
.
With lots to share and an overflowing amount of charm, whitt and humor,
Stephen O’Neil is a true ambassador for women in business, and the first
ones who need to hear about this and understand the HOW’s and the
WHY’s.. are women themselves.
Connect Here:
www.stephenoneill.co.uk
www.facebook.com/mrstephenoneill“In the end, the choice is always yours: Do you want to go fast or do
you want to go far?”- Stephen O’NeillS
AFEST
 L
INKED
I
N
 A
UTOMATED
 C
OLD
 O
UTREACH
 U
SING
H
YPER
 P
ERSONALIZED
 GIF
S
By Stefan Smulders
Short Description: 
Reach out to a cold audience on LinkedIn and double
your reply rates with the safest growth hack using hyper-personalized and
dynamic GIFs.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
Double reply rates and automate LinkedIn outreach safely using
Expandi.
Time to Implement: 
30 minutes or less to set up.
What You’ll Need:
LinkedIn profile
Expandi.io (Expandi subscription allows integration with Hyperise)
Your pictures or GIFs
Description/Overview:
Using hyper-personalization in your LinkedIn outreach cam-paigns, you will:
Be completely unique - No other LinkedIn tool has this feature and
you’ll be able to get your prospects’ attention every time because no
one else is doing this yet.
Stand out in your leads’ inbox and stay memorable - Leave your
competitors in the dust and get a reply for your message every single
time.
Have different use cases for booking calls and engagement - Your
creativity is the limit when using dynamic GIFs. You can experiment
with different GIFs, text, and so onLinkedIn is changing. People are numb to the same copy-and-paste and sales-
y templates. Most people only ever personalize first names and job names.
Using this growth hack, your leads will be compelled to reply, while your
LinkedIn account will stay safe.
We will be using an integration of the two platforms:
Expandi.io - The world’s safest LinkedIn automation tool.
Hyperise - Hyper-personalization tool to add dynamic personalization
to your GIFs or images.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
 Expandi x Hyperise Integration
1. Register on both sites.
2. Go to Hyperise API settings, create API Token, and copy the link.3. Log into Expandi. Go to your profile settings and paste in the API.
Now, the two platforms should be linked.
So, whenever you add a new image or GIF to your Hyperise account, you’ll
need to refresh the image list in Expandi.
To do this, simply click Sync From Hyperise link under each message in the
drop-down section.Once you do this, you’ll be able to upload images and GIFs directly to the
Hyperise dashboard, edit from there, and use them in your Expandi LinkedIn
outreach campaigns.
Step 2:
 GIF Customization
You can upload your GIFs or images from the dashboard and customize them
from there.
To create our custom GIF, we just took a Live photo on an iPhone, converted
it into a GIF using the Lively app (GIF Maker or other 
similar app for
Android), and used First Name and LinkedIn Profile Image personalization
from Hyperise.
Once you’re done, you can adjust your GIF in the Canvas settings.
For images, we recommend an 850×466 size ratio, and for GIFs - around
600×750 size. But just to be safe, we always recommend testing these kinds
of hyper-personalization messages to your colleagues first to see if the size
ratio looks good on their screen.
Finally, to keep your outreach campaign and LinkedIn account safe, we
recommend connecting with only 20-50 (to start with) relevant people within
your target market.Step 3:
 Outreach and Social Selling Templates
Here’s what we did for our campaign.
1. Find a significant influencer on LinkedIn for your niche who just went
viral.2. Then, we scrape the list of people who commented on the post using
Expandi. To do that, simply copy the post URL.3. Select Search on the left menu and then create a new search.
4. Paste the post URL and ID like so:5. Create a Connector Campaign, import the people from the Search results,
and prepare your outreach templates (or copy and adjust ours below)!
Connection Request
Knock Knock...
Now you’re supposed to say “Who’s there?”
Just kidding {first_name}
saw you’re also a fan of (name) post about (topic)
Love it too! Let’s connect.
Follow up message 1 – Time delay directly after accepting
Welcome to the party!Follow up message 2 – Time delay 4 hours after
It gets pretty boring in the inbox, especially with all the massive sales
pitches you 
getFollow up message 3 – Time delay 2 days
Let me teach you how I have been hitting a hole in one with my hyper-
personalization at scale through LinkedIn. {first_name}, are you free next
Tuesday for a chat?
Follow up message 4 – Time delay 1 days
Have a spot left for Thursday as well… suits?
The Results
Why did it work?
Summary/Conclusion:
1
. 
Hyper-target your audience for better results - The more you have in
common with your audience the better. You can scrape influencer
posts.
2
. 
It’s funny – No one loves snobs and boring people, you can always use
humor to catch your leads’ attention and stand out.
3
. 
Minimise the Ask – Personalization in images trigger Pattern
Interrupts, implementing this in your sales flow will typically improve
engagement 2-3x.A
BOUT
 
THE
 A
UTHOR
Stefan Smulders is a SaaS Entrepreneur, Founder of Worlds safest software
for LinkedIn Automation - Expandi.io. He bootstrapped his company to €3M
ARR in just 1 year.
Connect Here:
www.expandi.io
www.facebook.com/stefan.smulders.83
LinkedIn is changing. People are numb to the same copy-and-paste and
sales-y templates. Hyper-personalization is the key to effective LinkedIn
outreach. - Stefan Smulders.H
OW
 T
O
 G
ET
 F
IRST
 100 P
AYING
 C
USTOMERS
 F
OR
 Y
OUR
S
AA
S P
RODUCT
 B
Y
 E
MAIL
 O
UTREACH
By Will Cannon
Growth Hack Title:
 
Acquiring Paid Customers Through Email Outreach
Short Description: 
This growth recipe shows you how to grow your paid
customer base by using the power of email.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 Securing 100 paying customers for your SaaS product by using email
outreach optimally.
Time to implement:
 1-2 hours for setup. Run the email campaign for 8-10
days. Another 8-12 days to communicate with customers.
What you’ll need:
1
. 
uplead.com
2
. 
lemlist.com
3
. 
invitereferrals.com
Description/Overview: 
Email outreach, although effective, is very time-
consuming. Using this recipe, you’ll be able to land your first 100 paying
customers – all by focusing on creating an effective email outreach campaign.
You’ll be able to use tools that will not only reduce the overall time and
effort but will also boost the efficiency of your outreach 
campaign. It also
teaches you to use your current customers to add to your clientele list.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Finding target leads using UpLead
After you’ve defined your target customer, the next step is to get contact
leads.UpLead is an excellent tool to get contacts for boosting business by focusing
on the right sales leads. It already has an extensive database of verified
contact information. This includes the contact’s company, their title, phone
number, email, and location.
Simply set up an account with UpLead to get your email outreach mailing list
sorted.
Step 2: Sending visualized and personalized outreach emails using
lemlist
lemlist is one of the best email outreach tools that can automate and
personalize cold emails on a large scale. In fact, the platform’s USP is its
ability to personalize images that can be added to your cold emails.
You can use this to lock in prospects, boost reply rates, and possibly warm up
your cold leads. (Integrating lemlist with UpLead is also possible.)
Create and schedule a customer acquisition campaign with lemlist.
Afterward, export your target lead from UpLead to this campaign. You can
also edit the campaign to customize the automation process as per your will.
Here’s an example:
Hi (Prospect’s Name),
I know that leading a fast-growing start-up gives you little time to spare, so
I’ll keep this brief
.
My name is [Your Name] and I‘m with [Your company’s name] that offer
[Your SaaS product] that can be great for [Your USP].
Would you be interested to know about our product in greater detail? Let us
know and we’ll be in touch.
Best,
(Your Name)
Step 3: Reply to emails from warm leads
Once you start getting replies of interest from leads after activating your
outreach campaign, you need to win over your prospect.For instance, ask them to schedule a call with you. If they agree, have a
candid conversation about who you are, your SaaS company, and what you
can do to help them. It’s equally important to listen to your prospects and
their pain points. Your aim should be to connect the solution of their pain
points with your services.
If your prospect doesn’t agree to a phone call, send them a detailed email
about what your company can do for them. This should again be personalized
to make them feel that your company 
is
 worth trying out. For this, you can
talk about how using your product will help them retain their customers, or
improve their day-to-day efficiency – keep an eye out for their pain points.
Step 4: Start with customer onboarding
After securing your first batch of customers, shift your focus on making their
onboarding process as comfortable as possible. Customer onboarding is
critical as it defines the ongoing relationship of your customer with the
product.
Start by sending a welcome email and a product tutorial. Before you send
them their first login and educational emails, make them fill a signup form
and submit important documentation.
Don’t stop there
.
After they have logged on for the first time, call them to get their feedback.
This can help retain customers in the long run.
Remember, there is still a chance for the customer to stop using your SaaS
services if they don’t deem it useful. So, be welcoming and don’t waste time
in following-up after they log in.
Step 5: Implement customer feedback
Knowing customer feedback and areas of improvement won’t make a
difference if you don’t actually implement the changes. Hence, you need to
tweak your campaign according to the lessons given to you by your first set
of customers.
Doing this will help you get customers quickly – both due to improved
efficiency and word-of-mouth publicity.
Step 6: Setting up a referral programSet up a referral program using InviteReferrals for word-of-mouth publicity.
This is an excellent process in which your customers bring in customers for
you in exchange for a reward.
Before you create resources to alert your customers, identify your referral
incentives. Offer something that would be appealing to both the referees and
referrers like extra credits or a premium service.
Conclusion/Summary:
 That’s everything you need to kickstart your email
outreach campaign and secure your first 100 paying customers. Invest time
and effort in developing relationships with your prospects to grow your
customer base.
(Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability.)A
BOUT
 
THE
 A
UTHOR
Will Cannon is the founder and CEO of the B2B sales intelligence platform
UpLead. UpLead is a tool that allows businesses to identify and reach out to
their ideal customers with ease.
Connect Here:
www.uplead.com
www.linkedin.com/in/will-cannon
The easiest way to acquire your first 100 customers is to build a list of
your ideal client, run personalized cold outreach campaigns and setup a
referral program for your product. - Will CannonA
GILE
 M
ARTECH
 T
O
 G
ROWTH
 H
ACK
 S
ALES
 W
ITH
N
EURO
 L
INGUISTIC
 P
ROGRAMMING
 (NLP): A C
USTOMER
C
ENTRIC
 AI A
PPROACH
 F
OR
 D
ATA
 D
RIVEN
 S
ALES
 A
ND
B2
B
 M
ARKETING
By Kushagra Sharma
Short Description: 
The Agile Martech to GROWTH HACK sales with
Neuro Linguistic Programming (NLP) in B2B space is a customer centric AI
approach for data driven sales and marketing, where the vision is to bring out
a culmination of data centric insights which will help build deeper persona
based behavioural Insights using AI/ML which will enable deeper hyper-
personalized conversations establishing relationships and a deeper
penetration of products and services digitally with an agile, scalable and
automated model thereby building account based insights driven, targeted
funnel and pipeline build and accelerated conversations to shorten sales cycle
and bring out desired traction in revenue streams and build stronger and
deeper perception with our customers.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
The objective of this thought process is breaking the code of volumes
of unstructured data to structured meaningful marketing data and integrating
NLP (Neuro Linguistic Programming) through deeper persona based
behavioural Insights using AI/ML which will enable deeper hyper-
personalized conversations to get meaningful targeting outcomes which will
enable a redefined approach to marketing campaigns
.
Time to implement: 5-7 weeks
What you’ll need:
 Social Listening Tools, Market Research Tools, Crawlers,
Chatbots, Cookie Clusters, Neutral platforms
Description/Overview:Account Based Marketing (ABM) in the B2B world today is in its most
conventional form, driven on minimal data points and more on value based
relationship selling and lack of optimum collaboration between internal
teams, this needs to transform into a more Insights driven with predictive,
personalized customer centric approach, which allows collaboration across
internal and external stakeholders.
Step-by-Step Process:
Challenges, Drivers and Deliverables
Challenges
Drivers
Deliverables
Optimized
Collaboration with
distributed
workforce
Collaboration and
knowledge transfer
between the
marketing and sales
team
SaaS
acceleration
Thinking
B2C, Acting
B2B
Agile
Marketing
Approach
Becoming SaaS
ready
Faster SaaS sales
cycle
Vertical +
Account based
Approach -
>allows deeper
penetration with
commercial
customersMaking Digital
selling more
datacentric from a
market, vertical,
competitor POV
Building a more
targeted Sales
funnel and Pipeline
with collaborations
across stakeholders
Insight Driven to
personalise SaaS
offering for faster
sales cycle with
our. customers
Personalization
and Customer
Centricity for
customers
Automation
Insights
Driven
Account based
dashboards
provide single
source of truth
Data & insights
driven approach
Scalable and
automated
process for
internal teams
and partners
Move to a
growth hacking
mind set
For a modern digital account-based marketing the tools required for a
winning ABM strategy include
How we will get there –Impact pre and post purchase
Buyer Journey (Pre-
Purchase)
Customer Life-Cycle (Post Purchase)
Buyer Goes online and looks
for info in his desired purchase
Via social listening we track the present
market and competitive offerings
The social listening helps
analyze his market,
opportunity, triggers and pain
points
Through account-based tracking we
identify his perception, sentiments
towards our products and maintains a
constant channel of comm.
Using behavioral/digital
footprint we identify right
selling opportunity
When it comes to subscription renewal we
are better prepared to answer his queries,
have a discrete analysis of what is the
optimal path for them moving forward
Using NLP we personalize that
offering to according to his
needs and wants but also
according to his interests and
beliefs
Conclusion/Summary:
Modern marketing calls for more than developing a good product, service,
pricing it attractively, and making it accessible to target customers.
Organizations must work towards being impeccable in terms of building
data-driven Insights, have a Hyper-personalized approach powered by Neuro
algorithms and use these models effectively thereby building, targeted
pipeline build and accelerated conversations to shorten sales cycle and bring
out desired traction in revenue streams and build stronger and deeper
perception and relationships with our customers.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Founder - 505 Circle | Inspiration and Motivation Evangelist | Storyteller |
Podcast Host | Author | Passionate Marketer and a Digital Creator who is
making wisdom go viral.
From a Passion Standpoint -
Kushagra Sharma (Kush) Is a digital creator and believes in the collusion of
“Arts & Science” and through 505 circle he attempts to bring out – “A
powerful vibration of positive change”
505 Circle is a media platform that showcases inspirational stories and the
journey of thought leaders and creators from different walks of life and works
on the premise of “Inspire and be Inspired”
He has co-authored in the - The Growth Hacking Book 2 and in the process
of authoring another book on Growth Mindset.
From a Professional Standpoint -
With an Innovation and quality focused global outlook he carries over 15
years of success developing value propositions, customer-focused cultures,
and business strategies that create and maintain competitive advantage to
deliver sustained revenue and profit gains. He has a broad understanding
across areas like Marketing management, Strategy, Growth Hacking, SaaS
based Marketing, Account management, Client management & services
across world-wide markets.His focus is to consistently seek out opportunities and challenges in the
business to develop attainable solutions for improvement. He is a Pragmatic,
systemic thinker who is consistently able to restructure businesses with his
innovative approach and lead 
transformational change to achieve synergy
between business strategies, processes, and IT investments. He consistently
looks at creating empowered environments with passionate, success-driven
teams. He is consistently working to be a proven business strategist and an
aspiring leader who can build a distinguished track record delivering-
revenue growth, top and bottom line increases, improved operating
procedures, efficiency, lower costs, expanded markets, high customer
satisfaction, and enhanced competitive advantage. He is a deeply committed
individual who believes that collaboration yields best outcomes.
Connect Here:
https://linktr.ee/505circle
https://www.505circle.com
Account Based Marketing (ABM) in the B2B world today is in its most
conventional form, driven on minimal data points and more on value based
relationship selling and lack of optimum collaboration between internal
teams, this needs to transform into a more Insights driven with predictive,
personalized customer centric approach, which allows collaboration
across internal and external stakeholders. - Kushagra Sharma.H
OW
 S
UPERCONNECTORS
’ U
SE
 T
HE
 R
IGHT
 T
OOLSET
 T
O
W
IN
 B
IG
 I
N
 B
USINESS
By ADitya Kandari and Rohan Chaubey
Short Description: 
This growth recipe shows you how to become a super
connector and grow your business through mutually beneficial relationships.
Difficulty Level: Easy
Goal: 
To stay connected to your 1000 people tribe
Time to Implement: On-going.
What You’ll Need:
HoldOnApp as a personal CRM
Description/Overview:
How many connections do you have on LinkedIn? And how many of those
connections you have actually connected to one-on-one?
The above two questions would be fairly simple for you to answer but very
difficult to understand from a networking perspective. In the social media
age, a lot of us are confusing networking with increasing the number of
people we are connected to on social media without having any personal
connection with them on a regular basis.
But what is important in personal and business relationships is to keep in
touch with your network and directly reaching out to them 
whenever you
need something from them. In other words, keep relations warm and
concentrate on the quality of it rather than the mere quantity of it.
So how best to do it? The answer is a personal CRM. It does exactly what a
CRM does for business, helping you maintain relations with your friends,
family and those you want to keep in touch professionally.
Step-by-Step Process:Here’s how to use a personal CRM in order to make best use of your
network:
Step 1:
 Check in regularly - And by regularly, I mean to keep in touch with
your contacts. A simple “Hello, how are you today?” or “Can I be of any
assistance?” or “You might find this article interesting, give it a read.” can go
a long way in making sure that your connection with your network does not
go stale.
Step 2:
 Set up reminders for important days - This could be work
anniversary, birthdays, promotion or other milestones. A personal CRM here
can help you do just that.
Step 3:
 Remember details of contacts by noting them - Maintain a database
of a few specifications of each person in your network. You can also add
information about your last conversation and the note on which the
communication got ended. This will give you the idea about how to best
restart the communication channel with the person concerned.
Some of the pros and cons:
Pros
1
. 
More Opportunities - Super connectors are more likely to land new
opportunities than a normal person not willing to help others or check
in with them occasionally. When you support or help others, luck
magically finds you. Recruiting 
new talent becomes easier. You get
exclusive information about deals and private investments. Clients
magically seem to land on your doorstep, uninvited.
2
. 
More revenue - A common myth around free advice is that it is free and
why should I waste my time on giving something free of cost. But in
reality, there is nothing called free lunch. Successful givers are likely to
produce more annual revenue through referrals and other means.
3
. 
It gives you an edge in your business - It is always easy to sail rough
waters when you have someone to hold your hand. Similarly in a
competitive market, it is always good to have a brand where people are
referring you to their connections and clients are knocking on your door
without any extra effort from your side thus giving you an edge in your
business.Cons
It is a time-consuming process - A personal brand based on mutual respect
and care does not get built overnight. It takes a lot of time and effort and thus
a personal CRM can do wonders in this journey.
Conclusion:
A personal CRM can turn you into a super connector with a network of like-
minded and kind-hearted people who are trying to build a conducive
environment for everyone to grow and flourish. Although networking is the
official term for it, it can be best described as “Friends looking out for one
another.”
Use HoldOnApp (a personal CRM) that can help you to build a strong family
of supporters so that you never have to miss even a single opportunity in your
life ever again.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
ADitya Kandari
 is an experienced digital product strategist, tech evangelist,
and consultant focused on helping individuals and well-established
companies to transform their dreams into reality.
He has 7+ years of experience in Product Strategy, Development, Designing,
UI/UX, Product Development, SEO, Digital Marketing, Growth Hacking,
and MVP Builds.
Rohan Chaubey
 is one of the most celebrated Growth Hackers and
HoldOnApp is his side-project with ADitya Kandari.
Connect Here:
www.holdonapp.com
https://www.linkedin.com/in/adityakandariB
UILD
 Y
OUR
 O
WN
 D
IGITAL
 A
SSET
By Raghavendra Devadiga
Short Description: 
Take charge of your digital presence by creating digital
assets that will stand the test of time.
Difficulty Level: Easy
Goal: 
To design and build your digital assets to build your brand.
Time to Implement:
 4 - 12 weeks
What You’ll Need:
Domain + Hosting
Website theme
Facebook Chatbots (ManyChat)
Content Creation Tools (Canva, InVideo, etc.)
Description/Overview:
A common misconception among business owners and even some Digital
Marketers is that social media profiles (Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc.) are
their digital assets. The reality is, it is not our digital property, it is owned and
controlled by the platforms. It is a rented property and we are at the mercy of
the platform creators.
No one thought Google Plus, Orkut, etc. will be gone someday. And no one
knows when the next major social media website will be taken down or they
can delete your profile for any reason on which you have no say, their
decision is final
.
Having a million social media followers is worthless if you’re unable to drive
them to your website or email list if you want your revenue to be recurring
not one-time or random.Hence it is important you have your website or membership site as the hub
where all your true fans can find you and no social media giant or other
company can control your website.
You need to build your digital asset that you truly own.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Know yourself
The first and foremost requirement is to know yourself and your business or
profession.
You can set up a website if you are providing a service, selling a product or
simply displaying your portfolio as a professional.
Create a blog to keep your audience aware of your personal or professional
updates.
Step 2: Getting the basics right
Now since you have clarity on who you want to be, you can build your digital
hub.
Get a domain name which suits your brand, it can be your name or your
company name; anything that is memorable. You can also find an expired
domain on www.expireddomains.net which will help you in SEO too.
Get a self-hosted website/blog so you can have complete control over your
digital asset.
Setup and launch your website with basic pages and most importantly add
Google Analytics and Google Search Console.
Step 3: Produce content
Consistently provide value to your audience by publishing content 
regularly.
You may ask - How to come up with fresh content regularly?
The answer is repurposing.
Every content format is content. It can be a video, blog post, infographic,
podcast episode, etc.
Repurpose the same content into multiple formats and distribute it on relevant
platforms that suit the format of the content. Example, you can publish videos
on YouTube and embed it on your blog.Your website and library of content is a digital asset for you. They are
working to market you 24/7.
Step 4: Creation of web 2.0 properties
Now that you have your website and library of content, you can start working
on your social media presence and integrate it with your website.
Web 2.0 properties include - Facebook Page / Profile / Group, LinkedIn Page
/ Profile / Group, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, Tumblr, Medium, Blogger,
YouTube channel, etc. Choose channels that are relevant for your business.
Your goal is to drive traffic from these channels to your digital asset.
Step 5: Build complex digital infrastructures to capture and retain your
audience
Once your website is created, the next step could be building your digital
funnel, creating a membership site, advanced Facebook marketing (using
pixels, chatbots, etc.) and more.
Conclusion:
Once you have a systemized process and customer journey defined, your
digital assets will work for you.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Raghavendra Devadiga is the co-founder of Digital Marketing Consultants
and also works with India’s most-followed growth hacker Rohan Chaubey.
He helps leaders, entrepreneurs, business owners, marketers, and influencers
to grow their business online through Digital Marketing and different Growth
Hacking techniques and take their business to the next level.
He started his career as a website developer, developing niche blogs, Search
Engine Optimization, and Social Media Marketing. Now he works on
creating Digital Sales Funnel, creating Membership sites, pay per call only
for US clients, and other advanced techniques. He also helps small local
businesses to get their business into the next level through Digital Marketing.
Connect Here:
www.facebook.com/raghavendra.devadiga24
www.digitalmarketingconsultants.co
“Your website is your Digital Asset. It should work for you — instead of
the other way around. Systemize and automate through building a
funnel.” - Raghavendra Devadiga.U
SING
 M
EMES
 F
OR
 NUA (N
EW
 U
SER
 A
CQUISITION
) O
N
F
ACEBOOK
By Sindhu Biswal
Short Description: 
How to
 
use meme marketing for acquiring new users by
leveraging Facebook Ads.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 Improve your existing content reach and conversions.
Time to Implement:
 7 days (1 day to make the meme, 4 days to run paid ads
on meme for awareness, 2 days to run paid ads for acquisition)
What You’ll Need:
Adobe Premiere Pro or Final Cut Pro
Facebook Ads Manager
Getfvid
Downloadgram
Description/Overview:
Facebook organic growth is not dead. The content consumption has changed
but we have not adapted our marketing efforts accordingly.
This growth recipe will tell how to create a video meme, make it relatable
optimized for organic growth and use facebook ads retargeting to get your
desired results
.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1:
Researching followers and creating a user persona.
Use Facebook’s audience insight tool to understand them more.Check which other facebook pages they follow and which demographic
is in the majority
Now, you lock your audience. Create a user persona on which you want
to create content on.
Step 2:
Time to add emotions and some life.
Download free to use videos on the internet. You can use - Getfvid,
Downloadgram.
Drop them to your Adobe premiere pro/Final cut pro.
Add a text to the top of the video which will make it relatable to your
target audience.
Higher the relatability. Better is the content.
Step 3:
Time to upload the video and run ads.
Create a campaign on Facebook Ads Manager with objective as post
engagement.
Choose the existing post, run the ads for the next 4 days at least.
Step 4:
Time for optimization.
After the first 24 hours of your ad running, optimize the ad for 2 metric
only - video average playtime, cost per shares, cost per comments.
Your cost per shares and cost per comments should be below Rs.
10/0.13 dollars.
Create a custom audience and save it - People viewed at least than 25%
of your video.
Step 5:
Time for retargeting.On the 5th day it’s now time to kick in your North Star metric
campaign. Could be app installs/website visits.
Now your adset should re-target the custom audience that you created
earlier using the video meme.
Run it for 2 days and check the cost per results.
And then take a decision in scaling up.
Remember, the meme should be relatable and the creative that you use in
your acquisition campaign should be in sync with the earlier meme with good
brand visibility.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Sindhu Biswal is a marketer born in Cuttack and living in Mumbai. After
completing his BBA and MBA, he jumped in to become a Founding Member
and Marketing Lead of a social networking startup - Dogether, that was
backed by Facebook start program and NASSCOM.
He has worked with PayTm Insider, earlier called as Insider.in and promoted
some of the largest sports in India - Indian Super League, T20, ODI, Pro
Kabaddi League etc. He also handled digital marketing and app growth for
PayTm Insider.
Currently, He is a digital marketer in the growth team of India’s largest
digital entertainment startup - Pocket Aces, the parent company of
FilterCopy, Dice Media, Gobble, Loco, Nutshell, Jambo.
He is passionate about B2C startups and keeps sharing his learnings and
insights on his LinkedIn and YouTube channel.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/sindhubiswal
www.bit.ly/SubscribeSindhuBiswalU
SING
 T
HE
 P
SYCHOLOGY
 O
F
 Y
OUR
 C
USTOMER
 T
O
I
MPLEMENT
 R
IGHT
 ABM S
TRATEGY
By Nitish Mathur
Short Description: 
This growth recipe teaches you ‘replace the fish net with
a spear’ mindset; outlining the right ABM strategy.
Difficulty level: Advanced
Goals:
1
. 
Better Sales & Marketing Alignments
2
. 
Shorter Sales Cycles
3
. 
ROI Growth
4
. 
Personalised Marketing Approach
What You’ll Need:
1. Strong Alignment of Sales and Marketing teams
If your sales and marketing teams work as a cohesive unit, you have set for
yourself the perfect recipe to score those indispensable C- suite accounts.
Right from the mutually decided budget, high-ticket accounts,
communications, content to ultimately sticking to the goals, they should be
in sync handling the roadblocks and paving way for each other
.
This will also ensure improved transparency, cross-team collaboration and
communications across your teams.
2. Ideal Customer Profile (ICP)
Tap into your existing customer base to analyze who fits in your definition
of an ideal customer taking into consideration the factors like revenue
potential, how likely they are to purchase from you repeatedly, how can
your service solve their problems etc . This will allow you to invest your
resources wisely.3. Tools and Technology:
Here are a few tools and platforms you can start with to assist you in the
process:
Xtensio or Canva - Comes handy to build precise Buyer and Account
Personas.
Linkedin Sales Navigator - This works like a spearhead to hunt down
those look-alike target companies you will need.
Clearbit or Zoominfo or Discover.org - Finds email IDs and all other
relevant contact details.
Funnnelytics or Simple Click Funnels - Aids to monitor the inflow and
outflow of the traffic quite seamlessly. Also their ‘forecast’ feature
brings out the best of optimization.
Email tool - Stick to the classics in this case like Snov.io, Sendfox,
MailChimp to take your messaging to the next level.
Kickfire or Inside View - Go secretive with these tools to discover
those hidden leads. A little ahead of their competitor, Google Analytics,
these tools are precisely what sales intelligence boasts about.
CRM - You obviously can’t get away without this one.
Zoho, Hubspot, Freshworks - scoring the top positions here - are really vital
for nurturing your leads.
Description/Overview:
ABM is a focused growth strategy to create highly targeted and personalized
buying experiences for a set of mutually identified high value accounts by a
strong alignment of marketing and sales.
These accounts are treated like they are individual markets. The more you
tailor your communications, content and campaigns around them, the more
reasons you give them to incite actions and convert.
There’s even more to it. Account-based marketing due to it’s highly
customized approach lets you shorten your sales cycle directly impacting
your ROI.
Infact, the words of 87% of marketers who measure ROI suggest that ABM
outperforms every other marketing investment.Talk about win-win situations, right?
No doubt, ABM is scaling up towards such an unparalleled stature.
ABM is the place where marketing and sales are at their closest with a clear
vision about their goals, accompanied by a series of comprehensive strategies
to nurture and convert the mutually decided key accounts.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Define your high-value target accounts
Devise an ideal set of high-value, validated and carefully tiered target
accounts to spend your resources in. More or less, it often boils down to the
most profitable, long-term and happy customers who bring longest lifetime
value
.
Step 2: Map accounts and key decision makers
Identify the key stakeholders and buying committee members of your target
accounts. You need to drive consensus among them who can directly
influence the final decision making.
Step 3: Curate hyper personalized targeted campaigns
This is where you take the first step towards forging a strong relationship
with the stakeholders.
Orchestrate high-performing, cross-channel campaigns to facilitate
streamlined demand generation for their companies.
Align your messages and content around their interests , needs and business
challenges. Make sure to checklist all the relevant channels they are likely to
leverage as web, emails and mobile.
This personalized approach will shorten your sales cycle and improve the
overall customer experience too.
Step 4: Measure and optimize
After you get through the above steps, account retention and delighting
comes into play.
Always keep a keen eye on your impact. Test, run, monitor and improvise
your ABM campaigns consistently so that no loopholes go unnoticed to
ensure customers don’t endure fragmented experiences.Conclusion:
As Sangram Vajre says, “Account based marketing is focused B2B
‘Smarketing’. It’s the combination and range of activities all centered around
the ideal set of accounts that you believe has the need for your solution. It’s
quality over quantity in its most basic form.
”
When 92% of B2B marketers quote ABM an indispensable asset to their
overall marketing efforts, you realize the hype is quite justified. Just figure
out where you lie on the spectrum of ABM readiness and be agile enough to
set up your ABM strategy.
Moreover, when COVID-19 pandemic has left all of us in a limbo, ABM is
of even more emphasis than ever. This calls out for your immediate actions to
adapt your communication strategies to empathize more with the accounts
you are targeting. Provide them with more valuable resources and insights
that will solve their businesses’ loopholes. Help them grow amid and post
this pandemic.
ABM is all about going as targeted and humanized with your outreach as
possible.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
A food blogger turned Growth Marketer, co-author of the best seller “The
Growth Hacking Book 1” and featured on Forbes and, Nitish Mathur helps
companies hone their brands through everything DIGITAL.
As the CEO of his proud brainchild, 3CANS Digital, he is providing Purple
Cow solutions to help brands stand out in this digital world. He can often be
spotted discussing viral marketing trends with the industry experts as the host
of LinkedIn’s trending show - Talking Social.
After being part of esteemed organizations like Deloitte, Collabera and a
bunch of SaaS based start-ups, he is now aiming to make Account Based
Marketing and Growth marketing the superstars of the business. He stands
out with his motto of - “You can be serious without a suit”.
Connect Here:
www.nitishmathur.in
www.linkedin.com/in/nitmathur28L
EVERAGE
 O
THER
 W
ELL
-P
ERFORMING
 Y
OUTUBE
 V
IDEOS
T
O
 G
ET
 F
REE
 O
R
 L
OW
-C
OST
 T
RAFFIC
By Nader Sabry
Growth Hack Title
: YouTube Description Free Traffic
Short Description
: Leverage other high-performing old YouTube videos to
get free or low-cost referral traffic.
Difficulty Level
: Easy
Goal
: Get traffic from a low-competition area most never thought of as a
source to get free traffic using YouTube.
Time to implement
: 1-2 hour
What you’ll need:
1
. 
YouTube.com
2
. 
Email scraper (Hunter.io, etc.)
3
. 
Mass email tool (LemList, MailShake, etc.)
Description/Overview:
YouTube is one of the most underestimated sources for traffic, although it is
the second-largest search engine on the planet.
Too often, we turn to social media platforms like Instagram, Twitter, and
Linkedin, where your content’s lifespan is short due to their firehose
mechanics. But on YouTube, the lifespan of your 
content is very long; hence
it’s worth the investment, and it can bring in more traffic over time than other
sources.
Our objective here is to use the YouTube Description real estate someone
else has to get you traffic. Usually, the youtube creator has not considered
being that valuable or knowing what it is worth.
Step-by-Step Process:Step 1: Choose your niche or topic you want to optimize for
In this case, we will use the topic of “Building a website” to assume your
selling website development services.
1
. 
Go to YouTube
2
. 
Type in your topic, in this case, “Building a website.”
3
. 
Click on filter
4
. 
Choose videos for “This year.”
5
. 
Choose videos for “view count.”
TIP: Choose videos that target the same audience you want but do not
compete with you directly, so you are not seen as a threat
Step 2: Choosing the right videos
You need to be strategic about who you target and finding the right targets.
We are looking for people who see value in what you offer and are willing to
collaborate.
1
. 
Click on the video
2
. 
Go into the description and qualify if they are a good target.
a
. 
Do they have a ‘
sponsor’
 in their description? If no, go to the next
qualifier.
b
. 
Do they have a ‘
competing affiliate link’
? If no, go to the next
qualifier.
c
. 
Do they have a ‘
lead competing magnet’
? If no, go to the next
qualifier.
3
. 
Build your short-list ideally; you want to target the top 50 qualified
videos.
a
. 
The bigger the list, the better your chances.
b
. 
Don’t worry about if they are lower down your target list.
TIP: This isn’t about getting the top video; this is about getting as many
videos near the top as possible to give you more traffic through the
accumulated efforts of this hack.Step 3: Building the proposition
The sweet spot has arrived; what we want to do is place our offering or
message to get traffic in the videos’ description. This is a very underutilized
space where traffic can be gained for free or low-cost.
1
. 
Choose your offering model.
a
. 
Free placement 
- will you be asking for a free placement, if so
think carefully about what is in it for the video creator and the
audience
b
. 
Paid placement
 - will pay a small to mount for the placement,
think carefully about how much and why, and for how long.
c
. 
Affiliate placement
 - what you will pay them and how you will
track it to show them, including how often you will pay them
2
. 
Choose a position
a
. 
Above the fold =
 first 50 words at the top of the description; this is
valuable real estate, so come with an excellent offering to
incentivize
b
. 
Below the fold =
 anything below the first 50 words; this is less
valuable real estate but essential; if your offering is of less value,
aim here.
3
. 
Design a pitch
a
. 
If your 
offering payment or an affiliate offer
, state how much can be
made right at the start and keep it a reason, not an unrealistic
number that might draw suspicious or even disqualification you
themselves
b
. 
If you’re asking 
for a free placement
, find a reason you add value to
them and their audience.
i
. 
Create a valuable lead-magnet on offer
ii
. 
Create a credit toward a purchase that us very attractive
iii
. 
Create a branded promotional code with a generous discount
iv
. 
Cross-mention or traffic back to their digital assetsv
. 
Offer an interview for their next video.
vi
. 
Offer some help that might enhance their content you can provide
c
. 
Offer a shoutout back
 
via your channels and give them some traffic;
remember YouTube videos have a long lifespan.
d
. 
Give them a background 
on who you are and use numbers to show
your network size if that is applicable, like how many followers or
subscribers you may have
e
. 
The big ask
, be sure to be explicit about your ask, what your
offering, and that you’re open to discussions.
f
. 
Include any assets
 you can for them to see as an example or proof
to make a quick decision.
TIP: Keep it short, simple, and what is in it for them. Be open to discussions;
leave that door open as they may come back with something you did not
think of, which might be of great value.
Step 4: Placement for free traffic
1
. 
Ensure it stands out; if you’re above the fold, use the real estate wise.
2
. 
Keep it 50-70 words max.
3
. 
Put a direct and straightforward call to action.
4
. 
You need a hook to use it upfront and clearly.
EXAMPLES OF PLACEMENT CONTENT
-- ABOVE THE FOLD
Example 1
www.yourwebsite.com low-cost custom web design services
Example 2
Free ebook - learn how to build your website now compliments of [name of
the channel] click here www.yourwebsite.com
Example 3
$500 free website design consultation sign-up now at
www.yourwebsite.com
-- BELOW THE FOLDExample 1
============
$500 free website design consultation click here
www.yourwebsite.com
============
Example 2
============
free ebook on how to build your own website click here
www.yourwebsite.com
============
Example 3
============
Need a new website? Let us help you get more customers today
www.yourwebsite.com
===========
=
Stop 5 outreach
1
. 
Scrape contacts - there are many tools to do this with, including finding
their connections on other platforms like LinkedIn. This I will leave to
your choice, as there are many scraping tools and like, e.g., Hunter.io,
LinkedIn Sales Navigator, UpLead, Seamless.ai, TexAu, and
Webhose.io, etc.
2
. 
Send it out. You can use tools like Gmass or LemList or MailShake.
3
. 
Follow-ups are crucial to making this work. Have a series of 7 total
emails, including your original pitch backed with follow-up reminders,
and don’t nag, but try to create value in each email even if it’s a
friendly reminder.
4
. 
CTA have a clear call to action like scheduling a zoom-call or a reply
with a yes to move to the next step. Zoom-calls are nice; it allows you
to get to know who you’re doing business with, which goes a long way.
TIP: Ensure you have a great follow-up sequence and leave 3-5 days between
them, yes it might take some time, but the result is worth it, mostly if you are
repeating this process across several videos.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Nader Sabry is a strategist, innovator, growth hacker, and entrepreneur in
NASA space tech, government & health/wellness who’s raised $120 million
in building start-up companies. He is also the author of the bestseller “Ready
Set growth Hack: A beginners guide to growth hacking success,” featured in
Mindvalley, Entrepreneur Magazine, Time Magazine, Huffington Post, MIT
Technology Review, and NASA Spinoff magazine.
Content Here:
www.youtube.com/c/nadersabry
www.nadersabry.comE
MAIL
 M
ARKETING
: E
XPERIENCE
 F
RAMEWORK
By Ishaan Shakunt
Short Description: 
Value creation by delivering experiences using email
marketing.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 Deliver a better experience than all your competitors and hence gain a
competitive advantage.
Time to implement:
 7 - 8 Hours
What you’ll need:
1
. 
Email marketing software (Like SendInBlue, Hubspot)
2
. 
Screen recording software (Like BerryCast, Loom)
Description/Overview:
The experience you provide is a part of the value you deliver to your
customers. One of the goals of marketing is to enhance value delivery. This is
something a lot of brands miss out on. So, if we focus on this, it gives us a
huge advantage.
You are likely to see an increase in all sorts of performance metrics like
referrals, repeat purchases, conversion rates, open rates, click rates
.
Step-by-Step Process:
FRAMEWORK (IN SHORT):
Set the macro goal of your email marketing for the delivery of experiences
and micro goals for each email. The micro goals can be things like getting
more information or purchases.
The major experiences that you may want to focus on delivering (with
example) are:Onboarding: When they fill up a lead form
Interaction: When they interact with a certain page
Transaction: When they purchase something
Time-Based: When there is an occasion like their birthday or a festival
Offboarding: When they want to unsubscribe from your emails
Almost every email needs to have 2 parts:
Something that they expect
Something that will delight them
Putting it all in action:
Step 1:
Set up your email marketing software. Make sure that it supports activity
tracking of contacts, segmentation and workflows. We primarily use
SendInBlue or HubSpot for this.
Step 2:
Map out the interactions your audience will have with your brand. I would
suggest focusing on one experience type at a time.
(see framework
)
Step 3:
Hypothesize what they would expect and what is the one thing you can send
to them that will surprise them. You can later try out variations to see what
works better.
Step 4:
Create experiences that you can deliver using emails. (A single experience
can be delivered over a sequence of emails as well.)
Step 5:
Create workflows in your email marketing software to help assist them. Make
sure you keep the basics in mind while drafting the emails (marketing goals,
brand voice, buyer journey, customer persona, etc.)
Examples of emails that you can swipe/take inspiration from:1
. 
If a product is too complicated and a person visits the product page 2-3
times, you can send them an email that has a video recording of you
walking them through it. If you use software like BerryCast or Loom
they can directly respond to the video via their own recording.
This should help increase conversion rates and/or give you valuable
feedback.
Expect: Nothing
Delight: A personal video walkthrough from you
2
. 
If someone gives a test on your website and doesn’t do well in it, you
could send them a guide on how to attempt that test or you could send
them study-material for it.
Expect: Results
Delight: Guide
3
. 
If a subscription is going to get over, offer them an extension to their
subscription in return for referrals.
Except: A reminder
Delight: The offer for a free extension
Conclusion/Summary:
A survey found that about 80% of customers who have 2 bad experiences
with a brand say that they would switch to a different brand and 87% of
people said people would pay a premium for better customer service.
Focusing on experiences as a form of value creation can be a quick way to
create differentiation and increase revenue.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Ishaan Shakunt is a Growth Marketer and Trainer. He primarily helps
startups who need help launching/relaunching their digital marketing
activities and then scaling them.
He has worked with over 20 startups, trained over 2000 people, headed a
marketing channel at a unicorn startup and contributed to an internationally
best-selling book, The Growth Hacking Book 1.
Connect Here:
www.Ishaanshakunt.com
https://www.linkedin.com/in/ishaan-shakunt
The experience you provide is a part of the value you deliver to your
customers. - Ishaan ShakuntE
NGINEERING
 A
S
 M
ARKETING
By Charlie Patel
Short Description: 
Building micro-tools to generate more leads than
common low-effort lead magnets such as a checklist, template, etc.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal: 
Build and launch micro-tools to generate 10x - 100x more leads.
Time to Implement: 
One week to a month (Depends on the complexity of
the tool)
What You’ll Need:
Quiz or Calculator makers (Example: LeadQuizzes)
Freelancer or in-house developers
Description/Overview:
You need traffic to get more users or sales. Unfortunately, if nobody knows
you exist, then resorting to one-off time-consuming tactics will ultimately be
insufficient and lead to the quick death of your startup.
So the common approach is to create a lead magnet. We’ve all seen the
thousands of lead magnets that companies offer - typically they’re ebooks,
templates, worksheets, or infographics.
However, based on my experience, there’s a SUPER lead magnet that almost
everyone ignores. These typically come in the form of:
Calculators
Generators
Graders
Testers
Libraries
DirectoriesQuizzes
And more
A micro-tool specifically focused on attracting your target audience has
numerous benefits such as:
Lead generation
Increased traffic
Increased conversions
Establishes authority
Greater differentiation
Cost-effective to build
Karma points from users
Some refer to these tools as ‘engineering as marketing’ because they require
developing an actual tool or engineering a valuable asset. Based on my
experience, these types of tools can typically generate 10x - 100x more
results than all other lead magnets combined.
Regardless of whether you’re running a SaaS, a service-based agency, or
selling a physical product, you can apply this tactic for your business.
Here are examples of this tactic being used by various companies:
1
. 
Hubspot Website Grader (SaaS) - Hubspot offers marketing, sales, and
service software. They implemented one of the most popular examples
of this tactic in action - Hubspot’s 
Website Grader - which grades your
website for “free” and delivers a neat PDF of your score as long as you
give them your email.
Link: website.grader.com
2
. 
Ahrefs Backlink Checker (SaaS) - rather than rely solely on people to
register and pay for their keyword research tool, Ahrefs built a free
Backlink Checker that anyone can use for free to check backlinks
associated with billions of websites, albeit limited to 100 results.
Link: ahrefs.com/backlink-checker3
. 
Credit Karma’s Calculators (content site) - if you visit their site, you’ll
definitely stumble upon one of their many calculators, as well as a way
to check your credit score for free. From credit cards, insurance,
mortgage rates, and more, these calculators drive a substantial amount
of organic traffic to such sites.
Link: creditkarma.com
4
. 
Ad Angles (Agency) - As part of our launch plan for a new service
called Ad Angles targeted towards advertisers and brands running ads,
we created a curated ads library of over 1,500 compelling ads with
critiques by me and fully categorized and searchable. Note that it
required zero programming skills to build this asset which drives 80%
of our traffic.
Link: adangles.com/ad-library
5
. 
Triberr (SaaS) - We needed to attract a different audience to our site.
Specifically, Instagram influencers. So we created a tool for Instagram.
It became so popular that Instagram asked us to remove it recently. :)
Link: Triberr.com
6
. 
Podcasts.com (SaaS) - As a leading podcast host, we cater to podcasters
and listeners. To attract more of these folks to our site, we developed a
free search engine for podcasts and episodes.
Link: podcasts.com/directory
7
. 
Coworkify (SaaS) - We sell coworking space management software so
we needed to attract coworking space owners. So we’re building a free
listings directory for coworking spaces to raise awareness of our
product and generate more leads.
Link: coworkify.com
Conclusion:
As you can see, these tactics can be utilized by any business. The key is to
ensure you’re developing something valuable for your target audience. So go
forth and identify what’s a valuable utility, develop it, and promote it like
crazy. Reap the rewards thereafter.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Charlie Patel is a serial entrepreneur behind companies such as Triberr - a
content and influencer marketing platform, Podcasts.com - a leading podcast
host, 99 Robots - a digital marketing & WordPress development agency,
Ampfluence - an Instagram Growth service, and Startup Growth - a growth
marketing blog. As a startup enthusiast, he’s got a knack for launching and
growing SaaS products and services.
Connect Here:
www.startupgrowth.com
www.twitter.com/charliepatel
Building micro-tools can typically generate 10x - 100x more results
than all other forms of lead magnets combined. - Charlie PatelS
ETUP
 A
ND
 G
ROW
 A R
ADIO
 S
TATION
 T
O
 I
NCREASE
B
RAND
 P
RESENCE
By Charlie Childs Jr.
Short Description:
 How to set up and grow an internet radio station to
increase your brand awareness and traffic to your site.
Difficulty Level:
 Beginner to Intermediate
Goal: 
To increase brand awareness, expand social media footprint, maximize
website traffic, and increase sales.
Time to Implement:
 7 Days Set up / 30 Day Increase
What You’ll Need:
 Website, Social Media, Zeno Media 24hr Radio station
(Free) Zenomedia.com, Mixxx Software (Free) mixxx.org, Computer
Headphones and Microphone, Music/ Talk source
Overview
: First setup of a 24hr Radio station. Now you have an unlimited
customizable window for audio content. Your Radio Station will boost Brand
Awareness and Social Media footprint by 50%+. Your site traffic will jump
30% or more.
Step-by-step Process:
Step 1:
 Download Mixxx software to your computer and set it up to allow
broadcast and recording of your shows.
Step 2:
 Download Music or audio content for the station to Mixxx on your
computer
Step 3:
 Select music for the channel and Hot topics for the sho
w
Step 4:
 Set up your Zeno Media account, connect and test with Mixxx (
Zenomedia.com)
Step 5:
 Upload music/ audio content and create auto DJ to Zeno Media, this
will run for 24hrsStep 6:
 Invite everyone on your social media and on your guest’s social
media to your website to listen
Step 7:
 Put a Welcome video at the top of your website
Step 8:
 Place Radio link midway down the page
Step 9:
 Underneath radio link, place Invitation to receive additional
information and notices for new shows via listeners names and email
Step 10:
 On your site place all of the products and services you and your
guest’s are selling
Step 11:
 When broadcast ends send a partial show link on all social media
for those that missed the broadcast (due min 2x week) also invite them to
ask questions about the show.
Step 12:
 Notify every guest on the show and their respective audiences for
all upcoming shows and tease for reruns.
Step 13:
 Launch your show and refer to the website during the show.
Step 14:
 Repeat 3 -12
Conclusion/ Summary:
You can do this! Take action now!
Get the huge boost in Brand Awareness and Social Media you deserve after
just five shows! Having your own radio station will eclipse a podcast in under
7 days.
There is a world of benefits such as commercials for your products and
commercial space that generates income. You also have space 
to create
additional programming for your station. Invite your guests to do promos for
your station. Invite the community to be a part of your Social Media team.
The more shows and guests you have the greater your momentum will be.
You have to be consistent with your shows time, place, and frequency.
People now have a greater reason to come to your site and keep returning.
You are constantly adding value by providing information to the community.
After you make good money upgrade your equipment and continue your path
to success.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
The Million Dollar Idea Network is the Brainchild of Mr. Charlie Childs Jr.
Mr. Childs, the host of the Million Dollar Idea Network Radio Show
currently in its 11th year amassing over 600 episodes with well over 80,000
listeners across the nation in 42 Cities and internationally in 5 countries.
Million Dollar Idea Network Television currently has over 25,000+ viewers
worldwide. Mr. Childs is also the creator of MDINRadio.com, a 24hr internet
radio station with premium programming covering Personal Development,
Wealth, Health, Family, and Guest Interviews. He produces, programs,
designs, and creates Roku and Radio/Television Channels and is always
willing to share his expertise and help you develop your station and achieve
your media goals.
Connect Here:
www.milliondollarideanetwork.com
“Your own radio show can give you a huge boost in Brand Awareness
and Social Media you deserve after just five shows!”- Charlie Childs,
Jr.5-S
TEP
 A
PPROACH
 T
O
 G
ETTING
 M
EDIA
 C
OVERAGE
By Niki Papaioannou
Short Description: 
Easy to implement tactics to help you build your
personal brand efficiently.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal: 
Getting published on renowned online platforms and doing interviews
twice a month
Time To Implement: Six months
What You’ll Need:
 Marketing assets (logo, fonts, colours), laptop,
meaningful strategy and ideas, Canva
Description/Overview:
Enhance your online social media visibility by marketing yourself to
journalists and news outlets. Gain social media mentions and do recorded
interviews at least twice in a month.
Follow a realistic timeline and a doable strategy to reach your goals. In short,
discover, network, collaborate, learn and grow. Building credibility on the
social media platforms is the key to becoming popular and reputable.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step1: Build a Press Kit
Having a press kit is essential when it comes to marketing yourself. 
Think of
it as your own personal advertisement.
Press kit allows the interviewers a ‘one-glance’ read through all your
achievements and accomplishments. Your press kit may start off small, but as
you secure more interviews, your press kit will grow with time.
You can get started by building your own press kit with no cost involved at
Canva. It allows you many basic templates to personalize with colour, font,
and photos of your liking.Your press kit should possess the following sections:
About Me/Bio:
 Having a short and long written bio which needs to be
updated on a regular basis.
Accomplishments/Awards:
 List of all career accomplishments. It can
also include awards which you received in your professional career.
Press: 
It should include photos of your interviews, screenshots of your
social mentions, and descriptions to add to the credibility.
Speakable Points
: Make a note of topics you are comfortable to
address. Short and crisp pointers will help your audience to understand
what the speaking session would entail.
Contact Information:
 This should include essential details like your
phone number, email address, city, etc.
Step 2: Make Meaningful Connections
Use your existing network to get started at a faster pace. Contacting friends in
the industry to put you in touch with their friend at the local radio station can
be a great start.
Next step can be to improve your social media presence on Twitter and
Instagram by gaining more followers.
Start following local journalists on Twitter and interact with their 
tweets as a
great way to catch their attention. Be on their top of the mind so that they are
able to recognize you when you “pitch” them.
Make your press kit presentable by adding a screenshot of the photo used
with every social media mention. You need to be popular to enter into good
books of media outlets so that they consider interviewing you.
Step 3: Pitch Yourself to Outlets
Have an understanding of WHO wants to hear about you and WHEN. This is
the key to understanding the game because timing is everything. Think about
what is trending and pitch it. You can also start with podcasts and local
magazines. You can target larger outlets as you become an experienced
interviewee and continue upgrading your press kit.Emails of journalists can be found on their Twitter accounts or websites
.
Keep your email pitches brief and concise to ensure that they are actually
being read. Don’t forget to include information related to who you are, what
you do, key points and your availability. It should comprehensively cover
everything that an ideal pitch should possess. If you are not receiving
responses, be mindful of your ‘speakable points’ to ensure that they fit into
your outlet’s audience at the current time.
Step 4: Secure and Prepare for Your Interview
To prepare for your interview, you may ask for a list of curated questions
they’ll ask. You can rehearse your answers well in advance. Be prepared to
touch all your ‘speakable points’. Also, you need to be well groomed when
you appear for the interview. And if the interview is virtual, then lighting is
everything. Get your photos clicked so that you can use them for your press
kit later.
Step 5: Update Press Kit
With a decent credible portfolio in hand, you can always go 
about pitching by
interviewing with renowned publications. Keep updating your press kit by
adding relevant photos and videos related to your overall experience.
Conclusion/Summary:
Pitching is all about scaling. You need to start small and local and then move
on to larger media outlets. Make sure you update your press kit with all
interviews. Plan and strategize to secure new interviews and create your own
spotlight.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Niki Papaioannou spent over ten years in senior marketing roles with a focus
on the casual dining/restaurant sector where she honed her passion for food
and storytelling into successful publicity strategies and marketing campaigns.
In her first year of business as the founder of Niki Inc., a Toronto-based
publicity firm, she had two clients hire her to help announce their departure
from the Canadian Football League and into the Canadian political scene.
Niki worked on this announcement and saw it go viral for a 24 hour period.
Her phone rang non-stop from various media outlets and prospective clients.
Niki is also working as an Associate Producer with an Amazon show “The
Social Movement”, with Red Knight TV studios. Her clients include
superstars like: Josie Ho (Hong Kong Actress, Musician), Dr. Nadia Rizzo,
(Naturopathic Doctor) Lanette Jamieson (The Seed Movement Film). She is
the voice behind the podcast “Superstar PR” which was ranked 11
th
 in
Canada for the Top 20 podcasts for 2019.
Connect Here:
https://nikiinc.ca
https://www.linkedin.com/in/nikipapaioannou
“Building credibility on the social media platforms is the key to
becoming popular and reputable.” - Niki PapaioannouB
E
 A
N
 I
NTERNATIONALLY
 R
ENOWNED
 D
OCUMENTARY
F
ILMMAKER
By Shruti Sharma
Short Description: 
Simple and efficient ways to make timeless
documentaries and take them to International audience.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Ability to tell stories in the form of documentaries or short films.
Learn to use enormous possibilities provided by digital media. Also, target
International festivals to reach out to global audiences.
Time To Implement:
 12 - 15 weeks
What You’ll Need:
 Innovative ideas, mobile phone and digital platforms like
Twitter, Instagram, Youtube, Facebook, Linkedin, etc.
Description/Overview:
The presence of the digital media has only brought with it enormous
opportunities for content creators. If only we stop doubting ourselves and our
ideas as insignificant, we can contribute highly to the world of meaningful
films.
When you know you have a message to share and that it can be presented in
any visual form, then all you need is to start working on it, giving it some
kind of audio visual shape. Sometimes, the end result might surprise you.
Sometimes it can shock you too, but how would you know. Shoot it and / or
you would never know
.
Step-by-Step Process:If there is a story that you feel compelled to tell, please tell it. Be it in the
form of a movie, documentary or motion picture, just tell it. There is a reason
that that idea has come to you. Because that idea needs your voice, your
perception. No one is probably thinking about that idea when you are. So,
respect your intuition and get on to the task of bringing your story idea to life.
Follow these steps below to keep the workflow simple and organized.
Step 1: Ideation
Ideation is the first most significant step in the making of a documentary. A
well researched and clearly stated idea, develops distinctively. If you are
aware of the outcome beforehand (though in a documentary, many times the
story changes because you never know how the events in real life are going
to turn out), then there is less confusion and uncertainty as the project moves
forward.
Step 2: Writing the Script
Once you know the story that you are going to tell, you start visualizing how
it is going to flow and putting that down on paper. This process is known as
script writing.
Script writing involves writing down everything to the last detail that you
plan to show in your documentary. You can start by writing the flow of the
shots, what will be said, by whom, and where.
Every scene if written and camera angles thought about, brings more clarity
to your vision. Of course, there is a need to be flexible too because in a
documentary, it’s real life of people that you are shooting, so things can go
haywire pretty fast and you need to be prepared for that.
Script writing also helps you find the right people who could do justice to
their roles and the script, interview them beforehand, take screen tests to
create the best version of your story.
Detailing all your ideas, thoughts, dialogues & timeline on paper 
helps you
stick to your goals and deadline. This is also a good time to figure out the
budget and estimate a rough cost of production.
Step 3: ShootingAs soon as you are ready with your script, you need to start shooting. If this
is your first documentary, keep it simple, short, crisp and precise. Focus on
the content, and not on the number of cameras you would be using.
Step 4: Editing
Hire an experienced editor who understands your vision and believes in it.
You can also learn video editing if you are on a tight budget. Editing is the
most crucial part of filmmaking. It can make or break your documentary.
Placement of shots, music, graphics, etc can simply change the way your
message is delivered to your target audience. So, it is advisable to hire
someone who is extremely experienced in his field.
Usually good editors charge between $100-$300 for one shift of work (8
hours a day). It’s always a good idea to go to the editors with a tight script, so
as to save time, money and effort.
Step 5: Publish Your Work
When it comes to getting our work published, we undoubtedly have a lot of
diverse options today. To start with, we have Youtube and Vimeo, perfect
platforms to show your work around. Free and easy to use. From here, many
filmmakers also go on to collaborate with successful channels on Youtube to
showcase their work.
Then comes OTT platforms like Jio, Amazon, Hotstar, and Netflix, wherein
new and upcoming creators are getting their work published. Networking
plays an important role here. It saves time and other resources too.
If you have any influencer friends, get them onboard to talk about your work
in a genuine and transparent way
.
Step 6: Time to Reap the Awards
Create your account at FilmFreeway and send your movie/documentary/short
film to as many film festivals, as you would like. Whether it’s the European
market you want to explore or the North American market, there are all kinds
of options for film festivals at
 
eeway.com.
Conclusion/Summary:Storytelling in the form of visual arts and cinematographic videos is a great
way to share your message with the world. The art of making an award
winning documentary is easier than we think. With proper planning, strategy
and script we can be the voice of change for a wide audience.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Shruti Sharma is a documentary filmmaker passionate about bringing diverse
social issues to light. After graduating in journalism from Medill School of
Journalism and working on human rights issues in Chicago, Shruti went on to
work at NDTV and Economics Times, as a video producer. But her passion
to produce films and documentaries independently motivated Shruti to set up
her production house. Her first documentary film 
“
Payal, I see Now”, based
on the journey of a girl who suffered from congenital cataract, got selected to
be screened at four film festivals, internationally. Shruti plans to continue
bringing important issues to light. When not working, Shruti enjoys shooting
videos of her son talking about the fascinating world of animals.
Connect Here:
www.instagram.com/shrutisharmaproductions
shrutisharmaproductions.wordpress.com
“Think outside the box. Think about presenting your unique idea in the
form of a documentary movie and changing people’s lives by sharing
your story.” - Shruti SharmaD
RIVING
 S
ALES
 A
ND
 I
NCREASING
 V
ISIBILITY
 F
OR
 Y
OUR
E-C
OMMERCE
 W
EBSITE
By Badr Berrada
Short Description: 
Discover best practices to drive more traffic and sales.
Difficulty Level: Advanced
Goal:
 Learn how to optimise your website to get more sales and grow your
business.
Time to implement: 3-4 hours
What You’ll Need:
1
. 
Performing Website/ E-Commerce
2
. 
Unique Products & Services Powered by Technology
3
. 
Digital Marketing Tools
Description/Overview:
In order to receive more orders, you need a performing website. Investing on
the latest technologies will take you one step ahead of your competitors.
Digital marketing is key to grow your business.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Optimize your website
Improving your e-commerce metrics are crucial to convert leads 
into sales
and get more organic customers. Here is how to optimise your website to get
new customers.
1
. 
Compress Images: If there are images weighing more than 100 kb on
your website, they need compression now! Kraken.io can optimize your
images very quickly.2
. 
Minify the Code: Minification is a great way to clear out the
unnecessary bulk in your code that your website can absolutely do
without. JSMin can carry out the minification for you.
3
. 
Increase Your Speed: If speed is your top priority, you can switch to a
cloud server or a virtual private server.
Outspending your competitors is expensive, and rarely works. Outsmart them
instead by creating an e-commerce built on purpose and passion.
Step 2: Leverage Technology
Implementing the latest technologies can help you send personalized product
recommendations, optimize prices, leverage predictive analytics, and
troubleshoot issues.
1
. 
Personalised Product Recommendation: Implementing an accurate
product recommendation system is likely to increase sales.
OptinMonster is one of the best e-commerce personalization tools that
can instantly boost your revenue.
2
. 
Optimize Prices: Pricing right is extremely valuable. If you are looking
for more than just keeping tabs on your competitors, PriceEdge is an
all-in-one platform for pricing.
3
. 
Predictive Analytics: Anticipating your customers’ next move is crucial
to drive more sales. Product improvement could be generated thanks to
softwereag with the help of IoT sensors installed in products to monitor
them in real-time.
4
. 
Troubleshooting: Creating a connected digital twin with the help of
Predix will assist your sales team detect faults and interact with
products remotely
.
Step 3: Implement Digital Marketing
Increasing your visibility requires using the latest digital marketing trends.
Newsletters, chatbots, influencer campaigns and visuals will make your
business much more compelling to new customers.
1
. 
Newsletter: Email marketing is an excellent way of keeping your
visitors up to date. Mailchimp integrates with the major ecommerce
providers including Magento and Shopify.2
. 
Chatbots: Using the right software is crucial to get new customers.
Manychat can book appointments, sell products and build relationships
through Messenger.
3
. 
Influencer Campaigns: Influencers with a niche audience can increase
your reach. CreatorIQ helps companies run influencer campaigns at
scale.
Conclusion/Summary:
 You can always incentivize your customers with
special deals & discounts. Don’t be afraid to fine tune your positioning if
something needs to change.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Badr Berrada is a successful entrepreneur & international best-selling author
of The Growth Hacking Book 1 based in the United Kingdom. As a Founder
& CEO of BBN Times, he manages a team of more than 150 renowned
industry experts. Since launching in Q2 of 2017, his start-up has achieved 15
million page views by 7 Million users. Several of BBN Times’ articles have
been featured on Harvard Business School, MIT, UPEN & NYU. Badr
Berrada closed some major advertising deals with the likes of BT Sport,
Adobe & Microsoft. He is an Alum of the London School of Economics with
a Masters in Economy, Risk and Society, and holds a Bachelor in Finance
from Cass Business School.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/badrberrada
www.bbntimes.com
"Outspending your competitors is expensive, and rarely works. Outsmart
them instead by creating an e-commerce built on purpose and passion."
- Badr BerradaG
ROW
 Y
OUR
 B
RAND
 O
N
 Y
OU
T
UBE
 O
N
 A S
HOESTRING
B
UDGET
By Aadesh Chauhan
Short Description: 
How to effortlessly augment your storytelling with the
power of your smartphone.
Difficulty Level: Beginner
Goal:
 Leveraging video content to build a loyal community and thriving
business.
Time to implement:
 Depends on your publishing frequency and distribution
strategy.
What you’ll need:
 Just you and your smartphone.
Description/Overview:
People think they need a pro setup to start off with their YouTube channel
and grow. Did I tell you you need none? You just need your smartphone and
you can reach your target audience with the help of videos with the right set
of strategies that I’ll share with you in this chapter.
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: Choose your niche
Deciding niche is an important step as it is the primary reason your audience
will be interested in your content
.
Examples:
If you are a Social Media Marketer, you can create content that will
appeal to businesses and influencers who may need help with social
media marketing.
If you are a Freelance Chartered Accountant, you can create
infotainment videos on Finance, Investments, Planning, etc.Step 2: Produce professional-looking videos
Making your video look professional will help you dominate the YouTube
game. Your eye and the camera lens perceives the physical world
surrounding you in a different way and in a different angle. Tweaking the
resolution and angles according to your content would look pleasing to the
eyes.
Example, If you are shooting in a closed premises 720P with normal angle
would justify the scene, but if it is an outdoor shoot tweak it to 1080P or 4K
and wide angle if that is available.
You can play with the focus of the camera to see what looks better and if you
are doing it by yourself autofocus will help too.
Step 3: Create a cohesive story
While you shoot a video, start a story in your mind of how you are going to
edit it. This does not necessarily need an out-of-the-world creativity, but
clarity in thoughts and a cohesive story to tell. Once you are convinced with a
flow, it will help you edit with ease.
Keeping a storyteller’s approach will help you find correct Texts,
Animations, Transitions, color grades (optional) for your videos.
Some editing apps/softwares will give you ready-to-use templates, some will
give you the space to create your own presets and templates.
Use relatable and engaging pictures/videos in your videos, your audience will
stay hooked
.
Step 4: Setup your YouTube channel right
The Name of Channel, Tags, and Description should be SEO optimized. Use
Keyword Planner, GDoc SEO Assistant. You don’t need an SEO expert for
this. You can do it yourself using the tools.
Design your Logo, Channel Art (Images in particular) using the tool loved by
all ‘non-photoshop users’ - Canva.Do you require an Intro/Outro? Outro is usually the Call To Action for the
viewers to Subscribe to your channel or Like the video if they did. Intro is
usually a Creative which can be made under Your Name, Your Channel’s
Name, adding some compelling words - by this the viewer gets to know more
about you and your channel.
Your content should be compelling enough for the viewers to subscribe to
your channel and eventually also reach out to work with you or your brand.
Step 5: Do whatever it takes
Don’t think of YouTube as a hobby, but as a business or perhaps, your
startup. Feed it with your time and efforts and it will feed you in return once
it grows.
Step 6: Choose your shooting equipments
Using a minimum setup you can record good quality videos and as your
channel grows, you can purchase equipment.
You must focus more on audio quality and that can be achieved using your
earphone or a Lavalier Mic while shooting videos.
If you are a business or have the budget to invest in professional shooting
equipment right from the beginning, go for it.
Step 7: Choose your toolset
After you have shot the video, you can either edit on your phone or use tools
like Power Director, KineMaster, InShot (most preferred for Instagram
videos)
.
I suggest “Adobe Premiere Pro” as that’s the standard and might help you
advance your editing skills in the future.
The Content that you put out, is it compelling? The style you use for editing
is that presentable? These are some prime questions you should ask yourself.
Researching for your content and proper scripting is very crucial.
Step 8: Set yourself up for YouTube success
Thumbnail is the one creative that viewers will see at the periphery, make it
captivating, using Canva, tell the summary of your video in the Thumbnail.
Make it click-worthy.In the Title and Description use target keywords and tags so as to increase the
searchability of your channel and video. If you are putting targeted keywords
in the title put them in a Square bracket. Keep your title short.
Finally when the video goes live on your Youtube, try to maximize
distribution across all possible social and messaging platforms. Ask your
close community to help you spread the word and give you feedback. Say if
you are a gym rat and you create videos about health and fitness, ask your
gym buddies to watch your videos and give their feedback. Grow accepting
constructive criticism and strive to do better with every new video you
publish. Once you build a loyal subscribers base, distribution will be easier.
Conclusion/Summary:
Videos is the one gripping and engrossing stimulus with which you can
double or even triple your numbers. It has helped me to create a good
personal brand and has given me an engaging and active audience.
Once people start knowing you, everything goes on autopilot and the
community helps you grow bigger through word-of-mouth.
(Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability)A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Aadesh Chauhan is a Content Creator, a Filmmaker, and a YouTube Channel
Manager, particularly specializing in End-to-End Video Production &
designing Content Strategies.
He is also seen blazing a trail with some of the most renowned Social Media
Influencers, Production Houses, and Media Agencies. Ever so exuberant &
innately a hustler, he started his professional career at a young age of 16.
Completing his Engineering, he joined a corporate job at a renowned
Telecom Brand to get a pulse of the corporate life. Realizing his aspiration to
become his own boss, he set out to break free from the corporate job, to tread
in his own course. Building up a business in the digital space from ground
zero, he now helps individuals or companies portray their story through
videos and build an empire through digital products.
Connect Here:
www.aadeshchauhan.com
www.instagram.com/aadesh_chauhan
People think success on YouTube comes through expensive shooting
equipment. You can start your YouTube channel with limited or no
budget and still win through your valuable content. - Aadesh ChauhanM
AKE
 Y
OUR
 F
IRST
 $100 O
NLINE
 I
N
 100 D
AYS
 W
ITH
F
REELANCING
 & B
LOGGING
By Om Thoke
Short Description:
 Make your first 100 USD online as a newbie freelancer
or blogger within 100 days.
Time to implement: 100 Days
Difficulty Level: Easy
What you’ll need
Keywords Everywhere Chrome Extension
Ahrefs.com or SEMRush
Moz chrome extension for checking DA / PA / Spam Score of your
website
A Domain name and hosting provider
Fiverr, Upwork, Truelancer, and Bloggers World Marketplace accounts
Join Desi Bloggers World Facebook Group
Description/Overview:
When you start your online journey, you may dream of millions, but the first
and the foremost hurdle is your first $100, so let’s cut to chase and address
this pressing issue and all the gurus conveniently avoid, and just talk
superficially about financial freedom, and millions of dollars
!
Second problem is that even if they gave you some “insider tips”, you won’t
be able to utilize them, because it is “half baked” knowledge.
If you try to adopt strategies that worked once upon a time, say way back in
2011, you won’t get any results in this decade - those are now a “thing of the
past”.For a newcomer, I think the ideal starting point is to get started as freelance
content writer/designer/developer on platforms like Fiverr, Upwork,
Truelancer, Freelancer, Guru.com etc to make your first $100.
Step-by-Step Process:
I’m listing down my blogging blueprint for you.
Step 1
: 
Identify your niche
You can start with something you’re passionate about, such as Super Cars!
Next, you need to dig one level deeper, in order to identity the primary
keyword, so we narrowed down to Lamborghini, and then “Lamborghini
SUV Prices”
Rules for Selecting Primary Keyword
You need to find a primary keyword with
a
. 
Monthly searches > 10,000 (can check it via Keywords
Everywhere/Google Adwords Keyword Planner/ Ahrefs or any reliable
SEO Tool)
b
. 
DQR < 10 (Number of About results when you Google search it with
double quotes like “keyword”)
c
. 
CPC > $1 (again can be checked using any of the reliable SEO tools
like search volume)
d
. 
At least one paid ad showing up on Google search
For writing this chapter, I created this micro niche blog as a public example,
and you can see Lamborghinisuvprices(dot)com and it was ranking in
featured snippets while I was writing this chapter.
NOTE: This was just an experiment, you must not register domains that
infringe trademarks. Such domains can’t be monetised with Google Adsense
due to TM infringement issues.
Tip: Choose domain name on basis factors like monthly searches, brand
name/presence, ability to rank fast for desired keywords, and availability of
keywords related to your target niche.
Step 2: Content planning and research
Prepare list of areas to target to build categoriesUrus
Huracan
Specs
Wallpapers
News
Step 3: Setup Wordpress website
Setup WordPress website with a good theme and static homepage - keep the
site under no index by checking “don’t encourage search engines to index”
option, and then uncheck when you’re ready to roll, and then also install
Google Analytics tracking code. Use a good theme like Newspaper, and
avoid hacked/nulled themes at all costs.
Step 4: Install essential plugins on your blog
As part of setup, install these essential plugins:
SEO Yoast
Any Caching plugin like WP Total Cache or Super Cache
Any Social Sharing plugin like Sassy Social Share
Akismet (need to create account and enable) for fighting spam
Contact form plugin like Contact Form 7
TOC plugin like Easy Table of Contents
SSL like Really Simple SSL
Step 5: Write content for the homepage
We need 1000-2000 words homepage in Wiki Style (may vary depending
upon niche) and 5-10 supporting posts of 400-1000 words in length.
Rules of On-Page SEO: DOs and DON’Ts
For longer posts, always use PAGINATION and split it into multiple
posts/pages
Use keyword 7-8 times in 1000 words article (maintain 0.7-0.9%
Keyword density)
Use keyword in first 20 words and last 50 words of your article
Use keyword once in one of the h2/h3 sub-headingsDon’t spam and forcibly use keyword - embed it smartly and
seamlessly
Step 6: Off-Page SEO & Social Media Marketing
Start with social media marketing and link building, here’s a checklist:
Setup profile on Gravatar.com and Wordpress.com
Submit your blog URL to pingomatic.com
Create a Facebook page and insert website link
Create a Instagram account and a link in your bio
Create an intro or short video (anything relevant) for Youtube, Vimeo,
etc.
Create Quora profile and mention website link in your bio
Medium.com profile and write your first post
Social bookmarking - ex. folkd(dot)com
Web 2.0 websites: Tumblr, HPage, Weebly, Blogspot, Wordpress.com
Profile links on websites like Orcid(dot)org
Audio submission sites like anchor.fm (you can also start your podcast)
Blog commenting - drop comments with your website link on relevant
blogs
Mit.edu - you have to find threads that have commenting option
enabled
Register on forums like Edmunds, Tripadvisor and get signature links
Submit on websites like EzineArticles, TheArticlesBase, HubPages etc.
Things to Remember in Off-Page SEO: DOs and DON’Ts
Build healthy mix of backlinks from all TLDs like .com, .net, .in, .org,
.world, .site etc
Don’t have more than 35% anchor for primary keyword - again healthy
mix of 30% generic like click here, know more, for more info, 35%
Partial match
Don’t build more than 10% links from one type - comments or profile
Don’t build more than 30% of links to homepageAfter 15 days, see if your article is on the 1
st
 page of Bing & Yahoo! But not
Google - check if it’s ranking on the 1
st
 page of Google when you search your
keywords in quotes.
Rinse and repeat - if article doesn’t rank on Google, try to target some
longtail variation of the same keyword
Tip:
 
Disavow any spammy links that you get unexpectedly
.
Now that you’ve learned how to write articles, perform On-Page SEO, Off-
Page SEO, build and rank a micro niche blog, you can create your first Fiverr
gig, and start bidding on projects on Truelancer, Freelancer, Guru.com, and
various freelancing platforms, and you’d easily start making $100/month
from freelance gigs alone.
Next, when you have 10+ posts on your blog, and rank on the 1
st
 page of
Bing & Yahoo in a month’s time, you can apply for Google Adsense,
Amazon affiliate program and vCommission.
The top monetisation methods for your blog are listed below:
Google Adsense
Sponsored posts
Banner ads directly
Text link ads link Infolinks
Native Ads like MGID
Amazon affiliate
Affiliate Network offers like Vcommission
JVzoo Launches
Your own product / E-commerce
Selling your own Ebooks
Promoting CPA/CPI/CPL offers from Adcombo or other networks
Conclusion/Summary:
Remember, your first $100 is going to be the toughest one to earn. Don’t get
fooled by those big numbers - start building your online empire $100 at a
time, and then dream bigger.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Om Thoke is a serial entrepreneur who started as a freelance content writer
cum blogger in 2006, and today he’s one of the most followed Indian
bloggers on Linkedin with 1M+ post views, 1M+ Quora answer views, and
100,000+ followers on Instagram & Facebook.
Apart from his flagship company Webfosys, Om also owns 5 other successful
digital companies that have generate millions of dollars of revenues every
year, and he’s currently on a mission to empower 200,000+ individuals
through Bloggers World University & Ecom World University to generate
$100-1000/month, and generate combined revenues $10M/month to
contribute a small 0.0001% to nation’s GDP currently at 3 Trillion Dollars.
He’s mentored 100s of startups and invested in a few, including Global Child
Prodigy Awards.
Connect Here:
www.instagram.com/omthoke
www.omthoke.com
When you start your online journey, you may dream of millions, but the
first $100 is the toughest to earn as you are not fully-equipped with the
necessary skills and knowledge. Start small and dream big. - Om Thoke.T
URN
 Y
OUR
 W
EBSITE
 V
ISITORS
 I
NTO
 P
AYING
 C
LIENTS
By Rahul Chavan
Short Description: 
Creating conversion-focussed landing pages to optimize
for best possible conversion rate.
Difficulty Level: 
Intermediate
Goal:
 Increase conversion rate of sales pages by 5x to 10x.
Time to Implement:
 8 - 9 Hours
What You’ll Need:
Your domain and hosting
WordPress Page Builder (Elementor)
Description/Overview:
A sales page might look like an easy task for the developer who has to get the
page up and running. But there’s more to it than just a simple web page
containing information about a specific product or service.
A good sales page requires a lot more than just simple web designing, it
requires skills like understanding the visitor’s psychology, creating a path for
the visitor to complete the goal you wish them to, the CTA to make a
purchase or just signing up for a webinar or scheduling a call
.
You want them to complete the “Objective” of the page. But they will only
take action when they are inspired and convinced. Some visitors take action
based on emotions whereas others look for the logic or a final push,
essentially, an irresistible offer.
Creating a successful sales page will require designing and copywriting for
these three types of visitors. I name this “3-Step Sales Page”. It contains three
sections on the landing page as mentioned in the steps listed below.
Step-by-Step Process:Step 1: Appealing to emotional minds
This section solely focuses on touching the emotional triggers of the visitors.
Example, if we are asking people to sign up for a webinar that teaches a new
business model, you can use emotional triggers like “Live the life of your
dreams”, “Become Financially Independent”, “Give your efforts the direction
they need!” and similar. Place an eye-catching call-to-action button
prominently in the first section.
Talk about side effects or loss of not using your product or service. For eg. if
you are a health coach, explain how your visitors are losing their relations,
business, social respect just by not having a good personality or being fit.
Explain how they can overcome these losses if they choose your product or
service.
Step 2: Appealing to logical minds
This is the section where a lot of visitors convert. In this section, you answer
the “WHY” of your objective. For instance, if your objective is to sign up for
a free webinar, this is the section where you tell what they will learn if they
attend the webinar. Address what’s in it for them.
Now, you can get all creative with this section and use some psychological
tricks to create urgency among your visitors, and trigger curiosity. Example,
you can include phrases like, “It’s NOT what you’re thinking.” or “What’s
not included in this webinar?” 
This ultimately creates a sense of curiosity
among the visitors.
Step 3: The final push
This is your last chance to convert the visitor to opt-in for the offer. You can
include the following elements:
Call to Action: Rather than putting a CTA everywhere, keep it sticky at
top or bottom.
Perfect Pricing Model : Charge less with a tripwire and high at an
upsell.
Hello Bar: Capture random visitors and nurture them further.
Free Trial: Freemium or free trial is always profitable in the long run.
Fonts and Colors: Choose appealing fonts and colors for your brand,
use maximum three fonts.Video Sales Letter: Rather than having direct sales video, use free
training video sequence through an email campaign before showing the
main product.
Testimonials: Get video testimonials from your past customers.
Conclusion/Summary:
You will be surprised you can boost your conversion rate by simply
optimizing your sales page for conversion.
(Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability)A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Rahul Chavan specializes in designing conversion-focused landing pages and
business websites. He helps Digital Marketers, Authors, Speakers, Local
Businesses and SaaS founders build fully optimized websites using
WordPress Rahul also has experience in making recurring payment websites
such as membership websites, course platforms, software billing platforms as
well as e-commerce websites. One of his top clients include Rohan Chaubey.
Connect Here:
www.rahulchavan.in
www.linkedin.com/in/therahulchavan
The purpose of the sales page is to get people to opt-in for your offer.
Remove anything else that does not help in achieving the objective. -
Rahul Chavan.C
OMPLEX
 P
RODUCT
 I
NNOVATION
 I
S
 T
HE
 N
EW
 G
ROWTH
E
NGINEERING
By Dhanur Sehgal
In the current market scenario, brands are investing too much in customer
acquisition (top-of-the-funnel) and too little in customer retention & referral
(bottom-of-the-funnel).
With time, SEO competition will surge and paid channels will get saturated
with high CPCs & CPMs due to very high numbers of bidders.
The companies that will be able to survive are the ones who provide the
maximum long-term value to the user. In short, the products that can retain
the users for as long as possible & the brands that leverage product-based
growth hacks apart from conventional tactics.
Growth engineering / growth hacking is not about marketing or customer
acquisition. It’s about long-term, sustainable, viable, lean and scalable
growth.
Product along with user-centricity forms the core focal point for literally all
business activities & processes. Complexity plays a vital role in long-term
growth as complexity in product innovation and protected intellectual
property rights build an entry-barrier for potential copycats and future
competition. Other barriers to entry may include things like network effects,
high switching costs, economies of scale, etc
.
Product-innovation is a highly misunderstood domain. Remember, building
something “unique” is good ONLY when it adds more value to the end-user
than the conventional systems.
A few ways to innovate on a product level may include things like building a
better CX and UX, building a personalized solution for super-specific
audiences, trend-mixing, easing-out processes & user-flows, saving time /
effort / money, removing user hassle, etc.A few characteristics of a great product include things like non-generic
appeal, great adoption and retention rates, low churn rate, great net-promoter
score, high practical utility, good logical and emotional appeal, high entry
barrier, generates organic referrals, organic word-of-mouth and organic PR.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Dhanur Sehgal is a young entrepreneur & a growth engineer with a wide
stack of technical and business skills and a zest to bring value to the world.
He previously worked with companies like Microsoft & GrabOn in growth
hacking domains. Creative innovation is his north star on his entrepreneurial
journey. He plans to leverage his skill-stack to solve real-world problems and
contribute back to the planet. During his college days, he ran affiliate
campaigns and made 2 Crores in revenue organically within just the first 4
months.
Currently, he is building BrowseBetter, a super-tool that aims to
revolutionize the personal productivity space completely. It’s a new &
productive way to browse the internet while getting stuff done timely &
effectively.
Connect Here:
www.linkedin.com/in/dhanur-sehgal
www.browsebetter.io
“Growth engineering/growth hacking is not about marketing or customer
acquisition. It’s about long-term, sustainable, viable, lean & scalable
growth. “- Dhanur SehgalH
OW
 T
O
 C
REATE
 A M
ILLION
-D
OLLAR
 B
USINESS
Featuring Noah Kagan
We are living in an era where titles like ‘How to Create a Million-Dollar
Business in one weekend’ seem like clickbait but they are not.
Gambit, a simple product that grew to $1,000,000+ was created on a
weekend, the same goes for AppSumo.
Intrigued?
The strategies listed below will show you how to get a million-dollar
business idea off the ground
Step 1: Find Your Profitable Niche
First, you have to look for something which people are ready to spend their
money on, it doesn’t have to be revolutionary, a simple thing might do
wonders too. Jot down all the ideas on a paper which you think might be
profitable. If you have trouble coming up with ideas, then here are some
methods that will help you accelerate your research process.
1
. 
Explore Kickstarter 
- Kickstarter is filled with amazing products, an
hour of surfing the website will help you generate 100 ideas. Bonus,
you already know what is working and what is not by seeing people’s
interest.
2
. 
Explore Reddit 
- Reddit is such an underrated social media platform.
It is a goldmine of ideas. There are so 
many subreddits like DIY, where
people are ready to pay money for something which somebody has
made.
3
. 
Explore eBay and Craigslist
 - Explore the popular section in eBay,
see what people are interested in and ready to spend a buck on, see if
you could make something similar or an improved version of the one
being sold. Search the terms you very well know on craigslist and you
will find tons of people requesting services and are ready to pay you
their money, see if you could develop a product or agency around it.Step 2: Find Out How Big Your Market Is
Once you find your idea that people are ready to spend their money on, it is
time to move to step #2 and analyze whether your niche has a big pool of
prospective buyers and also ensure that the market is not shrinking or
saturated.
The following tools help assess market opportunities :
1
. 
Google Trends:
 Search for your keyword/niche along with similar
terms for comparison and current trends people are searching for, has
the search spiked or shrunk, etc.
2
. 
Keyword Planner by Google:
 This is more of a database section
where you get an in-depth analysis of ‘are people searching for it and is
there any competition or not for your keyword’, which means are
people spending money on ads, that suggests there is money in the
category you are searching for.
3
. 
SEMrush:
 Use this as an alternative to the Keyword planner and see
how the search volume looks.
4
. 
FB Ads
: This is phenomenal and highly recommended. Go to FB ads >
Audience - type your keyword, check out the audience size. For
example, if it shows 5 million, it doesn’t mean we will be reaching all
of them, it is just an indicator that helps you assess the opportunity.
Use Google spreadsheet to create key numbers of your business 
and your
competitors, it is a very simple, handy, and powerful tool that immediately
clears your mind with numbers already calculated on your screen.
Step 3: Assess Your Customer’s Value
Once you have found your niche/idea which people are ready to spend their
money on and a pool of potential customers, it is now time to assess your
customer’s value.
Let us take an example of a chihuahua and we will estimate how much a
chihuahua owner is worth.
1
. 
Find out how much it costs - An average Chihuahua costs around $650
2
. 
Check out the maintenance cost (recurring cost), it will be somewhere
around $500 to $3000, let’s take 1000$3
. 
Check out their average life expectancy - it is 15 years for Chihuahua -
this is how many years they will have to pay the recurring cost
(maintenance)
Calculating all and that brings us a whopping $15,650. Whoa, that is a lot of
money.
If they are putting down $650 on a dog and around $80 a month for its food,
spending another $30-$40 on their training won’t be much of a big deal for
them. By assessing your customer’s value, you get a rough idea to decide a
price.
Step 4: Assess TAM
TAM - Total Addressable Market
(How many customers you found) x (customer’s value) = TAM
In this case, 6 million people are interested (data from FB ads) in
Chihuahuas, obviously, not everyone is going to buy your product. Let’s take
5% from the 6 million which leaves us with 300,000. Our customer value is
$40 and by using TAM equation:
300000*40 = 1200000
0
That is a 12 million dollar market opportunity.
Obviously, we cannot reach 100% market penetration because it is just a
single product, also there are a lot of other dogs in the market.
We got a million-dollar idea, it’s now time to validate which brings us to step
5.
Step 5: Validate
We have seen that people are ready to spend money on this but are they
willing to buy your product?
There are 3 key pieces to validate - You need to challenge yourself to get
1
. 
3 customers (in)
2
. 
48 hours (aiming for)
3
. 
$100 (in revenue)How to get your customers? Use your network.
Message, call, or email 10 people in your area or your network to pre-buy
your product. Don’t sell a dog product to someone who does not own dogs.
Not everybody would want it and they will reject your product but that is
okay. When they reject your product, ask them these 3 questions which will
help you gather some more data?
1
. 
Ask why?
2
. 
What would they pay for? / What are they looking for?
3
. 
One with a dog will know people with dogs, so If they don’t want to
buy, politely ask them if they could refer you to their network.
Always remember whenever you launch a product, you first have to sell it to
your network, get the appropriate feedback that can help you better your
product
.
After that, you can anytime create a landing page on WordPress, run some
ads on Facebook/Instagram/Google, understand your audience behavior, and
accordingly convert your leads.
Woo-Hoo! You made it! Now you officially have a million-dollar idea in
your hand and customers who are ready to spend their money - It is now time
to kill your inner
 
Wantrepreneur and START! All you need is one weekend!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
This 
chapter is a summary of a video from Noah Kagan’s YouTube Channel: 
https://youtu.be/kcikCLINuVg
 
https://youtu.be/nS1Bx7yYBCU
(Produced and published with permission from Noah’s team).
Noah Kagan is a taco loving Chief Sumo at the 8-figure AppSumo and Sumo,
a company that offers tools and content to help entrepreneurs succeed.
Before AppSumo and Sumo, Noah was employee #30 at Facebook (reporting
directly to Mark Zuckerberg) where he helped build the Facebook Ads
platform. After Facebook, he was employee #4 at 
Mint.com.
Subscribe to Noah’s YouTube Channel:
https://www.youtube.com/c/okdork
“There are three key pieces to validate your business idea - You need to
challenge yourself to get 3 customers in 48 hours aiming for $100 in
revenue.” - Noah KaganT
HE
 S
IMPLEST
 H
ACK
 T
O
 S
ELL
 M
ORE
 P
APERBACK
C
OPIES
 O
F
 Y
OUR
 B
OOK
By Parul Agrawal
The root term in the word AUTHORITY is 
AUTHOR
. To launch yourself as
an authority in your field it’s vital to write a book.
But let’s face it, writing a book is one of the easiest parts of the book
publishing process. Getting consistent sales and readers for the book is a
totally different ball game.
So how do we ensure a book’s success?
Change your mindset: 
Think of ROI in terms of more business, speaking
gigs and paid clients.
Know your Why?:
 Are you writing the book to
Share your ground breaking research or message with the world
To heal yourself
To use your book as a lead magnet and an ice-breaker.
What’s your WHY?
Add Worksheets:
 Think outside the box. How can you make the book useful
for the reader? Can you add?
Mind-maps
Tables
Graphics
Blank Space for making notes
ToDo lists
Points to ponder area
WorksheetsAdding a space where readers can make notes and write their own ideas
is one of the BEST ways to get more sales for your book. Readers
usually save a copy of the book with their own written notes and end up
recommending it as a great resource to friends and family.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Parul Agrawal is a Business Growth Strategist, International Bestselling
Author and a TEDxSpeaker. She is a publisher and publicist for CEOs,
Entrepreneurs & new Earth Leaders.
Connect Here:
www.parulagrawal.com
www.linkedin.com/in/authorparul
“The difference between a good book and a great book boils down to
the VALUE it provides to the readers.”- Parul AgrawalM
ANTRA
 T
O
 G
ROW
 T
HE
 B
USINESS
 F
OR
 S
ERVICE
 B
ASED
C
OMPANIES
By Surbhi Jindal
Instead of the traditional “push” model of marketing, use engagement
marketing that pulls people in by telling stories, driving conversations, and
addressing customer needs and interests by sharing expertise in various
industry forums, being thought leaders & by creating your own brand
advocates.
Publish Articles, Blogs & Columns in renowned magazines, create
communities of like-minded individuals. Upload relevant content with
videos, new courses, coaching sessions & interviews from the industry
influencers
As a young Entrepreneur, grow brick by brick & mortar by mortar. It’s OK if
things aren’t aligned in the beginning, the Mason which is us and our
entrepreneur skills and efforts, will do the right job and get the alignment
right.
‘Ask not how we can sell, but how we can help & add value’A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Architect Surbhi Jindal - Founder, CEO and Principal Lighting Designer -
DaLightHub Lighting design & Consultancy. The Times of India - She
UnLTD Entrepreneur Award Winner 2020 & 40Under40, Class of 2020
recognised by The Lighting Magazine, London, UK.
Connect Here:
https://www.dalighthub.com
“Best way to sell something - don’t sell anything. Earn the awareness,
respect and trust of those who might buy.” - Rand Fishkin, Founder of
SparkToro (prev Moz).H
OW
 T
O
 S
TART
 Y
OUR
 Y
OUTUBE
 C
HANNEL
 A
S
 A T
HIRD
G
RADER
By Kanha Agrawal
You want to start a YouTube channel but you don’t know anything about
Youtube, editing and filming. Here are a few things you need as a starter.
The main
 
thing you would need is a topic or a theme or a niche. The topic
could be anything that you are passionate about or something you are good
at. In my YouTube channel, I talk about Origami, Geography and now mostly
about technology. You want to make sure that your YouTube channel
 
doesn’t
have too many topics because if your channel has too many topics it will be
confusing for the audience.
The
 
second thing is that you should at least have a smart phone with a camera
to record your videos. As you get bigger you can get a professional camera
and a microphone.
You will also need to learn video editing and thumbnail making
 
to make your
videos look professional. With video editing you make your video look good
and thumbnails make your videos stand out to the audience.
Basic and Free Editing Tools: 
Kinemaster, iMovie, Phonto, Veed, InShot,
PowerDirector, Splice
Advanced and Paid Editing Tools: 
FinalCutPro, Vegas, Adobe,
AdobePhotoShop, Filmor
a
I started making videos in summer of 2020 and for about 6 months I used
iMovie on my phone. As I became proficient with it, I started exploring other
tools and now I use Filmora X which is a very complicated video editing
software on the computer.
It’s best to start learning with free versions of various editing softwares and
then buy the paid version of the tool you are most comfortable using. My
favorites are: Kinemaster for the basic tool and Filmora X as a paid software.I hope this article helped and now you can finally go and make your
YouTube video you have been waiting for.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Kanha Agrawal is a 9 year old, 4th grade student. He loves maths, geography,
origami and travel. He recently started his YouTube channel to talk about
geography, origami and tech used by children his age.
Connect Here:
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC9BdbCnAfL9Ff2Y6SuOfxFQ
“Initially your videos might be basic but in a few years you can be the
biggest YouTuber in the entire world even bigger than Mr. Beast.”-
Kanha Agrawal, 9 year old YouTuberK
HE
 H
Y
 O
N
 P
RODUCTIVITY
, F
INANCE
 A
ND
 B
LOGGING
Featuring Khe Hy
Q: What are your top five productivity apps?
Khe Hy: 1. Notion
2. SuperHuman
3. Text Expander
4. Fantastical
5. OmniFocus
Q: Since you maintain a blog and you are a contributor to media
columns, what kind of posts usually perform well for you - Listicles,
Personal Stories, How-To Guides, News, Case Studies, etc.?
Khe Hy: 
The ones which usually perform well for me are storytelling with
life lessons around 800 words. The others which perform are 3000 words
guides (how do you set goals, etc.)
Q: What are some qualities of people who have antifragile, future-proof
and pandemic-proof careers?
Khe Hy:
 1. Develop adjacent skills. (Example, if you’re a stock analyst,
learn how to understand legal contracts, if you are a marketer, learn how to
understand a product design, etc.) So find out those adjacent skills
.
2. Solve the pain of your audience. Identify your audience and then find how
you can go about relieving their pain.
Q: You popularly talk about the $10K work. How does one go from $10
to $10K work? Is there a simple path to that?
Khe Hy: 
No! There isn’t a simple path. That’s a lifetime journey.But I would say that the underlying principle of $10K work is what I call the
10K flywheel. That’s the combination of self awareness (Why did you do
what you are doing) combined with a tool or a system, then combined with a
behaviour change.
So when you put those three together that’s when you start moving up the
wheel from $10 to $10k work.
$10K work would come from self awareness. What is the highest leverage
work you can do? What is your unique super power in this world - recruiting,
building brands, design, audience development, customer obsession, etc. So
there isn’t a simple path but if you follow that 10K flywheel, that is helpful.
Q: Since you also write quite a lot about finance. What are your thoughts
about FIRE?
Khe Hy:
 I think FIRE is an incredible set of principles around minimalism
and around understanding what is enough under separating or moving life
from consumer oriented culture.
However, I think where it goes wrong is that some people are missing self-
awareness. People want to retire, but they don’t know how to spend their
time. They don’t know what makes them happy. They don’t know how to
love, who to serve. FIRE is hard, so why would you go through all that work
when you haven’t even figured out what’s on the other side.
So that’s my problem with FIRE. My other problem is that it really makes
you live in the future. If you are always living in the future you never get to
enjoy the present moment
.
Some parts of FIRE propel you. I think the principles like know where your
money goes, minimalism, discipline, being smart about investing,
compounding, etc. I think those are incredible principles you may want to
apply.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Khe Hy worked on Wall Street for 15 years. He has been called “Oprah for
Millennials” by CNN and the “Wall Street Guru” by Bloomberg, and He is
deeply passionate about communities centered around generosity - both
enabled by technology but also embracing in-person serendipity.
He is the Podcaster, Course Instructor, Blogger and Founder of Rad Reads -
A guide to the examined and intentional life. Deconstructing our complicated
relationship with status, time, and money.
He was the Founding Editor at Quartz At Work - Covering management,
office culture, productivity, workplace inclusion, career development, and the
chaotic lives of working parents. Host of the FWD: Thinking podcast.
Connect Here:
www.radreads.co
https://twitter.com/khemaridh
“The underlying principle of $10K work is 10K flywheel. That’s the
combination of self awareness (Why you do what you are doing)
combined with a tool or a system, then combined with a behavior
change.” - Khe HyN
ETWORKING
 - M
AKE
 P
EOPLE
 Y
OUR
 B
IGGEST
 A
SSET
By Sachin Raturi
“No man is an island.” 
Or in simpler terms, we can say that man is a social
animal and networking comes naturally to all of us. Finding like-minded
people and working together to create an avenue for mutual benefits is vital
for professional success.
Before social media knocked on our doors, networking was pretty much
confined to the people we met physically but the advent of the digital age has
redefined networking for us. You can now connect with almost anyone
around the globe and find a common interest and work together to achieve a
higher goal.
So how to make networking your biggest asset? Below are some tips:
Offer Value: 
In order to start reaping the benefits of your network, you need
to sow the seeds of value. Be generous and help everyone who asks for it.
Doing this will help you to forge long-term relationships with the people
likely to be useful in the future.
Be Authentic: 
Your network is intelligent and can see right through you. So
do not pretend. It won’t last long. Be your authentic self and use your
expertise to genuinely help people around you. The more you do that, the
more recognition you will get amongst your network.
Don’t Be a Salesperson: 
You do not have to sell yourself to your network.
You have personal interviews for that. Rather propose 
solutions to the
problems your network faces. Be available and try to help as much as you
can.
Be Honest: 
Do not try too hard to win your network. If you do not have a
solution to anybody’s problem, be honest about it, and connect them with the
relevant person. No need to be insecure. This would in-fact strengthen your
bond with both parties involved.
BENEFITS OF HAVING A STRONG NETWORK:Helps You Become a Strong Brand: 
Social media has helped a lot of us in
making our brand. A lot of potential employers are checking you out on
social media, so an engaging network can help you become visible in front of
even those you have no idea about.
Can Help You Land a Good Job: 
Do you know, your interviewer checks
you out on LinkedIn before deciding to meet you in person. Having a good
social network can help you land a good job.
Helps Develop Long-lasting Relationships: 
Having the right networking
channel can help build your career. A two-way approach to relationship
building can help forge stronger bonds and therefore can help you achieve
your goals in the long run.
A Hotbed of New Opportunities: 
A strong network is a hotbed of plenty of
opportunities that can come your way. For example, you are a content
generator and you have been helping a lot of people with good content
advice. So now if anybody asks someone in your network about a good
content creator, their mind would immediately go to you and they will refer
you right away. The result - a brand new opportunity without having to make
any extra effort.
(Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability)A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Sachin Raturi is best known for his endeavor in marketing. He has been
working with many connectors and influencers throughout the world. Now he
is partaking as a balanced bridge between the field of
 
marketing and
international relations.
Sachin’s central goal is always to inspire people, to help others in finding
their passion to be successful, and to promote his country’s legacy. He is
known as a travel enthusiast and super-connector among his network. Sachin
with his remarkable network skillset is promoting the essence of his country’s
history, language, cultural, and political power throughout the world where
his marketing strategy plays a vital role.
Sachin has been a considerable contributor and firmly collaborates with
various global organizations and startups.
Connect Here:
www.sachinraturi.com
www.linkedin.com/in/sachin-raturi
“Make people your biggest asset and success will surely come your way.
From physical to now digital, networking is not a new concept but the
ways to build a strong network have drastically changed. So blend the new
ways with the good old traditional ways of networking and you will have a
strong network that will never fail you in the future.” - Sachin RaturiP
REVENT
 I
LLEGAL
 D
ISTRIBUTION
 O
F
 C
OURSES
 T
O
I
NCREASE
 L
ONG
-T
ERM
 S
ALES
 R
EVENUE
By Rohan Chaubey and Kunal Aggarwal
As the courses get older, usually a few illegal distributors start selling or
distributing pirated copies of your pre-recorded course.
To prevent the download or recording or any form of illegal video content
distribution, follow the proposed strategy in this chapter.
How to make courses harder to pirate?
Let the purchase be one-step, and send a registration link via email.
In the registration form ask for a full name, email and phone number. Verify
phone with OTP.
Email ID of the buyer should flash in the video and change location
randomly. Even if someone pirates, their ID will be exposed and you can find
their name and phone number in your database.
People can use temporary email and phone numbers, that’s the loophole. But
only clever people could do it thereby making pirating harder.
Also, if they attempt to conceal the email address flashing on the video at
random spots, it will be hard to edit the entire video.
Additionally, we can run an algorithm to detect fake email IDs based on
certain domain names but again, this is not a very tightly sealed solution. But
it does discourage pirating to a great extent
.
Many courses usually see a dip in their revenue as the pirated copies start
circulating and become popular. By using this strategy to protect your
courses, you can stop illegal distribution thereby preventing any leaks in your
revenue.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Kunal Aggarwal is a marketing enthusiast and loves to combine it with
coding and designing. Connect here:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/kunalaggarwal04/
Rohan Chaubey is the host of 
www.RohanChaubey.TVW
ORD
-B
Y
-W
ORD
 S
CRIPT
 T
O
 A
VOID
 G
HOSTING
 F
ROM
P
OTENTIAL
 C
USTOMERS
 [S
ALES
 H
ACK
]
Ever happened to you? A potential client approached you, you pitched them a
great offer. It all was going according to plan -- you had a great initial call,
they met you again in-person or via phone call. Things were looking good.
You sent them a proposal with a finalized plan and budget. And then… they
ghosted you.
A high ticket lead you thought you had bagged all of a sudden disappeared.
This is “ghosting”. When a sales process is going smooth and you feel
positive you’ll close the deal, and then your prospect disappears without a
trace. They just stop getting back to you.
Sometimes they won’t ghost you, they will simply assure they will get back
and then they never really write back.
Don’t let your prospects do this to you.
To combat ghosting, here’s a word-by-word field-tested script you can use.
___________________________________
Hey Ryan,
I’m in the process of deleting emails that have no agenda or specific next
steps. Typically when I haven’t heard back from 
someone it means they’re
either really busy or aren’t interested or not committed.
If you aren’t interested, do I have your permission to delete your email?
If you’re still interested, [suggest a specific next step].
Thanks for reaching out!
Best,
Neville
_______________________________________This works because you are politely asking them to make a decision, it will
either be a yes or no. It works for me 3 out of 5 times. I have been using the
same script for two years now and it always works like magic!
The email script is taken from Neville Medhora’s blog: 
https://www.nevblog.com/
Connect with him on his YouTube channel: 
https://www.youtube.com/kopywritingH
OW
 T
O
 B
UILD
 A
N
 A
RMY
 O
F
 A
MBASSADORS
 F
OR
 S
ALES
By Aahan Malhotra
Short Description: 
As a startup with limited funds, it is always helpful to
have minimal investment and higher ROI in lead generation activities.
Goal:
 To build a sales force of women ambassadors and empowering women
to be self-reliant.
Time to Implement:
 3 - 6 months
What You’ll Need: 
A good team that can communicate and train the
workforce.
Step-by-Step Process:
Edudictive is a Ed-Tech startup providing them the upskilling courses and
training.
They transitioned from online to offline marketing as the new normal
demanded. They needed to market their content and courses through online
channels. The students that were in search of learning a new skill were their
potential customers.
They planned to hire and train ambassadors for executing their online
outreach strategy: There were two categories of ambassadors:
A. Campus Ambassadors (College Students),
B. Women Ambassadors (Mothers of enrolled school kids)
.
The sole reason behind this strategy was that they wanted their students to
market their product as customers are potentially the best marketers (referral
marketing). Hence, they launched an ambassador campaign and within 3
months they roped in 120 campus ambassadors and 30 women ambassadors.The ambassadors were trained for communication skills, leveraging their
personal network, and right content marketing for social messaging apps
through webinars. For Campus ambassadors, the target audience was their
college network and friends. And for Women Ambassadors, the target
audience was the parents in their network.
The ambassador program generated 4000+ leads through word-of-mouth via
Whatsapp, Facebook, and Instagram.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Aahan Malhotra is an Entrepreneur & Founder @Edudictive.P
ODCASTS
 F
OR
 B
USINESSES
By Souniya Khurana
Let me start by asking you “What’s Your Narrative?”
And the way I’d define a narrative is by saying
“The story ‘told/ retold/ untold’, ‘factual/ fictitious’, ‘appealing/ tame’,
‘short/ long’, ‘written/ spoken’, ‘created/ dramatized’ or whatsoever the
consumers or buyers of the story choose to believe in.”
Do you believe you have a narrative?
And when I say YOU, it may be a business or an individual. To go by the
books ‘an entity’, anything with a distinct and independent existence.`
Coming back to answer the question for you, whatever you may believe, the
answer is ‘YES’ because every entity has a story. Now whether you own it or
not is a choice you make.
Come to think of it, all relevant questions start with addressing the Why,
What, Where, When, Which and How.
I’ll work with some assumptions here and address a few questions. Since
you’re reading this book, some of my assumptions would be, you’re
somewhere in your journey as a business or a personal brand already and that
you know your
1
. 
Business
2
. 
Product/ Service/ Offering
3
. 
Target Audience & Market
4
. 
Customer
5
. 
Competition
6
. 
Finances
7
. 
Legal Framework
8
. 
Marketing9
. 
Most importantly, Raison d’être (reason of existence)
While all of the above assumptions may be completely or partially true, we
are all in it to continue to grow. And that can not happen without
phenomenally, massively and insanely increasing our reach to our target
addressable market also referred to as TAM.
At this juncture, let’s dump all the jargons, rather focus on a story. About a
business, let’s name it Get Rich Enterprises LLP, a financial consulting
business, with a history of 7 years and over 100+ clients, mostly traditional
businesses and a steady yet stagnant business. Now where and how they get
their clients? Mostly the credible word of mouth references, sometimes
through industry meets, rarely through e-mail and social media campaigns.
An inquiry or two would pop-up through the newsletters, blogs and articles
that the firm published frequently, but they were getting sparse by the day.
Well who has time for it anyway?
Reading and watching content comes with its own fatigue. While listening is
an inclusive activity and doesn’t eat away time from other things one needs to
do. So why not as well leverage the need to do more in less time.
The owner and partners had been desperate and eager to make a breakthrough
and capture new businesses, MSMEs and Start-ups. What they had been
struggling with was distinctly reaching their potential target market and
decision makers.
Now that is a problem worth solving, and so we did.
With an overall objective to communicate and reach out to a broader
audience, and with a message to improve financial literacy 
as a business
owner whether large or small, we charted out the path ahead.
With the expertise of the owners and the partners and our team’s expertise in
creating, amplifying and managing narratives through podcasts and audio
content, we knew the possibilities and opportunities that would soon open up
for Get Rich Enterprises LLP.
According to a report by PwC, India had about four crore monthly podcast
listeners in 2018, which is estimated to grow at a CAGR of 34.5% to reach
17.61 crore by 2023.
And we had a rule!NO CHEST THUMPING.
Which is “No boasting or talking about our own business or services or
accolades etc”. Think about it, who likes someone who is high on his/her own
accomplishments. No one likes a Narcissist, be it an individual or a business.
Value Creation was top on our list of priorities as we strategize with the
owners.
And how was that to happen?
Diving into defining the listener base with the owners, we figured, the
audience/ listener persona was crystal clear be it their age, gender, what they
do, where they’re from, what are their interests and needs, what problems are
they likely facing, and when and where are they likely to listen to a podcast.
And with the expertise in financial consulting for businesses, well
established, finding the niche in our content was a no-brainer. Thus setting us
onto the path of defining the topics that were relevant, creating value for the
small and medium sized business owners.
Be it financial modelling for businesses, business model canvas, schemes,
grants, rebates etc available for businesses and so much more, shared in crisp
15-20 minute episodes through case studies of other businesses was the
concept and format we laid out
.
Why?
Because it is all about the listener!
Knowing how much time they are likely to dedicate, the format they’d prefer
and what they really need.
With one episode each week distributed across all streaming platforms, Get
Rich Enterprises LLP saw some traction coming from the fifth episode
onwards.
With some collaborations with other podcasters who serve a similar listener
base, the host who was also the partner in the firm started appearing as a
guest on other podcasts. Helping reach out to a wider audience.
Ten episodes down, they started getting requests for one-on-one consulting
calls almost on a daily basis.Twenty five episodes down, they started getting invitations for conducting
webinars by various associations and requests for organising paid workshops
and bootcamps.
By the time they published episode 48, they already had 30 odd paying
clients with most of them being Medium and Small Enterprises.
And you’re still thinking if a podcast makes sense for your brand?A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Souniya Khurana is the Co-founder & CEO of WYN Studio. Souniya is a
globetrotting entrepreneur, a communications professional, a professional
speaker, an IIM A graduate who failed her 6th grade only to do it twice and
then failed in her first entrepreneurial stint and since then, has had quite a
love-hate relationship with failure. And as she says “In my failure I found my
story and new beliefs.”
Over the last decade, she has fallen in love with stories and compelling
narratives and thus Building Brand Narratives is what excites her. She also
coaches individuals, brands and businesses to carve new beliefs and voice
their narratives through some powerful podcasts.
Connect Here:
www.wyn.studio
“Reading and watching content comes with its own fatigue. While
listening is an inclusive activity and doesn’t eat away time from other
things one needs to do. So why not as well leverage the need to do more in
less time via an audio platform such as Podcasts.”- Souniya KhuranaA D
AY
 I
N
 T
HE
 L
IFE
 O
F
 A C
ONTENT
 M
ARKETING
M
ANAGER
By Issac Thomas
When the title says, “A day in the life of a content marketing manager”, it
won’t be a boring journal of what I ate, or how I felt when I woke up in the
morning.
It would be about a 
series of tasks I do and the skills, tools, and mindset I use
to get things done.
So basically, what it takes to be a content marketing manager?
First things first, you need to be an excellent writer with impeccable grammar
and mojo to tell a great story.
Second, you need to have a basic understanding of how marketing works.
Thirdly since you are a manager too, you need to be a great team leader as
well.
So, yes what constitutes a content marketing manager, a Writer + A Marketer
+ A Manager.
So, let’s peep into, 
“A day in the life of a content marketing manager”.
As I enter my office, I know I have to cater to multiple clients. I have to
divide my time, team and resources among clients.
Writing a blog, scheduling social media posts, and managing freelancers is
the task for the day.
But in this chapter I will talk about my approach to write a blog of 2000
words and the tools I use to stay on top of the content marketing game.
How to write a 2000 words blog in just four hours?
Sharing it with you my seven-step process-
1
. 
Research2
. 
Content Curation
3
. 
Create a headline and basic outline for the blog
4
. 
Write the blog
5
. 
Read it aloud and correct the mistakes
6
. 
Run it through Grammarly, make the necessary changes
7
. 
Publish or ship it to the clien
t
Lets elaborate the whole process:
When I am about to write on a particular topic, the very first thing I do is do
intense research around it. I read the best blogs around the niche, curate
content, and write down my raw thoughts on the subject.
Research and content curation together would take around 60 to 90 minutes.
Once I have enough content, I create a headline and a basic outline for the
blog based on the purpose, long term goals, and the role of the blog in the
overall content marketing strategy.
Creating a headline and a basic outline won’t take more than 30 minutes.
We are 120 minutes down, we have another 120 minutes left.
Spend the next 60 minutes writing the blog. Turn off your wifi to avoid any
distractions and write your blog on MS- word to finish your blog at a
lightning speed.
Use the next 30 minutes to edit your mistakes, read it aloud, run it through
grammarly and make sure it is err free.
And once it is ready, publish it.
Now that you know about how to finish blogs in four hours, let me get you
familiar with content marketing tools that can keep you on top of your game.
The Complete Toolkit for a Content Marketer:
Firstly let’s understand what is the basic workflow of a content marketer!
1
. 
Generating a content idea
2
. 
Doing Research
3
. 
Content Curation
4
. 
Writing Well Optimized Content5
. 
Distributing Content
6
. 
Analyzing their efforts
Now here are some tools for every step-
Generating new content ideas- 
BuzzSumo
 & 
Google
 Trends
Doing Research- Google, 
Quora
, 
Reddit, Inc.
 (You don’t need tools here, all
you need is time and platforms to explore)
Content Curation- 
Flipboard
, Pocket and 
Feedly
Writing Well Optimized Content- 
Grammarly
, Hemingway App
Creating Visuals- 
Canva
, 
Kaboompics
 and 
Crello
Distributing Content- 
Kontentino
 
RocketLink
 
Chatbotize.me
 
Hootsuite
Analyzing your Efforts- Google Analytics
Special mention- 
SEMrush
You cannot confine SEMrush to just one thing, it is in a different league
altogether.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Issac Thomas is currently working as a Senior Writer and has been practicing
content marketing for the past five years. As a blogger, romance is his forte
and as a marketing professional, he loves creating content that acts as lead
magnets and stand the test of time.
A writer, entrepreneur, and marketer, Issac is a voracious reader and loves
binge-watching Netflix during his spare time.
Connect Here:
http://www.issacthomas.com
https://www.linkedin.com/in/issac-thomas-contentmarketing
“When I am about to write on a particular topic, the very first thing I do
is do intense research around it. I read the best blogs around the niche,
curate content, and write down my raw thoughts on the subject.”- Issac
ThomasW
AYS
 T
O
 S
ECURE
 Y
OUR
 D
IGITAL
 A
CCOUNTS
 A
S
 A
R
EMOTE
 T
EAM
By Jyotishman Nath
Since the world is increasingly getting digital and tech savvy, digital security
needs to be taken more seriously than ever. A Dashlane analysis suggests an
average internet user has 90 online accounts. If your identity is stolen, your
bank accounts are hacked, etc. you can probably recover the damage but it
might take a lot of time, effort and not to mention the emotional distress that
comes with it. Prevention is better than cure. It is wise to secure your digital
accounts before it’s too late.
Hacking is a huge problem for all businesses and many businesses have
suffered greatly due to its negative impact. This has led to distrust among the
customers and decreased their profits over years.
The role of introducing safety measures early in life can do wonders to young
innovative minds of young kids. In this age of gaming, almost every kid is
into online gaming and they use home computers with specific Wi-Fi
networks. Some common things that everyone can do are some listed below:
1
. 
Log out and shut down your computer after you are done using it:
Your computer should always be shut down after you are done working
or playing on it. This not just to avoid burning out, but also helps
avoiding other people getting onto it.
2
. 
Always add a separate account that does NOT have admin
privileges: 
Always use a different sign in because hackers can easily
get through your computer on an admin account. If you are on an
admin account, it doesn’t ask for a password when installing software
or other malicious files. Hence, if you create a separate account and
work on it, then it becomes difficult for the hackers to get in.3
. 
NEVER save your passwords to google but use a different
password manager:
 When your passwords are saved to google, there
is a higher chance of getting them stolen. Instead, you can just use a
password manager like LastPass. With LastPass, you can save your
passwords securely with just one click. And when you log out by
accident, your passwords will show, and you can select the one you use
to log in.
4
. 
Often check your data and clear cache often: 
Whenever you have a
lot of files stored in google, your laptop can be at a high risk of hacking
because usually hackers think that there is a lot of valuable information
that they can gain access to. That is why you should use a chrome
extension called Click and Clean.
5
. 
Using the right/trustworthy extensions: 
When installing extensions,
you never know if the one you’re installing is trustworthy. Always
check to see if an extension is sketchy like starts asking personal
questions like where you live or what is your paycheck? Avoid
websites that ask for personal information
6
. 
Remember to check on your passwords and make sure they are
strong: 
Usually, most people just go with a simple password like a
name of a youtuber with few numbers or a real life friends name with
numbers and symbols. A strong password should contain:
i
. 
At least 10 Characters
ii
. 
3 numbers
iii
. 
2 or 3 symbols
iv
. 
Hard to guess.
If you do not know if a password is hard to guess or not, the website
https://www.lastpass.com/password-generator
 will generate a strong
password with the requirements that you want! Update passwords
regularly like every 2 months.
5
. 
Never leave a password site open: 
A password site is a site like
LastPass. A Site that shows all your passwords and you can see them
easily. When you leave it open, a hacker can see your chrome tabs and
steal your passwords. Kind of like a backdoor.6
. 
Put specific firewalls for sites you don’t trust: 
A firewall is
something that you can use to prevent yourself from going to specific
websites. An app like Site Block, is a chrome extension that prevents
you from going to unfamiliar sites. The only drawback is that you have
to type in the URL correctly.
Conclusion/Summary
: As most businesses have a distributed or remote
team with COVID-19 situation, it becomes imperative for all to understand
the components of growth using safety protocols.
(Additional Commentary by Rohan Chaubey to enhance readability)A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Jyotishman is a 12-year-old gamer and a tech wizard. He goes to a public
school in Chandler, Arizona and loves playing Roblox and creating more
gaming platforms for other players. He currently knows Python programming
and JavaScript. He is in the process of learning R. He plays three instruments,
the Tabla, the Rabab and the Santoor. He is also a drummer, has been called
the Rabab Prodigy by the Renowned Santoor Maestro Pandit Tarun
Bhattacharya. He is also a cuber and avid origamist.
Connect Here:
ItzIMainTracer1@gmail.com
“When your passwords are saved to google, there is a higher chance of
getting them stolen. Instead, you can just use a password manager like
LastPass.”- Jyotishman NathH
OW
 T
O
 M
AKE
 A V
IDEO
 G
O
 V
IRAL
By Rohan Chaubey
‘Viral’ is the most abused word in marketing because it is hard to define and
understand.
Some of my clients approach me requesting tips to go viral or help them
make their existing content go viral. Just as a joke might or might not make
you laugh, similar videos may or may not go viral based on how the audience
perceives and shares it.
All major social platforms have started to push videos as their dominant
content format which gave rise to video influencers on platforms such as
TikTok, YouTube, Instagram, LinkedIn, etc.
In my opinion, virality or growth can be provoked. You cannot control
whether or not a video content will go viral, but you can definitely control it’s
distribution.
Virality has Two Stages:
Stage 1 Virality:
 Stage 1 virality challenges the traditional definition of
virality. If your content is shared outside your immediate network then you
have achieved Stage 1 virality. Without achieving Stage 1 Virality you
cannot achieve Stage 2 Virality.
Example: If your video is shared by your followers or fans into their personal
networks and then their personal network shares it further in their networks.
Stage 2 Virality:
 This follows the traditional and mainstream definition, if
your content is widely distributed to tens of thousands to millions, then you
have achieved Stage 2 Virality. Everyone 
ignores the Stage 1 virality which
makes Stage 2 virality seem like magic or unattainable.
So the key to achieve Stage 2 virality is provoking or orchestrating shares
(distribution).Case Study: 
To promote the pre-orders of The Growth Hacking Book 2, we
launched a 60-second video featuring the authors and a popular pet influencer
(George Monkey from Texas) holding The Growth Hacking Book 1.
Watching a monkey in an ad for a book was a novel and funny idea which
helped us receive a lot of shares, engagement and even a feature in a news
publication thereby indirectly generating awareness for the book. The video
received over 100K+ views on YouTube.
Aashish Chopra, an award winning viral video marketer and bestselling
author of Fast, Cheap and Viral shared five ingredients of a viral video
in one of his keynotes:
#1 VIRAL = Shareworthy - 
The only way to make your content viral is to
make it shareworthy.
#2 Storytelling beats production value - 
You are blessed to be born in an
era where you don’t need massive production value to be a creator. If videos
are going to be played on a tiny screen then you don’t require massive
production value.
#3 Move fast and Engage - 
Attention span is very low these days unless
they are watching a movie. If you want 1000s of people to open your video
you have to convey your message (the base of it) in 3-6 seconds.
#4 Distribution strategy - 
Your amazing pieces of content will die in a vault
if you don’t distribute it well. The most important part of distribution is that
in the first 30 minutes, your video has to get 100 shares organically and how
do you get that? By sharing it among your community first, your friends,
your family, people you work with.
#5 Authentic, NO ADS - 
Ads and content are like water and oil - 
they are
separate. PERIOD.
The above five points are summarized from Aashish Chopra’s keynote at
Mad Over Videos event: 
https://youtu.be/qHNT6Z0JS40
Connect with Aashish here
https://twitter.com/aashishc
“The only way to make your content viral is to make it
shareworthy.”- Aashish ChopraH
OW
 T
O
 R
ECRUIT
 A
FFILIATES
 F
OR
 Y
OUR
 S
AA
S O
N
S
CALE
By Rohan Chaubey
All successful SaaS companies have a powerful affiliate or partner program
that brings them a significant amount of revenue.
However, not every SaaS company is able to onboard quality affiliates. This
growth experiment teaches you how to get quality affiliates and partners at
scale.
Using Google search operators we can piggyback on the affiliates of the best
competitor in our space. This marketing hack will help you find and reach out
to partners who will help you sell your product on scale.
Step 1: 
Make a list of your competitors or similar SaaS companies using
affiliate programs to drive sales.
Step 2: 
Find what kind of content affiliates usually create. In most cases, it
is:
Comparison posts
List of top / best tools
Listicle on alternative tools
Product reviews
Video tutorials
Case study blog pos
t
Step 3: 
Use Advanced Google Search Operators to find the affiliates:
Syntax: Intitle: “[Keyword]” intext: ”disclosure” (intext:”commission” OR
intext:”affiliate”)
Example: Intitle: “best ecommerce platforms” intext: ”disclosure”
(intext:”commission” OR intext:”affiliate”)Step 4: 
Collect links from the search results page using LinkClump (Chrome
Extension).
Step 5: 
Find the traffic stats and DA/DR of the websites using Ahrefs.
Contact decent performing sites via cold outreach campaigns using
FindThatLead / LemList / MailShake.
This growth hack saves hours and hours of time wasted trying to figure the
ideal affiliate partners for your product / service.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
 A
ND
 F
EATURED
 T
OOLS
Rohan Chaubey
 is the host of 
www.RohanChaubey.TV
Ahrefs
 is an all-in-one SEO toolset powered by the best and most complete
data in the industry.
FindThatLead
 is a B2B lead generation tool that helps you with lead search,
email verification, social search, prospecting and building email campaigns.
LemList 
is a cold email tool powering sales teams, agencies, and B2B
businesses to personalize and automate outreach campaigns.
MailShake 
is a sales engagement and automation software that helps you
personalize your cold emails at scale and engage with prospects via phone
and social media.U
LTIMATE
 SEO C
HECKLIST
By SEMrush
Getting the basics right
Set up GSC and Bing Webmaster tools
Set up Google Analytics
Install and configure an SEO plugin (WordPress)
Generate and submit a sitemap
Create a Robots.txt file
Check Search Console for manual actions
Make sure your website is indexed
SEO basics tools
Google Search Console
Google Analytics
Bing Webmaster Tools
Yoast
Dynomapper
Keyword Research
Identify your competitors
Conduct a keyword gap analysis
Find you main ‘money’ keywords
Find long-tail keyword variations
Find question keywords
Create a keyword map
Prioritize by search volume & keyword difficultyKeyword Research tools
Semrush Keyword Magic Tool
Google Ads
Semrush Topic Research
People Also Ask
Answer The Public
Technical SEO
Leverage “inspect URL” feature in GSC
Ensure your website is mobile-friendly
Check your site’s loading speed
Make sure you are using HTTPS
Find & fix crawl errors
Check the page depth
Check for duplicate versions of your site
Identify & fix broken links
Use an SEO-friendly URL structure
Find & fix orphaned pages
Check canonical tags
Add structured data
Technical SEO tools
GSC & GA
PageSpeed Insights
Google’s Mobile-Friendly test
Semrush Site Audit
Structured Data Markup Helper
Merkle Schema Markup Generator
On-Page SEO & Content
Fix duplicate, missing & truncated title tagsFind & fix duplicate, missing meta descriptions
Find and fix multiple H1 tags
Improve title & meta tags, and page content
Run a content audit and prune content
Optimize images for SEO
Organize topic clusters
Find & fix keyword cannibalization
Update outdated content
Improve content readability
On-Page & Content tools
Semrush Content Audit
Semrush Topic Research
SEO Writing Assistant
Off-Page SEO
Analyze your competitor’s link profile
Conduct a link intersect analysis
Steal your competitors broken backlinks
Leverage Digital PR
Implement the Skyscraper technique
Turn unlinked mentions into links
Set up and optimize Google My Business
Off-Page SEO Tools
Semrush Backlink Audit
Semrush Backlink Analytics
Semrush BacklinkGap
Semrush Link Building tool
HARO
ProwlyGoogle My Business
The above checklist was shared by SEMrush team, you can find more in-
depth details here: 
https://www.semrush.com/blog/seo-checklist/A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
SEMrush 
is an online visibility management platform, popularly known for
the SEO and content marketing toolset.
Connect Here:
www.semrush.comG
ROW
 A T
ARGETED
 F
OLLOWING
 O
N
 S
OCIAL
 M
EDIA
 B
Y
E
NGAGING
 W
ITH
 Y
OUR
 C
OMPETITOR
’
S
 O
R
 N
ICHE
I
NFLUENCERS
’ F
OLLOWERS
By TexAu
Short Description: 
The fastest way to build an engaged social media
following is to engage with the active followers of your competitors and
niche influencers.
What tool you’ll need: TexAu
Step-by-Step Process:
Step 1: 
Make a target list containing the social profiles of your competitors
and influencers of your niche.
Step 2: 
Engage with their target list’s followers on scale using TexAu’s no-
code marketing APIs. Be careful of the social media platform’s rate limits
and always set up workflows staying within the platform limitations.
Common use cases for growing your audience:
Engage with followers, likers and commenters of your competitor’s and
influencers’ profiles.
Connect with a list of profiles from different sources: LinkedIn or
Facebook groups, posts, searches, etc.
First, extract profiles or posts with dedicated TexAu Spices (Extract posts,
profiles, followers, etc.), then use TexAu’s Recipes 
that engage with your
target audience on scale. Focus on quality versus quantity.
Rohan Chaubey’s four-step framework for growing social media profiles is
the most practical approach to grow organically on any social media platform
while saving time and efforts through TexAu workflows.
Four-Step Framework To Grow On Any Social Media PlatformStep 1: Choose the platform
 - Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Quora,
Facebook, YouTube, TikTok, etc.
Step 2: Identify Key Actions -
 Identify key actions that will lead to
awareness or discovery - Key actions on any social platform are actions that
send notifications to other users when you perform them.
Step 3: Automate / Outsource / DIY -
 Perform key actions at scale by
automating or outsourcing or doing it yourself.
Step 4: Analyze and Repeat -
 Collect insights and analyze which key
actions are more useful and double down on those.
A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
TexAu 
is a powerful growth automation toolkit designed to help you
generate new leads and scale your business faster.
Connect Here:
www.texau.app
“The fastest way to build an engaged social media following is to
engage with the active followers of your competitors and niche
influencers.” - TexAuB
OOST
 Y
OUR
 S
ALES
 B
Y
 R
ECRUITING
 T
OP
 I
NSTAGRAM
I
NFLUENCERS
By Abhinav Rai
Finding the right influencers for influencer marketing campaigns on
Instagram can be a tough job. ProfileBud solves the hardest problem of
finding the right influencers for your brand. It gives you detailed analysis
reports apart from other data like follower counts, engagement rate, post
count, etc. Pick the best micro influencers for your business using ProfileBud
and drop them an email regarding a potential collaboration and skyrocket
your sales.
A smart apparel online store roughly doubled their sales in one month.
Sharing their case study and strategy:
Step 1: 
Exported detailed data of 100K targeted users from the niche
hashtags - #smartclothing, #SmartFashionInfluencers, #AntiViralHoodie,
#SmartTshirt and followers of some of their competitors.
Step 2: 
Filtered profiles who had emails and follower count from 3K - 12K
with engagement rate more than 8%.
Step 3: 
Sent emails to 2K targeted filtered influencers (Email stats: 90%
delivery & 35% open rate) with a proposal of 15% commission on every sale
they make for the store.
Step 4: 
Received positive response from ~100. Sent them their unique
discount code and marketing material
.
Step 5:
 Launched the influencer campaign with these 100+ influencers on the
same day before Black Friday.
Result: 
Got 8 times more sales than the average day along with massive
brand awareness in smart apparel online clothing niche. All this in just 28
days with less than $60 spent on marketing!A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHOR
Abhinav Rai is the Founder and CEO of ProfileBud. ProfileBud is a Chrome
Extension for Instagram Marketing. It helps you get data of your influencers
and customers with laser targeting options.
Connect Here:
www.profilebud.comH
OW
 T
O
 F
IND
 T
HAT
 1% T
HAT
 D
RIVES
 O
VER
 50% O
F
E
XTRA
 R
EVENUE
Featuring Chris Out & Marlies VD Brekel
What are the 3 main Growth levers you need to implement in your business?
We present our favorite strategy in this chapter.
Thanks to Chris Out and Marlies VD Brekel for allowing us to compile this
list from the ebook 
Growth Lever Cheat Sheet. 
For detailed explanation
please visit: https://chrisout.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/10/GrowthLever_CheatSheet.pdf
GROWTH LEVER#1: DREAM 100
Identify your Dream 100 and acquire new customers rapidly
You only grow a business by doing one of these three things:
Getting more clients
Getting a higher average order value per transaction - which means
selling more per transaction
Increasing the purchase frequency - getting your clients back more
often to buy from you again
This lever focuses on getting more clients or your Dream 100. There are
variations of the Dream 100:
One to one 
- This is when you create a dream list of 100 people/companies
that you want to sell to.
One to many 
- If you want to sell to many customers, you need to find the
100 most prominent spots where they are congregating
.
Let’s explore them one at a time.
How can you find your dream 100 in a one-to- many setting?First of all, know as much as possible about your ideal customer, so you
know who you want to target. After you’ve identified your ideal customer,
you can ask yourself these questions:
What are the top websites that my dream customers already go to?
What forums or message boards do they participate in?
What are the Facebook groups they engage in?
Who are the influencers they follow? What podcasts do they listen to?
What are the email newsletters they are subscribed to?
What blogs do they read?
What channels are they following on YouTube?
What keywords are they searching for in Google to find information?
After making this list, you add up the total reach all these spots have. So add
up all the subscribers, readers, and followers.
Now you know what the potential reach is of your campaigns, and you can
start building a Dream 100 campaign.
How can you find your dream 100 in a one-to-one setting?
Do you remember Pareto? In many industries, 20% of the companies are
taking up 80%+ of the market size. It can be the case that 100 companies are
enough to capture more than 80% of the market size. So you’ll only need to
focus on these 100 companies anyway.
The goal of a one-to-one Dream 100 is to get in front of all of those 100
companies that are on your list.
You want to convert them from saying about you: 
‘I’ve never heard of this
company before’ 
to 
‘Yes, I do business with that company.
’
You should, again, ask yourself the questions listed above and create a list of
overlapping spots where your 100 companies are congregating.
Understanding this will bring extreme focus to your marketing / sales efforts,
as you can start on the top of your list and work your way down as you go.
The next step is to leverage this with your dream campaign.
GROWTH LEVER#2: VALUE LADDER
Build your value ladder and increase your CLTVThis lever is designed to maximize the value of your customer.
You should never sell just one product or service at one price. Why? Because
you’re leaving so much money on the table when you’re under-serving your
customers.
The money is in the list
If you have an audience, which could be an email list or a customer list, there
is a difference in what people are willing and able to pay.
If you sell only one product at one price, it means that people who want to
buy from you with less budget go somewhere else. You are limiting who you
can sell to. And, sometimes people just need time to warm up.
Find hidden money
Do you want to know where you’re leaving money on the table in your
business? What would you be able to earn if you have one product and
introduce a lower-priced and a higher-priced product? This concept is called
a value ladder.
A value ladder is a lineup of offers that increase in price and value.
Meet people where they are on their journey to become a customer — from
initial awareness to their final decision to buy your premium offerings
.
A great value ladder delivers so much value to the customer that they want to
move up the ladder.
It’s an effective way for you to build trust and maximize the lifetime value of
each customer. A value ladder increases your customer lifetime value
because you’re focusing on expanding the relationship’s value.
You do this by strategically placing offers and moving them through the
ladder.
Types of revenue in a value ladder:
An important concept to make the most out of a value ladder is front-end and
back-end revenue.
Front-end revenue 
= Money you make on the first sale/start of the
relationship.Back-end revenue 
= Money you make on all the purchases after the first
sale.
The lowest offers in your value ladder are probably the most significant
source of front-end revenue. The threshold to buy is relatively low for these
offers.
The higher priced offers in the ladder are mostly back-end revenue. As
people need warm up time first.
Many companies measure their revenue success based on front-end revenue,
while top companies have more mechanisms in place to maximize back- end
revenue. Building a value ladder will help you focus on generating more
back-end revenue.
GROWTH LEVER#3: STRESS TEST
Revenue Stress Testing - increasing your throughput
For this lever you need to understand the relationship between revenue,
expenses, and profit. You also need to know how we can create systems to
drive revenue growth. And how much growth these systems would be able to
handle
.
Systems are a key component in managing extreme revenue growth. But
every system will eventually break when you increase the input. That’s where
the bottleneck is. So if you want to grow more it’s important that you focus
proactively on removing those bottlenecks.
We call this, stress testing your revenue.
how much revenue can your organization handle before it breaks?
where is currently your biggest bottleneck?
how can we increase the throughput of your organization?
Let’s explain how this works in a business situation:
A company wants to grow its revenue from 2 million to 4 million within one
year.
After a stress test of 5 minutes it was concluded that this revenue goal is not
achievable.They can only handle a revenue of 3.2M within their organizational setup.
Why?
In this case, customer success seems to be the bottleneck.
With every new client that comes in, a customer success manager has to
spend four hours to onboard the client. They have two customer success
managers who have in total 2,400 hours available yearly to onboard new
clients.
So what this team can onboard is: available hours / hours onboarding per
client = 2.400 / 4 = 600 clients.
So only 600 new clients can be onboarded.
If a new client brings in €2,000 in that first year, the team can onboard this
amount of revenue:
= onboard availability x revenue per client = 600 x €2,000 = €1.2 million
.
If we put this into numbers:
Revenue Goal:
 €4 millionCurrent revenue: €2 millionOnboard capacity: €1.2
millionGap: €0.8 million
We can do all the marketing and sales to get €4 million in business, but it
won’t work.
Customer success would break at 3.2 million.
What can they do? How can they solve this gap?
There are a few potential solutions:
Reduce the time spend per customer
Process re-design
Automate specific steps with, for example, video tutorials
Hire more customer success managers Outsource customer success
management to outside organizations that can quickly scale-up
What if they would go from €2 million to €20 million in 1 year, what
would break?
This question really triggers you to think about scalability and how you
proactively manage those bottlenecks away.One of the greatest writers about this topic is Eliyahu M. Goldratt, who
created the Theory of constraints. His approach is as follows.
Theory of constraints (TOC) by Eliyahu M. Goldratt
1
. 
Identify the system’s constraints.
2
. 
Decide how to exploit the system’s constraints.
3
. 
Subordinate everything else to the above decision.
4
. 
Elevate the system’s constraints.
5
. 
If a constraint has been broken in the previous steps, go back to step
one, but do not allow inertia to cause a system constraint
.
With his approach, you continuously increase the throughput of a system. In
other words;
You continuously test and increase what the system can handle or
produce.
You will see that there are also a lot of constraints in what a marketing and
sales department can produce. You can use this way of thinking in that
context to connect inputs with outputs and remove constraints. So we try to
challenge the marketing and sales team what the bottlenecks are to increase
their output. What is breaking, and is it a good business case to proactively
fix this bottleneck?
The real leverage of these growth levers is when you implement all of
them:
When you do this, you’re getting more clients in, you maximize the lifetime
value by guiding them structurally through a series of offerings, and, last but
not least, you’re building an organization that can handle more revenue
growth than ever before.A
BOUT
 T
HE
 A
UTHORS
Chris Out 
has founded one of the worlds best growth hacking agencies and
exited in July 2020. He has worked with hundreds of clients on different
continents. He is a lecturer at Beeckestijn Business school and has spoken
around the world about growth.
His true passion is unlocking extreme revenue growth and transforming
everything that is necessary to support that. Chris still works with some
clients 1-on-1 next to building his portfolio of online products.
Marlies VD Brekel 
has 10+years experience in working as a Marketing
Manager for big corporates such as eBay and Bugaboo as well as (tech)
startups and scale-ups in the Netherlands. In 2019 she co- founded the agency
Amsterdam Webdesigners and has consistently made 10K+ since her first
month as freelance consultant.
Connect Here:
www.chrisout.com
https://chrisout.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/10/GrowthLever_CheatSheet.pdf
“A value ladder is a lineup of offers that increase in price and value. A
great value ladder delivers so much value to the customer that they want
to move up the ladder.”- Chris OutS
UCCESS
 O
F
 T
HE
 G
ROWTH
 H
ACKING
 B
OOK
 1
1
. 
The book was endorsed by Mr. Amitabh Kant, CEO and Director of
NITI AAYOG, Government of India.
2
. 
BookAuthority, GrowthRocks and Planable listed ‘The Growth
Hacking Book’ as one of the top Growth Hacking books in 2020.
3
. 
The book is often referenced at many online media publications and
blogs, offline conferences and industry events.
4
. 
The contributors have frequently attributed their success in securing
speaking gigs, interviews and business opportunities to the book.
5
. 
It continued to be an Amazon bestseller for 8+ months in various
categories and countries.
6
. 
Forbes listed The Growth Hacking Book as one of the 8 books solo
entrepreneurs and other small business owners must read.
7
. 
The book sold thousands of Kindle and paperback copies. Ranked in
Movers and Shakers list on Amazon.
8
. 
Placement of the book in the University of Manchester Library.
Get you Copy Today:The success of The Growth Hacking Book 1 paved the way for The Growth
Hacking Book 2. On our community and reader’s demand, we compiled The
Growth Hacking Book with a new format and a new set of contributors for its
second edition.S
UCCESS
 O
F
 T
HE
 G
ROWTH
 H
ACKING
 B
OOK
 2
Amazon #1 Bestseller in Australia, France, India and US.
Made it to the Movers and Shakers list (Top 100 books on Amazon
Kindle store).
Ranking #1 at Amazon Kindle store in India.
On August 7th, 2020, The Growth Hacking Book 2 became the first
book on Digital Marketing and Growth Hacking to hit Twitter trends.A
BOUT
 G
ROWTH
M
EDIA
.AI
GrowthMedia.AI is a cutting-edge business consulting company, serving
professionals / companies who seek to reinvent themselves and leave a
legacy.
We offer turn-key business solutions:
We help subject experts in making bestselling books to grow their
impact.
We help thought leaders grow their social media tribe, become the
authority in their niche, build the influence and empower online
leadership with the right Mindset, Skillset, and Toolset.
Helping SaaS companies to reach from 0 to 100,000 users/customers.
Reach out to us for our solutions today:
www.growthmedia.ai
info@growthmedia.aiGet Your 46-page Complimentary Ebook along with the purchase of The
Growth Hacking Book 2 here:
https://growthmedia.ai/free
Did you learn anything new?
Did you find this book valuable?
What Growth Strategy do you plan to implement right away?
Do share with us and please leave a REVIEW on Amazon, Goodreads, B&N,
iBooks.
We LOVE to hear from our readers
!