AI for Agencies  
Blueprint
Sponsored By
© 2023, Marketing AI Institute, All Rights Reserved.
Published October 20232  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint3  Dawn of the Next-Gen Agency
 Why AI Matters  3
 Why AI Will Disrupt Every Agency  4
 What Agencies Can Do About It  5
7  Intro to Artificial Intelligence for Agencies
 What Is AI?  7
 What Is Generative AI?  8
 The Core Applications of AI  9 
10  How AI Will Disrupt Agencies
 Billing Models  10
 Services  11
 Creativity  11
 Innovation  11
 Marketing, Sales, and Business Development  11
 Operations  12
 Talent  12
 Technology  12
13  Top AI Use Cases for Agencies
17  Top AI Tools for Agencies
19  Building a Next-Gen Agency: A Checklist
21  Choosing an AI Partner Program
 What to Look For in a Partner  21
 Example of an AI Agency Partner Program  22
24  About Marketing AI Institute and Jasper
 Table of Contents3  |  AI for Agencies BlueprintArtificial intelligence is about to fundamentally disrupt marketing agencies of every type and size. 
Some agencies will seize the opportunity, and create enormous value for themselves and their clients. Many others, 
however, will become obsolete. The laggards won’t die off overnight, but their relevance and value will quickly fade. 
Their clients (and people) will move on.
ChatGPT is just the beginning…
It’s the shiny object that has captured every agency leader’s attention—and the attention of their clients. 
And rightly so. ChatGPT has already displayed advanced skills where it can write, create, and analyze. But what’s happening 
beneath the surface when it comes to AI is much bigger than just ChatGPT…
And what’s really going on will change all knowledge work as we know it, sooner than we think—including every aspect 
of marketing agencies.
Why AI Matters
Today, we stand at an inflection point. 
AI has been studied and theorized for decades. But, in the last 10 years, a perfect storm of factors has converged to 
create an explosion of AI innovation that is quickly entering a runaway exponential growth curve.
First, we now have trillions of tokens of training data readily available to AI systems, thanks to decades of information 
generated by the consumer internet. 
Second, key advancements in deep learning, an advanced subset of AI, have given machines the ability to do things 
that humans do best, like write, create, predict, and reason. The speed and scope of these developments have surprised 
even top experts in the field.
Third, a range of cloud, infrastructure, and consumer-facing technologies have made it easier and cheaper than ever to 
build and use AI technology.
Together, these factors have created the conditions for an explosion of AI innovation and adoption—the first phase of 
which is being led by generative AI.
Today, generative AI that can create words, images, audio, and code has disrupted roles and skills across industries. 
In just two months, ChatGPT reached 100 million users, making it the fastest-growing consumer app of all time. We’re 
already seeing the rapid development and deployment of advanced AI copilots across every major piece of business and 
marketing software.
And we are still in the early days. Soon, bleeding-edge technologies like autonomous AI agents and multimodal AI 
assistants will entirely change how we do every type of knowledge work.
The implications of the AI revolution are profound. These machines increasingly excel at the highest-order abilities that 
humans use to create economic value—the ability to think, create, and reason.
Dawn of the Next-Gen Agency4  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
And every AI advancement actually speeds up future innovation. Smart machines help us build even smarter machines, 
creating (as OpenAI CEO Sam Altman puts it) “a recursive loop of innovation.”
In a single year, ChatGPT alone has dramatically improved in its ability to understand, reason, and perform many 
cognitive tasks. It not only can read and write, but it now can see, hear, and speak.
ChatGPT is just one of thousands of intelligent systems, backed by billions in funding, being built by the smartest 
companies in the world to ultimately do any and every cognitive task as well or better than humans.
As such, AI will have a particularly rapid and monumental impact on every marketing agency that uses knowledge work 
to produce outcomes for clients—which is all of them.
Why AI Will Disrupt Every Agency
Think of everything that marketing agencies do to create value for their clients. Things like:
• Build brands.
• Build and execute inbound marketing strategies.
• Create content.
• Create and run email marketing campaigns.
• Create and run paid advertising campaigns.
• Create and run public relations campaigns.
• Create and run social media campaigns.
• Design and build websites.
• Do sales enablement.
• Improve customer service and support.
• Improve SEO.
• Manage CRM systems.
• Onboard clients to marketing technology.
Today, AI can be used to do each and every one of these things better, faster, and cheaper than it’s done today. 
It can also unlock previously unimaginable creative and innovative possibilities in every major area of marketing. 
In fact, right now, AI is already able to do many of the things your agency does for clients at a near-human level.  
Today, we have AI that can:
• Brainstorm creative and high-quality ideas for any type of campaign.
• Chat with, answer questions about, and analyze your HubSpot CRM data.
• Code websites, apps, and dashboards automatically from a single image.
• Create entire marketing campaigns, including strategies and assets, in minutes.
• Generate entire product image campaigns.
• Personalize every marketing message with the exact language that motivates users.
• Rank your content higher in search using personalized strategies.
And it is still very, very early…
Dawn of the Next-Gen Agency5  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Within the next 24 months, we expect this recursive loop of exponential innovation to produce even more advanced AI 
technologies like:
• AI assistants that are experts in every major area of business. You will soon have access to AI agents that 
function like ChatGPT but also possess accurate knowledge of every business domain, even technical ones. (You’ll 
never again ask for legal advice without also running it by LawyerGPT.) 
• AI tools that can produce long-form, realistic creative content with high fidelity. The chances are very good you 
will soon watch the first AI-generated commercial, fully AI-hosted and produced podcast, or AI-generated feature-
length film and not be able to distinguish it from human-made creative. 
• Autonomous AI agents that will take actions on your behalf online.  You will give these agents commands (“Build 
me a marketing strategy for a B2B manufacturing firm that sells to roofing companies”) and they will string together 
actions to complete your goal—without your involvement. Prototype tools like Personal Assistant from HyperWrite  
already showcase this technology in its infancy.
One thing should become clear from these examples:
AI gives agencies unparalleled opportunities to drive efficiency and productivity, enhance creativity and decision-making, 
and deliver greater value to clients…
But it can also quickly make you obsolete if you don’t urgently evolve your business model, talent, technologies, and services.
The choice is yours.
What Agencies Can Do About It
Technological revolutions have always created enormous opportunities and threats for agencies. 
In recent years, the martech revolution allowed companies like HubSpot to build powerful agency partner ecosystems 
that transformed thousands of agencies, created billions of dollars in value for partners, and continue to drive massive 
growth for customers. 
AI presents a similar, but exponentially larger, opportunity and threat for agencies today. The agencies that thrive moving 
forward will act with urgency to:
• Evolve their services and positioning to maintain their relevance and value to clients.
• Redefine business and billing models to cope with AI’s disruption of traditional industry economics.
• Train and upskill talent to leverage AI technology effectively, securely, and responsibly.
• Transform operations to capture more efficiencies using smarter AI tools and AI-powered workflows.
•  Innovate new ways to drive client success with AI technologies and create sustained new value through AI 
partner programs.
This guide is here to help you do that.
At Marketing AI Institute, we’ve been educating marketers on how to understand, pilot, and scale AI since 2016, years 
before today’s current generative AI craze and the rise of overnight AI “experts” on social media.
We also came from the agency world. Our founder and CEO, Paul Roetzer, previously owned HubSpot’s first-ever 
partner agency and authored The Marketing Agency Blueprint. And many people on our leadership team have deep 
agency backgrounds. 
We understand the opportunities, challenges, and concerns that agency owners and leaders face when it comes to 
running and growing an agency business—especially in the light of disruptive technological shifts.Dawn of the Next-Gen Agency6  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
In this guide, we’ve partnered with AI and agency experts at Jasper, a leading AI content generation platform, to cut 
through the noise and help you make sense of AI—and your agency’s AI strategy—starting today. 
In it, you’ll find:
• Clear, actionable definitions of AI, machine learning, deep learning, and generative AI…
• Expert advice on how to navigate AI’s disruption to agencies…
• Specific AI use cases and tools across major areas of marketing, from advertising to SEO to social media…
• A practical checklist you can use to start building a next-generation agency…
• And guidance on what to look for in AI partner programs.
By the time you’re finished, you’ll have a much clearer picture of your agency’s future in the age of AI.Dawn of the Next-Gen Agency7  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Intro to Artificial Intelligence  
for Agencies
Here’s the good news for agencies…
You don’t have to have a computer science or machine learning background to take advantage of the opportunities that 
AI provides. You just need to have a solid understanding of how AI works and what it can do. 
What Is AI? 
If you ask 10 experts to define “AI,” you’ll get 10 different definitions given the complexity of the subject. But our favorite 
definition of AI comes from DeepMind CEO and Co-Founder Demis Hassabis: 
“AI is the science of making machines smart.” 
What does that mean? It means giving machines the ability to mimic human intelligence—to think, create, understand, 
reason, and learn as humans do.
This is very different from the typical software we’ve all used over the last two decades in our companies and careers.
Traditional software, by which we mean non-AI software, only follows set instructions, operates on fixed rules and does 
not adapt or improve.
Think of your typical marketing automation system. It only does exactly what you tell it to do and follows fixed paths to 
do it. It doesn’t deviate from that path or make recommendations on how to perform a task better next time. 
It also requires a huge amount of manual labor: you still have to build all the plans, create all the assets, and adjust all 
the rules as the machine does its work. The software only produces better outcomes when you yourself come up with a 
smarter way to do things.
Moving forward, the software you use tomorrow (or already use today) will look very different, because it will be powered 
by AI. This software can:
• Reason through strategic problems to solve goals at scale.
• Adapt assets and approaches to new data in real time.
• Recommend the best strategies and plans to pursue next based on performance.
In short, it’s smart. It can learn how to get smarter. And it can work hand-in-hand with you to help you get smarter, too.
This is the core difference between AI and everything else. 
Imagine you’re a pilot. Traditional software is the plane, going only where you tell it to and responding directly to your 
manipulation of the controls. AI, however, is a copilot, working with you and adapting autonomously to help you achieve 
your goals.
The term “artificial intelligence” is actually an umbrella term, one that we use to describe a collection of technologies that 
make machines smart in the way we just discussed. One of the most important of those technologies is machine learning. 
This is when we literally teach machines how to learn to achieve goals. Once we teach a machine how to achieve a goal 
using training data, it can then go accomplish that goal on new data. And it can learn to improve its performance over 
time. This ability to learn and improve gives many AI systems tremendous power when continually fed new data.8  |  AI for Agencies BlueprintAnother important AI technology to know is deep learning. Deep learning is a highly advanced subset of machine learning 
that gives machines the ability to read, write, speak, reason, and understand by mimicking how the human brain works.
Deep learning is a key piece of the story of AI and our current AI moment because it’s what powers the technology 
behind ChatGPT and other new tools—a category of AI called generative AI.
What Is Generative AI?
Generative AI is AI that can produce content on its own, including text, images, audio, code, 3D images, and more.  
As such, the technology unlocks powerful use cases for marketers and business leaders. Today, it can do things like:
• Writing. You can now use AI tools like Jasper to automatically write high-quality marketing and business content.
• Image generation. Generative AI tools like Midjourney can create images and art in any style based simply on a 
text prompt.
• Video generation. We now have the ability to generate videos in any style using generative AI creative suites  
like Runway.
• Audio generation. You can use generative AI to create realistic or artistic audio and voices. (Companies like 
ElevenLabs create realistic voice clones using the technology.)
• Code. Generative AI tools can also write code in specific programming languages. This allows programmers to 
work hand-in-hand with tools like GitHub Copilot to be more productive.
All of these generative AI capabilities are made possible by foundation models. These are models that are trained to 
understand and generate different kinds of content, like text, audio, and images. 
A popular type of foundation model you’ll hear about often are large language models (LLMs), which are foundation 
models specifically for language. They can understand and generate text. 
But LLMs aren’t the only type of foundation model. You’ll encounter foundation models trained on all different mediums, 
like video or audio. 
Some foundation models are also considered multimodal, which means they understand more than one type of input, such 
as text and images and audio. (For example, GPT-4, which powers ChatGPT, used to understand only text but has now been 
trained to understand images and audio, making it multimodal.)
Sometimes, you will use a foundational model to directly generate an output. For instance, you can directly engage with a 
foundation model like Claude from Anthropic to generate text. Other times, you’ll engage with a generative AI tool that taps 
into a foundation model (or more than one of them) to produce outputs.
Tools built on top of—or interacting with—foundation models serve a valuable function in the AI ecosystem. These tools 
often use versions of foundation models that have been customized to specific use cases, like creating marketing copy. 
So, instead of using a model that’s generically good at, say, generating text on many topics, you’re using a purpose-built 
AI tool that is expert at generating text for a specific domain.
Some enterprises are taking this one step further. Instead of using foundation models or tools built for specific domains, 
they’re custom-training models on their specific data. (In one example, financial services firm Bloomberg built a custom 
model trained only on their data, called BloombergGPT .)
Generative AI isn’t the only type of AI that will transform the agency world, but it is one of the fastest-growing and 
attention-getting categories of AI today.
Some enterprises are taking this one step further. Instead of using foundation models or tools built for specific domains, 
they’re custom-training models on their specific data.
(In one example, financial services firm Bloomberg built a custom model trained only on their data, called BloombergGPT.)
Generative AI isn’t the only type of AI that will transform the agency world, but it is one of the fastest-growing and 
attention-getting categories of AI today.Intro to Artificial Intelligence for Agencies9  |  AI for Agencies BlueprintThe Core Applications of AI
Whether you’re focused on generative AI or the wider AI landscape, one of the biggest challenges that agencies face is 
trying to understand how AI will practically affect their business. 
To get clarity here, it helps to grasp the three core ways that AI can be applied across thousands of 
possible marketing and business use cases. 
Once you start to understand these, you’ll begin seeing all sorts of ways to start applying AI in your own business.
1. Prediction. AI has the ability to make predictions about outcomes based on historical data. As a marketing 
agency, much of the work you do every day involves some type of prediction. You try to forecast everything from 
which headlines will appeal to blog readers, to how much staff capacity you have this month, to which strategies 
will impact client KPIs. AI excels at tasks that involve forecasting outcomes using data.  
2. Vision. AI has the ability to analyze, understand, and create images and videos, including footage being 
generated in real time (as in the case of self-driving cars). AI likely has applications to anything your agency does 
that includes any type of visual data, like visual creative, video production, or design work.  
3. Language. AI can understand and generate the written or spoken word, as well as formal technical lexicons like 
programming languages. AI has vast applications across many different types of language—including anything 
your agency does that involves words, which is probably quite a bit. That includes: writing copy, generating 
reports, and podcasting.
You might be starting to think to yourself: It sure seems like AI can do a lot of the things we do every day as an agency. 
And you’d be right. 
AI’s prediction, vision, and language capabilities, and its ability to learn and improve over time from data, have profound 
implications for nearly every aspect of agency operations today.Intro to Artificial Intelligence for Agencies10  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
How AI Will Disrupt Agencies
We’ll be blunt…
The present capabilities of AI—and the power that AI systems will quickly develop in the near future—necessitate a 
wholesale reinvention of the agency model at every level.
The reason why is threefold:
1. AI can already do many of the tasks that clients rely on agencies to do—and it’s rapidly improving. This will 
increasingly lead to pressure from clients and the market to justify the continued existence and employment of 
agencies. Every agency will be forced to answer the question: Why do we need you when AI can do it just as well 
for less money?  
2. AI enables employees to create significantly more output per hour. This will lead to pressure from clients and 
competitors to deliver significantly more for the same or less money. Every agency will be forced to answer the 
question: How do we preserve revenue and margins in the face of relentless downward pressure on billable hours 
and projects?  
3. AI gives everyone, even the less skilled, superpowers. This will lead to pressure from clients and agency 
professionals at every level of the organization to justify the economic value of historically highly valued skills, 
capabilities, and roles. Every agency will be forced to answer the question: What is this person’s role, why is it 
needed, and why does it justify a commensurate level of compensation?
These aren’t questions that can be answered in a single sentence or strategy session. And each of these 
considerations has huge potential impacts on billing, services, creativity, innovation, business development, 
operations, talent, and technology. 
 
Billing Models 
Put simply, your agency must use some form of value-based pricing moving forward to survive. 
As a practical example, let’s say you are charging $150/hour to create content. 
A 1,000-word blog post, from idea to fully-finished product, may take 7 hours (or $1,050). That same blog post written 
with the right process heavily assisted by AI can easily be planned, researched, written, edited, optimized, and published 
(with AI-generated images) in 1-3 hours—and retain the quality and relevance of a 100% human-generated article.
You can do the math on how that impacts your revenue. Billable hours are dead.11  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Services
Your services, no matter what they are, will change. 
Many of the services you offer no longer offer the competitive advantage they once did. In many cases, either AI can do 
them at an expert level or humans armed with AI can level the playing field by bringing expert capabilities to the table 
without deep pockets or decades of experience. 
How you evolve—and how quickly—will depend on your service mix and market. But, consider some questions to ask 
moving forward, no matter what you offer:
•  Can a service be done by machines? If so, why does our way of doing it (with or without machines) create or 
add value?
• How do machine capabilities impact the perceived and actual value of this service?
• What services are unlocked by machine intelligence that our clients cannot do themselves?
As you use AI tools, you’ll also have to structure your service agreements accordingly. Many agencies operate under 
“Work for Hire’’ agreements, which transfer copyright of materials to clients. In the United States, you cannot enforce 
copyright of AI-generated content per the U.S. Copyright Office. Your service contracts will need to change.
Creativity
Generative AI unlocks previously unimaginable creative possibilities in all forms of media. 
That doesn’t mean human creativity and skilled creative professionals have no place in your agency. It does mean that 
every creative role and process must be infused with AI tools unless you want to be at a significant disadvantage.
In order to preserve their economic value, creative agencies, and professionals will need to embrace AI—and show 
exactly why their creative output is worth paying top dollar for.
Innovation
With AI, the only limitation is your imagination. You will be forced to re-engineer what an agency is and does. That 
includes products and services. Anything is possible now.
If you own, lead, or work for a marketing agency, understanding and applying AI to every aspect of your organization 
must be an immediate and all-hands-on-deck priority now.
Anyone with an idea has the ability to marshall affordable, powerful AI systems to start or grow an agency that disrupts 
your business and your market with a fraction of the staff. You must innovate now to disrupt yourself before someone 
else does.
Marketing, Sales, and Business Development
The fundamentals of marketing and sales have changed. AI has made these disciplines more personalized, predictive, 
and performance-driven. 
This is good news for the agencies with the vision and will to evolve their internal business development efforts as 
aggressively as they do their client-facing services.
Any rep responsible in part or in full for securing new business or growing existing business now has tools at their disposal 
to leverage latent data from meetings, calls, discovery work, and proposals to make sales more effective and predictable.How AI Will Disrupt Agencies12  |  AI for Agencies BlueprintOperations
Every aspect of agency backend operations requires a rethink. Today, we have tools that can already streamline or 
automate entirely certain agency operations such as: proposal creation, contract generation and analysis, strategic 
planning, project management, financial projections and budgeting, and capacity management.
If you are not using AI to augment these tasks, you are leaving money on the table. In fact, capturing operational 
efficiencies with AI will be one of the first ways many agencies realize benefits from AI while evolving other core areas of 
their businesses.
Talent
Every staff member at every level of your organization must have adequate training that empowers them to understand 
and apply AI as it applies to their own role. 
That does not mean everyone in your organization must have a technical background in AI. Or that everyone you hire 
moving forward needs a Ph.D. in machine learning.
It means that every specialist, service provider, account services professional, and manager or leader has access to 
foundational knowledge and a practical roadmap for how to begin exploring AI’s ability to improve their productivity 
and performance.
Not every staff member needs to be able to speak authoritatively about AI tomorrow. But every single one needs to be 
armed with a professional development roadmap to fully leverage AI in their role over the next 6-12 months.
Technology
As a baseline, the expectation will be that every agency uses AI technology to drive performance and reduce costs for 
their clients. 
While service firms may not choose to evolve into formal AI consulting services, they will be expected to at least 
understand how to advise their clients on the basics of understanding, selecting, and adopting AI technology.
There also exists a significant opportunity for the agencies who decode the AI landscape first. These firms will be 
well-positioned to both leverage AI to accelerate their own success, as well as grow through the leading agency 
partner programs.
Obviously, these considerations can’t be solved—or resolved—in a day. Many forward-thinking agencies we work with 
form internal AI councils to begin tackling these in a systematic way.
But just because this is an involved process doesn’t mean you have to wait to use AI in your business today…
There are literally thousands of use cases and tools that you can start deploying to capture significant wins right now 
while building an agency of the future.How AI Will Disrupt Agencies13  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Top AI Use Cases for Agencies
In the short term, many agencies are best served by starting with quick-win AI pilot projects that have narrowly defined 
use cases and high probabilities of success.
To brainstorm those, it helps to ask four questions about what your agency does every day, either for clients or for your 
business—questions related to what AI is uniquely good at.
1.  Is it data-driven? 
AI is fueled by data. Any task that relies on data to produce an outcome (reporting, analysis, strategy, etc.) should be 
high on the list of possible use cases to explore for AI.  
 
The data you already have (CRM systems, email databases, ad platforms, etc.) can also be used in a variety of ways with 
AI to produce valuable outcomes. 
2.  Is it repetitive?
Is the task clearly defined, highly structured, and repeatable?  
 
Like traditional technology, AI is great at any task that generally follows the same set of steps to achieve an outcome.
3.  Is it making a prediction?
AI excels at making predictions from data. It can help you uncover patterns, unearth insights, and predict what will work 
best across many different types of marketing and business tasks. 
 
If you’re trying to make an educated guess about anything, then you have a solid use case for AI provided you have the 
right data.
4.  Is it generative?
Are you generating content, images, video, audio, or code? Then you definitely have a use case for AI.  
 
AI is already competent at generating many different types of content and is getting better by the day.
To give you even more ideas, we’ve broken down some of the top use cases today across major areas of marketing that 
agencies rely on to create value for clients and grow their businesses.14  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Advertising
Dramatically improve the creation, performance, and management of ad campaigns for clients or your firm.
AI can help you create better ads that get better results at scale. Today, you can use AI advertising tools to:
• Automatically and strategically allocate ad budgets.
• Automatically manage and adjust ad budgets and performance.
• Decode ad performance to determine what went right and wrong.
• Discover new audiences for client ad campaigns.
• Create ad copy, ad creative, and ad variations.
• Predict ad performance before launch.
• Scale creative across different platforms and formats.
Agency Operations
Streamline and automate core operational functions to save time and money.
There are countless operational and administrative tasks that AI can help you do better, faster, and cheaper.  
These include:
•  Analyze calls, emails, and meetings with potential or existing clients to identify opportunities, pain points,  
and issues.
• Automatically draft proposals, scopes of work, and contracts.
• Forecast capacity and hiring needs based on historical time tracking and capacity planning data.
• Forecast revenue and churn based on historical client services data.
• Role-play sales and client services scenarios with AI agents to improve outcomes.
• Scope service engagements based on historical time tracking and client services data.
•  Summarize hundreds of pages of documents during the proposal or discovery phases of engagements.
Content Marketing
Create and personalize content at scale for clients and for your own marketing efforts.
No matter what types of content you create or promote, AI can help you do it better. Using AI, your agency can:
• Analyze and decode content performance for clients.
• Automate and augment writing processes.
• Optimize content for SEO.
• Personalize content to different audiences.
• Recommend content based on behavior.
• Summarize industry/market research to create more insightful and informative content.
• Transcribe, edit, and produce podcasts and videos.Top AI Use Cases for Agencies15  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Email Marketing
Intelligently segment and send more successful email messages at scale.
Every brand sends emails, and every brand that sends emails should be using AI. That’s because most email marketing 
that’s done without AI functions on educated guesswork. What subject lines work best? What content will perform?  
Who should we send to, and when?
AI removes the head-scratching and creates high-impact email campaigns. With it, you can:
• A/B test thousands of email subject lines at scale.
• Create newsletters automatically.
• Generate email content.
• Optimize subject lines.
• Personalize email send times on a 1-to-1 basis.
• Personalize newsletter content on a 1-to-1 basis.
• Predict engagement levels.
Public Relations
Intelligently monitor and influence the tone, sentiment, and content of conversations about clients.
Remember how AI excels at creating beneficial outcomes with data? Well, the conversations happening online about 
your clients and in their industry constitute a whole lot of data. And AI can be used to significantly streamline and 
improve your PR work.
• Create and edit website copy, brand messaging, and digital collateral.
• Decode the effectiveness of PR programs and strategies.
• Generate ideas and formal documents for editorial, comms, and PR calendars automatically.
• Generate images and visuals for PR assets automatically.
• Identify compelling news angles from existing releases and internal information.
• Monitor and filter industry news based on importance, relevance, and virality.
• Monitor and manage brand sentiment online.
SEO
Improve search rankings and appear in more relevant results.
Search engines use AI to determine exactly which search results to show you for any given query at any given time.  
It only stands to reason you’d use AI to make sure you show up in the right place. 
Today, AI for SEO can:
• Automatically identify and address technical SEO factors.
• Create and optimize content for voice search.
• Identify core topics and keywords to cover in new content to rank.
• Identify key ranking factors needed to own search results across topics. 
• Optimize existing content to rank better.
• Quickly update and optimize local search results across locations.
• Perform keyword research and construct keyword databases. Top AI Use Cases for Agencies16  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Social Media Marketing
Drive more social engagement and reach at scale.
Social media platforms rely on AI to populate your feeds with content you’ll engage with. But AI is also used by brands 
to create that content and get consumers to engage with it more. By using AI social media tools, you can:
• Analyze and decode post performance. 
• Create posts automatically from existing content.
• Generate new copy from scratch.
• Moderate comments automatically.
• Monitor brand mentions and sentiment.
• Predict the viral potential of content.
• Suggest relevant hashtags and mentions.
This is just a sampling of AI use cases across a handful of areas that agencies work in. As you explore AI, you’ll discover 
hundreds of other ways the technology can make what you do easier, better, faster, and cheaper.
But what tools can help you actually do all these things?
Glad you asked…
Keep reading to discover some of the top AI tools out there to start exploring.Top AI Use Cases for Agencies17  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Top AI Tools for Agencies
Ready to try out AI for yourself? 
There are literally thousands of AI tools out there that can help you build and run a smarter agency. In this guide, we’ve 
included just a handful that we use ourselves or know other agencies have leveraged to succeed.
They’re by no means the only tools to investigate. But they should give you a headstart on your exploration of AI technology.
Jasper
Jasper is a leading AI content generation platform that creates on-brand content across every aspect of your  
marketing operations.
With Jasper, you can create every piece of content for each stage of every marketing campaign, end to end.  
That includes blog writing, SEO, copywriting for pages and ads, social media, and content strategy. 
You can even teach Jasper about your company’s specific voice, facts, audiences, and style guides to make sure each  
and every word sounds exactly like you. 
Jasper also empowers you to create images to accompany all that original, high-quality content.
Thanks to the performance and productivity that Jasper enables, customers using it have experienced:
• 80% reduced time on first drafts.
• 40% increase in content downloads.
• 3.5X ROI on using the tool to create better content.
Want to try Jasper for yourself? 
GET STARTED HERE18  |  AI for Agencies BlueprintAgorapulse
Agorapulse is a comprehensive social media management platform with AI features baked right in. Using Agorapulse’s 
AI-powered Writing Assistant, you can enhance your social media content, test different messaging and approaches, and 
drive more engagement using AI. That’s in addition to all of Agorapulse’s standard (and powerful) social media publishing, 
management, and monitoring features.
Celtra
Celtra is AI for creative automation. It uses AI to create hundreds of variations of visual creative (think: ads, social, etc.) for 
different platforms and in different styles, so you can scale up campaigns quickly. 
ChatGPT Plus
We know, we know…
You’ve heard all about ChatGPT . But we need to emphasize it one more time. That’s because, especially for agencies just 
getting started with AI, a $20 per month ChatGPT Plus account is one of the quickest, easiest, and most powerful ways 
to get started with AI across a range of use cases.
In addition to powerful text generation capabilities, ChatGPT Plus also now has a feature called Advanced Data Analysis, which 
performs expert analysis on your data, and a browser plugin that connects the tool to the internet. Most notably and most 
recently, ChatGPT Plus also now has the ability to understand images and respond to prompts based on those images.
Claude from Anthropic
Another quick-start tool worth exploring is Claude from Anthropic. Claude is similar to ChatGPT, except it has an extra-large 
“context window,” which means you can input a large amount of text into it for your prompts. You can give Claude literally 
hundreds of pages of text and have it analyze, summarize, or extract takeaways from them, in addition to all its other 
ChatGPT-like conversational features.
Databox
Databox is a business analytics platform that helps you track, visualize, and use the metrics you need to grow your business. 
As part of Databox’s reporting features, the platform uses generative AI features to actually summarize key reports and 
metrics, as well as provide recommendations based on your data.
HubSpot
HubSpot has long been a leader in the marketing automation and CRM space, and now a number of powerful generative 
AI features are baked right into HubSpot’s blogging and web design. You can also now leverage ChatSpot, HubSpot’s AI 
assistant to converse with and query your HubSpot data.
MarketMuse
MarketMuse uses AI to help you rank higher in search. You can use MarketMuse to identify which topics you should be 
writing about (using special search metrics personalized to your specific website), and then generate SEO briefs that tell 
you how to rank for those topics. (You can even spy on how the competition in search results is ranking for a topic.)
Pathmatics
Pathmatics from Sensor Tower uses AI to deliver you up-to-date ad intelligence. You can use the platform’s insights to 
see the spend, impressions, and creative being used by your competitors, and how they’re allocating budget, time, and 
content across different channels and platforms.
6sense
6sense is an AI-powered marketing and sales platform. Using 6sense’s AI, you can actually predict and identify the 
accounts that are in-market, then prioritize which ones matter most based on their propensity to buy. 6sense’s AI can also 
uncover third-party buying signals to predict when you should engage with these prospects.Top AI Tools for Agencies19  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Building a Next-Gen Agency: 
A Checklist
Building a next-generation agency isn’t something that happens overnight—or in a single book. Not to mention, no 
single person or firm has yet figured out the exact playbook for reinventing marketing agencies in the age of AI.
The best we can do at this point in time is bring together very smart people within our organizations to ask very smart 
questions about our businesses. 
To help you get started doing that, we’ve created this checklist of important (and not always easy to answer) questions 
that leaders within agencies need to ask about their businesses as they brainstorm and build for the future.
Strategy
  Rethinking Services
      What services do we offer today that are now obsolete or significantly devalued thanks to AI?
      What services do we offer (or could we offer) that humans do better than AI?
      What does AI or AI + human now make possible that we can offer to clients?
  Rethinking Workflows
      Have we documented all of our core workflows and processes in a consistent, systematic way? If not, how do we do that?
      What tasks within our organization should AI be doing exclusively? Which tasks should a human never touch again?
      Which existing human-first workflows can be accelerated or augmented with AI?
  Packaging and Selling AI Services
      Do we want to offer formal AI-powered services? If so, what does that look like?
      What technology partners should we make strong bets on within the AI ecosystem?
      Are we helping our clients build, buy, or get more value out of AI technology?
Talent
  Structuring Teams and Roles
      How do team and role structures change in light of new services, billing models, and workflows?
      Who owns AI understanding and adoption for each existing or new team?
      What roles are the most important to the growth of the agency moving forward?
  Hiring and Training
      What types of skills do we need to hire for moving forward?
      What skills are no longer valuable? Can we transition talent with these skills to other teams or roles?
      How do we get comprehensive internal AI training for all teams quickly? What does the curriculum look like?20  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint  Change Management and Culture
      Who should be on the agency’s internal AI Council to drive organizational change?
      How do we plan for the long-term impact AI will have on employees once it changes our work and what skills we value?
       What fears and concerns do we need to proactively message and address regarding how  
AI will impact jobs and livelihoods internally?
Technology
  New and Enhanced Capabilities from AI
      How sizable are the productivity and performance gains we can get from AI in year one of adoption?
      How do we navigate the gains in productivity and performance we expect to see from the technology?
       What capabilities of AI today do we need to be actively testing? Which near-future possibilities should we be 
keeping an eye on?
  Integrating AI Across Your Tech Stack
      What existing technology do we already have that uses robust AI or has it on their near-term product roadmap?
      What are our top, highest-value use cases for AI to buy technology for first?
       What security and privacy considerations do we need to think about using new AI tools with existing agency or 
client data?
  Communicating AI to Clients and Stakeholders
      Do we have generative AI and responsible AI policies created? If so, are they public? If not, who will create them?
       What will we say to clients about our use of AI, scenarios in which we will and won’t use it, and how AI usage 
impacts their engagements with us?
      How will we message our AI usage to address concerns about job loss, security, ethics, and privacy?Building a Next-Gen Agency: A Checklist21  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
Choosing an AI Partner Program
As you build a next-gen agency, you’ll quickly find the need to choose partners to accelerate your transformation and 
growth using AI. 
In the early days of Marketing AI Institute, founder and CEO Paul Roetzer also owned PR 20/20, a digital marketing 
agency. PR 20/20 was HubSpot’s first-ever agency partner and Paul, like many other agency owners, bet his business on 
the fact that HubSpot’s growth and ecosystem could drive explosive success for him and his clients. 
He was right. But it’s not possible to run the same playbook with AI, he says. The sheer velocity of AI innovation and 
disruption makes it impossible to predictably bet on a single AI partner or partner program as agencies did during the 
marketing automation revolution.
Instead, agencies will likely find themselves placing several bets across different vendors as they look to build services 
around leading technologies and to partner with vendors for lasting growth. 
It’s still very early days for AI partner programs. Even leading companies in the space are often only a few years old, and 
don’t always have formal programs fully built or implemented. 
That shouldn’t discourage you from seeking out AI partner programs. But it does mean you’ll have to do your homework.
What to Look For in a Partner
Here are some key considerations when your agency looks for one or more AI partners:
1. How long have they been around? The world of AI moves at lightspeed. You can’t expect major players to have 
been in business for decades. But you do want to prioritize partners who have established business models and 
clear track records of success with customers.  
2. How much funding do they have? Most of the companies you consider will be venture-funded technology 
companies unless they’re already established tech giants. So, their level of funding matters. It’s a good proxy for 
how stable they are in the short term and how much confidence the market has in their technology. You don’t want 
to build around someone who’s about to run out of runway.  
3. Who are their customers? Social proof is always helpful to validate any possible partner, AI vendor, or otherwise. 
In AI, it helps if vendors have been validated by major tech players in the space like Google, Microsoft, Meta, 
Nvidia, or Amazon, by the companies building foundation models and technologies like OpenAI, Cohere, or 
Anthropic, or by established marketing and sales platforms like HubSpot and Salesforce.  
4. What are their public policies or positions on AI? How companies approach AI matters. Look to a possible 
partner’s public statements (and actions) on AI safety, security, and privacy for clues as to how much the company 
prizes responsible AI development and usage. (Hint: They should at least have a public position.)  
5. Could you see yourself using their technology? It’s important to actually understand what use cases a vendor’s 
technology enables, and it’s helpful if you actually understand those use cases as they apply to your own business. It’s 
easy to fall prey to overhyped or unready technology. Whenever possible, stick to your circle of competence and prioritize 
solutions you can easily vet yourself.  22  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint6. Do they have a partner program or a background working with agencies? It helps if founders or leaders at 
vendors have worked with other agencies (in past jobs or through a current partner program) or have previous 
experience at software companies with agency partner programs. As mentioned, there may not be a formal partner 
program in place, but they may still be able to advise or work with you on building around their technology. 
7. Do they offer coaching, education, or onboarding for agency partners? The top AI agency partners today 
are building out robust partner programs that heavily support the agencies adopting and selling their software. 
There’s a reason why. AI is not like other software. A huge amount of education is needed to get maximum value 
out of these tools—and navigate the change management that comes with what these tools enable. Prioritize 
vendors that give due weight to education and are investing in it. 
 
Example of an AI Agency Partner Program
In closing, we want to provide one example of an agency partner program to give you a sense of what’s possible and 
what to look for as you reinvent your agency.
Jasper, a leading AI content generation platform, has built a next-generation AI Solutions Partner Program. This is a 
partner program designed for agencies, and it’s an illustrative example of how agencies and client needs will evolve—
and how leading partner programs will cater to these evolving needs. 
Within content marketing, Jasper sees marketing agencies taking two possible pathways moving forward in the age of 
generative AI, neither of which is mutually exclusive:
1. Generative AI content creation agency services. These agencies own content creation for their clients and use 
AI to deliver superior content products to clients at speed, quality, and scale using an output-based pricing model.  
2. Generative AI content coaching agency services. These agencies implement AI tools for clients and onboard 
their teams, then coach clients to create superior content outcomes (both in terms of strategy and output) 
themselves on a time-based pricing model.
Jasper’s partner program is designed with different pathways to cater to each segment of the market. 
Content creation agencies can secure Jasper licenses at a discount for their agency team and any client stakeholders 
who may need access to the platform to vet outputs. Agencies can then leverage the productivity gains provided by 
Jasper to sell more engagements priced by output.
Content coaching agencies can bundle Jasper licenses for their clients, creating a win-win scenario where Jasper creates 
superior efficiencies and performance gains for clients, while agencies create significant revenue by coaching clients through 
the changes AI is causing in the world of content marketing.
Generative AI content creation and coaching services are the structural offerings that agencies will need to reimagine in 
the age of generative AI. However, there are also plenty of existing and future service offerings that can be paired with 
generative AI services, such as:
•  AI Education and Training Workshops. There is growing demand for training that can help your clients 
understand AI and build capabilities to use it in their organizations. 
•  AI Change Management. Consulting services can be paired with generative AI to help clients navigate the 
changes in mindsets, skillsets, and workflows that are required when using these tools.
•  Brand Strategy and Style Guide Creation. There will be a growing need for clients to have consistent and 
aligned brand strategies and style guides to power generative AI technologies. 
•  AI Model Training and Optimization. As companies adopt generative AI, they will need experts to train and 
optimize models to better understand a company’s unique voice, tone, and brand. 
•  Technical Integration Services. Even with the right generative AI tools, clients can often benefit from expert guidance 
on how to get the most out of this technology and integrate it with the existing systems they already have.
Ultimately, it’s up to you to determine the right mix of services for your clients and your agency. But Jasper’s AI Solutions 
Partner Program is designed to help you get there. Click here to learn more.  Choosing an AI Partner Program23  |  AI for Agencies Blueprint
24  |  AI for Agencies BlueprintAbout Marketing AI Institute
Marketing AI Institute is a media, event, and education company founded in 2016 that makes AI 
approachable and actionable for marketers and business leaders. The Institute owns and operates 
the Marketing Artificial Intelligence Conference (MAICON), AI for Writers Summit, AI for Agencies 
Summit, and AI for B2B Marketers Summit; hosts The Marketing AI Show podcast; runs the AI 
Academy for Marketers featuring dozens of on-demand courses; and published Marketing Artificial 
Intelligence: AI, Marketing, and the Future of Business (Matt Holt Books, 2022).  
 
Learn more at www.marketingaiinstitute.com. 
About Jasper
Founded in 2021, Jasper is an AI copilot for marketing teams that want better outcomes in addition 
to faster outputs. Jasper securely trains on your brand and strategy, accelerates project management 
and content production, and helps marketers measure and optimize for performance all as part of 
an end-to-end copilot. Jasper has been recognized as “one of America’s fastest-growing private 
companies” by Inc. 5000 and was one of the fastest companies to reach 100M+ users. Customers 
include Sports Illustrated, Anthropologie, SentinelONE, Transcend.io and more.  
 
Learn more at www.jasper.ai.