AI for Financial Services 
Marketing Blueprint
Sponsored By
© 2023, Marketing AI Institute, All Rights Reserved.
Published July 20232  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint3  Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for Financial Services Marketing and Sales 
 How to Ensure Compliance When Using AI Tools  3
4  What Is AI, Really?  
 3 Core AI Applications  5
6  How to Determine the Right AI Use Case for Your Firm 
 Content   6 
 Regulation and Brand Compliance  6 
 Social Media  7
 Client Prospecting  7
8  Top Marketing AI Tools for Financial Services 
11  Why the Future of Your Firm’s Marketing Depends on AI
 About Marketing AI Institute  11
 About Drift  11
 Table of Contents3  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
Financial services firms offer some of the most sophisticated products and services on the market. They 
service wildly diverse customers and offer drastically varying solutions to differing problems. Yet most 
of these firms’ prospective clients are asking the same question:
Why can’t I buy the way I want to?
That is, on their terms. By self-educating and talking when they’re ready—which doesn’t necessarily 
mean always picking up the phone to have a chat with a lender. They want easy-to-navigate resources 
that get them the answers to their questions quickly and simply, without roping them into a rigid sales 
process that they’re not ready for. 
Getting clients what they need, when they need it, in their preferred format demands more digitization, 
personalization, speed, and ease of use from firms’ online presence and processes. 
And the numbers back it up. BCG reports that for every $100 billion in assets a bank has, it can achieve 
as much as $300 million in revenue growth by personalizing its customer interactions. 
The financial services market as a whole is expected to grow to $33.36 trillion by 2026. Prospective 
clients have ever-heightening expectations for the buying experience. So it should come as no surprise 
that digital transformation in terms of artificial intelligence (AI), automation, and simplification of 
compliance-related processes is table stakes.
For the volume of tedious work required to make one-to-one personalization a reality, AI is the only 
way to achieve it at scale. 
The good news is that you don’t need a degree in data science or machine learning to take advantage 
of all that AI has to offer, and you don’t need to put your compliance regulations at risk, either. You just 
need to understand:
•  What AI is and what it is capable of doing.
•  What AI use cases are available for financial services marketing, and how to find the use 
cases that make sense for your firm. 
•  Which specific AI tools can create real business outcomes for you.
Keep reading to learn all that AI can safely do for your firm. 
Why Artificial Intelligence Is a  
Must for Financial Services  
Marketing and Sales
When leveraging AI for marketing, 
it’s important to remain compliant 
with FINRA, SOC2, Privacy Shield 
Certification, SSO, Cloud Security 
Alliance, Reg BI, PCI, GDPR, and other 
similar regulations. 
You likely already vet everything in your 
tech stack for compliance, and AI should 
be no different. Consider asking your AI 
vendors the following questions before 
you start sharing data with them:•  What are your compliance 
certifications?
•  What are the specific requirements that 
you attest to being non-compliant with, 
if any?
•  How are transcribed customer 
conversations and interactions stored 
and archived?
•  How do you guarantee secure logins 
and role-based access controls for 
members of my team?
 •  Do you have a dedicated security team 
internally who keeps your systems up 
to date?
•  Where does my company’s data live 
once I integrate it with this tool?
•  Do you have internal security training 
programs required of your team to 
maintain compliance?How to Ensure Compliance When Using AI Tools4  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing BlueprintMany firms shudder at the thought of an automated semi-sentient robot trampling compliance law and 
regulations in the name of better marketing. And they should. When implemented haphazardly, AI can 
be a risk to privacy and security. Fortunately, that’s not what we’re talking about here when we say “AI.”
Artificial intelligence is a category of technology, not a single tool. It represents a broad suite of tools 
that leverage smart machines in different ways.
What does it mean for a machine to be smart? 
It means that AI uses machine learning to determine its own pathways toward achieving an overall goal 
(e.g. drive more sales). Machine learning requires human influence. 
First, humans train the machine by showing it data and teaching it to recognize patterns in that data. 
Using those patterns, the machine learns how to achieve the goals programmed into it. After a certain 
period of time, the machine starts to recognize those patterns, achieve its goals without human 
influence, and even iterate on its performance based on feedback.
To illustrate what we mean, let’s compare how AI software would handle online support cases 
compared to the traditional software you may use today. 
Imagine you want to start offering an option for your prospects and customers to get their questions 
answered online versus only over the phone. You’d probably take the following steps: 
1. Manually create a Contact Us web page and form on your website where site visitors can 
submit their requests.
2. Wait for the questions to come in, and then manually route those inquiries to the 
appropriate person on your team who will follow up in an email. 
3. Maybe you add a live chat function to your website and staff your team with live support 
agents. Your agents then manually answer each question as they come in.
There are probably a number of tools in your tech stack that would help you with this process, but it’s 
still not very sophisticated. Every step of the way, you have to have a human at their computer giving 
the software instructions on what to do. It’s tedious, and it’s inefficient.
What if you added AI to your tech stack?
AI-powered marketing technology would:
1. Instantly recognize how a person landed on your site as well as their previous interactions 
with your firm to send a personalized greeting.
2. Gather initial information about the individual and their question, and ask for follow up 
details as relevant. 
3. Pre-populate known information, such as email addresses, from your contact management 
system into questions and responses.
4. Automatically answer simple support questions.
5. Route the individual to the most appropriate relationship manager along with the context 
of the inquiry for more complex questions.
6. Schedule meetings for relationship managers if they are unable to chat live.  
What Is AI, Really?  5  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
And the best part? AI learns with every interaction it has on your site, so it gets better over time. 
Whenever a chat conversation is successfully completed, the machine remembers what worked well. It applies these 
learnings to the next campaign and incrementally improves the playbook instantly and at scale. Or take another 
example: If the same question continues to come up, AI suggests topics so that you can build immediate responses 
around what customers care about most and alleviate reps from redundant questions. What Is AI, Really?  
Machine learning isn’t the only term you’ll 
hear in discussions of AI. You’ve probably 
read or heard people using terms like:
 
Deep learning: A subset of machine 
learning that recognizes and brings 
together complex patterns in pictures, 
text, sound, and other data by 
mimicking how the human brain works.  
Reinforcement learning: A type 
of machine learning model that 
uses environmental signals (such 
as rewarding a machine for certain 
outcomes) to optimize toward a long-
term goal. 
Neural networks: A collection of 
interconnected artificial neurons that 
power deep learning. 
Topic modeling: When AI identifies 
how words relate to each other and 
group with each other, enabling all 
sorts of capabilities like generating 
language and identifying recurring 
themes in content.
Robotics: Robotics combines image 
recognition, facial recognition, and 
computer vision to power a physical 
machine. It is not AI, but rather 
powered by AI. 
 
There’s a lot of AI jargon out there, but for 
the sake of financial services marketing, 
there are only three AI applications you 
really need to pay attention to: Language, 
Vision, and Prediction. 
 Language AI—The ability for machines 
to understand and generate written and 
spoken words. 
Language AI technologies and terms you 
may encounter include:
 
• Natural language generation
• Voice recognition
• Natural language processing
• Text analysis and summarization
• Sentiment analysis
 
An example of Language AI is Gmail’s 
Smart Compose feature. You type 
an email, and Gmail predicts how to 
complete your next sentence.
In financial services, Language AI can be 
used to write and edit any type of copy—
from emails and blog posts to landing 
pages and social media posts.
Vision AI—The ability for machines 
to analyze and understand data 
from still images and videos. Vision 
AI technologies and terms you may 
encounter include:
 
• Object recognition
• Emotion generation
• Image generation
• Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
• Video generation
 
An example of Vision AI is the facial 
recognition feature on iPhones. Vision AI 
determines if the face it is seeing is the 
owner of the phone’s and, if it is, grants 
them access to the device.In financial services, Vision AI can create 
compelling, original images to be used 
on your website and on social media.
 
Prediction AI—The ability for machines 
to predict future outcomes based on 
historical data. The better the data 
that goes in (the inputs), the better the 
predictions that come out (the outputs). 
Prediction AI you may already be familiar 
with include:
 
• Personalization
• Pattern recognition
• Forecasting
• Recommendation
 
An example of Prediction AI is credit 
card fraud alerts. The AI is trained on 
your historical data, and, based on your 
buying history, can predict fraudulent 
transactions. It then automatically notifies 
you of those data anomalies.
In financial services, Prediction AI can 
help personalize your brand experience 
for every audience member, at scale—
and make changes in real-time based on 
mountains of data.3 Core AI Applications6  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
Between Language AI, Vision AI, and Prediction AI use cases, it’s easy to wonder where to even begin. 
We recommend starting your AI journey by taking a holistic view of your marketing programs and 
asking yourself three main questions.
For each task, consider:
 
Is it data-driven? Are you using data to do the task? Alternatively, do you have data you should 
be using to do the task, but you’re not? Consider anytime you analyze customer demographics, 
transaction history, browsing behavior and other data points. 
 
Is it repetitive? Do you do the same thing over and over again to accomplish the task? Is there a list 
of defined steps that you follow to get the task done? Weekly or monthly reporting on your financial 
product sales could fall into this category.
 
Is it making a prediction? Are you trying to forecast an outcome or behavior? As examples, are 
you trying to predict what promotion a prospective client may respond to best? Or perhaps the best 
product price point to maximize sales? 
 
You don’t have to answer “yes” to all three questions in order to have an AI use case, but these 
questions are a great framework for creating your AI roadmap and prioritizing where to focus first to 
see the most impact from AI. Let’s take a closer look at what your use case could be:
Content
 
•  Automatically outline, generate, and summarize long-form content assets, like ebooks and 
reports, to explain complex financial topics to audiences.
•  Generate outlines, scripts, and transcripts for hosted webinars or partner webinars. 
•  Intelligently segment prospects to personalize content and messaging to a user’s specific 
financial data or goals.
•  Segment prospects based on website source and/or past site engagement, and then 
personalize content based on that activity. 
•  Automatically generate content ideas, story angles, and editorial calendars across various 
product lines and services.  
Regulation and Brand Compliance
•  Standardize messaging to be inclusive and compliant across all content assets.
•  Train your chatbot to speak only in the approved brand voice, to share specific resources, 
and to pass conversations over to a human when certain security topics are mentioned.
•  Simplify complicated compliance regulation paperwork for internal team members with 
comprehensive summaries. 
How to Determine the Right  
AI Use Case for Your Firm7  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
Social Media
•  Generate eye-catching, conversion-focused visuals based on a text description. 
•  Create social posts based on long-form content created by your human teams.
•  Find the ideal days and times to post on social media for optimal engagement. 
•  Cater your posts to the various audiences that make up your ideal prospects and clients. 
Client Prospecting
•  Automatically categorize sales conversations to recommend the right financial product or offering at the 
right time to customers. 
•  Personalize one-to-one offers at scale.
•  Identify and target new audience categories for your firm’s solutions.
•  Provide product pricing recommendations by assessing complex data. How to Determine the Right AI Use Case8  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing BlueprintIf you’ve asked yourself those three questions around data, repetition, and prediction and decided it’s 
time for your firm to try AI, check out these AI tools that were built with financial services in mind.
 
Drift leverages client insights to help financial services organizations start the right conversation, with 
the right person, at the right time.
Drift’s Conversation Cloud includes secure, real-time communication tools and predictive insights that 
empowers sales and marketing teams to provide personalized financial advice that converts self-service 
browsing into assets under management opportunities and satisfied clients.
With Drift, you can: 
•  Respond 24/7 through an online concierge: Securely answer questions, 
surface resources, and engage with prospects and customers anywhere in 
the world.
•  Book secure online meetings with relationship managers: Clients can 
automatically book time with their relationship manager directly in a bot 
conversation.
•  Advise clients on new product investments: Use client insights to 
proactively engage with your top clients, make recommendations, or 
answer questions about an investment they are exploring.
•  Deploy live chat: Let clients start real-time conversations with you via 
chat—and seamlessly transition that chat into a secure video or phone call.
•  Convert more site traffic: Provide relevant gated content or invitations to 
live and virtual events.
Drift was tailor-made for regulated industries like yours. Some of the benefits 
include: 
•  Compliance with SOC2, GDPR, Privacy Shield Certification, SSO, Cloud 
Security Alliance, PCI, and FINRA.
•  Secured archiving of documents and communications for legal, regulatory, or auditing 
purposes. 
•  Open API and integrations with platforms such as Dynamics, Salesforce, Microsoft Teams, 
Google Meet, Zoom, and Outlook 365. 
Top Marketing AI Tools  
for Financial Services
Sound good to you?
START HERE9  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
Top Marketing AI Tools for Financial Services
 
AiAdvertising is a cloud-based Artificial Intelligence-as-a-Service (AIaaS) advertising platform that 
allows marketers to easily plan, predict and execute hyper-personalized advertising campaigns with full 
transparency, while gaining the intelligence they need to prove advertising’s impact on the bottom line. 
This means powerful, high-impact ads that convert. 
Demandbase is a go-to-market platform built around Account Intelligence, which combines your sales 
and marketing data with its validated external B2B data to help you find and engage with the accounts 
most likely to buy from you. It uses AI to make sense of everything, and then it helps you put it into 
action with Demandbase One™.
The result? Your team can spot opportunities faster and better understand where to focus their time 
and money. 
 
Eloqua is an intelligent marketing automation sector of Oracle. With its numerous AI-powered 
functions like email fatigue analysis, send time optimization, subject line optimization, predictive lead 
scoring, and account engagement scores, Eloqua helps you create a smart and personalized email 
strategy that cuts through inbox clutter.
 
MarketMuse is an AI platform that identifies your top content opportunities. The platform uses AI to 
tell you which topics to target and how to rank for them, and it even generates content briefs for those 
suggested topics. Plus, it can show you what other pieces of content are on Page 1 of SERPs missed, 
so you can beat out your competitors.
 
Microsoft 365 Copilot combines your own Microsoft data with its large language models to extend 
your firm’s capabilities in any Microsoft program—Word, Excel, Outlook, Teams, and otherwise. For 
example, you can leverage Copilot in Word to automatically generate a first draft of a blog. You can 
use Copilot in Excel to help you visualize your data faster. You can leverage Copilot in Teams for 
meeting summaries and suggested next steps.  10  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
Top Marketing AI Tools for Financial Services
 
The Persado platform combines natural language generation, machine learning, and experimental 
design to tailor marketing messaging to be in a language and tone that it knows will motivate 
individual users the most—turning words into growth levers for your business.
Salesforce Einstein—a layer of intelligence within the Lightning Platform—allows admins and 
developers to use the rich set of platform services to build customized, AI-powered apps. 
Tableau is a visual analytics platform that helps people see and understand data to solve problems. 
Tableau GPT, powered by Einstein (Salesforce’s AI) allows you to create stunning and informative data 
visualizations with just a simple prompt. 
Tableau Pulse—an AI-powered insights generator—lives within your team’s Tableau view and offers 
personalized summarizations of your data. This means everyone on your team gets their own summary 
of changes in data in real time, so your relationship managers never miss a spike in product interest 
and your marketing team never misses a beat on trends in website traffic. 
 
Writer is an AI writing platform built for teams. Unlike other GPT-powered applications, Writer is trained 
on your data—your best-performing blog posts, landing pages, social media posts, as well as your 
brand style guide so that you never have to worry about a runaway algorithm getting you in hot water 
with your compliance team. 
6sense uses AI to capture “intent signals,” or indicators that identify people who are likely to take a 
desired action, to help businesses improve their communication efficiency and productivity.11  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing BlueprintAI has the power to simplify the complex process of making the financial services industry more buyer-
friendly. It can help your firm provide one-to-one personalization in your marketing—which, in turn, has 
a ripple-down effect on revenue. 
In its report “The Future of Banking – The Hyper-Personalisation Imperative,” Deloitte states that client 
experience is predicted to overtake price and product as a firm’s brand differentiator. And BCG reports 
that personalization can lead to annual revenue uplifts of 10% for banks.
And if you think you have more time, you’re wrong. Industries everywhere, but especially financial 
services, are adopting and even doubling down on AI faster than you think. In fact, financial services 
has witnessed the largest growth in AI usage across all industries, and is the fastest-growing vertical 
adopting online chat. 
It’s time to get to work. 
About Marketing AI Institute
 
Marketing AI Institute is a media, event, and education company founded in 2016 that makes AI 
approachable and actionable for marketers and business leaders.
 
The Institute owns and operates the Marketing Artificial Intelligence Conference (MAICON), AI for 
Writers Summit and AI for Agencies Summit; hosts The Marketing AI Show podcast; runs the AI 
Academy for Marketers featuring dozens of on-demand courses; and published Marketing Artificial 
Intelligence: AI, Marketing, and the Future of Business (Matt Holt Books, 2022).
 
Learn more at www.marketingaiinstitute.com.
 
About Drift
 
Drift, the Conversation Cloud company, helps firms connect with people at the right time, in the right 
place with the right conversation. 
Using the Drift Conversation Cloud, firms can personalize experiences that lead to more quality 
pipeline, deposits, and lifelong clients. Drift brings Conversational Marketing, Conversational Sales 
and Conversational Service into a single platform that integrates chat, email and video and powers 
personalized experiences with AI at all stages of the buying journey. 
Financial services customers have seen a 28% increase in web conversion rates and an additional 2,500 
qualified leads added to their web channel annually since implementing Drift. 
More than 5,000 customers use Drift to deliver a more enjoyable and more human buying experience 
that builds trust and accelerates assets under management. Financial services firms reaping benefits with 
Drift include State Street Global Advisors, Cetera, Fairway, Hines, North American Bancard, and Apex. 
Representing less than 1% of unicorns led by Latino founders, Drift is building an equitable, enduring 
company to transform the way people buy online.
 
For more information, visit www.drift.com and follow @drift.
Why the Future of Your Firm’s  
Marketing Depends on AI12  |  AI for Financial Services Marketing Blueprint
