The New Multichannel, Integrated
Marketing: 29 Trends for Creating a
Multichannel, Integrated Campaign to
Boost Your Profits Now
Craig A. Huey
Media SpecialistsForeword
Over the past few years, there have been multiple major trends in
marketing that have made it possible for businesses to grow faster than
ever.
One 
of 
the most exciting new 
trends 
that’s impacting every business
in America is the trend of multichannel, integrated
 
marketing.
Never before have such powerful channels of marketing been
available in such a focused, targeted and comprehensive way.
Multichannel integrated marketing is accountable, scientific and
measurable 
– and the results 
are 
phenomenal.
Since it’s such a new form of marketing, we wanted to put together as
comprehensive of a directory and road-map to success as we could.
                   
                        Feel free to contact me if you have any questions
                            – (310) 212-5727.
Craig Huey, President
Creative Direct Marketing Group, Inc.
Nobody knows direct response and digital marketing
better.The New Multichannel, Integrated Marketing: 29 Trends for Creating a Multichannel,
Integrated Campaign to Boost Your Profits Now
Copyright © 2019 by Craig Huey
All rights reserved
Media Specialists, 21171 S. Western Ave., Suite 260 Torrance, CA 90501, USA
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any other information
storage and retrieval system, without written permission from the author.To my 
smart 
and beautiful wife Shelly, whose insights keep me on track. She has been my gift from
God, best friend, cheerleader and prayer warrior.
To my clients, who have trusted me with their marketing, advertising, growth and expansion. I am
honored and eternally grateful to them.
A special thanks to members of my team for making this book become a reality.
Caleb Huey; 
an 
expert 
of 
the 
benefits 
of 
multichannel 
marketing 
who has 
joined 
me 
in 
panels,
seminars, webinars, speeches and in private meetings. What Caleb brings to the table is 
true
transformational wisdom that launches successful campaigns.
Kelsey Yarnell; an avid copywriter who has done the research and clarified and crafted a complex
issue into readable, 
dynamic 
content. Without 
her skills and wisdom, this book would not have
happened.
Kent Barry; an editor whose wisdom and insights make everything more understandable.
Finally, I thank God for directing my path, not just for my career but for my entire life. It is in Him
whom I place my trust. (Proverbs 3:5,6) I can do all this through Him who gives me strength.
(Philippians 4:13)PART ONE
Table of Contents
Introduction: Introduction to Multichannel, Integrated Marketing
PART ONE
Chapter 1: The New Multichannel, Integrated Marketing and Advertising
Chapter 2: Custom List Targeting Domination: Reaching Your “Perfect
Prospects” and Increasing Response and Sales
Chapter 3: How to Supercharge Your Marketing with Look-alike Audiences
PART TWO
Introduction: Multichannel, Integrated Opportunities
Chapter 4: Facebook Advertising: Surprising New Integrated Strategies and
Tactics on The World’s Most Popular Social Media Platform
Chapter 5: The Facebook Messaging Revolution
Chapter 6: Banner Ads and Native Ads: Your Keys to Effective Lead-
Generation or Sales
Chapter 7: Retargeting to Dramatically Boost Response
Chapter 8: Email Strategy Now: The Rules of Email are Changing
Chapter 9: The Amazon Revolution: Nine Powerful Insights and Strategies
for This Transformational Marketing Platform
Chapter 10: Instagram: Your Social Media “Power Tool” for Boosting
Response to Your Multichannel, Integrated Marketing Campaign
Chapter 11: Pre-Roll Ads: The “Commercial Before the Video”Chapter 12: Infomercials: Overlooked, But Still Powerful Strategy
Chapter 13: Mobile Marketing Breakthrough
PART THREE
Introduction: Little-Known Secrets to Using Direct Mail For Multichannel,
Integrated Marketing
Chapter 14: Direct Mail Resurgence: Your “Secret Weapon” for Getting an
Exceptionally High, Profit-Boosting Response
Chapter 15: Traditional Envelope Direct Mail – Little-Known Strategy for
Skyrocketing Profits
Chapter 16: Magalogs: Infomercials in Print
Chapter 17: Unique Direct Mail Formats to Generate Leads and Sales: The
Newsalog, Bookalog, Tabalog, Videolog and 3-D Package
Chapter 18: Informed Delivery: The “Pre-Mail” Alert
PART FOUR
Introduction: Multichannel, Integrated Creative Essentials to
Maximizing Response
Chapter 19: Writing Copy That Sells: 50 Rules for Creating Effective, Sales-
Boosting Copy
Chapter 20: How to Identify Your Unique Selling Proposition
Chapter 21: How to Create an Irresistible Offer
Chapter 22: The Power of Value-Added Marketing
Chapter 23: The New CredibilityPART FIVE
Introduction: Multichannel, Integrated Strategies and Tactics to
Boost Response
Chapter 24: Your Landing Page: The Foundation of Your Multichannel,
Integrated Marketing Campaign – 12 Critical Rules
Chapter 25: New Breakthroughs in Shopping Cart Abandonment
Chapter 26: The Key Question: Your Spokesperson
Chapter 27: Video: A Critical, Powerful Key to Your Multichannel,
Integrated Marketing Campaign – 21 Critical Rules
Chapter 28: Testing to Maximize Results
Chapter 29: Addressable TV
Now What?PART ONE
Introduction to Multichannel, Integrated Marketing
In 
Chapters 
1–3, you’ll 
get 
an 
overview 
of 
multichannel, integrated
marketing … and discover why this revolutionary approach to marketing
could transform your
 
business.
You’ll also learn how to use high-level strategies to target your “perfect
prospects” … and get maximum
 
response to your multichannel, integrated
marketing.CHAPTER 1
The New Multichannel, Integrated Marketing
and Advertising
Entrepreneurs and company presidents are often confused …
even overwhelmed … with choosing the most cost-effective and
powerful ways to:
✓
 Generate leads and convert them to sales
✓
 Bring in new customers faster and more efficiently
✓
 Dominate their market with an exciting product or
 
service
✓
 Successfully launch a new product or reposition an existing
one
Marketing and advertising directors can’t afford to make
mistakes. They don’t have budgets to waste, and must see great
results – now.
I wrote this book for both Presidents and Marketing Directors …
to clarify a path to success for marketing strategies and tactics.
The noise, confusion and overwhelming clutter – ignore them.
The new trend to increase response and achieve greater market
response is intelligent, accountable 
and
 
scientific advertising:
multichannel, integrated marketing and
 
advertising.
As a business owner or marketing director, you hear a lot of
different advice on how to best market your product or service.
  You have learned that social media marketing is a great route – it’s fast,
low-cost and relevant. You might have been told that email marketing is your
best option for reaching your ideal audience and getting a high response.
You have also heard about direct mail – an “old school”approach to marketing that gets an excellent response.
Ultimately, you want to implement the best marketing approach
– the strategy that will generate a high response at the lowest cost-
per-lead and cost-per-sale.
You want to use the approach that will get you the highest profits
… and fastest growth.
For more than 40 years, I’ve helped businesses achieve rapid
growth with marketing and advertising.
I’ve seen skyrocketing
 
profits.
I’ve seen ideas and dreams become reality.
I’ve seen small companies explode into multimillion- dollar
companies and large companies grow even bigger.
And, I have learned that the best marketing approach is none of
the options listed on the previous page.
It’s “all of the above.”
This is the very best way to:
•
     
Launch a product or
 
service…
•
     
Grow an existing
 
brand…
•
     
Reposition 
an 
existing mature product 
or 
service…
•
     
And to dominate your market. Let me
explain:
Your best marketing approach is called “multichannel, integrated
marketing.”
This approach implements all of the strategies listed above – and
more – to significantly boost your response rate … and supercharge
your
 
profits.
It’s marketing and advertising on steroids. It will revolutionize
your marketing
 
results.
Multichannel, integrated marketing is changing the way
businesses such as yours reach new
 
prospects… upsell and cross-sell more effectively … get higher response …. and earn massive
profits.
Multichannel,  integrated
 
marketing:
✓
 Combines marketing across all channels – digital, direct mail,
social media and more – to generate new leads, conversions
and sales
✓
 Deploys all materials to the same names, boosting response
from prospects, leads and 
current 
customers
✓
 Drives potential customers back to the same landing page,
with the same powerful offer throughout all materials
✓
 Uses advanced data modeling and other high- level targeting
strategies to reach your “perfect prospects”
✓
 Gives potential customers the impression and credibility that
you have a widespread presence and high budget
And, it’s accountable and scientific: You always measure what
works and what does not … you know your cost-per-lead and your
cost-per-sale.
In the following guide, you’ll learn about each aspect of
multichannel, integrated marketing … and how you can use this
new marketing approach to revolutionize your business.It’s Been Proven:
Multichannel, Integrated
Marketing Gets the
Highest Response
Businesses that use multichannel, integrated marketing report more
success and satisfaction with their marketing results than businesses that use
a non-integrated, digital- only or single-channel approach.
Though 
a 
multichannel, integrated marketing 
campaign may require
more work upfront, it generates more leads and more customers over the long
run.
In fact, statistics show that marketers at companies with annual revenues
greater than $200 million report that their multichannel, integrated marketing
campaigns are
 
three
 
times
 
as
 
effective
 
as
 
other
 
kinds
 
of
 
campaigns.
And I know from many personal experiences, it’s the key  to success  for 
start-ups or smaller
 
companies.
What makes multichannel, integrated marketing so powerful?
The answer can be found in the graphic on the next page.
As you can see from this wheel of multichannel, integrated marketing, this
unique approach uses advanced data modeling and optimized data as the key
“starting point” for a marketing campaign.
The ability to specifically target your key target audience with this
powerful new data strategy is critical to your
 
success.
It lowers your cost. It enlarges your universe of potential clients or
customers. And, it increases your response.     I'll shortly explain why “transactional” data is so powerful in targeting
your audience. It’s not Google clicks, Facebook likes or other internet data.
It’s actual buying behavior (see Chapter 2).
  This ensures that all marketing materials are targeted at the prospects who
are most likely to respond to your offer – and pull out their credit cards to
make a purchase.
  As you’ll see, using this data will transform your marketing and advertising.
  It allows you to direct your message across multiple channels so that
prospects see your offer many times – and have numerous opportunities to
say “yes” to your offer.These channels may include  a combination
 
of any of the
following:
A LANDING PAGE
✓
 A powerful, streamlined landing page is the foundation of
your campaign. The key is to give
 
your prospects one
streamlined call-to-action to respond to your powerful offer.
BANNER ADS
✓
 Banner ads on Google, Yahoo and other platforms are
powerful in combination with other media.
DIRECT MAIL
✓
 Direct mail is my #1 “Secret Weapon” for boosting 
response.
Direct 
mail 
is 
essential 
to 
most 
multichannel, integrated
campaigns.
AMAZON ADVERTISING
✓
 
Amazon marketing 
is a 
brand-new 
strategy 
that enables you
to reach Amazon customers with targeted marketing – even
if you don’t sell anything on the
 
site.
VIDEO
✓
 Video is a crucial component to your landing page, social
media marketing and more.EMAIL
✓
 Email is used to generate sales and provide response-boosting
follow-up to your leads.
PRE-ROLL
✓
 Pre-roll videos are the “commercials before the video” on
YouTube and other sites.FACEBOOK ADVERTISING
✓
 Facebook advertising can be a powerful tool when used
correctly … especially when combined with Facebook
Messenger.
TWITTER
✓
 Twitter drives followers back to your landing page with
strategically crafted Tweets that sell your product or service.
LINKEDIN
✓
 LinkedIn targets a select audience with your powerful offer
through LinkedIn advertising and InMail.
INSTAGRAM
✓
 Instagram is a powerful platform to advertise your offer and
increase visibility – and response.
All
 
marketing 
and  
advertising materials 
are 
“integrated,”
meaning they work with each other to generate a response by
strategically retargeting prospects with the same
 
offer.
Ultimately, every channel receives a higher response than it
would by itself.
This
 
phenomenon 
was 
discovered 
and 
used 
successfully when
Publishers Clearing House began running TV commercials back in
the 1980’s. They noticed that when they ran these commercials, the
response to
 
their direct mail shot up. After all these years, they stilldo this, because it works. A typical multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign may include the components shown
 
below:
Each of these components works together to boost response from
prospects, targeting them again and again with your powerful offer
and reminding them of the benefits of your product or service.
There are also additional components you might use, such as
Amazon ads, a 3-D package, a videolog and more.
A multichannel, integrated campaign might seem complex, but
it’s actually very simple.
Let me walk you through a typical campaign using these
elements, created for an investment newsletter called 
Independent
Living
.
The writer of 
Independent Living 
sells a monthly newsletter that
helps readers develop wealth-creating
 
investment 
strategies. 
By
creating multichannel, 
integrated campaigns to sell his services, I
helped this client develop a profit-generating machine that
continues to bring in massive revenue year after year, even after we
changed the corporate name.
Whether 
you 
run 
a 
subscription service 
like 
Independent Living
or you sell a one-time product, you can use the same model of
multichannel, integrated marketing to boost your profits and
response.
Here’s a breakdown of the eight core elements we used for
Independent Living.
1.
        
Data
 
Modeling
Data modeling enlarges your prospect  universe  for your
multichannel, integrated campaign by using advanced transactional
data to identify your “perfect prospects.” We used this key strategy
for 
Independent Living 
to eliminate wasted dollars on marketing to
prospects who won’t respond – and massively increase overall
response.
2.
        
Landing
 
Page
The landing page is the foundation of the integrated,
multichannel marketing campaign. 
All 
marketing 
materials link
back to the specially created direct response landing
 
page.The landing page on the next page, created for 
Independent
Living
, lists “5 reasons” a prospect would want to invest in a
specific opportunity … and then ends with a call- to-action.
The landing page continued on with four additional reasons, and
ended with a call-to-action.
You  might notice that this landing page is not like  a corporate
website; it doesn’t have the navigational distractions that could
drive prospects away from the page. Instead, it has a single message
that brings visitors to a powerful call-to-action at the bottom of the
page.
You’ll learn more about how to create a powerful landing page in
Chapter 24.3.
        
Direct Mail –
 
Magalog
Direct mail 
is a key 
element 
to an 
integrated, 
multichannel
marketing campaign. One of the most powerful direct mail pieces
you can create to generate response for your campaign is called a
“magalog.”
A magalog looks like a magazine and feels like a magazine, but
it’s actually a marketing piece in disguise. For 
Independent Living
, I
created three direct mail pieces, including this magalog.
In the magalog shown on the previous page, we used powerful
direct response copy to describe a specific investment opportunity –
and the amazing benefits of the 
Independent Living 
newsletter to
readers.
This magalog was 20 pages long. I typically create a 16–24 page
magalog, which generates a higher response than shorter magalogs.
In Chapter 19, you’ll discover why longer copy usually leads to
more sales, and in 
Chapter 16, you’ll learn more about this
revolutionary marketing piece.
4.
        
Direct Mail –
 
Newsalog
Like a magalog, a newsalog is also a marketing piece in disguise.
A newsalog looks and feels like a newspaper, but it actually drives
prospects to respond to an offer.
For this multichannel, integrated campaign for 
Independent
Living
, I sent out both a magalog and a newsalog to prospects.     
You’ll notice that this newsalog has a headline, subheads and articles –just like a real newspaper. The headline reads: “Trump Energy Bombshell,”
generating curiosity for what’s inside.
     While newspapers may be going out of business, this “retro-
marketing”strategy gets amazing response from prospects and customers. In
fact, I have seen newsalogs generate a 20-30% boost in response for many of
my clients.
You’ll learn more about the newsalog in Chapter 17.
5.
        
Email
 
Marketing
For any multichannel, integrated marketing campaign, you can
create three different types of integrated, multichannel marketing to
maximize response:
1.
    
Integrated emails 
are sent to names who have received
the direct mail
 
piece.
2.
    
Conversion
 
emails 
are multiple emails  sent to your
leads generated from your
 
campaign.
3.
    
Look-alike prospecting emails 
are sent to new leads
using a “look-alike” audience based on existing
 
leads
.
6. Banner ads
   Banner ads on Google, Yahoo, and other platforms are displayed across
different websites that prospects may visit.
We install a special pixel on the back-end of a landing page to retarget
landing page visitors with banner ads.Banner ads can be targeted
 
to:
1.
 
Custom
 
audiences
2.
    
Look-alike
 
audiences
3.
   
And as retargeting tools, to leads who have already seen your
offer
As you’ll discover in Chapter 6, banner ads typically use
editorial-style headlines that create curiosity and intrigue in your
prospects.7.
        
Facebook Advertising
Facebook ads run in the newsfeeds of your prospects, shown as
ads with a headline, graphic and seven lines of copy.
Like banner ads, Facebook ads can be targeted to custom lists or
look-alike audiences … or be used as retargeting ads.
For 
Independent Living
, I created a set of different Facebook ads
that advertised their offer and drove prospects to the landing page.
Like all other marketing materials that you  create,  it is critical
that you use direct response copy in your Facebook
 
ads.Now, you can also display Facebook ads in Facebook
Messenger, so that prospects will see your offer displayed in their
personal message history. This is a very effective and more direct
strategy of reaching prospects, as your ads are not competing with
other content for their attention.
I’ll cover Facebook advertising in greater detail in Chapter 4.
8.
        
Pre-Roll Ads
Pre-roll ads are short videos that run before longer videos your
prospects may watch on YouTube or other video platforms such asFox News, the Travel Channel or the History Channel. Pre-roll
videos get a high response from prospects and leads, especially
when they use direct response video
 
technique.
Pre-roll ads can be targeted to custom lists or look- alike
audiences … or be used as retargeting ads.
For the 
Independent Living 
campaign, we created a special,
targeted video to display in pre-roll ads, on the landing page and in
other media channels.
Pre-roll videos should 
not be 
skipped 
in your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign. They are an effective tool for
increasing your response, and give you a greater degree of
credibility. Learn more about pre-roll video in Chapter
 
11.
What’s great is that you can now market with precise accuracy to
your client or prospect you’re already targeting.
Yes, 
there 
are 
other channels 
to 
use 
for 
your 
multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign – but as 
of this writing, they are not
as effective. And, there are more to come.CHAPTER 2
Custom List Targeting Domination
Reaching Your “Perfect Prospects” and Increasing Response and Sales
You might create the perfect multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign, with all of the necessary elements, brilliant direct
response copy and art and an irresistible offer.
But if it’s not targeted to the right prospects, it will fall flat. You
won’t get a high response, and you’ll have thrown away time,
money and opportunity.
Targeting is absolutely critical to any marketing campaign.
When I work with a client to create a multichannel, 
integrated
marketing campaign, 
I 
ensure that 
all 
marketing materials will be
directed only at the prospects who are most likely to purchase their
product or
 
service.
This could include their own customers and leads   in their
current database. It could also be focused on prospects who are new
to their brand or business.
In either case, I use custom lists for maximum targeting
effectiveness – a powerful approach that helps 
ensure you get the
highest possible response to your multichannel, integrated
campaign.
Custom Lists: 4 Powerful Segmenting
Strategies for Targeting Success
There are four basic types of custom lists that allow you to target
specific segments of potential customers,
 
helping to increaseoverall response and ROI (Return On Investment) across Facebook,
Google, YouTube and other digital platforms.
Strategy #1: Create a List from Your Own Database
First, you can create a powerful custom list simply by
segmenting your own
 
database.
For example, you may want to create an ad set for your
multichannel, integrated campaign that reaches only your active
buyers.
Or, you may want to launch a special campaign to reach former
buyers, inviting them to start purchasing your product or service
again.
You may want to reach an audience of leads that clicked on an ad
for a specific product. You can segment your database to reach this
specific audience, with ads to which they are likely to respond.
Here are a few additional examples of audience segments you
may want to use to create a custom list:
✓
 High-end buyers
✓
 High-frequency buyers
✓
 Leads from a trade show
✓
 Leads from direct
 
mail
✓
 People who have visited  a  specific  retail  store As long as
you have tagged your contacts and
 
remained organized in your marketing, you can separate your
database in any way you want to create response- boosting custom
lists.
Custom List Strategy #2:
Target Prospects Not in YourDatabase to Convert Them to
Leads
A second method for using custom lists is to target prospects 
who are not included
 
in your  own database –
 
not leads,
current  customers  or former
 
buyers.
For example, you may want to reach an audience of 100
prospects who are going to a specific trade show or conference. Or,
you may want to reach a group of 5,000 people who have been
identified as good prospects by an external source. Or, you may 
use a list  of 500,000  or more prospects you have
 
identified.
In any case, this strategy targets prospects outside of your
database, expanding your audience and generating new customers.
Custom List Strategy #3: Multichannel Integrated Campaign
You can also create a custom list to strategically market with
prospects who have been targeted … and hitting them with your
message in multiple channels.
For example, your custom list can target only those prospects to
whom you send emails or direct mail.
These recipients will receive strategic marketing materials from
more than one channel.
For example, you could send an email campaign to this list that
receives the mailing piece, shown on the next page.This can work for many specific channels. For example:
•
     
Direct
 
mail•
     
Email
•
     
Facebook
•
     
Google
•
     
Pre-roll
•
     
Native
 
ads
•
     
Instagram
  Each of your targeted prospects will see assets on these channels cross-
promoting your products. It seems like you’re everywhere your prospect
looks.
Custom List Strategy #4: Transactional Data Custom Lists for Greater
“Look-alike” Accuracy
A fourth powerful strategy for creating custom lists is to use
advanced transactional data (ATD) to build a new list of your
“perfect prospects” and a look-alike audience.
It works like this:
Transactional data is gathered from large database modeling
companies, which record thousands of data points of transactional
data, such as what a person has purchased over the past six months,
year or more; how
 
they
 
make
 
purchases;
 
their
 
income
 
and
 
net
worth;
 and other information on what they have purchased.
Behavioral scientists are then able to “clone” prospects from this
information.
     
Take a look at the graphic below to see what kinds of pieces of
transactional data are used by these large companies to identify “the perfect
prospect.”
    For example, the prospect we see below makes $350k a year; spent $150
on a pair of denim jeans in 2017; and donated $750 to animal welfare
organizations in 2019.    You’ll use this powerful data to reach new prospects, and create “look-
alike audiences” to reach more of your “perfect prospects.”
This prospect list then gets:
•
     
Emails
•
     
Direct
 
mail
•
     
Pre-rolls
•
     
Google
 
leads
•
     
Facebook
•
     
Instagram
•
     
And moreThis is a far superior strategy to relying on the algorithms of
Facebook or other digital platforms, which rely primarily on
information such as search history or
 
likes.
Instead, you’re reaching prospects who have been reliably
proven to have the buying habits that make them ideal customers
just for you.
You’ll learn more about this strategy in Chapter 3.
Custom lists are critical to your marketing strategy, as they help
ensure you are targeting the right prospects with your marketing
materials.
They are the backbone of special campaigns that you would want
to target on a specific segment of leads or customers.
They are also a powerful method for expanding your prospect
universe and generating new leads.
Custom lists should always be part of your multichannel,
integrated campaign, as they provide necessary and strategic
targeting to maximize your response.CHAPTER 3
How to Supercharge Your Marketing with
Look-alike Audiences
With a perfectly targeted audience, you’ll be able to get a high
response and generate new leads, customers or clients.
What if I told you that there was a way to reach prospects just
like your best customers and leads?
They behave the same, are interested in the same things and
share very similar demographics to your most loyal
 
clients.
A look-alike audience, like a custom list, will be one of your
most valuable tools in your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.
If done right, look-alike audiences can dramatically expand your
prospects, grow leads and increase the number of your new
customers like never before.
There are multiple ways to build a look-alike audience on
different platforms.
In this chapter, I’ll explain how to create look-alike audiences on
the following seven platforms in greater detail:
•
     
Transactional
 
Data
•
     
Facebook
•
     
Google
•
     
AdRoll
 
Prospecting•
     
Bing
•
     
Pre-Roll
•
     
Amazon
Let’s look at how each of these differ … and how you can
supercharge your look-alike quality and response by a little-known
strategy I developed for my clients.
#1 Look-alike Audiences Built with Advanced Transactional
Data
As you learned about in Chapter 2, you can build look-alike
audiences using transactional data, generated from purchases. Using
this valuable information, you’ll be able to create highly strategic
audiences that are virtual clones of your own current customers.
It’s so advanced that today I can create a look-alike audience that
usually matches 90-95% of the original audience’s qualities.
Large database management companies like Oracle store
thousands of data tags on prospects. For my clients, I work with
behavioral scientists and engineers at their transactional data
companies to match them to a precise product or service profile,
then create the look-alike audience. It enables us to get a much
higher response, doubling it over traditional efforts in some cases.
Using transactional data to build look-alike audiences works
especially well if you have a customer list of 5,000 or more names.
In this case, the “closing” has been called “miraculous.”#2 Facebook Look-alike Audiences
Another great way to build a look-alike  audience  is by tapping
into Facebook’s algorithms. You’ll learn more about this in Chapter
4.
Facebook keeps perfecting its ability to duplicate clones of your
customers. And while the results aren’t as good as transactional
data, they come pretty close.
Using these algorithms, I can identify the common qualities of
your prospects and find similar audiences on Facebook.
Facebook locates new prospects based on similar profiles and
online behavior. What do they click on? What do they like or
comment on? Facebook will create a look-alike audience that
matches the behavior and  the characteristics of the prospects you
have identified. 
This includes analyzing data such 
as 
page likes,
demographics, interests, website visits and more.
Our very best results occur when I take a model built on
transactional data of a customer  file and use
 
it as the base audience
to create a look-alike audience on
 
Facebook.
You can choose the size of a look-alike audience during the
creation process.
A smaller look-alike audience will more closely match your
source audience.
Larger audiences increase your potential reach, but reduce the
level of similarity between look-alike and source audiences.
However, the larger your customer list or transactional data
modeled list the more accurate your look-alike audience will be …
prospects will “look” and behave like your source
 
audience.
And if your source audience is made up of your best customers
rather than all of your customers, that could lead to improved
results.#3 Google Similar Audiences
Google uses data collected in the Google Display Network to
create a “look-alike” audience. Data includes demographics,
searches, video views, website visits, application downloads and
more. They use a type of artificial intelligence to analyze trillions of
searches and activity across millions of websites to help figure out
when people are close to buying.
While a long way from the quality of the transactional data or
even Facebook, it’s a vital part of any marketing plan.
Again, using advanced transactional data (ATD) and/or your
customer files with this approach will dramatically improve
 
results.
#4 AdRoll Prospecting Look-alike
Audiences
AdRoll finds audiences using the IntentMap, the largest
proprietary data co-op that advertisers can access by contributing
their site data.
About 5,000 advertisers of all sizes have opted into IntentMap,
pooling more than 1.2 billion digital profiles from across the web
and mobile sources.
Such diversity allows AdRoll Prospecting to perform for all
verticals and find you prospects.
If you want to make this work even better, use advanced
transactional data (ATD) and/or customer data.
#5 Bing Look-alike Audiences
Bing Ads now has a look-alike feature.Bing’s in-market audiences allow marketers to target consumers
who appear to be on the verge of making purchases. Grabbing
someone’s attention when they’re ready to purchase is a powerful
strategy.
Bing’s in-market audiences focus on 14 different targets: four are
dedicated to finance, three on travel, two on cars. Others include
clothing, hobbies, leisure, toys and
 
games.
And more in-market audience targets are on the way.
#6 Pre-Roll Look-alike Audiences
Having created more than 400 TV commercials and videos, I
love integrating video into a campaign. Pre- rolls are a big
breakthrough.
You can create a look-alike audience for your pre-roll video on
YouTube, using their algorithms. However, you’ll get better results
with advanced transactional data (ATD) and/or customer lists. This
is a powerful strategy to ensure similar audiences see your video ad.
You’ll learn more about pre-rolls in Chapter 11.
#7 Amazon Look-alike Audiences
One of the most targeted and effective ways to build a look-alike
audience is on Amazon, which I’ll cover more in Chapter
 
9.
Look-alike audiences on Amazon rely on Amazon’s own
massive transactional data, which creates the most accurate look-
alike audience possible.
Look-alike audiences are an extremely effective way to expand
reach and target prospects who will respond to your investment
opportunity.
Should you use just one platform for look-alike audiences?
No!I use all seven – and more – and my clients love the results.
For each company and each of the systems, I use slightly
different models.
The results of using a look-alike audience include:
•
     
Better Return on Investment
 
(ROI)
•
     
Greater enlargement of the
 
universe
•
     
Higher
 
profits
For these reasons, I use all look-alike audiences. I have one
campaign now that’s divided 40/20/10 with different look-alike
audiences.
One of the keys to success beyond proper testing is knowing how
to create the models yourself.
I’ve learned you should never rely on the modeling company.
They are statisticians.
They are not marketers who understand the peculiarities of each
target market.
That’s why I have trained my staff to modify and adjust each
model based on solid direct response psychographic market
principles, knowledge and experience.
Building look-alike audiences will significantly elevate your
marketing efforts by creating responsive new leads and by
powerfully expanding your prospect base.PART TWO
Multichannel, Integrated Opportunities
Multichannel, integrated marketing opens a whole new
 
world
 
of
marketing
 
possibilities
 
for
 
your
 
business.
It combines  the benefits
 
of every  type  of marketing
–
    
digital marketing, direct mail, TV and more – to supercharge
your
 
response.
In Chapters 4–13, you’ll discover how to create the online
portion of your multichannel, integrated campaign.
You’ll discover the secret to effective, 
strategic 
Facebook
marketing (Chapter 4) … retargeting your
 
leads with powerful
native and banner ads (Chapter 6) … how to use pre-roll videos to
supercharge response
 
(Chapter 11) … and more.CHAPTER FOUR
Facebook Advertising
Surprising New Integrated Strategies and Tactics on the World's Most
Popular Social Media Platform
  Facebook should be an integral part of a company’s integrated, multichannel
marketing campaign.
  It’s profitable by itself.
  
It’s able to lift response to other media.
  It’s got a variety of strategies and tactics to help you grow.  It’s perfect for integrated, multichannel marketing.
  
Facebook advertising is an effective way to reach  the vast majority of U.S.
consumers – who, on average, spend
 
27
 
minutes
 
a
 
day
 
on
 
this
 
social
 
media
platform.
You can precisely target your audience … and it’s measurable and
accountable.
This gives marketers a great opportunity to reach their most
likely buyers with their offer.
Facebook can be extremely effective in increasing your response
and boosting your sales. But it can also fall flat and get you few
results … if it’s not done right.
Here are two critical keys you must know when using this social
media
 
platform:
1.
        
Facebook should not be relied on by itself. It must be used
as a part of your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign to
maximize 
return 
on your investment.
        Let’s look at two key strategies:
Lead Generation
Typically, your Facebook  ads will drive prospects to your landing page
through a “Learn More” button (such as with the ad shown on the previous
page).
Free Report
Another powerful strategy is to entice prospects to click through by
promising them a free report in the body copy of the ad. Here’s an example:    
I use Facebook advertising for nearly all of my clients and get powerful
results from using the following 13 response-boosting strategies...
13 response-boosting strategies to use
on Facebook right now
1.
        
Create a custom
 
list.
     As I explained in Chapter 2, custom lists are a powerful resource for
targeting the right audience – and can be used on Facebook to strategically
target and re-target prospects who are likely to purchase from you.
     You can upload any custom list – from your existing
database, for example - to Facebook to directly target current customers,
inactive customers or new prospects with your offer. For example, you can
use a custom list to target leads who have signed up for a newsletter.You can segment your Facebook custom list any way you want in order to
strategically target prospects with specific ads.
     Here’s a powerful story that demonstrates how effective Facebook custom
lists can be in increasing click-through and lead generation.
    Volvo’s Construction Equipment division (Volvo CE) targeted American
and Canadian prospects who were already connected with Volvo competitors.
   The company also targeted prospects similar to their current
customers, age 23 and older.
The Volvo CE Facebook ad generated 300,000 impressions;
9,485 clicks; and 27 qualified leads.
By using custom lists on this social media platform, Volvo CE
was able to bring in $2,000 with every lead… and enjoyed a 30%
cost reduction.
2.
        
Create a look-alike audience.
A 
second 
key 
targeting strategy 
on 
Facebook 
advertising is to
use your custom lists on Facebook to create “look-alike” audiences,
as explained in Chapter
 
3.
Facebook algorithms are used to review the data and habits of
prospects that “look” like your most responsive customers and
prospects in terms of their demographics and behavior.
I have developed a strategy to make the look-alike feature of
Facebook perform better than the strategies of most digital
“experts.” It’s critical if you don’t have a custom/client list. And it
helps if you do.
You start with a direct mail transactional model list, create a
custom list and then use it to create a Facebook look-alike audience.
It’s a look-alike audience on
 
steroids.
Look-alike audiences aren’t limited to Facebook only – See
Chapter 3 for more details.
3.
        
Retarget leads and
 
customers.
Retargeting should not be skipped. Many of your prospects may
need multiple touch-points before they will respond to your offer,so it’s important to retarget these prospects again with strategic ads.
You’ll also want to retarget one-time purchasers or current
customers, turning them into loyal, long-term buyers.
Retargeting ads will actually “follow” prospects who have
already seen your offer or made a purchase, reappearing in their
Facebook news-feeds.
Retargeting ads will not be written like your other
advertisements; they should be specifically geared towards
prospects who have already seen your offer and may be familiar
with your brand or company.
I’ll cover retargeting in greater detail in Chapter 7.
4.        Facebook “lead ads” allow you to collect contact information.
Facebook “lead ads” are a special type of Facebook ad that
allows you to collect the contact information of
 
prospects through a
form directly embedded in the ad.
The advantage of Facebook lead ads is that prospects are able to
input their information directly on an ad
 
instead of clicking away to
a webpage. This is made even 
easier 
by
 
the
 “auto-populate”
feature on many browsers.
   And, you are more likely to collect the valuable contact inf or mation about
prospects- turned-leads.
Here is a Facebook lead ad that I created for a client (shown below):5.        Click-to-Call.
      Click-to-call ads allow prospects to click a button on your ad that will
allow them to immediately call your phone number. Click-to-call ads are
ideal for prospects for whom your product or service fills an immediate need
(such as a tourism service for people on vacation or food- delivery
subscription service for someone who has just moved).
Here is a form for a click-to-call ad:6.
        
Facebook Messenger is a powerful
 
tool.
   “Messenger” application is where prospects communicate directly with
their Facebook friends. Facebook now allows you to run your ads in their
Messenger “news-feed,” effectively reaching prospects without having to
compete with other ads.You’ll discover more about Facebook Messenger in Chapter 5.
7.
    
Follow the
 
rules.
In order to get the most out of your Facebook ads, you must
follow certain guidelines, which include:
✓
 “
You-oriented
” copy. Emphasize the reasons why your
product or service will change your prospect’s life, using
words like “you” and “your” frequently in both the body
copy and the headline. This is one of the key rules of direct
response copy that you will learn about in greater detail in
Chapter
 
19.
✓
 
Hot words
. You only have limited space in your Facebook
ads to create intriguing copy. Use words like
“breakthrough,”
“dramatic,” “discover,” and “easy” to get
your prospects to respond. In the example on the next page,
note the power words: “explosive,” “historic” and
“megatrend.”✓
 
Direct response visuals.
 Direct response visuals
or graphics are those that get a response. They may not be the most beautiful,
but they prompt prospects to respond because they seem “real” or
“authentic.”
✓
 
Powerful video
. Video gets a powerful response. When used in a
Facebook ad, it can include captions so that prospects can quickly understand
your offer and message, even without audio.
    By following these time-tested “rules” for all of your Facebook ads, you’ll
get the most out of your time, effort and money.
8.     Create separate ad accounts for different campaign categories.
       
For example, organize ads for sales of a specific product under its own
campaign. The Facebook pixel uses data from previous campaigns to
optimize future performance.
      To make sure the data gathered from Facebook’s pixels best match youroffer and creative content, set up ad accounts for your different verticals.
Then, organize ads for specific products under their own individual
campaign.
      When you create separate ad accounts, you can be more strategic in the
objective you choose for your ads
… and get a much higher response.
9.   Write a powerful headline that targets your audience.
70% of your success or failure depends on your headline. Longer
headlines get more of a response than shorter headlines.
An effective headline will show the benefits of a product or
service. If you have statistics, include them in the headline.
   Check out the detail-specific headline we created for this investment client
(written below the image shown on the next page).
10.
     
Create shareable
 
content.
One of the most powerful ways to expand your reach and boost
response is to create content that users can share on their own
Facebook
 
pages.
Shareable content creates interest and increases curiosity. For
example, use a headline that inspires awe in the user. Or, create
content that is useful … for example, “10 Steps to a Healthy
Morning Routine.”
11.
    
Testing will improve your response rate.
Try testing different headlines, teaser copy and images to
improve your results.
Below
, take a look at the test we ran with
 
different ad copy for a
client who sells a weight-loss supplement.
     Can you guess which one got the better response? Ad 1 outperformed Ad
2 by 38%.
Testing is critical to ensure that you get the maximum response
on Facebook. You’ll learn more about testing in Chapter
 
28.12.
     
Use a powerful
 
visual.
If your Facebook ad or post doesn’t have a powerful, eye-
catching visual, you might quickly lose the attention of your
prospect. Use a relevant image that evokes an emotional response.
13.
     
Use a
 
video.
Videos can bring your product or service to life, boosting your
response and creating high engagement.
The first few seconds of your video are key. That’s your
opportunity to capture the attention of your prospective client.
Facebook ads with video allow you to choose a custom
“thumbnail image” for the still image that is displayed before the
video plays.
Be sure to leverage Facebook’s ability to caption videos, too.
This will ensure that your videos are more accessible to people who
browse with the volume muted. Videos with Facebook subtitles get
a 12% higher response. In fact, Facebook’s algorithms prefer videos
with a subtitle, which will give you a greater reach when you
include this
 
feature.
A critical final step: optimize for
mobile devices
Just as you must optimize your landing page for viewing on a
cell phone, make sure that you optimize all of your Facebook ads
for mobile use.
Many of your prospects will be looking at your ads on their cell
phones. This means you may have to cut down 
your copy – and use
powerful words and graphics to immediately grab the attention ofyour prospects as they
 
quickly
 
scroll
 
through
 
their
 
news-feeds.
You’ll learn more about optimizing for mobile phones in Chapter
13.
Facebook advertising will be a critical part of your multichannel,
integrated campaign. When used with the key principles and
strategies outlined above, it’s a powerful way to communicate your
offer – and get a profit-boosting response.CHAPTER 5
            
       
The Facebook Messaging Revolution
In Chapter 4, you learned about cutting-edge, innovative
strategies to use on Facebook that will improve response to your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
Now, you’ll discover one of my favorite tools to use on
Facebook right now to reach new prospects and generate leads like
never
 
before…
It’s so powerful that I have dedicated this entire chapter to it.
It’s Facebook Messenger, and it allows you to reach leads and
prospects directly with your digital ads … without competing with
the noise and clutter of other ads.
Plus, it helps you build valuable, response-boosting relationships
with your prospects and leads.
If you’re not completely familiar with Facebook Messenger, it’s
a stand-alone application that is connected to your Facebook
account. Even if prospects don’t use Facebook on their phones or
other devices, they may use Facebook Messenger. In fact, Facebook
Messenger is the #1 app in the iTunes App Store … while
Facebook is
 
#2.
Facebook Messenger may be a critical part of your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign.
The most common way to use Facebook Messenger for
marketing your offer is to leverage your existing ads.
    When you create an ad, you can “opt in” for additional placement in
Messenger.
Here’s what an ad in Facebook Messenger looks
 
like:A second method for reaching prospects and leads directly with Facebook
Messenger is to conduct a Facebook Messenger campaign similar to a texting
campaign.
    Here are six insights and strategies that will help you use this revolutionary
new tool to supercharge your marketing now:
#1: Messaging apps get a response that is 10 times higher than response
to email or traditional text messaging.
And, users are 53% more likely to buy from you if they can
directly message you.
When prospects receive a message on Facebook Messenger, they
instantly receive a notification on their cell phone or other device.
This increases the likelihood that they’ll look at your message –
plus, it feels more personal, and increases overall response rate.
#2: Facebook messaging gives users more control.
Users must give businesses permission to communicate with
them on Facebook
 
Messenger.
   You can only message someone who has “liked” yourpage on Facebook, or who has “opted in” through a link on your landing page
or email. That means users have more control over who contacts them … and
will be more responsive to your offer.
#3: Use direct response copy.
Facebook Messenger is about creating a two-way conversation.
Use direct response copy to address your prospects with “you-
oriented” copy and emphasize how your
 
product
 
or
 
service
 
will
benefit
 
them.
Your messaging and copy should be personal. Message prospects
as if you’re speaking to a friend or family member. For example,
don’t send a free promo code; instead, say, “I saw something you
might
 
like…”
#4: “Chatbots” can be used to engage prospects on Facebook Messenger.
Chatbots can actually have conversations with prospects, by
answering their specific questions. This makes the whole
experience more personal and user- friendly – and it automates the
conversation for you.
#5: Ad copy should be short, sweet and direct.
Along with keeping direct response principles in mind, keep your
copy brief. Remember, your ads must be optimized for mobile
devices … they occupy a small space, so copy must be short.
Remember, Facebook Messenger is  about  creating a dialogue.
Use direct response copy to address your prospects with “you-
oriented” copy and emphasize how your
 
product
 
or
 
service
 
will
benefit
 
them.
#6: Run separate ad campaigns for specific promotions or goals.
Try running different campaigns for different goals or objectives.
This allows you to gather targeted
 
data
 about prospects that can be
used to further improve future campaigns.Make sure that all assets in your campaigns are mobile-optimized. That
means fewer form fields, shorter copy and streamlined landing
 
pages.
Facebook Messenger offers you a tremendous opportunity to grow new
leads and get a higher response to your offer. It overcomes some of the
problems associated with email and text-messaging marketing, gives your
prospects a personal, user-friendly experience and builds valuable loyalty and
trust.CHAPTER 6
Banner Ads and Native Ads: Your Keys to Effective Lead-Generation or
Sales
    B
anner ads and native ads are two types of digital ads that I use for almost
every multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
In this chapter, I’ll explain how to create powerful banner ads and native
ads. I’ll also show you how to strategically target and retarget these ads to
prospects and leads, driving traffic back to your landing page and boosting
your overall
 
response.
Three Key Marketing Categories for Banner and Native Ads
Banner ads and native ads can be grouped into three major
targeting categories for marketing purposes:1.
    
Custom. 
Ads targeted to custom audiences  will be viewed
by a specific custom list that you upload to Google or other
advertising platform. You can learn more
 
about
 
custom
 
lists
 
in
Chapter
 
2.
2.
   
Look-alike. 
Ads targeted to a look-alike audience will reach
potential buyers who “look like” your current customers and best
prospects. You can learn more about look-alike audiences in
Chapter
 
3.
3.
     
Retargeting. 
Retargeting ads will be seen by leads who have
already visited your website, or started the purchasing process.
These ads will lift response significantly by driving leads back to
your page to say
 
“yes” to your offer. You’ll learn more about
retargeting at the end of this
 
chapter.
Banner Ads
Banner ads might appear on various websites that your prospects
or leads visit. They include a headline, short body copy, a small
image and a call-to-action (CTA)
 
button.
Typically, banner ads have headlines that sound more “editorial.”
They provoke curiosity by presenting an unusual situation or
opportunity.
For example, for a client who writes an investment newsletter, I
might create a headline that presents an unusual new investment
opportunity:
“The Death of OPEC? Massive Market Disruption Ahead”
Then, I use the brief body copy to explain further…
 
perhaps
giving an estimate of how much investors could make on this
“newsworthy” opportunity.
To motivate prospects and leads to click on the site,  I promise a
free special report – a “value-added” piece they can see if they
proceed to the landing
 
page.Native Ads
Native ads are different from banner ads because they look
“native” to the surrounding content – that is, prospects may not
initially realize they are even advertisements because they blend in
with surrounding content.
Like banner ads, they also include a headline, body copy and an
image.
Similarly to banner ads, the amount of copy you can create for a
native ad is limited. That’s why you must use powerful words and
create intrigue to compel prospects to click on the
 
ad..
3 Keys to Creating
Banner Ads and
Native Ads that Get
a Response
1.
    
Longer headlines get a higher response than shorter
headlines.
The first thing anyone will notice about your banner
 
ad or native
ad is the headline. About 70% of the success
 or failure of your ad
relies on the headline.
A weak headline will be ignored and overlooked, while a strong
headline can draw in prospects and supercharge your response.
It may seem counterintuitive, but more words and characters
often means more click-throughs for your online ads. In fact,
headlines between 90 and 99 characters received a click-throughrate that was 43% higher than headlines that had fewer than 90
characters.
Take a look at the following test:
Headline #1:
97% of men suffer from some type of prostate problem, but …
these amazing nutrients could help you join the 3% who live worry-
free!
Headline #2:
Breakthrough Prostate 
remedy 
taps decades 
of 
scientific
research, brings relief in as little as 30 days!
Headline #2 got a 79% higher
 
response.
2.
        
Test, test,
 
test.
Test different headlines, ad placements and graphics to see which
variables perform best in your banner ads and native ads.
     Testing is the backbone of direct response marketing –   testing ensures
that the results from your marketing spend are measurable.
Here’s an example of a test that measured results from two
banner ads, with different headlines and graphics.Ad 1
        Ad 2
3. 
Media
 
strategy.
      Banner ads and native ads are only as good as where you place them. You
must make sure you are placing them appropriately. Test! Don’t rely on
Google or a service to do this for you. Evaluate each media placement for its
effectiveness.
Retargeting:A Critical Strategy for Increasing Response
Retargeting is absolutely critical to your banner ad and native ad
strategies.
Without retargeting your ads, you’ll miss out on gaining valuable
leads and prospects who may have missed out on your offer the first
time around … but who will respond to the second or third
touchpoint.
Retargeting means that 
your ads “follow” your prospects and
leads around the internet: popping up on search engines and
different websites.
In order to retarget, you’ll need to place “cookies” on your
landing page that tag visitors and direct your ads to follow these
visitors.
Here's an example of a “retargeting” banner ad (shown on the
next page), targeted at a prospect who has visited the landing page,
but hasn’t responded to the offer.Banner ads and native ads are essential to your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign. They not
only expand your prospect base, they are key to your
retargeting strategy, which I’ll cover more in Chapter 7.CHAPTER 7
        Retargeting to Dramatically Boost
Response
A key component of your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign will be to retarget prospects who have already responded
to your ads, visited your landing page
 
or
 
purchased
 
your
 
product
 
or
service.
In this chapter, I’ll dive deeper into the details of retargeting
banner, native, Facebook, pre-roll ads and more described in
previous chapters.
Why Retarget?
When used by themselves, Facebook ads, banner ads and pre-roll
ads can be effective. But when combined with retargeting, they can
dramatically increase your number of leads and customers.
In fact, retargeting can result in a 100% increase in click-through
for digital ads. Retargeting is the type of banner ad or Facebook
campaign that gets the highest
 
response.
Retargeting will also lower your overall marketing cost-per-lead
and cost-per-sale.
In some marketing campaigns, 70% or more of landing page
visitors
 
will
 
leave
 
without
 
making
 
a
 
purchase.
Even if they start the buying process, nearly the same percentage
will abandon your shopping cart before they make a purchase.
   Retargeting ads help you get these prospects back to your landing page orshopping cart and convert them to paying customers.
For prospects who have purchased something from you,
retargeting can turn one-time buyers into loyal, long-term
customers. You can also use retargeting to turn your one-time
buyers into loyal “up-sell” or “cross- sell”
 
clients.
So, how is retargeting
 
done?
Here’s how I do it for a multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign:
I create specific ads aimed at prospects who have already visited
your landing page. The ad is compatible with the direct mail, email
or other media message used in the campaign.
When prospects come 
to your 
landing page 
– whether through
direct mail, email or other media – I use retargeting codes on the
landing page so that your specific retargeting ad will “follow” them
around the internet.
For example, they might see a retargeting ad appear on various
websites they visit, or in their Facebook news-feed.
This is a powerful way to reinforce your offer and remind
prospects of what they showed interest in.
But to make retargeting work at its best, the ad needs to use
powerful direct response copy. As explained in Chapter 6 on banner
ads, I usually create an editorial looking ad to generate a higher
response.
Your offer and/or call-to-action (CTA) are critical to the ad. For
example, you may want to show a video and offer a free special
report. In any case, you should
 
test to see what kind of offer will
work best for you.Here are some retargeting ads (shown on this page and the next)
that I created that have proven to successfully remarket offers for a
conference
 
for libertarians.
A second, critical type of retargeting ad is an ad sent to prospects who started
the process of buying your product or service… but abandoned their
shopping cart.These prospects should be re-contacted with a specific kind of retargeting ad,
to bring them back to your page to finish the purchase.
You’ll discover more about how to decrease shopping cart abandonment with
retargeting in Chapter 25.
Here are 12 creative retargeting strategies to use in your ads that will
supercharge sales:
#1: Show a picture of the product your prospect searched for to remind
them that you have what they need.
You can retarget your prospects with a picture of what they
searched for. For example, if your prospect searched for “hearing
aids,” show a pair of your hearing 
aids to remind them that they
need this product – and yours are readily available to buy.
#2: Remind them to download their “free special report” for value-
added incentive.For many of my clients, I create one or more “special reports”
that act as a powerful incentive for prospects to respond as a lead or
to buy. If you offer a free special report as a part of your offer, you
can retarget leads with a picture of the report – creating curiosity
about this free informational
 
piece.
#3: Use a testimonial to prove you’re credible and trustworthy.
Show a testimonial of a satisfied customer in your retargeting ad.
Testimonials offer powerful proof that your product or service is
valuable and can be trusted. Prospects and leads are likely to trust
someone else about the quality of your product.
A testimonial can be shown as a video, a special landing page or
on your sales
 
page.
#4: Display a video update to create intrigue.
Your landing page should have a video that explains your offer.
Create new curiosity and excitement by telling leads that you have
a “video update” to take them back to
 
your
 
landing
 
page
 
to
 
watch
your
 
video.
#5: Use the word “alert” for response-boosting urgency.
“Alert” creates a sense of urgency, increasing response. “Alert”
also suggests you have new, powerful information to share with
your leads, helping to funnel them back to your landing page.
#6: Say “thank you” to start a dialogue and create relationship.
Saying “Thank you” creates immediate dialogue with your leads, and
reminds them that they have taken action on your landing page. Thank them
for their visit, and then remind them about what they forgot to complete
(download a free report, buy a product).
#7: Ask a question to bring “shopping cart abandoners” back to your
page.Typically, I don’t recommend  asking  a question
 
in a headline. But when
a potential customer has placed something in your shopping cart and then
forgotten  to buy it, they may just need a reminder: For example,
 
“Did you
forget
 
something?”
 #8: Tell old customers you miss them to bring them back to your page.
Retarget one-time buyers with ads that say, “We miss you!” This is a
powerful way to remind them of your product or service, and create a
relationship and trust that can turn them into loyal customers.
#9: “Ready for a refill?” reminds customers to repurchase products they
love.
If you sell a product that might be purchased again and again – such as a
food or cosmetic product – send a retargeting ad to customers when you think
they would have finished the product. For example, if a tube of skin cream
lasts a couple of months, send a retargeting ad  to a customer towards the end
of that cycle that says something like “Ready for more?” or “Ready for a
refill?”
#10: “Renew your subscription” turns one-time buyers into continuity
buyers.
If you have a subscription service, remind customers to renew
their subscriptions with retargeting ads. Or, retarget customers who
have canceled their subscriptions.
#11: Ask for a review or testimonial to strengthen your offer.
Retargeting can also be used to get more customer reviews and
testimonials, while creating a more powerful relationship with your
customers. Soon after a product or service purchase, retarget recent
buyers with ads that ask for a review and star rating. For example,
“Please, tell us what you think!” with the specific product or servicename.
#12: Suggest related products to
“upsell.”
To upsell your product or service, suggest related items or a
larger package to customers, based on their past purchases. Retarget
customers with an image of a new, enticing product or service your
customer might like.
These are just a few  ideas … but you may
 
come  up with
additional strategies for your own integrated, multichannel
marketing campaign.
Retargeting is a game-changer.
It can dramatically increase your response, help you gain more
leads, reinforce your marketing campaign and increase your
 
profits.
It’s an essential strategy in your multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign.CHAPTER 8
Email Strategy Now: The Rules of Email are
Changing
Email campaigns are an important component of your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign.
However, you must resist the urge to rely on email 
campaigns alone.
Using only email, 
you 
will 
be 
underperforming – you can do better. But used
in conjunction with direct mail and other digital elements, email can help you
dramatically lower your cost-per- lead and
 
cost-per-sale.
The rules of email are changing. In the past, it may
 
have been possible to
use email alone without having high-level strategy – and still get acceptable
results.
But as 
response 
and 
open rates 
have 
dropped 
dramatically over the past 5
to 10 years, you must use email strategically with a different set of rules in
order to get a powerful response.
I have sent more than 100 million emails since email became a marketing
tool in the late 1990s – and in the process, I have discovered what works, and
what doesn’t.
For every multichannel, integrated marketing campaign that I create, I
design separate email campaigns. These
 
might
 
include
 
two
 
or
 
more
 
of
 
the
following:
1.
        
A “prospecting” series. 
A prospecting series is sent to names on
rental email lists who you have no relationship with you and who may have
never even heard of you
 
before.
2.
   
A “conversion” series. 
A conversion series is one of the most powerful
ways to turn leads into clients.
With a conversion series, you carry on a conversation–not engage in asales presentation. Every single email carries on a dialogie. For example, "I
forgot to mention. Let me tell you one more thing. It's important for you to
note."
      It’s very personal, one-on-one communication.
      It should be used, even if you have a sales team aggressively following up
leads.
     You may have the very best salesperson trying to call prospects. But the
conversion series will get the attention of your prospect, while your
salesperson might only get voicemail and avoidance.
       If you’re giving value to your prospects, they are going to read your
emails. They may not be ready for a sale immediately. It may take a week,
two weeks, a month, two months, three months or longer – depending on the
product or service.
     But it’s a way to keep in touch with them. A conversion series may
include five emails – or it may include up  to 18 emails.
Ultimately, a conversion series will maximize your sales
 
results.
3.
    
An “integrated” series. 
An integrated series is sent to the
same names, as a part of the integrated, multichannel campaign. For
example, your prospect gets an email, a direct mail package,
Facebook ad and pre-roll ad. One tactic is to send an email that
gives prospects an idea of what they  can expect
 
to receive  in their
mailboxes, creating curiosity and
 
excitement.
Once recipients actually receive their mailing piece, they receive
more “follow-up” emails, with images of the mailing piece about to
arrive. Integrated emails reinforce the offer and help persuade direct
mail recipients to look carefully at their mailing pieces, with copy
like, "Did you see page 2 of your special offer I mailed to your
postal box?" Each of these series might include 5-7 emails. Here is
an example (shown on the next page) of an integrated email that
displays a magalog–a direct mail piece that looks like a magazine
(see Chapter 16).The 3 “R’s” of Every Email
Emails flop when they are pure sales-hype. The rules of email
have changed. In today’s world of spam filters, massive email
clutter and little time to read, traditional email sales hype will be
deleted. You won’t stand a chance.
For every email series that I create (prospecting, conversion or
integrated), I follow the “3 R’s”:1.
        
Relevant. 
Every email must be relevant to the needs and the
interests of the
 
prospect.
When an email is part of a conversion series, or a retargeting
email, the subject line and copy should also allude to something the
prospect has already seen.
For  example, in an integrated series email sent to   a prospect
who has received the direct mail piece, I might include “[As seen on
pg. 13 of your  magalog]” in the subject
 
line.
2.
        
Reputation. 
Your email series should reinforce your
reputation through a proven track record of success. For example,
for an investment newsletter writer, I might include details about
his track record of anticipating stock market successes in a
prospecting or integrated email.
Other reputation-building elements
 
include:
•
     
Written
 
testimonials
•
     
Video
 
testimonials
•
     
Reviews
•
     
Comparison
 
charts
•
     
Star
 
ratings
3.
        
Rewarding. 
Finally, every email you send must stress the
benefits of your offer to the prospect. Your prospects don’t want to
know about every feature of your product or service; they want to
know how it will make them richer, happier, thinner, more
successful or younger-looking.
To make an email more rewarding, it should have value. Give
valuable information. Teach, instruct or confirm existing beliefs.
Now, let’s walk through a breakdown of how to create a
successful email for your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.The Subject Line:
The Opener That Can Make All the Difference
Your subject line is absolutely critical to the success of your
email. Without an effective subject line, your prospect won’t even
open your email – and your time, money and effort will be
 
wasted.
In fact, 35% of email recipients have cited the subject line as the
most important piece to motivating them to open an email. And,
with 269 billion emails sent each day – and your prospect
potentially receiving 100+ emails – your email subject line must
stand
 
out.
Cute, dull and bland subject lines won’t work. Be intriguing,
make a promise and create curiosity.
The goal of the subject line is to entice your prospect to read
further. Nothing
 
more.
Write 10 to 20 subject lines for each email before choosing two
or more to
 
test.
Even the most experienced digital marketer can guess wrong
about what’s effective. That’s why it’s absolutely critical that you
test two or three subject lines to see which one will work best.
Unlike so-called marketing “experts,” the marketplace is never
wrong.
In one test, an integrated email campaign went out to all direct
mail (in this case, a magalog that looks like a magazine – Chapter
16) recipients, so that they received the email as a “follow-up”
reminder of the powerful
 
offer
 
they
 
saw
 
in
 
the
 
mail.
Subject line A: 
You should have received this
magazine by now
Subject line B: 
This complimentary magazine shouldbe in your mailbox now
Which subject line performed better?
Subject line A got a 42% higher click-thru rate – showing that a
small change can make a big difference.
Lastly, use a consistent “from” line, with the same name and
email address every
 
time.
Body of the Email: Counterintuitive Ways to Get a High Response
One of the key principles of direct response marketing is that
“pretty” doesn’t always get a high response.
It may seem counterintuitive, but plain text emails get 17% more
clicks than HTML-designed emails with lots of graphics. They
often receive the same open rates, but when a prospect is focused
on a single-link text-based email leading to a single call-to-action,
he  or she is more likely to click
 
through.
Ultimately, the purpose of the email is to drive prospects back to
the landing page by enticing recipients with a “value-added”
incentive – a bribe to respond.
A value-added piece needs to be something the prospect
perceives as valuable and desirable. It could include a set of special
reports or other “free gift.” You’ll learn more about value-added
marketing in Chapter 22.
The idea is that you’re offering prospects valuable information –
not just driving a sale. Copy that is too sales-heavy will depress
response.
Finally, avoid hype. Give customers clear, specific information
that’s easy to understand, and you’ll get an above-average response.
Test Different Lists to Identify Who is Most Likely to Respond
There are three types of email lists you can use for email series:Prospect List
A prospect list is a list that you can rent for a one- time use. If
you want to use those specific names again, you’ll 
have to get
permission or rent it again.
A prospect list may produce a lot of leads and sales.
 
Or, it may
not work. That’s why you must test a small portion of the list and
see if it works for
 
you.
Integrated List
Your integrated list could include customers, leads or
 
prospects.
These prospects will see your email … as well as Facebook ads,
banner ads, pre-roll ads and other digital ads – all integrated with
your marketing message.
Your Own Email List
The last type of email list is your own email list – leads
generated by your own database.
For one client, I did a 2-way test with the same email campaign
to see which list worked best out of the following:
List “A” = New opens from leads who have previously opened
(last 6 months
 
opens)
List “B” = New opens from prospects who have never opened
(last 6
 
months)
The results were as follows:
A 45.33% opens/7.71% click-thru
B…0.97% opens/11.32% click-thru
    As you can see, List A received dramatically better results. People whohave previously opened your emails are far more likely to open again.
Think twice about deleting inactive  names – 24%
 
of your
inactive names will open your re-engagement email, and 45% will
open emails following.
On the following pages, you’ll discover examples of emails I
created for multichannel, integrated campaigns for clients.
Real Water
Real Water is a client who was raising investment capital for his
alkaline water company.Note that the email is easy to scan and presents the most
important information at the top.
The email ultimately asks recipients to respond to the premium
or value-added piece, not the offer itself.Here is another example, from a prospecting series  for   a weight-loss
supplement (shown above).
    Notice the strong headline, the “you- oriented” copy and the video
thumbnail in the email.
     The email makes the offer clear, and stresses the benefits of this weight
loss supplement.
      
Email series are a powerful way to reinforce your offer and increase
response from your prospects.
      They are an effective way to increase response and retarget prospects.
They also reinforce your mail piece and give prospects another opportunity to
respond to your offer.
   
But they cannot be relied on
 
alone.
  Using the keys and principles described in this chapter, you can
create effective, persuasive emails that drive prospects to yourlanding page, ultimately convincing them to click on “Buy Now.”
Email is a great marketing tool, but it should never be used by
itself. Instead, it should be used to complement other marketing
pieces and retarget leads and prospects.CHAPTER 9
 The Amazon Revolution: Nine Powerful Insights and Strategies for This
Transformational Marketing Platform
Amazon advertising has become a revolutionary marketing machine.
I’m not talking about selling a product on Amazon. I’m talking about a
huge new custom list/look-alike opportunity using Amazon data for an
integrated, multichannel
 
campaign.Harnessing powerful transactional data provided by hundreds of millions
of customers, this mega-retailer has dominated the advertising space …
taking from Facebook and Google in the process.
In fact, every time the mega online retailer moves up another percentage
point in U.S. retail (worth about $5
 
trillion), Google and Facebook lose
around $50 billion worth of data that they rely on for profits.
Amazon advertising should never be overlooked in your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign.
It will allow you to run highly targeted, effective ads to Amazon’s 310
million customer base – even if you don’t sell a product on Amazon.
Retargeting: The Foundation of Powerful, Effective Advertising on
Amazon
One of the most powerful ways to use Amazon advertising is to retarget
your own website visitors with Amazon ads.
The first step is to use a special pixel on your landing page. This pixel
allows you to identify prospects who are visiting your landing page and
shopping on Amazon
… so that you can see where “audience overlap” occurs on both sites.
When these prospects go to Amazon or anywhere on the web, they’ll see
your offer advertised, drawing them
 
back
 
to
 
your
 
landing
 
page
 
to
 
respond.
Amazon Look-alike Audiences:
A Supercharged Strategy to Expand Your Prospect Universe
     Just like Facebook and other social media platforms, you can build a look-
alike audience on Amazon using information from the pixel on your site to
expand your reach and increase conversion.
     Better yet, you can take your custom list to make an Amazon look-alike
audience.
     Amazon will generate a look-alike audience to generate new leads or
customers. They use Amazon’s transactional data to reach new prospects or
customers that look and behave just like your best customers and prospects.
What makes this better than Google or Facebook and similar platforms is that
it doesn’t rely on algorithms.           
     It’s transactional data, based on real purchases. In other words, it’s the
most accurate way to generate look- alike audiences that behave – and buy –like your best prospects and customers.
     Amazon retargeting and look-alike audiences provide a powerful core
foundation for advertising on Amazon. But, there are additional insights you
should know to effectively advertise on this powerful site.
Here are nine additional tools to use on the world’s most
powerful digital retailer – that will help you to grow new leads,
expand your customer base and boost profits on Amazon.
#1: Use your own data.
Using your own existing data will not only allow you to create a
look-alike audience – it will help you target your 
current customers
and prospects who currently shop on Amazon.
#2: Run targeted ads to your “perfect
 
prospects.”
Amazon advertising enables you to create different
 
types of ads
for your multichannel, integrated campaign.
Headline search ads
One profitable option for marketers who are selling products on
Amazon is headline search ads.
Headline search ads are keyword-targeted cost-per- click search
ads that can appear at the top of the first page of search results on
Amazon.
Target headline search ads using keywords. Amazon
recommends that you use 30 to 40 short, clear keywords.
Display ads
Display ads are targeted, response-boosting ads that can be used
to reach customers on or off Amazon. They harness powerful
transactional data to target potential leads and customers who are
the most likely to respond to your offer. And, they can be used by
any business – whether or not you sell a product on Amazon.
Video adsVideo ads on Amazon can be run across the web, displaying your
powerful offer in a video. You can run video ads on Amazon
regardless of whether or not you sell a product on the site.
You’ll discover more about video in Chapter 27.
#3: Access the power of Amazon
Prime.
One of the reasons that Amazon advertising is so powerful is that
it enables you to reach the vast number of people who are on
Amazon Prime, a special paid subscription service that offers free
two-day delivery for  all subscribers, plus  free  video  streaming
services.
Amazon Prime customers are typically frequent 
shoppers 
… 
and
they 
provide huge amounts 
of 
transactional data to Amazon,
allowing you to target prospects and customers with even greater
effectiveness.
#4: Target prospects and leads
based on specific lifestyle
demographics.
Amazon will also give you powerful data that allows you to
examine the search patterns and browsing habits of specific
prospects.
You can identify segments of prospects based on their general
lifestyle interests. If you are selling a multivitamin, for example,
you’ll want to take  a look at the buying habits of customers who
are interested  in health and
 
wellness.#5: Target customers who
have recently searched for a
specific
 
product.
You can also use in-market targeting segments to identify and
reach  customers  who have  searched  for a product in a specific
category over the past 30 days. This allows you to target potential
customers who are actively searching for products similar to your
own.
#6: Lastly, you can target
prospects based on general
demographics.
Amazon enables you to target audience segments based on
general demographics such as gender, age, income and even
number of children. This lets you focus solely on your target
audience. For example, if you are selling a product for the mature
market, you’ll want to target consumers ages 55+.#7: Increase your search ranking by improving relevance.
If you sell a product on Amazon, be strategic about improving
your ranking by using keywords. You want your product to show
up on page  1, not page
 
10 …  or
 
100.
Most products that rank at the top of the page on Amazon are
less expensive and higher volume. But even so, you can use specific
strategies to improve your ranking.
Like Google, Amazon will not respond to keyword- stuffing or
poor word usage.
So, use 
keywords 
wisely 
in your 
brand 
name, 
product-listing
title, product description, in the URL, nodes (identified in product
category relationships) and product line, which is an additional
opportunity  to categorize your
 
product.
You can also use keywords in descriptions of color, material,
size/dimensions and quantity, as appropriate.
#8: Optimize your product images to maximize response.
Again, if you sell a product on Amazon, you’ll want to optimize
your product images. Images should be high-resolution, zoomable
and shot from a variety of angles. Include product label close-up
images; if applicable, photos of the product being used; product
shots that show a point of reference, like a hand; and any additional
images that might be helpful, like charts or even
 
text.
#9: Run sponsored ads.
    Sponsored ads are for those businesses who already sell a product on
Amazon. By pitching your product  as a “sponsored product,” you can help
drive up sales on
 
Amazon.
Sponsored ads are keyword-targeted and are sold on a cost-per-click basis.
They can appear on the right side or the bottom of search results on Amazon,
or   on product detail pages. You  can optimize the ad as  it runs by viewing
clicks or sales. This gives you the ability to maximize the success and
performance of your campaign, and decrease the total amount you spend.Bear 
in 
mind, 
however, 
that 
Amazon 
keeps 
a percentage of the profits
sold by sponsored listings. You should also know that these ads won’t link to
your landing page for your multichannel, integrated campaign, so they are
limited in how you can deliver your powerful marketing
 
message.
By using these powerful strategies and insights, Amazon advertising will
become a powerful, response- boosting component to your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign.CHAPTER 10
Instagram: Your Social Media “Power Tool” for Boosting Response to
Your Multichannel, Integrated Marketing Campaign
Instagram is more than just a tool for seeing what your friends
are up to or posting beautiful photos.
Think of it as a powerful, far-reaching online catalog that helps
you communicate with a wide range of prospects or customers who
are likely to respond to your
 
offer.
Not only that, but you can post persuasive video content and
even live Instagram “TV” commercials that reinforce your offer.
When used strategically, this social media platform can become
an important part of your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.
There’s one very important thing you should know, however.
Instagram works best for marketers selling consumer products –
especially for those in the health,
 
fitness, beauty, fashion or travel
industries.
If that’s you, then keep reading to discover seven key insights
that you need to know about creating a powerful Instagram
campaign to reinforce your offer and boost response.
Key Insight #1: Post frequently.
     You must create an Instagram account for your
product. Once you have done so, post frequently to build relationships with
your prospects and create interesting and informative content regularly on
your account page.Key Insight #2: Follow direct
response principles in your
copy and art.
Following direct response principles, your photos and copy
should communicate the benefits – not the features – of your
product.
You are not limited to using photos alone. You should post
graphics and copy as well.
And remember to include a strong call-to-action (CTA) in every
post, with a directive to click the “link in bio” to follow through
(you cannot include a link in an Instagram post – Instead, links can
be included on your account
 
page).
Key Insight #3: Create Instagram
stories.
Instagram “stories” are temporary posts that link together into a
mini slideshow that your prospects can
 
click on throughout the day.
These are less formal, more casual “live-action” posts that may
include video content.
Instagram stories are a powerful way to build an ongoing
relationship with your prospects, and increase interest and reach.
Key Insight #4: Interact with yourfollowers.
As you build Instagram followers, interact with them. 
When they
comment on a post, you can reply with a quick “Thank you.” This is
one of the most powerful aspects of social media – the ability to
respond to comments made by
 
others.
Key Insight #5: Instagram TV
Instagram TV (IGTV) allows you to run “commercials” that
 
can
be
 
viewed
 
by
 
your
 
prospects.
Your videos can be anywhere from 1 minute to 1 hour long; so if
you’d like, you can run a full “infomercial”
 
on this powerful
platform. When you upload videos to IGTV, you automatically
create a “channel” that can be seen by your followers and a wider
audience.
Plus, unlike Instagram stories, IGTV videos remain on your
channel – creating a great lineup that your prospects can view again
and again.
Once again, this is a powerful strategy for reinforcing your offer
and building relationship with your followers.
Key Insight #6: Advertise on Instagram.
Advertising on Instagram is easy when linked to your Facebook
account. You’re able to quickly and easily sync your Facebook ads
to run on Instagram as well, expanding your reach across
 
platforms.
Instagram ads include regular, static photo ads, video ads or
carousel ads, which feature multiple, rotating photos.
Instagram advertising is an easy way  and effective to reach new
prospects, gain interest in your offer and
 
boost
 
response.
Key Insight #7: Instagram “checkout” lets your followers shop directly
from the application.You can include a link to your landing page in your Instagram
bio, displayed at the top of your account page.
But now, Instagram followers can also click directly on a post to
go straight to checkout and make a quick purchase.
Instagram’s in-app checkout feature can significantly increase your overall
response rate by making it quick
 
and easy for prospects and customers to say
“yes” to your offer.
Instagram could just be the “power tool” that drives up response and
profits for your integrated, multichannel marketing campaign. When used
strategically to reinforce your offer, it can become a critical key to earning
the trust of your
 
prospects.CHAPTER 11
Pre-Roll Ads: The “Commercial Before the Video
     
One of the most powerful ways you can use your video is in a pre-roll
commercial – it’s the “commercial before the video” that you often see on
YouTube or another video streaming
 
service.
Pre-rolls are perfect for doing a powerful multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign.
They are one of the most effective and rapidly growing
techniques being used to target a specific audience, as
 
they get
strong response and can significantly grow new leads and
prospects.
In fact, they have an average click-through rate of 1.84%. That’shigher than any other type of digital ad. And the average online
video viewer spends about 16 minutes a month watching video ads.
   But here is what is even better: Pre-roll ads generate leads and sales to grow
your business.
And yes, you can also use look-alike audiences with pre-rolls to
expand your prospect universe.
4 Strategies Every Marketer
Should Use
Here are four strategies to use with pre-roll videos, to boost
response rate:
1.  Target your best prospects to maximize response.
Pre-roll videos can be targeted to prospects, leads and customers
on your custom lists.
Or, you can target them based on specific demographics or
lifestyle interests.
Send the pre-roll videos only to those to whom you’re sending a
direct mail piece, an email, a Google ad or Facebook ad.
It’s integrated, multichannel direct marketing at its best.
2.   Create pre-roll look-alike audiences to expand your reach.
You can also create look-alike audiences on YouTube to reach
new prospects and leads. The best results come from basing the
look-alike audience on your custom list of buyers and/or
transactional-based direct mail data
 
modeling.
3.    Improve SEO with pre-roll videos.
Pre-roll videos give you the added advantage of improved Search
Engine Optimization (SEO) on both YouTube and Google,increasing your search ranking and overall visibility.
4.
    
Optimize your pre-roll videos with
 
buttons.
YouTube provides special buttons for pre-roll videos that say,
“Shop Now”, which can easily be converted to “Subscribe Now”,
“Donate Now”, “Attend This Event”, etc. These buttons can help
increase your response rate by driving prospects to your landing
page with a powerful
 
call-to-action.
Here’s a powerful example that shows what kind of response
pre-roll videos can achieve:
The Nassau Paradise Island Tourist Board spent more than $1
million on Google TrueView, the platform that enables marketers to
run ads on YouTube.
YouTube lets viewers skip ads after five seconds. But,
advertisers are only charged if the entire 30 seconds are
 
viewed.
The average completion rate of the Tourist Board’s 30-second
pre-video commercial rose up to 20%. By the end of the campaign,
their price per completed view was only 8 cents – a powerful ROI.
Using these four strategies, you’ll be well on your way to
creating a powerful pre-roll video that generates new leads and gets
a high response to your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.CHAPTER 12
Infomercials: Overlooked, But Still Powerful Strategy
I love direct response TV, better known as infomercials. When
done well, they can become a powerful part of your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign.
In the early days of television, infomercials exploded in
popularity. In fact, many TV shows actually sold sponsored
products at the end of the program. When the government cracked
down with rules and regulations like the “Fairness Doctrine,”
however, infomercials were crippled. Many marketers were forced
to simply use 30 to 60 second commercial
 
slots.
In 1987, President Ronald Reagan deregulated the airwaves.
Once again, marketers were free to advertise with direct response
TV. Infomercials exploded in popularity, generating millions of
dollars in sales.
I helped my clients take advantage of this massive opportunity,
and created powerful infomercials that generated new leads and
sales.
We soon learned that infomercials also helped lift response to:
•
     
Direct
 
mail
•
     
Print
 
ads
•
     
Direct
 
sales
And a major benefit: Retailers who routinely said, “NO!” to
products completely changed their attitude when infomercials aired.
They begged for the product to be sold in their stores, displaying
“As Seen on TV” signs throughout their
 
facilities.Why?
Because the multichannel marketing increased sales
 
and profits,
and made products sold on TV credible and desirable.
Today, direct response television in the form of infomercials and
commercials is still one of the most effective, cost-efficient ways to
reach a large number of prospects, convince them of the value and
benefits of your product or service, and convert them into buyers.
    You may be thinking, television has changed. And you’re right.
People are watching more TV than ever – but most of it is on
streaming television services. Although this presents a new
challenge to advertisers, it also creates  a
 
great
 
opportunity
 
for
direct
 
response
 
marketers.
Because the cost of advertising on cable television continues to
go down, direct response marketers now have more opportunities to
advertise on traditional television at a lower
 
cost.
Ultimately, direct response television in the form of infomercials
will help:
•
     
Increase sales. 
Infomercials sell products directly to
consumers and sometimes business to business.
•
     
Generate leads. 
Infomercials can be used to generate
prospects. Send these prospects brochures, videos or product
samples etc. that will generate direct sales or bring the prospect
into their nearest
 
retailer.
•
     
Gain retail distribution. 
Products that might never see retail
distribution are fast-tracked to the largest retailers once the
infomercial
 
hits.
•
     
Relationship marketing. 
Once you have generated
 
your leads and built
a database, begin developing
 
relationships with your prospects. For
instance, send your prospects an unsolicited sample of your product to
encourage a purchase.
•
     
Continuity program. 
Once a consumer’s  business is
captured with an initial sale, subscription or club membership,
keep your customers buying every month or quarter throughinstallments in a series of catalog or box/subscription
 
sales.
•
     
Brand awareness. 
Infomercials can function in the same way
traditional advertisements do, by helping to create and
strengthen brand identity.
If you decide that infomercials are right for your multichannel,
integrated campaign, you’ll want to use specific strategies and
tactics to ensure the success of your commercials.
Here are 11 strategies to use now to maximize response to your
infomercials:
Strategy #1: Consider your
product.
The products that work best in infomercials are those that are
easily demonstrated. For example, cosmetics sell well through
infomercials because the viewer can 
see them being applied and
how attractive they make the wearer.
Strategy #2: Educate your
prospects.
Research 
shows 
that 
the 
primary 
reason 
many prospects do not
buy is that they do not have enough information to make an
“educated” purchasing decision.
Give your prospects enough information to educate them about
products and services. Tests have proven that when there is a
substantial amount of information to be communicated about a
product or service, 30-minute infomercials work best.Strategy #3: Motivate the viewer to
buy immediately.
Emphasize urgency in your offer by giving prospects a bonus or
discount if they buy within a certain time period.
Strategy #4: Present
information in an engaging,
easy-to-grasp way.
Use a mix of hard facts, expert advice, verification, 
personal
appeal 
and the 
testimonials 
of 
satisfied 
customers. These elements
should be combined with the visual impact of television to make
your product or service
 
irresistible.
Strategy #5: Position yourself
without being overtly
commercial.
You can use a professional “spokesperson” or celebrity host to
guide viewers through your program, interview independent experts
and company executives, interact with satisfied customers and
provide transitions in between
 
scenes.
Strategy #6: Repeat importantclaims about your product or
service.
Appropriate visual reinforcement should include the use of eye-
catching graphics, video effects, stock documentary footage, charts
and graphics, star ratings, still photos and dramatic re-creations.
Strategy
 
#7:
 
Use
 
the
 
right
 
music
 
and
 
sound
 
effects.
Music and sound are critical to powerfully enhance key moments
in the program and increase product value.
Strategy #8: Design the entire
infomercial to “sell” your
product or
 
service.
Remember, your commercial is not entertainment; it’s an
opportunity to drive up sales and make a profit. Use the principles
of direct response marketing throughout your entire commercial.
Strategy #9: Emphasize
important ordering
information.
Make it easy and clear for prospects to order by showing your
URL, your Toll-Free number, your text information and other
important ordering information on-screen throughout the
commercial segments and at
 
other appropriate times throughout the
program.Strategy #10: Be strategic with
pricing.
The price of products sold on infomercials is as varied as the
products themselves, from $39.00 to over $100,000. However, most
are in the $19.95 to $295 range. Many marketers have found their
best results come when offering installments, such as four monthly
installments of $39 each.
Strategy #11: Make a powerful
close.
Last but not least, include a warm summary and a strong call-to-
action at the end of the infomercial. Remember, the point is for
viewers to immediately respond to your offer when the commercial
ends.
Infomercials should become a powerful component of your 
multichannel, integrated  marketing
 
campaign.
They can position your product or service strategically in the
marketplace, drive traffic back to your landing page, and most
importantly, significantly drive up
 
sales.CHAPTER 13
Mobile Marketing Breakthrough
Let’s 
face 
it: 
Smartphones 
have taken over the marketing and
consumer space. There are more than
2.5  billion  smartphone  users  worldwide,  with nearly 
247.5
   
million
 
of
 
those
 
users
 
in
 
the
 
United
 
States
 
alone.
And, in the past six months, 62% of smartphone users have made
a purchase online using their phone.
Smartphones are quick, easy and convenient … and they can be
used as powerful marketing tools, especially when used for
 
texting.
However, if your landing page, emails, ads and pre- roll videos
aren’t optimized for smartphones, you can be sure that your
prospects will click away from your marketing immediately … and
you’ll lose a lead, a potential customer and
 
sales.
In this chapter, you’ll discover how to take advantage of the
“smartphone revolution” to succeed in your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign.
Texting for Lead Generation and Data Collection
Texting has revolutionized the marketing space. It allows rapid,
direct communication like no other marketing medium … and can
powerfully increase 
response to your multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign.
Here are three ways to use texting to supercharge your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign:
1.
        
Follow up with a text message.
A text message campaign can be a powerful way to follow up
with leads who have visited your landing page, or clicked on your
ads and provided their phone numbers.Give prospects another chance to respond to your offer on their
smartphones, and see a massive increase in response … and profits.
2.
        
Send special offers, codes and
 
updates.
Text campaigns are especially effective when they include
something of immediate value to your prospect –
   
such
 
as
 
a
discount
 
code,
 
coupon
 
or
 
relevant
 
update.
3.
        
Collect valuable data.
Asking your audience to text in order to respond to an offer is
also a good way to collect phone numbers from prospects.
Here’s a story of how one of my clients used texting
 
for truly
phenomenal data collection:
A Christian musician held a concert with thousands of people in
the audience. I told him to hold up his cell phone during his
performance and ask everyone in the audience to get their phone
out as well. Then, we displayed a number to text on the main
screen. He asked them to text the number and offered everybody a
free download. Thousands of concert-goers took out their
cellphones, immediately responded and texted the 
phone number,
providing their email addresses and home addresses as
 
well.
Now, the musician had a new database, and was able to market
new albums and releases to them in the future.
Texting campaigns might become a critical strategy for your 
multichannel, integrated marketing
 
campaign
 by retargeting
prospects, reinforcing your offer and significantly boosting
response.
5 Rules for Mobile-Optimizing
Your Landing Page
Every digital asset of your multichannel, integrated marketingcampaign must be optimized for smartphones.
Here are five rules to follow to ensure that your marketing assets
are “mobile-friendly”:
1.
        
Write a powerful, benefits-oriented headline.
Mobile users will be viewing your  landing  page on a small
screen that shows less text. So, be  sure your landing page includes
powerful text upfront. An intriguing, captivating headline will help
make sure your prospects continue scrolling through your landing
page.
2.
        
Write
 
a
 
list
 
of
 
your
 
key
 
benefits.
Presenting your offer as a “list” is a powerful way to streamline
your copy and keep prospects intrigued and interested. Ultimately,
this list drives them to your call-to-action
 
to
 
purchase
 
your
 
product
or
 
service.
For example, for an alternative health product that utilizes
Manuka honey as the core ingredient, you might use the landing
page headline “5 Surprising Reasons 
Manuka Honey Can
Transform Your Health.” When prospects scroll down, they see five
different sections of copy that persuade prospects about the benefits
of your
 
offer.
3.
        
Streamline your landing
 
page.
Your landing page must be designed for mobile use. It should be
single-column and free of navigational distractions. Your call-to-
action (CTA) must be clear, with
 
a
 
one-
 
or
 
two-step
 
process
 
for
your
 
shopping cart (for more information on your shopping cart, go 
to Chapter
 
25).
4.
        
Cut down your
 
copy.
On a digital ad, your copy may  have  to be shorter to display
correctly.
5.
        
Test, test,
 
test.
Always test. Test your landing pages on different web browsers,as well as a smartphone, laptop and desktop to ensure  that  they 
appear correctly, and are clickable.
By following these five rules, you’ll optimize your multichannel,
integrated  campaign  for  mobile phones –
   
and prevent losing
many of your customers … and sales.
Now, I’d like to tell you a story about how mobile 
marketing 
can
create 
a 
phenomenal marketing 
breakthrough.
Campaign Breakthrough:
How Nike Used Mobile
Marketing During the
Super Bowl to Boost Sales
When done right, mobile marketing can 
create 
phenomenal,
buzzworthy breakthroughs that can rapidly boost
 
sales.
During the 2018 Super Bowl, Nike outfitted half- time performer
Justin Timberlake with a pair of limited edition Air Jordans while
he sang and danced in an elaborate performance.
Only minutes after the show, the high-end Nike sneakers –
selling for $200 a pair – completely sold out. How did Nike do it?
They followed this six-step plan to maximize their marketing
opportunities on the smartphone, create immediate engagement and
achieve a massive spike in sales:
1.
    
Use a high-profile
 
“spokesperson.”
By outfitting one of the music industry’s biggest stars in a pair of
their sneakers, Nike created instant credibility and hype around the
Air Jordan III
 
“JTH.”2.
   
Follow the principle of
AIDA (Attention, Interest,
Desire, Action).
Nike’s promotion showcased the marketing principle of AIDA
(see Chapter 19 for more details on AIDA) to instantly convert
prospects into leads and leads into customers.
First, the flashy white sneakers worn by Timberlake
 
caught the
attention of viewers.
Second, the fact that Timberlake was wearing Air Jordans
created interest.
Viewers who have a special interest in sneakers and
 
who use
Nike’s SNKRS app – Nike’s ideal audience – would have noticed
the new sneaker, which hadn’t been released yet on the market.
They might have already 
read about the design of the shoe, which
was posted a couple days prior to halftime and cross-linked on the
SNKRS app.
Third, as leads were shown strategic shots of the shoes again and
again, their desire to buy the shoe was peaked.
Fourth, leads became customers when Nike sent strategic push
notifications to their phones marketing the shoe … and they quickly
took action to make a purchase.
3.
    
Use social media
 
strategically.
Pre-show, Timberlake posted a photo of himself wearing the
limited  edition  Jordans  on Instagram, in a shot meant to highlight
the new shoe. Followers of Timberlake on social media would have
immediately seen the photo, helping to create buzz and curiosity.
4.
    
Focus on a targeted
 
audience.
Right after  Timberlake’s  performance,  Nike  sent a push
notification to users of the SNKRS app. The notification – whichpopped up on the phones of tens of thousands of ideal prospects
across the country – sent users to a special landing page to purchase
the shoe.
5.
   
Create higher response with a “limited
 
edition”
/ limited number offer.
Nike created exclusivity – and generated much higher response –
by marketing the shoe as limited edition. The shoe sold out in a
number of minutes.
Air Jordan III’s now sell online for well over their original
selling point  … some
 
for  as much  as $1,000  a
 
pair.
6.
   
Retain leads and increase
follow-through with an easy
check-out
 
process.
Users who visited Nike’s special landing page were led through
an easy purchase process: credit card, shipping and shoe size
information was  pre-populated, so all
 
it took users was a couple
clicks to make a purchase.
By facilitating this purchase process, Nike avoided the common
problem of shopping cart abandonment.
Prospects were taken to an easy landing page, where they could
click on “buy now” to immediately make a purchase.
These six strategies produced a massive marketing success for
Nike.
And though not every brand might have the leverage to use high
profile stars like Justin Timberlake during an event like the Super
Bowl, the steps Nike took can be followed for different kinds of
events.
For example, you might leverage the influence of a speaker or musician at
a local event to help you sell a product.By executing the principles and strategies outlined in this chapter, you can
use the smartphone and other devices to your advantage – producing
surprising results for your multichannel, integrated marketing
 
campaign.PART THREE
Little-Known Secrets To Using Direct Mail For
Multichannel, Integrated Marketing
In Part Three, you’ll discover one of the most underrated – and
most powerful– types of marketing: direct mail.
Direct mail gets a phenomenal response.
And while your upfront cost may be higher, your ROI will be
worth it.
In Chapters 14–18, you’ll learn specific strategies, formats and
tried-and-true techniques for creating a direct mail campaign that
complements your digital campaign…for skyrocketing response –
and profits.CHAPTER 14
Direct  Mail Resurgence: Your "Secret Weapon" for Getting an
Exceptionally Profit-Boosting Response
    
Your landing page, banner ads, Facebook ads, Amazon ads and email are
all valuable media for targeting your audience.
However, your #1 media for reaching prospects with your offer
is direct mail.
Yes, it may sound “old school”… but direct mailremains extremely effective in generating high-quality 
leads that
will convert 
your 
prospects into loyal 
customers.
No other component of marketing can target your “perfect
prospects” quite as well and specifically as direct mail.
This marketing medium may require a larger investment upfront
… but in the end, you’ll get a lower cost-per-lead and cost-per-sale
because of the significantly higher response rate.
In this chapter, you’ll discover  why direct mail is  so powerful ...
and how this marketing medium can
 
be targeted to generate
responsive leads for your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.
The Power of Direct Mail in an
Online World
Direct mail gets an amazing response … if done right. Why?
✓
 It’s ideal for a multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
Direct mail can be integrated with your digital assets for
powerful results.
✓
 It’s highly targeted. Direct mail can strategically target your
prospects, leads, former customers, current customers and 
prospects. For  prospects, a relatively new tactic that works
well is using advanced modeling based on transactional data
… The targeting includes mailing only to those who are direct
mail responsive and never mailing to those who are not.
✓
 It’s powerful and compelling. A direct mail piece makes a
high impact. Direct mail pieces usually
 
contain longer 
copy
and more 
information 
than other marketing materials,
effectively and 
powerfully persuading prospects to respond to
your
 
offer.
✓
 It builds trust and a relationship. Direct mail pieces convey a personal
touch and special value that help foster a relationship with the prospect.Direct mail is very effective … but it should be integrated with other
elements in your campaign to maximize response.
Using Direct Mail in Your Multichannel, Integrated Marketing
Campaign
Direct mail integration with digital elements in your multichannel
campaign will 
dramatically 
increase conversion and the return on your
investment
 
(ROI).
Here’s how I integrate non-digital marketing material with digital
elements:
1.        Data. 
First, I use advanced data modeling to identify the names of
direct mail recipients  who will be most likely to respond to a  specific  offer.
Using the transactional data matrix (TDM), I’m able to target prospects based
on their actual purchasing history. Then, I target these same prospects on the
internet, with digital marketing assets such as email, Facebook ads and other
types of communications.
2.        Drive direct mail recipients back to the landing page. 
Prospects
who click on digital marketing materials like ads and emails will be directed
back to a single, streamlined landing page, where they will see the same offer
they saw in their direct mail piece. The direct mail piece will also include the
URL of your landing page, so they can visit it directly after receiving their
mail.
3.        A single, powerful offer  is  reinforced  on both pieces. 
Direct mail
and digital marketing assets all include the 
same messaging, working together
to reinforce each other. For example, Facebook ads, banner ads and native
ads that target direct mail recipients remind them of what they’ve already
seen in the mail –  “Did you see this on page 7 of your free magazine?”
Again, prospects are driven back to the landing page, where they are more
likely to respond to the offer.
4.        Follow up the direct mail piece with an integrated email series.
Direct mail recipients not only see digital ads reminding them of the offer;
they also receive an integrated email series that reinforces the direct mail
piece.
Prospects receive at least one email before they get their mailing piece, with
an image of what they can expect to find in their mailbox and copy to create
intrigue.Then, they receive several follow-up emails after they receive their direct
mail piece containing subject lines like “Did you see page 12 of your free
magazine?”
5.    Use direct mail retargeting. 
One of the great new revolutions in direct
mail and online marketing is called direct mail retargeting (DMRT).
DMRT allows you to identify the physical mailing addresses of
your landing page visitors, which allows
 
you to send them a direct
mail piece … within 24 hours.
DMRT is a game-changer. It allows you to immediately retarget
hot prospects with your offer, and communicate with
 
them
 
in
 
a
powerful
 
direct
 
mail
 
piece.
The Lost Art of Great Return on Investment (ROI)
In direct mail, oftentimes an envelope mailing with  a long letter
will often produce better results than an envelope mailing with a
short
 
letter.
Likewise, a 20-page magalog or newsalog often gets a better
response than a 16-page envelope mailing piece. The cost and the
length of the piece may be higher … but ultimately, your ROI will
also be higher.
Having good 
ROI
 
results 
from 
executing 
a multichannel,
integrated campaign that will get you the results you’re looking for
– a high response with both a low cost-per-lead and cost-per-sale.
And with scientific and measurable direct mail, you’re always
able to determine the
 
ROI.
You might also benefit by investing money upfront in direct mail
programs.
In fact, for every $167 spent on direct mail, marketers sell $2,095
in
 
goods.
Here’s an interesting test that demonstrates why a larger
investment upfront may produce superior results:
Harry and Joe both published a travel newsletter for budget-
minded travelers. They both decided to use a 50,000-piece direct
mail campaign to attract new subscribers.Harry decided he would execute his direct mail campaign on a
postcard. After printing and postage, Harry paid $0.47 per postcard
and he received 200 leads for a 0.4% response
 
rate.
Joe decided to take a different approach in his direct
 
mail
campaign. He created a direct mail campaign using
 a traditional
direct mail envelope package. He generated 
950 leads for a
response rate of 1.9%, but each of his pieces cost him 11 cents
more, at $0.58 a piece.
Who made the smarter
 
investment?
The postcard mailing was in fact cheaper, but when the figures
were in, it cost $117.50 per lead. Although the envelope mailing
was more expensive upfront, the cost per lead was $30.53. In the
end, the postcard mailing was much, much more expensive if you
factor in the response
 
rate.
This test demonstrates why it’s very important to test your
mailing piece not simply for results or cost, but for its ROI.
For example, a #10 envelope is the least expensive envelope you
can use … but it doesn’t always get the best
 
results.
In the past, I used 9x12 envelopes for clients that have worked
very well. Unfortunately, the post office now adds a postal penalty
for this size envelope.
A 6x9 envelope with a four-color, powerful sales message will
often get a great response – and a great ROI.
Direct Response vs. All Other
Approaches
General ad agencies often produce “image-based” direct mail. It
looks pretty. But it doesn’t produce a response.
The only approach you should use in your direct mail sales pieceis direct response – not a mailing based on image alone.
     Direct response marketing relies on powerful,
benefit-oriented copy that speaks directly to the
reader.
You could lose 5-10 pounds in as little as one week.
You’ll regain energy and confidence like you’ve never had
before.
You won’t want to miss this opportunity to reap
 
soaring profits.
Direct response copy relies on a set of proven rules that generate
content that gets a response.
Beautiful graphics and cute copy might look great on your direct
mail piece … but they won’t get people
 
to pull out their credit
cards.
Your copy and graphics must adhere to direct response rules – or
your direct mail piece will fall flat and you’ll waste your time and
money.
I’ll explain this scientific, proven approach to copy more in
Chapter 19.CHAPTER 15
Traditional Envelope Direct Mail – Little- Known Strategy for
Skyrocketing Profits
In the previous chapter, you learned about the exceptional
power of direct mail to generate leads and boost
 
response.
In this chapter, you’ll discover how to create high- impact,
powerful direct mail pieces.
You will also learn about the different direct mail formats you
can use to communicate your powerful offer.
6 Critical Keys to Direct Mail
Success
I’ve overseen the creation and mailing of more than 1 billion
direct mail pieces that have helped our clients dramatically expand
their customer base and boost their revenue, sometimes growing
from small companies into multimillion-dollar
 
businesses.
After four decades and testing more than 10,000 variables, I’ve
identified and developed six critical keys to success using direct
mail:
#1: Targeted Mailing Lists
The best mailing list targets only the most likely prospects with
the best postal mailing list filters. It’s a 
major reason direct mailcan be so much more effective than online marketing. This means
using advanced transactional data modeling for targeting the right
prospects. If you need help with this, I
 
recommend
 you contact
InfoMat at (310) 212-5944 for guidance.
#2: Proven Direct Response Copy
The right direct response copy is the most important and
overlooked difference between success and failure. Use only direct
response copy in your direct mail campaigns and see a massive
response (see Chapter 19).
#3: A Compelling Offer
A compelling, benefit-driven offer is a key to success. Your offer
must entice the prospect to respond by telling them how your
product or service will improve his or her life (see Chapter 21).
#4: An Effective Landing Page
Your direct mail package drives your prospects to your landing
page. If your landing page doesn’t follow the principles outlined in
Chapter 24, you’re not going to get the great response you’re
looking for.
#5: Aggressive Follow-up
Follow-up with leads ensures smart conversion. This step is
essential, no matter how good your business opportunity is. Follow-
up includes retargeting ads and creating an integrated email series.
#6: Analyze Your ResultsAnalyzing your results helps you to improve your campaign and
continually produce better results.
You need to always know your “cost-per-lead” and “cost-per-
sale.” This is scientific advertising. Done right, direct mail will
generate a lower cost per lead and lower cost per sale than any other
medium.
These six critical keys provide a good foundation for a successful
direct mail
 
piece.
    Let’s take a closer look at the first two keys of direct
mail success: laser-sharp targeting with postal lists and dynamic direct mail
formats.
Precise Targeting for a
Supercharged Response
One of the reasons direct mail is so effective is because of its
unmatched ability to target precisely. Other kinds of media lack this
precision.
Advanced data modeling and postal lists target your “perfect
prospects” – those contacts who are most likely to respond to your
offer.
Postal Lists
Depending on your product or service, postal lists can be used to
target people in a certain demographic,
 
or who have exhibited
certain buying behaviors before.
When I choose postal lists for clients, I always look at
 
R.F.M.:
Recency. 
The more recent the names, the better the response.
Frequency. 
The more they respond to different direct mail
offers, the better the name.Monetary. 
The more they have paid, the better the prospect’s
response will
 
be.
These are predictors of how well a campaign will work.
With every campaign using direct mail, I analyze which lists are
producing the most response to each type of offer and promotion.
This critical database of response helps us to avoid wasting
resources and ensures that we use the very best lists.Data Modeling
     Data modeling can be used to generate names of the “perfect prospects”
who will respond to your offer. These names are generated by assessing
massive amounts of transactional data that’s collected by database modeling
companies (for more on data modeling, go to Chapter 2).
     Modeled data will generate a much higher response than non-modeled
data.
     Take a look at the graphic below to see the difference.
      Here are examples of list segments where you can select more targeted
data for a direct mail campaign:
•
     
Male or
 
female
•
     
Living in a home or an
 
apartment
•
     
Geographic area — region, state or local ZIP
codes
•
     
Income levels or net-worth
 
levels
•
     
Direct mail
 
responsive
•
     
Like sports, gardening, travel, music and other interestvariables
•
     
R.F.M. (Recency, Frequency,
 
Monetary)
When selected carefully, these test segments help you to identify
your most responsive leads.
Using these targeting techniques, you can reap the rewards of
this marketing medium’s exceptional targeting ability.
But in order to maximize the impact of direct  mail in your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign, you must choose a
strategic direct mail format that best fits the needs of your
prospects.
Strategy: Choosing the Best Direct Mail Formats for Your
Campaign
A variety of direct mail formats can be used for a successful
direct mail
 
program.
Here’s an overview of the types of formats that will help you to
create a high-impact direct mail campaign that delivers a powerful
response:
•
    
Traditional direct mail package. 
This is a mailing package
with a letter, lift note and response device inside an
 
envelope.
•
     
Magalog. 
A 
magalog looks 
and feels 
like 
a magazine, but
it’s actually a direct response sales piece, designed to generate
interest and response in your product or
 
service.
•
     
Newsalog. 
Like 
magalogs, this 
is a 
powerful 
direct mail
format that can help dramatically raise 
response. It looks like 
a  newspaper.  It  feels  like a newspaper. But it’s really an
advertisement for
 your product or service.
•
     
Bookalog. 
A bookalog is a book that acts as an informational
and advertorial piece to the
 
investor.
•
    
Three-dimensional (3-D) package. 
If you’re doing a highly
select campaign to a small audience of fewer than 10,000, I
often recommend doing a three-dimensional
 
piece.•
    
Videolog. 
This is high-tech direct mail at its best for
 
an
audience
 
of
 
fewer
 
than
 
15,000
 
people.
Let’s take a closer look at these six key formats for
 
direct mail…
Traditional Direct Mail Package
A traditional direct mail package is a powerful way to generate
leads and sales.
Traditional direct mail, if done right, can generate high-quality
leads for your offer. I recommend direct mail if your product or
service is clear and easy to understand.
If your offer is more complicated, I suggest using the magalog,
bookalog or a three-dimensional piece described on the following
pages.
The traditional direct mail package usually consists of these components:
Envelope
    You might be inclined to ignore the envelope, but this is one of the most
crucial pieces of your direct mail package. Why? A 
powerful envelope has
one purpose: to get the prospect to open it.
     If the envelope doesn’t immediately catch the attention of the recipient, it
won’t be opened and your direct mail package will be wasted on a potential
customer.
     A powerful envelope can be a handwritten or personally typed, with high-
quality personalization. I use a special machine that will “handwrite” using a
pen – a method called “real pen.”
    With “real pen,” a computer engraves writing on
your envelope, but it looks like a person did it.
 
Teaser Copy
   Copy on the envelope – called teaser copy – will usually produce better
response than a blank envelope.
And – though it might seem counterintuitive – copy on the back of theenvelope can increase response by as much as 15%.
    I always test to see what type of envelope will perform best in any specific
marketplace.
   
Take a look at the following examples of envelopes
 
I’ve used in different
integrated, multichannel marketing campaigns.
The first example shown below is an envelope I
produced for a company that marketed an investment
opportunity in rare gold coins.
On the next example, notice that the name and address
appear to be handwritten. This is an example of an
envelope with computer-generated “handwriting.” This
can be an extremely effective method of getting your
envelope opened.Notice the “handwritten” request below the name and
address on the example above. This detail can make the
difference between a direct mail package that is
responded to and a package that is completely ignored.
    
Here’s an envelope I created for the Pacific Justice Institute, a legal
advocacy non-profit:    
Here is an envelope with teaser copy that immediately
defines the unique selling proposition (USP) of the offer: “The banker’s
secret to potentially making…7%-10% yearly returns…paid to you monthly.”
    Finally, here is the back of an envelope that I created for the “Wine of the
Month” Club (shown on the next page).
      Just as with any other form of communication, it’s important to test
different variables to see what will work best on your envelope.
    For one direct mail campaign, I tested two envelopes that I had created formy client,  Ministries  Today.  Both versions had a stamp that read “FREE
REPORT ENCLOSED: DO NOT BEND.” However, each envelope was
designed with different tease copy on the outside to get the prospect to open
it.
    The “Free Report” was designed to get by the gatekeeper, keep it out of the
trash, and create curiosity in the pastor who would tear open the envelope.
    Envelope A said in large red letters, “A FREE gift for Christian leaders!”
     Underneath, in smaller black print it said, “No cost. No obligation. No
strings.”
     Envelope B said in red letters, “Billy Graham … Jack Hayford … Tommy
Barnett … Mario Murillo … David Yonggi Cho.”
Printed on the same places on both envelopes were “FREE
Special Report” and “FREE Self-Test
 
Inside.”
The majority of people might guess Envelope A, with the word
“FREE” at the top won. Wrong. The winner, by 36%, was Envelope
B.
By using prominent evangelical leaders that the audience
recognized, it created a curiosity about what was inside, much more
so than the offer of a FREE gift. This again shows the value of
testing.
Letter
The most important component of a traditional direct mail
package is a direct response sales letter. To generate the highest
number of leads or sales, a letter should be
 
between two and eight
pages long. Most lead-generation letters are four pages long.
Some market segments must be longer. The longest letter I’ve
ever created was 16 pages – and it was part of a mailing of more
than 2 million pieces, beating the
 
client’s
 
control.
The sales letter should include your unique selling proposition
(USP), follow a clear and consistent theme,
 
use persuasive direct
copy and communicate your valuable offer.
Here are six keys to creating an effective sales letter for your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign:Key  #1: Remember
 
to keep  the first sentence short.
Your reader will form an instant impression of your direct mail
by reading the first sentence. If it’s short and easy to read, chances
are better that they’ll read on. But if it’s slow, long or too complex,
they are likely to abandon
 
it.
Key #2: Watch your spacing in the
 
letter.
For the sake of improved readability, single-space the letter and
double-space between paragraphs. Most
 
people
 
find
 
this
 
style
 
the
easiest
 
to
 
read.
Key #3: Make your intentions
clear.
You may tease readers on the outer envelope or subject line, but
don’t make them read five pages to find out what you’re selling.
Remember, at the letter’s opening you have their attention — so
don’t be afraid to “fire your biggest gun” at that point.
Key #4: Be believable.
Make sure your principal sales story is feasible. Don’t use an
episode that’s not believable. A prospect respects probability, but
will reject something fake.
Key #5: Use a powerful P.S.
Skipping the P.S. is like taking the punch line out of
 
a
 
joke.
 
It
just
 
won’t
 
work
 
without
 
one.
Perhaps the most effective technique is to throw    in a curiosity-
building sentence like, “Remember the surprising financial forecastI mentioned  on page
 
2.” or “Don’t make the #1 mistake I told you
about in this letter.”
Finally, tell your prospect why he or she must respond right now,
and include the phone number or URL. Make them believe that
they will miss out on something valuable if they don’t act now.
Key #6: Reinforcement is critical.
Check to see if the components of your mailing package
reinforce and complement each other. If you 
have a letter, brochure
and lift letter or flyer, don’t just repeat the same copy — include
references in the letter to “see the brochure for full details.” The
brochure could include excerpted articles or more benefits.
Remember, an effective sales letter will follow the principles of
direct response copy: use the active voice and the word “you,” use
specifics and stress the benefits of this opportunity to the prospect.
You’ll learn more about how to create direct response copy in
Chapter
 
19.
Lift Note
The lift note is a small letter inside the envelope, folded and
signed by a credible signer who is not included in the main letter.
It’s called a “lift note” because it can lift your response by 5–20%.
This piece should not be overlooked, and can be a powerful
component of your direct response mail
 
package.
The lift note gives a different perspective or reiterates the unique
selling proposition (USP) of your offer.
Order Form
The order form is key to the success of a direct mail
 
package
because it shows the prospect the way to act on your offer.
One of the primary reasons some direct mail pieces bring in sub-par results is that the response device fails to follow tested and
proven direct response rules.
The order form is separate from the letter itself. It can be a
variety of sizes, but I recommend 8.5” x 11”  or 8.5” x 14”
 
paper.
Here are four elements that your response device must have:
1.
        
A clear call-to-action (CTA). 
The order form is your
chance to clearly describe your offer, guarantee, discount premiums
and the most important benefits – all in one spot. Tell your
prospects what they will
 
receive
 by responding to your offer and
why they simply cannot wait.
2.
        
Easy instructions. 
Prospects must be told exactly how to
fill out your order form. If it is not easy to do, they
 
will
 
lose
interest
 
and
 
you
 
will
 
lose
 
the
 
sale.
3.
        
Professional artwork. 
Remember, your prospect will judge
your product or service based on the quality of your response
device.
4.
        
A Positive Acceptance Statement. 
This powerful copy
technique engages the prospect and reinforces how he or she will
benefit from your
 
product.
Here’s an example for an investment newsletter client:
Using the key elements described on the previous pages, you’ll be able to
create a direct mail package that produces a great response from prospects.Marketing to the Wealthy
Here are two cases of clients I helped to reach wealthy prospects with their
offers, target this lucrative market and boost sales significantly.
Morningstar Resort
    Morningstar Resort is a country club in Palm Springs, California, that
wanted to promote their $1 million+ homes to wealthy prospects, primarily
golfers.
They called me to help them increase their leads and conversion while still
getting a great ROI.
The best way to do that is with direct response techniques.
Together with my team at Creative Direct Marketing Group, I created an
upscale, high-quality, personalized direct mail package that included
powerful video and  a new approach to list modeling.
The 
envelope 
was classy, 
used 
the 
best 
in 
personalization and quality.
We used “real pen” to create an authentic-looking envelope that prospects
would want to rip open.
Their offer was common and boring. So, I beefed it up. Prospects were
offered a chance to play a free round of golf at Morningside when they came
to look the place
 
over.
And because our list modeling identified the very best prospects, we also
offered them  the opportunity to spend the night if they chose to do so.
The letter, printed on high-quality paper with a professional-looking gray
tint, called the reader’s attention to the many 
benefits of the country club
facility, golf course and social
 
connections.And then we mined the data to create a list for a higher-quality prospect.
This powerful mailer would generate the leads, but what about the
conversion?
Our research showed that the spouse often killed the trip and sale, so we
emphasized inviting the spouse. In addition, part of the conversion sequence
was a powerful video to create a compelling desire for husband and wife to
enjoy the experience of visiting.
The results? The million-dollar-homes direct mail piece
succeeded in generating quality leads, exceeding all previous offers,
and converted the leads into multi- million-dollar sales.
Morningside gained new residents and achieved a higher
conversion rate than they had ever experienced.
This was another powerful example of direct mail   to deliver
quality leads and amazing ROI – producing millions
 
of
 
dollars
 
in
profits
 
for
 
Morningstar
 
Resort.
Zacks Money Management
Another client of mine, Zacks Money Management, told me they
had a very targeted group of wealthy individuals with whom it was
sometimes difficult to communicate.
A broad outreach would not work. As elite money managers,
their minimum portfolio was $500 million  or
 
more.
So, we developed a 7-point plan to create a marketing campaign
that mitigated risk and avoided costly blunders… powerfully
boosting sales.
The plan included:
# 1: Target Audience
For the direct mail campaigns for Zacks, we targeted specifically
Accredited Investors with estates of $3 million or
 
more.
#2: Direct Mail Envelope StrategyWhen you’re dealing with a high-end audience, where people are
able to invest more than $500,000, personalization and high quality
are essential. That’s why we chose to use only the best on the
envelope, which looks so authentic that no one can tell it’s not
personally
 
addressed.
#3: Powerful Direct Mail Letter
For Zacks, we used a powerful two-page letter that also appeared
personalized and authentic.
#4: Direct Response Copy
Rather than use editorial or journalistic copy, we used direct
response copy. We turned features into benefits and used a strong
“you” orientation and highly personal language.
Letters signed by an individual build up credibility and increase
response.
#5: A Tactical Lift Note
A lift note can increase response by 10–15%, sometimes as high
as 50%. In this case, the lift note used a question: “Your Zacks’ #1
rank and 32% return numbers are impressive … but how do they
apply to my investment portfolio? See inside.”
Readers opened up the short note that had a powerful message.
The message had a different theme than the main letter.
#6: A Powerful Order Form
We had a powerful order form with a strong Positive Acceptance
Statement (PAS). And the back of it added to the credibility by
showing the investment committee team.#7: A Great Direct Response Offer
The order form included a powerful direct response
 
offer – four
bonus reports. We called it the “Safety First Investing Kit.” Even
the wealthy could not resist the powerful titles that we used,
including “How to Protect Your Assets from the Market Downturn
or Crash.”
Using these seven elements, we produced a powerful direct
 
mail
campaign
 
for
 
Zacks
 
that
 
supercharged
 response from their wealthy
target audience.
When created with direct response rules in mind, direct mail can
deliver powerful response from prospects. It should be at the core of
your lead-generation
 
program
… and your multichannel, integrated
approach to strategic marketing campaign.
I urge you to use this powerful marketing medium. Direct mail is
not decreasing in usage or impact. In fact, it’s only getting more
powerful. Seven in 10 multichannel marketers surveyed said they
plan to maintain or increase their
 
use
 
of
 
direct
 
mail
 
through
 
2019
and
 
beyond.
Traditional direct mail packages are powerful … but there are
additional direct mail formats you can use to effectively market
your offer. In Chapters 14-16, you’ll 
discover additional direct mail
formats you can use to powerfully market your
 
offer.CHAPTER 16
                           
Magalogs: Infomercials in Print
     
The magalog is a powerful alternative to envelope mailings. It looks and
feels like a magazine, but it’s actually an “infomercial in print.”
     The magalog provides a refreshing alternative to the sameness of the
traditional direct mail package and has a longer life span and a greater “pass-
along” value.Unlike a traditional catalog, the magalog is not used to sell a
variety of products. It focuses on one product or service, with a
variety of editorial features that highlight your offer.
This 
unique direct 
mail 
format 
has 
produced 
outstanding results
for both consumer and business marketers since I first pioneered the
format in the
 
1990s.
The magalog could be your most effective direct mail choice for
your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign. In fact, I
recommend it to most of my clients.
Why?
It makes a powerful impression … communicates the detailed
benefits of your offer using an engaging format … and produces an
amazingly positive response.
What does a magalog look like?
When your prospects receive your magalog in the mail, at first
they will probably think that it’s a regular magazine.
But it’s really a detailed sales piece, designed to persuade
prospects about the benefits of your offer.
Magalogs are usually 16 pages in length, but they can also be 20,
24, 28 or 32 pages long, since printers find it most convenient to
print in sets of four or eight.
Magalogs with page counts in multiples of eight will usually be
the least expensive.
In most cases, I recommend 16-20 pages for lead generation and
20–24 pages for selling a product.
Finally, in order to make the magalog look more upscale and
reputable, I recommend four-color printing throughout the
publication.
Let’s look at the key elements for a magalog:
The CoverThe cover of your  magalog will have: 
✓
 A
powerful, direct response graphic 
✓
 A bold,
persuasive
 
headline
✓
 Informational copy that details what prospects can find
inside
A “direct response graphic” might not be the most beautiful
image, but it will compel prospects to take action. Usually, this
means it looks more “real” than a typical magazine photo.
Take a look at the test on the next page, displaying two different
magalog covers I created for Capital Holding Corporation, a life
insurance company.
When developing this piece, my mission was to create a cover
that the target audience (senior citizens) could relate to.
Cover ACover B
As you can see, Cover A features an elderly woman standing
outside her home holding a rake. The copy  on the cover was split
between both sides of the cover and an additional image (a stack of
money) was used to illustrate a headline that read, “Special Focus:
A mortgage that pays
 
YOU.”
Cover B shows an elderly couple sitting on a chair swing with a
cat sitting on the woman’s lap. The copy on this cover was lined up
in a box to the left and on the bottom in all caps read – “THE
GREAT LIFE.”
One important thing to note: The woman on Cover A was a real
customer of Capital Holding. Underneath her picture in small print
down to the right, the copy read: “One Woman’s Story: Nikki
Grant, Capital Holding customer, Long Beach, California.”
Cover B was a professional photograph using models.
Which cover do you think received the higher response?
    If you guessed Cover A you’re right. Cover A received an 84% higher
response than Cover B. Most marketers guessed cover B because the picture
is much better and far more “relational.”But Cover A most likely got the higher response because it’s a
photo of a real person.
When creating a magalog for your multichannel, integrated
campaign, keep this principle in mind: Often, the less professional-
looking photo or graphic receives a significantly higher response.
That being said, you should always test different variables to see
what works best. The marketplace is always right.
A similar test that I conducted was for a “tabalog” (a variation on
the magalog format) that I created for a longtime client, 
Health
Alert.
I mailed more than 40 million magalogs, creating the largest
alternative health newsletter in America and a $24 million dollar
mail order operation.
For one magalog, I tested two different covers: Cover A featured
a picture of an elderly man holding his head and looking straight
ahead with his eyes open, while Cover B featured an elderly man
holding his head but with his face looking down and his eyes shut.
The results showed that Cover B generated a 14.32% better
response than Cover A. In this case, Cover B may have gotten a
higher response because it evoked more emotion … but only the
marketplace really knows.
Covers should also be informational. Adding page numbers to
the story summaries on the cover helps to “tease” the reader inside.
See the magalog cover below that I created for my client
Independent Living
, on the next page.
      Notice how much copy is included on the cover
– letting prospects know what they can expect on the inside.      
On the bottom, there are short “teaser” snippets from "articles" inside the
magalog –showing "see page x" to let readers know exactly where they can
find the information.                                                     
    On some covers, this kind of information is shown as a short list of “teaser
bullets.” The back cover should also have more statements outlining the
articles in the magalog.
Inside the magalog, prospects will find valuable information that
describes the benefits of your product or service.
       
What you say on pages 2 and 3 is critical, and can mean success or
failure. Page 2 generally contains a letter from the company president stating
the purpose of the magalog, a table of contents or sometimes, the beginning
of the lead article.
        Page 3 starts the main article.
        The lead article helped investor prospects know about a growing energy
trend that could help them see skyrocketing profits. This powerful insight
was presented in an informational format that the prospect would consider
very useful.
    In addition to the main articles, prospects will see   sidebars t h r o u g h o
u t the magalog – smaller articles that usually focus on one  point or benefit,
and then end with a specific reader call-to-action (CTA) to respond.
    As with any part of your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign, it’s
critical that you use only direct response copy and art throughout your
magalog. You’ll discover key rules to this in Chapter 21. Following, not
breaking, the rules is critical to your success.
Ultimately, the purpose of this particular magalog was to generate
subscribers for an investment newsletter. This is the call-to-action (CTA),
presented towards the end of the magalog, along with a response, or order
form. The order form is one of the most important components of the
magalog, and should take up the last one or two
 
pages.
On the next two pages, see the two-page order form from the same
magalog.
     The first page of the order form includes information about the “9 Free
Bonuses” that prospects could receive if they subscribed to the newsletter. It
also included a "personal promise" from the newsletter writer that included a
guarantee.The second page of the order form includes a “Positive A c c e p t a n c e
Statement” (PAS) that states exactly 
what 
prospects 
will receive if they
respond
 
to  
the 
offer:
Yes, Lee! I want to cash in on this 
explosive 
energy 
megatrend 
and
receive 
early 
warnings on future 
megatrends 
that 
could have a major
impact 
on 
my 
family’s financial 
future. 
Sign 
me 
up 
immediately 
for your
monthly 
intelligence 
a d v i s o r  y ,     I n d e p e n d e n t Living. I
want tobegin receiving your regular bulletins designed to help me improve my
personal and financial independence – as well as early warnings on coming
megatrend profit opportunities.
Then, it lists different ordering options, as well as a clear, easy-to-
understand payment form at the bottom. Prospects are also given options: If
they don’t want to mail in the form, they can call a toll-free phone number or
visit a website.
If your product or service needs more explanation, images, graphs or
pictures than can be easily included in a traditional direct mail package, the
magalog may be the most effective choice for you.
For example, I often create magalogs for clients who
 
sell financial
products or services that may require more details, or for clients who provide
financial advice and
 
services.
By offering valuable information – and promising additional, free special
reports (which you’ll learn more about in Chapter 22) – the magalog helps
create trust and interest. Most importantly, it helps generate leads and sales.
Magalogs are valuable, informational and useful … and they produce
amazing results.CHAPTER 17
Unique Direct Mail Formats to Generate Leads
and Sales
The Newsalog, Bookalog, Tabalog, Videolog and 3-D
Package
The magalog isn’t your only direct mail choice for your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
Additional unique direct mail formats include:
✓
 
The newsalog 
– looks like a newspaper … feels like a
newspaper … but it’s really a marketing piece in
disguise
✓
 
The bookalog 
– a full-length book that offers prospects a
powerful value-added piece … and powerful persuasion
✓
 
The tabalog 
– a stand-out piece that grabs attention from
your prospects with its unique size and format
✓
 
The videolog 
– a unique, high-impact mail format for high-
end
 
prospects
✓
 
The 3-D package 
– a powerful, highly personalized and
unique direct mail format that gets a phenomenal response
In the following chapter, you’ll discover more about
 
these
breakthrough direct mail formats … critical keys to creating
effective marketing pieces … and how they
 
can help boost your
response.Newsalogs: Counterintuitive but
Effective
Sometimes what’s old is new. Newspapers may  be in
 
decline,
but
 
newsalogs
 
will
 
raise
 
your
 
response
 
rate.
The newsalog is an innovative format that falls in this category
of “retromarketing.”
I’ve seen this breakthrough format in direct mail create a 20–
30% increase in response for multiple clients.
Like magalogs, newsalogs are really marketing pieces in
disguise. They look and feel like an old-fashioned newspaper, but
they really drive prospects towards a powerful call-to-action (CTA)
to purchase your product or service.
We developed the newsalog when a client came to us looking for
a new mailing format. They had tried almost all the traditional
mailing formats on their profitable marketing campaigns, including
envelope mailings, bookalogs, magalogs and hand-written
envelopes.
But multiple mailings to the same names reduce response. This
client needed something new to command their prospects’ attention
and generate new clients.
So, I took the client’s old “magalog” or magazine- style format
that had been used for various versions for more than 10 years, and
turned the copy and art into a mock newspaper.
This advertorial-style format conveyed a sense of
newsworthiness about the company and its product, commanded
potential customers’ attention and, most importantly, dramatically
increased our client’s sales.
The results?
•
     
A 
17% boost 
response, generating 
more 
customers and a
superior
 
ROI•
     
Huge potential for a massive amount of cross- sell
 
revenue
•
     
The most successful year for the company ever, with more
than 50,000 new customers added because of the new
format
The newsalog is a disruptive format that can “shake things up” if
your response rate is stagnant.
Here’s an example of a newsalog I created for my client,
Strategic Investment
, an investment
 
newsletter service.
     Note the powerful headline: 
The End of Chemo
 – followed by editorial-
style bullet points including: 
University of Minnesota Researcher Discovers
Breakthrough that Powers Up the Immune
 Cancer 
Cells.
    The breaking story that followed described a powerful new innovation in
cancer treatment that could remove the need for chemotherapy, radiation and
surgery.
In reality, the story is meant to persuade readers to want to investin the company behind this cancer breakthrough – a powerful
investment opportunity presented by my client’s investment
newsletter, 
Strategic Investment
.
Inside the newsalog, prospects find additional articles as well as
detailed stock projections for the company behind the cancer
treatment.
Like magalogs, newsalogs contain a detailed order form and call-
to-action at the end of the direct mail format. Newsalogs look and
feel authentic, using the same paper type, size and color as a
traditional newspaper.
Here are three foundational principles that apply to newsalogs:
1.
        
Newsalogs are typically 20–28 pages in length; 20–24 for
leads, 20–28 for
 
sales.
2.
        
Newsalogs are written in a more editorial style, but still
follow the principles of direct response
 
copy –
   
benefit-oriented,
“you-focused” copy.3. Newsalogs also use direct response art and graphics to generate a high
response from the reader.
     Newsalogs may be an especially effective choice for you if you sell a
more complicated service or product that requires more explanation.
     Here is the winning newsalog control that beat all formats and over 12
covers for 
Health Alert
 (shown above).Bookalogs: A High-Impact Lead
Generation Tool
Bookalogs are not new, but they are rarer in the marketing world.
In fact, they are often overlooked. But one of the most powerful
marketing pieces that you can produce.
In politics, every serious candidate has one.
    That’s because a bookalog acts as a powerful branding and positioning
piece by establishing you as an “expert” or “authority” in your space.
    And one of the great advantages of the bookalog is that it provides you
with an opportunity to build credibility in the eyes of your prospect – and set
you apart in a very powerful way from the competition.  
     People respect books … and they also respect authors.
A 
bookalog 
is excellent for 
either 
business-to- 
business or
consumer campaigns. It’s also shown to be a successful tool for
fundraising, investment offers, health offers, tech campaigns and
much
 
more.
Though a bookalog is an effective marketing vehicle,it is not
viewed as a sales piece. Rather, it is considered a book, with
valuable information to be learned, acted on and shared with others.
Here’s an example of a bookalog I created for a client generating
leads for a financial service … along with the envelope it came in.
The title of the book was 
6 Blunders That Could
Destroy Your Retirement Dreams!
  The subtitle said, “How you can avoid common investment mistakes that
can turn your golden years into a nightmare.”    This book was a sales piece written for my client’s “perfect prospects” –
using highly targeted mailing lists. Prospects were not being “sold,” but
educated. The goal: by the time recipients put down the “book,” they had
learned a lot. Yet, in reality, the bookalog had one basic and specific
objective, and that was to generate leads from prospects who enjoyed the
information or story presented in the book.
      Most bookalogs I create are about 120 pages, softbound and have all the
features of a normal book (i.e., a table of contents, a dedication and an
appealing title that makes the recipient want to read it).
Usually we also create a hard cover version for special prospects.
Here are eight rules to keep in mind when creating your bookalog:
1.
     
Your copy needs to follow the time-tested, direct response rules for
copy. Remember, it’s a sales piece, not an editorial (See Chapter
 
19).
2.
    
Use an easy-to-read typeface that is 12-point or above.
3.
    
Choose your author wisely. Typically, the author would be your
company president, but it depends on the product 
or service. A
physician is a great choice for a nutritional product, for example, while
a teacher makes a great spokesperson for an educational
 
program.
4.
    
For a powerful 
direct 
mailing campaign that 
complements 
your
multichannel, 
integrated 
campaign, include a simple, one-page letter in
an envelope along with the bookalog. Use the letter to explain why the
prospect has received the book, what’s in it for them and why they need
to read it.5.
     
You must include an order form that is separate from your direct mail
sales letter and the book. Print several order forms at the end of the
bookalog itself. If the book is passed around, this ensures each reader
will have a chance to respond to your offer. Use the same order form
techniques that are key to every other direct mail piece.
6.
    
Create an e-book version of your book that you can use for digital
components of your multichannel, integrated campaign. And yes, put it
on
 
Amazon.
7.
     
Print both 
hard-cover 
copies 
and 
soft-cover 
copies. Soft-cover books
can be used for general
 
distribution. The hard-cover can be used for
personal distribution 
at 
important 
meetings. Nothing is more powerful
than signing the book for a prospect or client – you’re the
 
author!
8.
    
Finally, testing your bookalog is crucial and can be accomplished in a
variety of ways. As with a direct mail letter, the results will depend on
using the right mailing list, superior direct response copy, creative
direction of the book and the right offer to generate a lead from the
potential customer.
If you want to create powerful credibility, position yourself as an expert in
your field and set yourself apart from 98% of marketers who have never even
considered using a book. Do it 
skillfully and a bookalog might be an
effective choice for your direct mail campaign.
The Tabalog: A Rare
Marketing Format That
Breaks Through the
Clutter
Even rarer than the bookalog is the tabalog, a direct mail marketing piecethat makes a powerful impression on prospects because of its unusual size
and format.
The tabalog looks similar to a magazine, except that
 
is enlarged from
typical magazine dimensions to 11” x 12”. When I create a tabalog, I use a
coated stock cover to create extra
 
impact.
Here’s a powerful story about how we created a tabalog to supercharge
response for an alternative health client:
My client Sun Wellness wanted to aggressively expand its customer base
for its Sun Chlorella supplement. For about four years, the company had been
mailing a traditional envelope mailing package I created to grow its market
share. But Sun Wellness wanted to speed up its progress. The marketplace
was becoming increasingly competitive as many new nutraceutical
companies were entering the market, and the company’s target prospects
were being inundated with advertising.
My job was to help Sun Chlorella stand out among the crowd – and
generate more leads and profits.
    So, I decided to use a tabalog to create interest and curiosity, and capture
the attention of prospects who would turn into loyal customers.
    The primary function of Sun Chlorella was to help the body cleanse and
detoxify itself naturally. To highlight this, my team and I developed a tabalog
around the theme of “the invisible toxic enemy.”
    
The cover featured the true story of Dr. William Kellas, a noted authority
on toxins and the immune system, and his own path from a debilitating
disease to better health using the 7-Step “Health & Vitality” program.
Developed around Sun Chlorella, the program was highlighted throughout
the piece, and was supported by health facts, expert opinions and customer
testimonials.
    The campaign’s special offer included a 30% discount and up to four Free
Bonus gifts.
     The results?
   Campaign performance was three times greater than the company’s
previous mailing.
    This tabalog mailing not only helped Sun Wellness expand their customer
base, but they had to expand their staff and install a new phone system to
keep up with the number of orders that were coming in. More than 4 million
pieces were mailed, which generated thousands of new buyers.     This powerful story demonstrates how a unique direct
mail piece, such as the tabalog (but even the bookalog or newsalog) can help
response to your multichannel, integrated campaign skyrocket.
The Videolog: A High-End Piece for High-End Prospects
     
    You may have a product or service offer that you would like to send to a
select group of high-end prospects.
Maybe you’re willing to spend more cash upfront to make an immediate,
powerful impression and get an amazingly positive response.
    If that’s the case, you should definitely consider using a videolog to market
your product or service to a select audience.
    
A videolog is one of the newest technological advancements in direct
response marketing. It is a specially designed device included in a mailing
that automatically plays a video when opened by the prospect. A screen is
included on the device itself, which is opened by the recipient like a
brochure.
     Videologs command attention … and invite response.
They are stunning pieces that have probably never been seen by your
prospects before.
   The video itself can be two minutes, three minutes or even 30 minutes. And
it can feature a large or small screen. It can even include a button to make a
phone call on the spot to respond to your offer, without ever touching a cell
phone.
For the videolog, I create a powerful direct response
 
video with
the proper copy. It’s delivered in an envelope with a cover letter, a
small brochure that has the video
 
and a lift note. The impact is
spectacular!
The latest version includes a phone built in so all your prospects
have to do is push a button to generate
 
the lead or sale.    
   
For videologs, use a powerful direct response video, as explained in
Chapter 27. Deliver it in an envelope with a cover letter, a small brochure that
has the video and a lift note. The impact is stellar.
   Videologs will be your priciest option for your direct mail package – but
they also get an outstanding average response of 14% or higher.
    I expect that the cost of creating a videolog will decrease in the near future 
… allowing you  to create a high-impact piece at a relatively low cost … with
a low cost-per-lead and cost-per-sale.
The 3-D Package: Generating Leads with a Creative, High-Impact Piece
    A 3-D package is a high-impact piece that uses a creatively oversized or
odd-sized package that has the enticing appearance of a gift.
These packages are usually sent via Federal Express
 
or UPS and are
designed to get past the mailroom (if mailed to an office) and into the hands
of the targeted
 
decision maker, grabbing their full attention.
3-D packages get an extraordinary response because of their unique
format. Even the most jaded direct mail recipient will find it difficult to resist
opening a mysterious
 
package
 
that
 
looks
 
like
 
a
 
gift.
The package might be an odd-sized envelope, a cardboard or wooden box
or a tube. The contents could be a jigsaw puzzle with missing pieces, the
beginning of a collection of special items, a lock with an offer to deliver the
key — or a variety of other items that come
 
from an especially creative
imagination.If you are trying to market your product or service to a highly targeted
audience, this is one of the most effective ways to get 
your message to the
right people with the greatest immediate impact and the highest possible
response rate.
These intrusive hands-on pieces usually trigger a response rate that is five
to 50 times the normal rate of a traditional mailing piece.
3-D packages are more costly than traditional direct mail – easily $10 to
$75 per piece. So, they should be reserved for high-margin products or
services and are usually sent to target audiences of about 10,000 or
 
fewer.
Here are the details of a 3-D campaign I created for one client:
The prospect was given a pair of scissors and a coupon to “cut their
shipping costs in half.” The campaign on the right featured a 1-dollar bill and
a 2-dollar bill.
 
It
 was a visual play on how the prospect could double his or
her money.
As you can see, a three-dimensional campaign is a mailer that shows a
concept or a theme in a clever, interesting way. It’s also highly memorable –
and fun for your prospect. This package 
also contained a sales letter and a lift
note to tell the story. I recommend you include these traditional components
in your piece as well as newer items. Both pieces received more than a 20%response rate –   and increased even more by follow-up phone calls.
With a 3-D campaign, you’re able to break through the   clutter, make your
presentation dramatic and interesting and set the stage for your phone contact
or sales call. If the prospect doesn’t call first, a good salesperson will initiate
a call with the reminder: “We’re the company that sent you the….” It’s
amazing how creative three-
dimensional packages break down barriers.
     These formats often seem counterintuitive or even overly “retro” – but the
proof is in the amazing results: Your prospects will respond to a unique direct
mail format, especially when it is carefully created with direct response
principles and tactics.
   And, when integrated into your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign, these pieces will help you achieve a tremendous response – and
produce profits that will make you come back for more!CHAPTER 18
           
    Informed Delivery – The “Pre-Mail” Alert
    
    “Informed Delivery” is a cutting-edge new marketing tool that you can use
with your direct mail.
      It’s a special email that alerts your direct mail recipients that the direct
mail piece will arrive that very day in their postal mailbox.
    It reinforces your offer… Provides another touchpoint… And increases
your response… And it’s FREE!
That’s because Informed Delivery is provided by the U.S. Postal Service.
     The Postal Service provides Informed Delivery at no cost to anyone who
signs up. The program allows you to:
1)    Display an image of your envelope in the email that announces what’s
coming that day to a recipient’s mailbox, and
2)     Include a banner ad below the image of your direct mail piece.
    And you can use it for your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign –
to boost your response and reinforce your offer.What Will You Get in the Mail
Today?
    People love looking  at this email. It’s  addictive. It’s a sneak preview. The
email shows all the mail coming that day with a photo image offering more.
If you get one piece in your mailbox, it shows it. If you get 20, it shows you
all 20.
    That means that when you send your prospects a powerful direct mail
piece – either a traditional mailing package or another type of format detailed
in this book
–   they will receive an email displaying your direct mail package before they
receive it in their postal mailbox.
    The USPS sends this email for you … but you can still customize it with a
link to your landing page or video.
     Take a look at the example of what “Informed Delivery” looked like for
my client Independent Living, an investment newsletter (shown on the next
page):      
In this case, prospects can see what the incoming direct mail magalog
looks like. It’s creating curiosity and anticipation.
    Below the magalog image, we showed a tease of the landing page.
    Prospects then have the opportunity to immediately visit the landing page
and respond to the offer.
      Informed delivery will also allow you to run a free banner ad that drives
prospects to a video.
      Here is an example:
    
   Informed delivery gives you a powerful opportunity to enhance your direct
mail campaign – and your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign –
and should be used in every direct mail campaign you conduct.PART FOUR
Multichannel, Integrated Creative Essentials to
Maximizing Response
You might have all of the assets in place for a multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign…
But if your assets aren’t created with the right creative approach, your
marketing simply won’t succeed.
In the following five chapters (Chapters 19–23), you’ll discover time-
tested, proven strategies to producing creative content that gets a response.CHAPTER 19
Writing Copy That Sells
50 Rules for Creating Effective, Sales-Boosting Copy
     In the previous 18 chapters, we took a look at the individual elements that
make up your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
    Now, let’s dive into one of the core foundations that will make your
multichannel, integrated campaign effective and profitable: direct response
copy.
    You may create and deploy all elements of a successful marketing
campaign … but get a very low return on your blood, sweat and tears if the
content of your campaign copy falls flat.
    The hallmarks of effective marketing are not beautiful aesthetics and clever
writing. Effective marketing is never measured by what seems to look or
sound good. It’s measured by its rate of success.
   Here’s the bottom line: Effective marketing will motivate your prospect to
pick up the phone and call your toll-free number – or go to your website and
enter a credit card number.
So, what’s going to drive your prospects to respond to your
offer?
The Foundation of
Successful Marketing:
Direct ResponseCopywriting
More than beautiful graphics or short, cute copy, direct response
copywriting will motivate your prospects to purchase your product
or
 
service.
Direct response copy is a unique, conversational style of copy
that turns features into benefits. It develops credibility and reality in
your advertising campaign.
In short: It’s persuasive “word engineering” that gets people to
respond.
In more than 40 years of writing direct response marketing
materials, I have developed some critical foundations of direct
response copywriting that should always be followed for increased
response. These include a set of powerful foundations, tried-and-
true formulas for writing great copy and direct response rules that
should never be
 
broken.
These time-tested strategies and tactics should be applied to
every aspect of your integrated marketing campaign: landing page,
direct mail, email, banner ads, Facebook ads, pre-roll video, email
and more.
Direct response copy
succeeds because it’s
based in science
Most advertising agencies create art: beautiful design with clever
copy. But if you want to get new leads and
 
customers, attractive art
is only a small part of the battle.
Direct response marketing is based  on the science
 
of what
makes advertising effective and why. Using tried-and-true rules,direct response copy
 
will:
✓
 Grab the attention of your prospect.
✓
 Powerfully position your company and product in your
prospect’s mind.
✓
 Identify your unique selling proposition (USP).
✓
 Overcome your prospect’s skepticism and objections.
✓
 Create a “branding” effect that will help you gain market
share.
✓
 Motivate your prospect to respond immediately.
✓
 Follow time-tested copy rules that work.
Direct response copy begins
with you.
Direct response copy doesn’t necessarily begin with
 
a clever
idea. It begins with
 
“you.”
A good direct response copywriter will:
•
     
Discover what’s unique about your product or service and
relate it to the “you” orientation of the
 
prospect.
•
     
Decide exactly how your prospects will benefit from your
product or
 
service.
•
     
Create
 
a
 
specific,
 
clear
 
theme
 
for
 
the
 
prospect.
•
     
Develop personal, one-on-one communication with the
prospect.
•
     
Communicate your unique selling proposition (USP) to
your prospect – what sets apart your product or service
from the rest (see Chapter 20).Good direct response 
copy 
draws 
on the 
core 
emotional needs of
your prospect. The desire for money, love, respect and self-
improvement are some  of the strongest emotions you can appeal to.
Show your prospects how your product or service will meet those
needs,
 
and
 
they’ll
 
find
 
your
 
offer
 
irresistible.
Direct response copy focuses on one “Big Idea.”
A good direct response copywriter will focus on one big idea: a
single, strong theme that can be explained clearly and understood
quickly. A big idea lets your prospect know right away what you’re
getting at.
The best “big ideas” are closely tied to your audience’s strongest
trigger points. They’re timely and emotionally stirring, to awaken,
shock or fascinate your reader. They work because they make a
strong connection with your
 
reader.
     If you can’t describe your big idea in just a few words… then you don’t
have one.
Revisit your approach and search for that one idea that will reach
the real needs, fears and concerns of
 
your
 
prospect.
If you use direct response strategies effectively, your prospects
will clearly understand how your offer meets their needs and
desires. Your prospects become your customers because they see
what’s in it for them if they buy from
 
you.
Direct response copy stresses the benefits,
not the features, of your product or service.
Traditional advertising copy will tell you about the features of a
product or service. For example, an ad for a stroller might tell you
that it’s “lightweight,” has “all- terrain wheels” or features an
“adjustable handlebar.”
By contrast, direct response copy will tell you about the benefits
of a product or service. For example, it might describe a stroller as
“convenient to carry,” “ideal for the outdoors” and “simple to use
for both
 
parents.”Do you see the difference?
Features pertain to the product or service. Benefits tell the buyers
what the features do for them. Here are
 
three simple rules for
telling your prospects about the benefits of your product or service
– and getting more sales.
Rule #1
: Decide exactly how your buyers will benefit
 
from the
most important features of your product or service … and tell them
how these features benefit them.
If you are selling an extremely compact pocket knife, your
benefit could be: “slips into your pocket easily because it’s so tiny.”
If you are selling a high-quality set of precision golf clubs, your
benefit could be “highest precision and extreme accuracy help you
lower your score.”
Rule #2: 
Determine your prospects’ exact needs and desires …
so you can give them the right kind of compelling copy that makes
them want to buy from you.
Figure out precisely: What do your buyers want? What are their
goals? What makes them most
 
happy?
For example, with a less expensive, more powerful vacuum
cleaner the “you” method produces the benefit, “you can save with
our low prices.”
Rule #3: 
Put yourself in your buyer’s shoes before you write one
word of
 
copy.
Just imagine that someone else is trying to sell your product or
service to
 
you.
What benefits should they mention to convince you to buy it?
What order should these benefits be in? How should they
 
be
presented
 
for
 
the
 
most
 
successful
 
sales
 
story?
    
What strongest benefit should be the “clincher” that closes the sale?
    Use the valuable information you glean by imagining that someone else is
trying to sell your product or service to you … and put all this information
into strong selling copy!
     Long copy almost always works better than short copy.
    It might seem counterintuitive, but extensive research and testing haveshown that long copy almost always works better than short copy.
    A long letter in a direct mail piece, a long email or text-heavy landing page
will usually generate a higher response from your prospective customers.
Readership does fall off at 300 words, but does not drop off again until 3,000
words.
    Take a look at the five-way test, shown on the next page. This test was
conducted to compare results using several different sizes of brochures, sales
letters and a self-mailer.
    This five-way test clearly demonstrates two important facts.
The first is that a letter is one of the most important marketing
materials you can invest in.
The second important fact? As you can see from the test results,
response to a long letter can significantly outpull response to a short
letter.
Generating high-quality leads requires copy that is long enough
to properly tell your story to a skeptical audience.
Your marketing deserves a sales letter, landing page, video and
other media that:
✓
 Pack an emotional wallop.
✓
 Show your prospects what’s unique about you.✓
 Explain why your offer will benefit them more than
competitors’ offers.
✓
 Overcome their hesitation and objections.
Involving your readers and telling them exactly what you want
them to do might take more than one or two pages of copy.
Lead copy should be shorter than sales copy that’s asking for a
sale. Also, the more you’re asking for – especially $5,000 or more –
or the more complicated your opportunity is to understand, the
longer the copy needs to be.
Direct response copy is a better return on your investment.
For decades, direct marketers using direct response copy have:
•
     
Compiled 
the 
response rate 
to 
tens 
of 
thousands of
emails, web ads, paid search, direct mail packages, radio
spots and television commercials…
•
     
Compared marketing copy and strategies with the quantity
and quality of responses…
•
     
Discovered which strategies and tactics were hugely
successful, which were moderately successful and which
were devastating failures…
•
     
Analyzed exactly why successful marketing strategies and
techniques earned their companies millions
 
of
 
dollars
 
and
why
 
some
 
didn’t…
•
     
And validated their discoveries through solid measurement
and analysis, testing and more testing.
Over the years, I have developed a knowledge base of copy
strategies and techniques that work, as well as when they work and
why, which I’ll share with you on the following pages.
Writing great copy requires mastery of direct marketing strategies and
techniques.
An image-based advertising agency wants you to believe that noone can write sales copy like their clever copywriters. Don’t believe
them.
Even great writers don’t necessarily write great copy. More than
perfect prose or even perfect grammar, powerful direct response
copy will convince a prospect to respond to your offer.
Tried-and-True Formulas to
Create Effective Copy
for Your Multichannel, Integrated Campaign
Here are four formulas to help you succeed in creating
persuasive, powerful direct response copy that will boost your sales.
The 4 “P’s”
The 4 “P’s” is a basic copy formula to keep in mind while
making sure you’ve included all of the core elements of effective
direct response
 
copy.
The 4 “P’s” include:
•
    
Promise. 
Catch your readers’ attention by promising them
a benefit. Call it out in the headline, elaborate on it in the
subhead and then expand further in your opening. Showing
your readers what’s in it for them is the only surefire way
to grab
 
attention.
•
    
Picture. 
Help your readers imagine themselves enjoying
the benefit or outcome you’ve promised. 
This approach
appeals 
to your 
prospects’ 
emotional triggers. Specifically
elaborate on how your product or service will make this
benefit a
 
reality.
•
    
Proof. 
Back up the picture you’ve painted with cold, hard
facts: Statistics, research studies, charts, graphs,testimonials, third-party reviews, 
certifications, 
product
photos and product demonstrations.
•    
Push. 
This is more than just a call to action — it’s also
delivering your irresistible offer and illustrating how much
value your recipient will receive. Your goal is to link the
promised benefit 
to the enticing picture to the acceptance
of the proof … all to result in an action.
The 5 “U’s”
The 5 “U’s” are a simple code for creating copy that is
compelling, interesting and effective. Consider what your 5 “U’s”
will be before you write your copy.
The 5 “U’s” are:
1.
    
Unusual approach. 
Every day, your prospects see dozens, if
not hundreds of messages in their postal mail, email,
Facebook feeds, in pre-roll videos and more. If you want to
get noticed, do something different. Try a powerful headline
that speaks directly to your target. Highlight an unusual, but
strong offer. Or provide a guarantee that stands out from the
rest.
2.
    
Urgent feel. 
Unless you can convince your customers to take
immediate action, you’re at risk of losing them forever. To
convey a sense of urgency, give the product or service you’re
offering a limited window of time in which to buy. Also, be
sure to offer valid reasons for the urgency, not just an arbitrary
deadline.
3.
    
Useful and valuable information. 
Your email, Facebook
ads, pre-roll commercials or direct mail letters should include
some intrinsic value. Offering real value to your audience will
greatly increase response.
4.
    
Unique Selling Proposition (USP). 
What makes you
special? Why should a customer buy 
from you instead of your
competitor? How is your offerbetter than anything else on the market? Your USP
differentiates you in such a way as to make you the most
compelling choice for your customers.
5.
    
Ultra-specific and details. 
Test  after  test  prove it …
specifics outsell generalities every time. Use specific numbers
(tests show that odd numbers do better than even). Provide
facts supported by percentages. Use names of authoritative
figures when appropriate. Avoid vague copy and provide
details that
 
sell.
AIDA: Attention, Interest, Desire, Action
AIDA works because it keeps you focused on the final goal:
Prompting your reader to act. Use AIDA as the “line of action” as
you write your copy.
First, grab your prospect’s attention with a personal, benefit-
driven headline.
Now that you’ve got their attention, what you say next is critical.
You must create interest to keep them reading. Help them quickly
identify that your message is relevant.
To build desire, use your strongest benefit-driven selling points
to appeal to your prospects’ needs and wants.
Finally, get your prospects to take action by clearly stating what
you want them to do. For example, “Call 1-800-XXX-XXXX to get
your free recession-fighting report” or “Return this Special Savings
Certificate in the postage-paid envelope today to begin your FREE,
no-risk, 30-day trial.”
AIDPPC: Attention, Interest, Description,
Persuasion, Proof, Close
AIDPPC is a variation on AIDA that provides a winning formula to get
prospects to take action.
After you’ve got their attention and interest, your curious prospects will
want a full description of what you’re offering. Show your readers how youroffer will improve their lives by describing the benefits of your product or
service.
And remember, persuasion goes beyond simply presenting interesting
information. You must convince prospects that it’s in their best interest to
respond to your offer.
After 
you’ve 
made 
your 
claims, provide 
proof. Today’s skeptical
prospects demand that you prove your statements. Back up your sales pitch
with cold, hard facts and
 
testimonials.
Finally, close. Summarize the benefits and the offer, and pair them with
your call to action.
These copy formulas provide a good foundation for
 
writing an effective
direct response piece.
In addition, you must also know specific direct response copy rules. After
all, direct response marketing is persuasive word engineering that relies on a
set of foundational rules.
Over the years, I’ve worked on thousands of ads, direct mail pieces,
landing pages, emails and more. And from all of this work, it’s clear that
certain types of copy are most successful.
These are words, phrases and sentence types that can be tested for
effectiveness.
Simply put, experience has shown that this is the kind of copy
that works
 
best.
I’ve found that you can produce the best copy by following a set
of rules. Break the rules and bad things
 
happen.
50 Rules for Direct Response
Copy
Here are 50 rules for direct response copy that I use for every
element of an effective multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.Keep these principles in mind during all of your marketing
efforts – direct mail, email, TV commercials, your 
landing page,
video script, banner 
ads 
and 
everything else you use – and you’ll
see great
 
response..
Rule #1 Remember to keep
the first sentence short.
Your reader will form an instant impression of your offer by
reading the first sentence. If it’s short and easy
 
to read, chances are
better that he or she will read on. But if it’s slow, long or too
complex, the reader is more likely to abandon it
.
Rule
 
#2 Make
 
sure
 
your
 
intentions
 
are
 
clear.
You may tease a reader on the outer envelope or headline of your
landing page, but don’t make your
 
prospect read five pages to find
out what you’re selling. As a marketer, you’re competing with
multiple distractions
 
that
 
hinder
 
your
 
ability
 
to
 
drive
 
a
 
sale.
Remember, you have their attention at the opening – so don’t be
afraid to “fire your biggest gun” at that point.
Here’s an example of a strong opening:
I’m going 
to 
tell you about 
a 
natural health 
product that heals
your aches and pains just as well 
as prescription medications – but
with no side effects whatsoever. Not even one.
Or:
Dozens of online investment newsletters promise great stock tips.
But my service does more than promise great tips. It also teaches
you the 18 foolproof criteria for identifying great stocks…so you
can become your own high-powered Wall Street advisor.Rule #3 Approach the reader
from a position of authority.
The feel of the copy, the tone, the energy – must come across as
authoritative. Authoritative copy means words that include specific
information, details, figures and facts that will resonate.
Your readers must feel confident that the copy is speaking to
them with authority and conviction. Your copy must relate to their
challenges and solve their concerns.
Rule #4 Use specifics to strengthen
your copy.
    Don’t just write that your product or service is unique. Tell  the reader 
why, and use concrete examples.
Rule #5   Use specifics in your
 
testimonials.
For a health supplement, don’t use, “Your vitamin is terrific. I
feel great.” Instead use, “I tried your vitamin… so far, I feel more
energetic and focused. I’m sleeping better and I feel less anxious.”
Give your readers “meat,” not generalizations.
Rule #6 Make sure what you
provide is exciting to the
reader.
Sometimes what’s exciting and important to you isn’t interesting
to the prospect. So, you need to understand and key in on his or herneeds and concerns, not yours.
Rule #7 Avoid the passive voice.
Isolate and review all phrases telling what you’ll do for the
person. Then make sure to change a passive voice to an active
voice. Don’t write, “The kit will be forwarded to you immediately.”
Instead, simply write, “I’ll send you your kit now.”
Rule #8 Use the word “now.”
To stress immediacy, use the word “now” to persuade prospects
to act immediately. Your best  opportunity to make a sale is
immediately – before something or someone else grabs their
attention.
Rule #9 Remember that
benefits outsell descriptions.
Increasing “you-benefit” 
copy and 
minimizing 
mechanical
descriptions mean better response. You won’t sell a car by
describing the type of safety glass or the gauge of steel, but a buyer
will respond if you emphasize benefits: great handling, increased
gas mileage, high resale value, performance, etc.
Rule #10 Zero in on reader action.
Your objective is to make the prospect say, “Yes, I’ll buy!” If he
or she doesn’t act positively, then the only thing you’ve succeeded
in doing is keeping your name 
alive as a reminder. Give readers the
answers to their questions. Don’t keep them guessing.
Also, don’t forget to get the reader’s head nodding in agreement.
Keep him or her reading by maintaining the “yes” mood.Rule #11 Write sentences so
they’re short andeasy to read.
Instead of saying, “You can buy this product now,” say, “Buy
now.”
Rule
 
#12
Avoid big words
when 
shorter 
words are
available.
“Buy” instead of “purchase.” “Get” instead of “receive.” “Need”
instead of
 
“require.”
Rule #13 Cut long paragraphs
into several short ones.
Short paragraphs are easier to skim and read quickly. Try to keep
your paragraphs to one or two sentences –
   
three,
 
maximum.
Rule #14 Indent and use white
space to its advantage.
Your prospect shouldn’t be overwhelmed by words packed onto
a page. You’re not writing a textbook. Leave white space on the
page. It has a powerful effect.
Rule #15 Select hot words.
…such as “new,” “now,” “easy,” “introducing” and “save.”
These are the words that will capture the attention of your prospects
and get them
 
to respond.Rule #16 Vary paragraph lengths.
Keep paragraphs short – as stated in Rule #13 – but make sure
they aren’t all the same length. Some paragraphs should be one
short sentence. Others might be two longer
 
sentences.
Again, none of your paragraphs should be extremely long.
Rule #17 Make sentences and
paragraphs flow with natural
transitions.
Use transitional words and phrases to flow from
 
one
idea to the next. For example, you can say “Let me tell you…” or
“Next,”
Rule
 
#18
Occasionally
insert a paragraph that has just
a word or two, or a single
sentence.
Don’t be afraid of using just one or two words on one line, or one
short sentence. This helps keep your copy conversational and
engaging.
Rule #19 Use color forsubheads, bullets and
indentations.
Rule #20 Present information in easy-to-understand charts
and graphs.
In today’s fast-paced, low-attention-span environment, simple,
visual displays of information are very
 
effective.
That’s why it’s especially important to reinforce your copy
(specifically comparisons, ratios and percentages) with a chart or
graph that visually represents your content.
And make sure you always write a descriptive caption explaining
exactly
 
what
 
the
 
reader
 
is
 
looking
 
at.
Rule #21 Avoid bureaucratic talk. 
Never assume they all know
the lingo.
Rule #22 Don’t choose odd
words that will pull readers’
attention away from the sales
message.
Rule #23 Weed out clichés and jargon.
Rule #24 Avoid too many commas and semicolons.
They’ll slow your readers down.
Rule #25 Your headline shouldcontain a benefit.
Start your ad, brochure, webpage, email or any other marketing
tool off with a bang … meaning put your biggest benefit right in the
headline.
Use your headline to grab your prospects’ attention immediately,
so they will quickly understand that the message is meant for them.
Rule #26 Never ask a question in a
headline.
Question marks in a headline depress response. They cancel out
any prospect who would answer the question with “No.”
There are exceptions, but they are rare. If the question creates
shock, it may be effective. But think carefully about the risk.
Rule #27 Steer clear of new
language.
Slang words and phrases may jar, offend or confuse readers with
meanings they may not know.
Rule #28 Omit words that
convey doubt or uncertainty:
“I think,” “It appears,” “It seems,” “You might find.”Rule #29 Write in a language
that’s “you,” not “I” oriented.
•
     
“You’ll gain” (not “I provide”)
•
     
“You’ll discover” (not “I’ll show
 
you”)
•
     
“You’ll get a free” (not “I’ll give
 
you”)
Rule #30 Write in an active voice.
“You’ll get your free book,” not “The free book will be
forwarded to you.”
Rule #31 Use the present tense:
“Buy
 
now
 
and
 
you’ll
 
get
 
a
 
free
 
bonus.”
Rule #32 Write to one person,
from one person.
Rule #33 Write your copy
“out
 
loud.”
To ensure your copy is conversational, take the timeto read it out loud.
It should sound like a real face-to-face conversation.
Rule #34 Don’t brag – let the facts brag for you. Rule #35
Don’t say “trust me.”
Here’s the problem: Your prospects aren’t going to trust you just
because you tell them to. You actually have to earn that trust.
When you say to your prospect, “You can trust me,” without
backing that up with certifiable proof, you sound exactly like the
con artists you’re trying to distinguish yourself
 
from.
Focus on proving your claims on getting real, hard- hitting
testimonials. If you can do all that, you’ll win their trust – and their
business.
Rule #36 Pepper copy with proven
power words.
Power words alert your prospects and grab their attention.
Instead of announcing or describing the product like hot words do,
power words are packed with action.
Here are 10 power words to use in your next campaign:
1.
   
Own
2.
   
Get
3.
   
Control
4.
   
Take
5.
   
Capture
6.
   
Try
7.
   
Enjoy8.
   
Seize
9.
   
Grab
10.
   
Have
Rule #37 Use exclamation points,
but sparingly!
Sometimes you do need to punctuate your excitement. But be
careful not to go overboard. Too many exclamation points  make 
your  copy  sound  cheesy  or  even worse –
   
unbelievable. But in
other cases, they are needed to change the
 
tone.
See how differently these examples read, thanks to punctuation:
Wrong: Easy to understand. You even get email contacts.
      Right: Easy to understand. You even get email contacts! Wrong:
Revealed: The secret to a crash-proof portfolio! Right: Revealed: The secret
to a crash-proof portfolio.
If you’re not sure, consider your audience and your product.
Products that are serious in nature, as well
 
as luxury items, will
rarely use exclamation points in print
 
advertising.
Rule #38 Don’t use asterisks (*).
Rule #39 Use ellipses (. . .) instead of dashes (–). Rule #40
Avoid exaggerated claims.
They will destroy your credibility. Superlatives are
counterproductive. To claim that your service or product is the best
in the world is automatically ignored by the reader and casts doubt
on your entire presentation.
On the other hand, when you are specific and use actualtestimonials, you gain credibility. Let others verify your facts and
greatness, and let details and specifics reinforce your
 
claims.
Rule #41 Avoid complicated words.
Simple 
words 
are powerful words. 
Legendary 
copywriter John
Caples once said, “The headline of  an ad for an automobile repair
kit was, ‘How to repair cars.’ The headline was changed to, ‘How to
fix cars.’ The
 
second
 
headline
 
pulled
 
20%
 
more
 
replies.”
Rule #42 Anticipate the beliefs of
your prospects.
Don’t try to change the beliefs and attitudes of your prospects –
track with them.
Do your research on your prospects. Speak to their political
beliefs and their worldview, and they’ll be more likely to respond to
your offer.
Rule #43 Eliminate all
references to “I think” or “our
company believes.”
Remember, your prospects don’t care about what you think, they
only care about what they think or need.
Rule #44 Anticipate and
address your prospect’squestions.
Write your copy as if you were face to face with your prospects
and anticipating their questions.
Rule #45 Anticipate and
respond to your prospect’s
objections.
An objection is often a question. One way to turn a potential
negative into an advantage is with a question- and-answer format.
Rule #46 Write a list.
Writing a list will help readers who simply “skim” your copy
pick up on your points quickly and read through to your
 
call-to-
action.
Rule #47 Relate your product
or service to items in the news.
      Be careful to make sure that the news item is timely and relevant to your
product and its benefits.
Rule #48 Define your unique
selling proposition (USP).
Do it at the start and reinforce it in the middle and at the end.
This is what sets you apart — make sure it weaves through your
entire message. You’ll learn more about
 
how
 
to
 
define
 
your
 
USPin
 
Chapter
 
20.
Rule #49 Position your
company as an authority with a
solution to your target’s worst
problem.
Make it clear that you are the obvious and best resource to meet
your prospect’s needs. Speak with authority, and your prospects
will trust you to help solve their problems.
Rule #50 Choose only direct
response copy in all of your
marketing materials.
Finally, use 
only direct response 
copy in your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign. Don’t be tempted to deviate! Your
materials should all work together, relying on powerful, direct
response principles to drive a sale.
Now that you know the rules of direct response copywriting, let’s
take a look at a few pieces that show you how it works in action…
4 Examples of Direct Response Copy That Got Real Response
In more than 40 years of marketing, I have seen the power of
direct response copy work again and again to get a high response,
generate new leads and produce millions of dollars in profits for my
clients.
Below, you’ll find four examples of direct responsecopy used in pieces that got great response … and helped my clients
powerfully expand their businesses.
Envelope Copy for Monaco Rare Coins
“The U.S. government had most of these coins melted down in
the 1930s … but a handful escaped into European vaults … and
they’re now available to you.”
This intriguing detail directly addresses prospects and tells them
what they can get … and why it’s unique and valuable.
Sales Letter for Wine of the Month Club
“Imagine the rare pleasure of savoring exceptional new wines
every
 
month.
Wines handpicked for you by the world’s leading wine experts.
Wines you’ll rarely find on the store shelves  in club
 
warehouses.”
Again, note the “you”-orientation in this copy, and focus on how
this client’s subscription service would enhance the lives of readers
with rare, exceptional wines.
Magalog Order Form for Independent Living Investment
Newsletter
“Secure Your Access to Early Megatrend Warnings – and the
Blockbuster Profit Opportunities That Follow!”
This exciting call-to-action uses power words like “megatrend”
and “blockbuster” … and stays in the present tense.
Retargeting Banner Ad for World Opportunity Investor
“Video explains it all. Did you see it?”
This retargeting ad uses short sentences and “you- orientation” to
instantly create a two-way dialogue with prospects.
  Of course, there are tens of thousands of examples I could show you … all
of which follow a set of careful guidelines to generate response.
A Final Step: Capture the Attention of “Skimmers” with Your Copy
A “skimmer” is a reader who won’t read through your copycarefully. Instead, they’ll simply “skim” your copy to pick up
what’s important and
 
relevant.
Here are three direct response strategies to capture the attention
of “skimmers”:
1.
   
Write powerful headlines and sub-headlines. 
A long
headline with specific details can pull in otherwise reluctant
readers. Use words like “shocking,” “secret” and “finally.”
2.
    
Use captions. 
Skimmers may not read the bulk of your body
copy, but they will read captions. Write captions for all of
your images, graphics and
 
photos.
3.
    
Include pull quotes. 
A pull quote  is  a  portion of text that
“pops out” from the rest of the copy. Pull quotes help tell the
story for the skimmer and entices them to read more — if you
select the right pull quotes. Look for statements or phrases that
stand out as being especially powerful, unique or
 
surprising in
your
 
copy.
When you build each piece of your campaign on the foundations
of direct response copy, you’re helping to ensure that you catch the
attention of prospects and motivate them to
 
respond.
At best, image-oriented ads help an audience feel good about
your product or service, but they do not prompt prospects to make a
purchase.
Not only that, traditional advertising copy will kill your
campaign.
Likewise, journalistic copy will depress response.
Good direct response copy is easy to recognize because your toll-
free phone number is ringing more, your landing page is generating
more leads and your sales are soaring.CHAPTER 20
How to Identify Your Unique Selling Proposition
Your product or service is special. It’s unique. You believe that it
will change the lives of your prospects for the better … and that it’s
better than that of the competition.
But can you pinpoint exactly why you believe this?
Can you sum up why your offer is so special in one sentence …
or better yet, in just a few words?
If the answer is “No” or even “I’m not sure …” then you haven’t
identified your Unique Selling Proposition –
   
or
 
USP.
Knowing your USP is critical to effectively marketing your
product or service. It’s what differentiates your
 
offer from the rest
… and makes prospects believe they must buy your product or
service.
How do you define your USP?
Plain and simple, your USP is what sets you apart from the
competition. How are your products or services better, faster,
stronger, easier to use, more profitable or trendier? Your prospect
wants to
 
know.
If you don’t clearly communicate what you have to offer that no
one else does, your prospect won’t have   
a compelling reason to
buy from you … instead of choosing a cheaper or more convenient
alternative.
If you’re not sure what your USP is, finish the statement:
“Nowhere else will you find…”
If you have the best pricing on the market, say it. If you’re the
only company with a certain widget, tell them. If
 
you
 
have
 
the
trendiest
 
design,
 
let
 
everyone
 
know
 
it!In order to define your USP, you might have to take a
 
step
 
back
from
 
your
 
product
 
or
 
service.
What I mean is, sometimes you may love your product or service
for reasons that aren’t  necessarily  obvious or beneficial to your
prospects.
Identify what it is that your product will offer to your prospect
that is special and unique … and how it will change their overall
quality of life.
For example, you may sell a meal delivery service. You have lots
of competition … but your meal delivery service may help your
prospects lose weight … and feel happier, more energetic and more
attractive as a result.
Your USP is the fact that your service will make prospects
happier and healthier than any other competitor on the market.
Now, you’ve tapped into the psychological benefits of your
product – not just the characteristics (like “delivered once weekly,”
“gluten-free” or “three meals per package”).
The USP: The Ultimate
Response-Lifter
When your Unique Selling Proposition becomes central to your
marketing message, you’ll see a dramatic increase in
 
response.
Prospects can understand how your product or service will
change their lives … and why they cannot be happy without
 
it.
  That is why you must integrate your USP throughout all of your marketing
materials to lift response in your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign. Remind prospects about your USP again and again …. and tell
them that they can get a slimmer body, greater happiness or more energy.
Taking True Religion Jeans from Just a Dream to a Multimillion-Dollar
CompanyHere’s one incredible success story of how I crafted a USP for a
denim jean brand that took it from small startup to a multimillion-
dollar corporation.
When True Religion Jeans approached me, they were an
unknown, start-up company that faced many obstacles to breaking
into the cut-throat, denim clothing market.
We overcame two difficult hurdles to make this campaign
successful: Because their jeans cost between $150 and $350 a pair,
the first hurdle was motivating the consumer to pay the high cost of
the jeans and adopt   a
 
new
 
favorite
 
brand
 
in
 
a
 
seemingly
 
saturated
market.
The second, and perhaps more difficult, hurdle was
 
convincing
the retail leaders to clear valuable (and expensive) display space in
their stores to promote an unknown company with a small
marketing budget.
The solution?
We created a Unique Selling Proposition that set  the denim
brand apart from competitors and convince 
prospects to become
customers – and high-end stores to carry the
 
brand.
My marketing agency came up with a USP that focused on the
unique individuality of True Religion: A healthier, more natural
jean where no chemicals were used in  its production. This USP
promised a pair of jeans that would bring unique comfort and style
to the wearer
 
to set them
 
apart.
We stressed benefits such as “sanded by hand to make them
smoother, more comfortable and unique… like a piece of
 
art.”
Finally, we used phrases like “livable perfection” that elevated
the brand from a prized luxury item into an entire lifestyle.
So, we created an entire integrated, multichannel marketing
campaign that relied on communicating this powerful USP,
including a landing page, a special 3-D marketing campaign to
high-end retailers, social media, and data collection pieces.
The results were phenomenal, as True Religion rose
 
to become
one of America’s most popular denim names and a highly sought-after brand by retailers.
Today, the brand is carried by major luxury retailers, 
such 
as
Neiman Marcus, 
Saks 
Fifth 
Avenue 
and 
Bloomingdale’s, and at
most high-end retail stores.
And the owner who had only a hope and a dream when he
walked through my office door sold his company for $835
 
million.
Here are four other examples of USP’s we developed that helped
sales
 
soar.Chlorella Health Supplement
Came to Dominate the
Supplement Market
Chlorella is a Japanese health supplement that I helped
introduce to the American market by identifying this USP:
“Combats the invisible toxic enemy and triggers your body’s
natural cleansing and revitalizing power.”
Over the years we created one of the longest-running, most
successful supplement companies in America.
Chlorella touched on prospects’ fear of bad health and strong
desire for revitalized health.
How Health Alert 
Newsletter Came to Dominate the Health
Newsletter Market
Health Alert 
is a newsletter aimed at the senior market that
offers “health solutions that can’t be found in a doctor’s office.”
I launched 
Health Alert 
when it was just an idea … and helped
turn it into one of the largest alternative health newsletters in
America and a multimillion-dollar supplement operation.
Health Alert 
spoke to older prospects who needed health
solutions – not simply prescription meds – to help them live
longer, fuller and happier lives.
Vector Vest Online
Investment System Came toDominate Online Investment
Services
Vector Vest is an online investment system that “helps
 you make the right buy-and-sell decisions 95% of the time.”
This USP drew on the desire for secure stock market profits … in
other words, the desire for wealth.
We launched and grew this business into the first online
investment service in the world.
1-800 Contacts
1-800 Contacts offers contacts that are delivered, meaning
prospects “will never have to go to the store again to buy contacts
that
 
fit.”
1-800 Contacts drew on the desire for ease, convenience and time
saved.
All of these USP’s stress what’s special about the product or
service … and speak to prospects about the
 
life-changing
 
benefits
of
 
responding
 
to
 
their
 
offers.
Your USP will be central to your multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign.
It’s what makes your prospects feel that they must buy from you
… or they have missed a great opportunity  to improve their lives.
A good USP can help transform your positioning in the
marketplace, set you apart from competitors and, most importantly,
help you to see sales skyrocket.CHAPTER 21
How to Create an Irresistible Offer
   
 Like direct response copy, an irresistible direct response offer is absolutely
critical to the success of your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
      Your landing page, banner ads, emails and other marketing materials
should entice your prospects with an opportunity that’s almost impossible to
resist.
     If you’re unsure of what an offer is, it’s not what you’re getting but what
the prospect gets.
       Remember, your prospects are only human, like you or me. They are
only interested in their own needs.
The offer usually
 
includes:
•
     
Pricing: soft/hard
 
offer
•
     
Premiums
•
     
Discounts (sales
 
only)
•
     
A
 
guarantee
In the following chapter, you’ll learn how to create an offer
that’s irresistible to your target audience … raising overall response
and boosting sales for your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.
Pricing: Price Points, Soft Offers
and Hard Offers      Price is a vitally important part of your offer.
     
A higher price will lower your response. A lower price will increase your
response.
     But every product or service has its own price point where you get
maximum possible profit – and you can only find this optimum price point by
testing different price variables.
     When setting your pricing, you’ll also want to consider whether to make a
“soft” offer or a “hard” offer.
    A “soft” offer increases your response over a “hard” offer. However, a
“soft” offer may not pay off in the long run.
      A “soft” offer is where buyers are given the opportunity to order without
paying with cash or a credit card before receiving their merchandise. They
merely check a box on the order form that reads, “bill me later.”
     Or if you’re generating a lead, a “soft offer” is usually used for an
expensive product.
     A “hard” offer is an offer where payment by cash or credit card MUST be
made with the order before it is shipped.
This strategy is usually used for an inexpensive product requiring
payment by credit card.
Premiums: “I Want It More than
I Want the Product”
One of the most powerful elements of your offer is the premium.
     A premium is a “free” gift or item that’s so enticing, your prospects will
want to buy your product or service just to get the premium.
      
Premiums can include:
•     Free gift items, such as free food or a household item
•     Special reports, checklists or other informational items
•     Anything else creative you can think of – early access to a special
service, an item signed by the owner or a free ticket to a special event,  forexample
•     Discounts, adding value for prospects by helping them save money
      Depending on your business or approach, think creatively about what you
can offer potential customers as free incentives to buy from you.
     One of my clients, Wine of the Month Club, is a luxury subscription wine
delivery service.
     As an incentive to subscribe to their monthly service, we crafted an offer
for them that included:
•     A free bottle of wine, if they joined Wine of the Month Club within 10
days of receiving the direct mail package.
•     A reduced price on the first two bottles of wine.
•
     
A free “Wine Explorer’s Kit” that included: A cheese board; a seven-part
wine education series; a monthly newsletter; a pocket-sized vintage chart to
help decode wine menus; and a guide titled “How to speak wine like a pro.”
Another client Starshop (a mobile shopping app that taps into
celebrity trends), aimed to raise capital from investors. As an
incentive to invest in their venture, prospects were offered the
opportunity to participate in special events that tie into the
company’s product line.
This not only caught the interest of investors, it motivated them
to respond to an offer that promised so
 
much
 
more
 
than
 
a
 
financial
opportunity.
Starshop’s offer included:
•
     
Entry to a New Year’s Eve Party in Times Square with
celebrities, DJs, full bar and a chance to dance the night
away.
•
     
Access to a VIP suite at Coachella, a popular music and
arts festival in Indio, California.
•
     
Entry to the Grammy’s After-Party at the Staples Center in
Los Angeles, where investors could mingle with the
“Who’s Who” of the music industry.
•
     
The chance to go to a movie premiere in Los Angeles andNew York with the full red-carpet treatment.
•
     
Three Special Reports for the investor, reinforcing their
offer and educating and informing their prospects.
     Of course, a few of these value-added pieces may be difficult to use in
your own campaign … But you can still create powerful, response-boosting
value-added pieces that don’t include access to special events.
       
      One powerful  premium that I often put together is  a “kit” of special
reports.
      For a real estate-related offer, I created two special report premiums that
the prospect would find worth keeping. The names of these reports were:
•
     
Secrets to Lower-Risk, Higher-Yield Investing
•
     
The Ultimate Guide to Profitably Investing in Real Estate
I branded these two reports as the “Income Investor Profit Kit.”
Ultimately, they helped motivate prospects to make
 
a decision to
respond to our client’s offer, and
 
helped
 massively boost response.
If you decide to create special report premiums, it’s critical to
give these editorial reports powerful titles that offer prospects
highly relevant and useful insights or information.
The special report(s) might be two pages long – or 10 pages or
20. They might even be 50 or 100 pages. They
 
could also be
formatted as a PowerPoint presentation. Special reports can also be
videos or downloads.
Finally, a kit can 
include 
a 
variety 
of 
valuable 
informational
pieces, but also a piece that helps explain why your offer is
exciting.
Discounts – Increasing the Value
of Your OfferOne way to make your prospects feel great about your price and
the value of your offer is to include a discount.
People love to hunt for bargains. A discount can be  a great
motivator that causes your prospects to believe that their purchasing
decisions are wise … not
 
frivolous.
For example, you may want to offer a 10-20% discount on
 
your
product
 
or
 
service
 
for
 
a
 
certain
 
period
 
of
 
time
 … and make sure to
communicate how much money they are saving.
I am selling a book right now, 
23 Equity Crowdfunding Secrets
to Raising Capital
, and offering a 20%
 
discount –
   
and
autographing copies, adding another dimension of
 
value.
The Call-to-Action (CTA):
Direct Response Copy
for a Powerful Offer
Your CTA should include all critical elements to your offer, including not
only the call to purchase from you, but reiterating what prospects will receive
when they click on “Buy Now.”
This is the same CTA repeated throughout all marketing materials.
On the  next page, you’ll see the CTA page from a magalog in a
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
Note that we gave our prospects three options “Best
 
Deal: Two Years
$69,” “Great Deal: One Year $39,” or “10-Day Quick Response
 
Bonus.”
For your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign, you’ll want to test
different versions of your CTA.     
For example, even a simple tweak to your “Purchase” or “Submit” button
can make a big difference.
   In one test, two checkout pages were tested that were identical in nearly
every way, except one had a “Submit button” and the other had a “Go to
Payment Options” button.
When tested, “Go to Payment Options” got a whopping 87.5%
more click-thrus than the plain and simple “Submit” button.
Both are commands with an implied you-orientation, but “Go to
Payment 
Options” 
provides a 
specific 
direction that doesn’t have
the implication or worry of “commitment” behind it.
The CTA is a key step to maximizing your offer and helping
ensure that prospects respond “Yes” to purchase from you and
receive great value.
Guarantees: Increasing Trust
(and Response)The higher your price, the stronger your guarantee should be. A
strong guarantee helps increase your marketing response.
A typical guarantee that I make for subscription services is called
a “Triple Money-Back Guarantee.”
In this guarantee, customers get their money back if they’re not
satisfied … and they get to keep the first product or service they
received, along with the premium.
This kind of assurance communicates that you are absolutely
sure that your prospects will be satisfied.
And, it helps increase overall response by lowering the risk
factor of buying.
What you offer to the prospect – and how well you communicate
it – is absolutely critical to your success.
Think strategically and creatively about your pricing, premiums,
CTA, discount and guarantee – and you’ll see your response
skyrocket!CHAPTER 22
The Power of Value-Added Marketing
What is value-added marketing?
Value-added marketing is the powerful boost you give to your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign that completely
changes the tone, approach  and  feel of your
 
offer.
It does this by communicating to your prospects that you are
there to give, not take from them.
Simply put, value-added marketing offers your prospects
something that they think is in their self- interest:
Something valuable. Something
objective.
Something that creates high interest.
Value-added marketing includes a gift or free information that
educates and informs the prospect … and that also offers powerful
motivation to purchase your item and become a loyal customer.
In fact, I created a powerful system called V.I.V.A. that acts as a
powerful foundation of any value-added
 
marketing.
V.I.V.A. relies on two principles:
Valuable information: 
First, value-added marketing must
include information that the prospect will find valuable. This is
content that is  actionable, insightful or surprising – or all
 
three.
Value-added: 
Second, value-added marketing entices your
prospects by making them feel they are getting
 something for free.
It increases the overall value of your offer by making it moredifficult to resist.
Value-added marketing can help elevate your offer and ensure the success
of your campaign in the following four
 
ways:
1.
        
Convince 
skeptical 
prospects
that 
you’re trustworthy.
Your prospects automatically think that you’re selling them something.
When that happens, they’re likely to not even want to discover what you
have to offer. For example, they won’t look at your mailing piece to learn
about your product or service because they don’t think
 
there’s anything in it
for them.
Value-added marketing helps to override that initial skepticism and
persuade prospects to consider your offer.
2.
        
A value-added component will
help get your advertising or
marketing effort read … and
generate a response.
When you offer something of value to prospects, they are more likely to
rip open your envelope, click on your ad or open your
 
email.
Take direct mail. Most direct mail does not have a value-added
component. But when you add it, you’ll increase your response.
Take a look at the envelope on the next page, created for a Wine of the
Month Club
 
campaign.
Note that the envelope says, “Do Not Bend: Free Checklist Enclosed” – a
suggestive way to communicate that something valuable is inside that will be
theirs just by opening the
 
envelope.The “Free Checklist” was a special piece with “7 Things You
Should Never, Ever Do at a Wine Tasting” –
   
a
 
fun
 
extra
 
that
 
wine
aficionados
 
would
 
appreciate.
3.
   
Value-added 
advertising
helps 
create 
the
relationships with prospects
and clients you must have for
successful
 
marketing.
By offering high-value advertising for free, you create a sense of
trust with prospects … helping to build valuable relationships that
turn prospects into customers and current customers into loyal,
longtime buyers.4.
   
Value-added marketing can
be used on most marketing
channels to achieve great
success.
I’ve used value-added marketing in email, landing pages, native
ads, direct mail and more.
It’s giving – not taking. And it results in greater
 
sales.
Valued-Added Marketing: What
Will You Offer?
     Value-added marketing is a critical tool for building strong relationships
with your prospects and customers… and boosting your response.
     Next, consider what kind of value-added advertising tactic you will want
to use.
        One example of a direct mail package that uses value- added marketing
to build and strengthen relationship was for a Christian organization called
“The Navigators.”          
       They put together a direct mail piece for Christmas that included the
following free gifts:
•     Personalized return address stickers
•     A booklet of Christmas carols
•     Christmas-themed envelope seals
•     A Christmas-themed desk calendar
•     A personalized certificate of appreciation
•     A “Christmas Fun” booklet    Of course, this was a very extensive value-added campaign, with multiple
pieces. But they understood that adding value to an offer builds valuable
relationships –    ultimately lifting response, and most importantly, increasing
profits                              
CHAPTER
23
      The New Credibility
A critical 
part 
of your multichannel, 
integrated 
marketing
campaign is to help overcome your prospects’ objections and
skepticism.
Seven out of 10 prospects who visit your landing page or receive
your direct mail piece will be skeptical about whether you are
telling them the truth about your offer.
That’s why it’s up to you to immediately overcome that
skepticism by establishing your
 
credibility.
The New Credibility:
Persuading Your
Prospects That You
Mean What You Say
The new credibility means that you use multiple ways to
convince your prospects that your offer will be worth their time and
money.
The new credibility is the key to help “close the deal” on yoursale.
Here are six ways you can help establish credibility on your
landing page, direct mail piece, emails and other 
marketing
elements of your multichannel, integrated campaign.
1.
   
Use star ratings to show customer
 
satisfaction.
Use a 4- or 5-star rating to help prospects see how satisfied other
customers have been with your product or service.
  You can display the star rating on your landing page or direct mail piece,
with an image of your product or service.
   Star ratings make an immediate impact on your prospects by showing
simple, straight for ward evidence of the quality as rated by others of your
product or service.
    On the next page, see a powerful example from a newsalog we created for
Health Alert – an alternative health newsletter.2.    Video testimonials show your credibility in action.
When prospects see live video footage of satisfied customers
talking about your product or service, they are far more likely to
trust your
 
credibility.
Plus, video will boost your overall results – your prospects will
enjoy watching different testimonials on your landing page or in
your digital ads.
3.
    
Reviews will be carefully read
 
– and believed
– by potential customers.A more traditional approach to testimonials is to show multiple
reviews from customers (with star ratings included).
Include reviews of happy, satisfied customers on your landing
page – many of your prospects will take the time to read them. In
fact, 85% of
 
prospects read up
 to 10 reviews before purchasing a
product or service.
4.         Build your credibility with your pre-heads and captions.
       Use powerful pre-heads and captions that cite credible outside sources to
affirm the trustworthiness of your offer.
     Here are some pre-heads and captions that help build credibility and createintrigue:
•     Former IRS agent and best selling a u t h o r reveals…
•    After 25 years of research, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
engineer creates software breakthrough…
•    As seen in… (Tech Weekly, Software Review Magazine, etc…)
5.
     
Positive reviews on Amazon are powerful response-
boosters.
      If you sell your product or service on Amazon,
make sure that your satisfied customers are leaving you reviews.
Amazon reviews are considered powerful credibility pieces.
They will be even more likely to be read than your product
description.
Encourage your current customers to leave reviews with
retargeting emails and digital ads.
6.
    
Give
 
prospects
 
the
 
option
 
for
 
a “live
 
chat.”
Showing that you have excellent customer service is key to your
credibility.
Now, you can offer prospects the option of actually talking with
a customer service representative (or “chatbot”) using a live chat
option on your landing page.
Prospects are more likely to trust your offer when they have the
option of talking to a representative
 
“live.”
Your credibility is critical to getting a high response with your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
Prospects need to believe what you say – and trust that your
product or service is high-quality.PART FIVE
Multichannel, Integrated Strategies and Tactics to
Boost Response
In the final four chapters (24–28), you’ll learn critical
 
foundations to your
multichannel, integrated campaign.
These include key tactics – such as using a targeted
 
landing page and
creating a direct response video – that will help you take your multichannel,
integrated campaign to the next level.CHAPTER 24
Your Landing Page: The Foundation of Your Multichannel, Integrated
Marketing Campaign – 12 Critical Rules
   Your landing page is foundational to your multichannel, integrated
marketing campaign.
   Why?
   Because it is the “landing place” seen by your prospects or customers.
   And the landing place should not be your “corporatewebsite” or a website filled with graphics but devoid of
 
copy.
When prospects click on Facebook ads, they will be taken to
your landing
 
page.
When they click on a link in an email, they will be taken to your
landing
 
page.
When they click on “Find Out More” after a pre-roll video, they
will be taken to your landing page.
The message they see matches the sales message on the
Facebook advertising, emails and pre-roll videos.
This specifically targeted sales message will maximize your
response, producing the leads and sales you want.
That’s why it’s so critical to create an effective landing page.
Otherwise, you will experience mediocre results and a depressed
response.
Don’t make this fatal
mistake!
A fatal mistake for any marketer is to rely on your corporate
website – instead of a landing page – to drive your sales.
Corporate websites tend to depress response by confusing
prospects with too many choices and decisions to make. Multiple
messages and navigation bars drive
 
prospects away from the page
… without getting them to click on “buy
 
now.”
Without a singular focus on your products or service message,
you’ll experience a greatly reduced response.
In fact, most corporate websites are anti-marketing sites that do
too much … and don’t help you sell.
That’s why the landing page is so important. A good landing
page does not have navigation distractions. It presents a single
message that is clear and simple. It has a focused unique sellingproposition (USP) and call-to-action (CTA) and drives the prospect
to respond.
And, the 
landing 
page has copy and 
art that 
complement the
marketing materials and nothing else.
Remember, prospects don’t want to have to think too hard when
they come to your page. They make quick judgments to read on or
move on, based on how well the page matches the ad they
responded to. Make sure
 
your product and offer are clear and
upfront.
Otherwise, they’ll leave your page – probably forever.
To an ad agency or graphic web designer, a landing page like this
can look pretty boring. But for the prospect, it’s what helps generate
high response … and ultimately, profits.
12 Critical Rules for an Effective
Landing Page
Here are 12 foundational rules to keep in mind when creating an
effective landing page for your multichannel, integrated campaign:
#1: Use a powerful, highly targeted
headline.
Your headline is critical to drawing the prospect in and making
sure they don’t leave. It should be written to show how your offer
will benefit your specific audience, and create curiosity, benefit and
drama or
 
suspense.#2: Use mobile and desktop
versions.
It is very important to optimize your landing page for mobile
phones, as you learned about in Chapter 13.
That’s because most of your prospects will use their mobile
phones, rather than a desktop or laptop computer, to look at your
landing page.
In fact, 62% of all mobile users make purchases on their cell
phones – and 80% of shoppers use their phones to look up products
or services before making a
 
purchase.
Having few navigational distractions and a clear call- to-action
will help ensure that your landing page is optimized for a mobile
phone. Consider presenting your copy as a “list” of easily readable
points: This will help streamline your message and make it easier to
read.
And always, always, always test your landing page on both a
desktop and a mobile device before running it. Driving prospects
away from your page will cost you in sales and
 
profits.
#3: Break copy into numerical
points.
Break copy up into a list of numerical points. For example, “6
Things You Must Know About CBD Oil Now.” This makes it
easier to scan and understand, especially for readers who are
“skimmers” (those who skim the copy, without fully reading it).#4: Don’t break copy  up with
images.
Use graphics to help direct eye flow to the copy – not to
 
distract
readers
 
from
 
reading
 
your
 
offer.
#5: Use direct response copy.
As you learned about in Chapter 19, direct response copy is a
scientific, measurable approach to advertising that relies on “you-
oriented” copy that stresses the 
unique benefits – not the features –
of your  product  or
 
service.
   It’s key that you use only direct response copy on  your landing page –
otherwise, you will drive prospects away from the page. The copy on your
landing page will also reinforce the exciting offer that is in your mailing
package, banner ads, emails and other marketing materials.
As I explained earlier, direct response copy is often longer than
what you might normally see on a website, email or ad.
But it gets a higher response – and persuades the prospect to
respond to act on your unique offer.
#6: Show a clear call-to-action
(CTA).
Remember, your landing page has one clear purpose: to drive the
prospect to respond to your offer. That’s your call-to-action (CTA),
and it should be presented clearly.
The CTA should be made clear on top of the landing page, and
should be repeated multiple times throughout the page.#7: Use retargeting to powerfully
boost response.
As you learned about in Chapter 7, retargeting uses cookies on
your landing page to “follow” your prospects around the web with
digital ads, including  banner ads and Facebook ads. This is a
critical part of your
 
marketing program that will increase response
and drive
 
prospects
 
back
 
to
 
the
 
landing
 
page.
#8: Include a video.
Video adds a powerful element to your landing page by creating
drama and delivering a high-impact message 
to the prospect. Video
has been shown to significantly increase viewer response by as
much as 80% for a landing
 
page.
Here are a few quick tips for effectively using video
on your landing page:
1.
   
Place your video at the top of the page – it should be the first
thing prospects see when they visit your landing page. Even if
they don’t watch it, it still gives
 
your
 
product
 
or
 
service
greater
 
credibility.
2.
   
Place 
an 
attention-grabbing, benefit-oriented 
headline just
above the video – and a powerful caption under
 
it.
3.
   
In the first 12 seconds of the video, promise something big
and unusual to your prospects.
You can also offer a transcript of the video directly on your
landing page for prospects who prefer to read
 
the video
 
script.
You’ll learn more about creating powerful video in Chapter 27.#9: Use direct response art.
Just like your copy, your graphics should invite your prospects to
respond. Graphics should reinforce your big idea and not create
unnecessary distractions.
Direct response art is the science of creating “eye-
 
flow” to
encourage and maximize readership … and ultimately, response.
#10: Show credibility.
It’s critical that your landing page shows the credibility of your
product or
 
service.
One of the most powerful ways to convince prospects of your
credibility is to show customer testimonials.
Use customer reviews. Amazon revolutionized the buying
process by showing customer reviews on every single product page.
   In fact, they have made testimonials and reviews so
customary that, if you don’t include them, prospects may be turned off and
leave your page.
You can show satisfied customer testimonials in a number of
ways: for example, as a video, or a picture of
 
the
 
testimonial
 
given
with
 
their
 
quote
 
below
 
it.
Star ratings are also an effective way to increase the
effectiveness of your testimonials or reviews.
“Wow” prospects with killer testimonials and reviews on your
landing page, and you’ll help persuade them that they absolutely
cannot live without your product or service.
#11: Optimize for search engines(SEO).
   Many people think that if your website is not a
.gov, .edu or a news website, your site won’t be easily searchable.
In reality, these types of sites don’t rank well in search engines,
because they are poorly optimized. But with the right Search
Engine Optimization (SEO), your page can show up more easily in
organic search results.
Here are six critical foundations for your landing page SEO:
1.
        
SEO keywords
These are the words and phrases that help people find your page
through an organic search. Your focus 
keywords should be highly
relevant to your content and optimized for your ideal audience.
Strategically place SEO keywords in your copy – such as in the
first paragraph of your copy, in your  site title and in subheads. But
don’t “keyword stuff.” Using keywords needlessly, in places that
don’t make
 
sense, won’t work to improve SEO. Search algorithms
are smarter than
 
that.
2.
        
Title tags
These are the titles that appear on search engine results pages.
Your title tags should be between 55 and 60 characters, and clear
and descriptive of what’s on your page. Include your SEO
keywords in your title tag.
3.
        
Meta descriptions
Meta descriptions are the brief descriptions shown on search
engine results pages. Your meta description should be under 160
characters and include SEO keywords.
4.
        
Alt text
Use alt text for any graphics you may include on your page. Alt
text may not be displayed to the user, but it will improve your
SEO.5.
        
301 redirects
If you are creating a new page that will replace an older one, use
“301 redirects” so that when you remove the old page, the SEO
value remains. 301 redirects let your prospects know that the page
has been moved, and provide the link to the newer page.
These five SEO foundations will help you get a good start on
optimizing your landing page for search engines.
6.
        
External links
Build links into your external landing page to relevant sites.
When other sites link to your landing page that’s even better.
Both are great for improving your SEO.
#12: Use a floater
A floater is a marketing tool that sends a form that “floats up”
over a website or landing page. Most think they are the old “pop-
ups” … and they are similar, but they don’t open a new window.
Floaters can appear in different formats, shapes and
 
sizes – including a
“slide-in” floater or transparent floater.
Typically, the form is used for data collection. It can also show a special
offer or discount (which later links
 
to data collection). Usually, I’ll use it to
collect a name and email address by offering a free special report.
The floater form asks a user to enter in their contact information: name,
email, and sometimes phone number or
 
address.
Here’s an example of a floater I created for my own marketing newsletter
update.    Floaters are powerful, because they help you collect a highly responsive
database to convert visitors into leads and sales.
   Leads then receive your emails, see your digital ads and receive your direct
mail, and they are much more likely to become customers … loyal customers
that purchase from you again and again.
   
Floaters enable you to collect valuable data, to expand your prospect base
and to build powerful custom lists that will help you multiply your profits and
grow your business.
     This is not an optional marketing tool – floaters are key to your success.
     As with any marketing piece, it’s critical that you test different types offloaters with different copy to determine what will get the best response.
      Now, let’s take a look at some landing pages I’ve created for different
clients, using the principles outlined on previous pages…
Powerful landing pages I’ve
created for clients
      Here are some examples of landing pages I’ve created for different
clients:
Allegiancy
     I created the following landing page for “Allegiancy,” a client looking to
find investors for an equity crowdfunding campaign.Breaking
: New, Disruptive
Technology On the Verge of
“Blowing Up”
a $15 Trillion Industry
Why Smart Investors Are Getting in on This
“Mini-IPO” 
Before
 Wall
 
Street
The Last Company to Offer this “Mini-IPO” Saw its
Shares Soar 525% in Just a Matter of Days – Will this
Company Be the
 
Next?
Year               Projected Assets Under Management
2016
$1 billion
2017
$2.8 billion
2018
$4.8 billion
2019
$6.8 billion
2020
$8.8 billion
2021
$10.8
billion
   
     Strategically, no navigation options exist. This headline creates intrigue
and helps motivate visitors to continue reading.
   There is also a call-to-action in the upper right-hand corner of the page. It's
also listed further down the page, giving prospects multiple opportunities to
respond to the call-to-action.
    Note the strong headline at the top: Breaking: New Disruptive Technology
on the Verge of "Blowing Up" a $15 Trillion Industry.
   
But again, there is only one call-to-action.
   The copy may look longer than is typical for a website  – but this will
actually increase viewer response.
    On the next page, see another landing page I created for my client,
“SuperFood Weight Loss.”
The video is prominent and easy to see.
    Also, notice the “spokesperson” – in this case, the owner of the company –in the upper left corner.
    A spokesperson helps create both trust and credibility for the prospect,
increasing the chances that he or she will respond to your offer.
   
The spokesperson may be the owner of the company, a celebrity or
someone else who is relevant to the product or service (such as an investment
analyst for an investment
 
newsletter).
              
You’ll learn more about how to choose a spokesperson in Chapter 25.
      
      Here's a quick recap of what your landing page should include to be
effective:
    
✓
 No navigational distractions
✓
 One clear CTA
✓
 Direct response copy and art
✓
 Video
✓
 Retargeting
✓
 Testimonials
✓
 Optimize for mobile devices
Do not neglect your landing page. If you want to maximize your
profits and increase your conversion rate, then you absolutely must
get your landing page right. Your landing page is your closer. It’s
up to your landing page to break through your prospect’s
skepticism and make you money.
Your landing page is your last line of defense before the
prospect clicks away and is lost forever. If it’s sub- par, then you
will have wasted your time, money, and effort on all marketing
materials that drive  prospects to the landing
 
page.
Remember to use the elements above to ensure that you have an
effective landing page – and a strong foundation for your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.CHAPTER 25
New Breakthroughs in Shopping Cart Abandonment
You might think that by the time a prospect has placed an item
in your digital shopping cart, it’s a done deal – you’ve made a sale.
Unfortunately, that’s not the case.
More than seven out of 10 people abandon their shopping carts
without completing a purchase. In 2017, online merchants lost
around $7 trillion from shopping cart abandonment alone.
Why?
Potential customers get sidelined by navigation distractions. Or,
the purchase process is too complicated. Shoppers get distracted
and confused  – and you  lose a
 
sale.
5 Keys to Creating a High-
Response Shopping Cart
Optimizing your shopping cart is critical to increasing profits
from your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
After all, your campaign may have been successful in driving
prospects to your landing page, and finally to a
 
purchase.
But if the shopping cart is unsuccessful, all your efforts will be
wasted.
Here are five keys to creating a high-response shopping
cart that will reduce shopping cart abandonment and boost salesfrom your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign:
1.
    
Keep it simple with one or two steps.
The more steps that are required to purchase items in your
shopping cart, the more likely it is that a potential customer will
abandon the transaction.
Keep your purchase process simple, with only one  or two
 
steps.
Customers should be able to make a purchase by filling out the
minimum amount of information.
2.
    
Get rid of navigation
 
distractions.
If your shopping cart page offers multiple opportunities to do
something other than make a purchase, then your prospects are
likely to get distracted.
Keep your shopping cart simple and streamlined, with one action
to perform: Buy your product or service.
3.
   
Offer your prospects a premium and
 
guarantee.
A premium (as discussed in Chapter 21) makes buying your
product or service more enticing – and decreases the
 
chances
 
that
prospects
 
will
 
abandon
 
their
 
purchase.
Remind prospects of the special item, report or bonus they will
receive if they buy from you.
And, remember to include a guarantee: A money-back offer
within a certain time frame if they aren’t satisfied with their product
or
 
service.
A “Double Risk Free Guarantee” is shown on the next page.
4.
   
Include a Positive Acceptance Statement
 
(PAS).
A positive acceptance statement (PAS) helps customers make a
decision to buy from you.
It 
helps prevent 
your 
multichannel, 
integrated marketing
campaign from falling short of its anticipated response.
You may recognize a PAS as the “Yes” box. But more
importantly, it is the section of
 
the order form where your prospectcan read a recap of what he or she gets in return for responding. It is
a powerful statement that should motivate even the most reluctant
prospect to say, “Yes, I want your product in order to sleep better at
night. Sign me
 
up!”
Using a PAS on your shopping cart will affirm your prospect’s
decision and dramatically reduce the chance of abandonment.
5.   Retarget prospects who abandon their shopping cart.
   
You can still recapture customers who abandon their shopping cart with
retargeting emails and ads.
  Retargeting is a powerful strategy that reminds potential prospects of what
they forgot about in their shopping cart.
   First, prospects who have abandoned their shopping cart receive a follow-
up email.
    The subject line might be, “Did you forget something?”
–   or something similar.
   Then, these prospects will be retargeted with Facebook, banner ads and
native ads that “follow” them around the internet. Similarly to the emails,
these ads could display an image of what they left in their shopping cart,
reminding them of what they forgot.
Retargeting is a powerful strategy to help shopping cart
“abandoners” complete their purchase.CHAPTER 26
The Key Question: Your Spokesperson
Your spokesperson is one of your critical keys to success that
will help you generate leads and get prospects to respond to your
offer.
Your spokesperson is your “voice” for generating the lead – and
your voice in the conversion process.
You may not  have  even  
thought about having 
a 
spokesperson
yet … or 
thought 
of 
choosing 
a spokesperson for your
 
campaign.
But consider the following questions:
•
     
Who
 
will
 
sign
 
the
 
direct
 
mail
 
letter
 
or
 
email?
•
     
Whose picture will you place on the landing page? Will
you use
 
one?
•
     
Who will be the voice of the
 
company?
•
     
Who will be your spokesperson or
 
personality?
•
     
Who will be the people or star in your 
TV 
commercial or
video?
These choices will significantly affect response to your
campaign, and can make the difference  between a campaign that
generates massive revenue and one that fails to get a
 
response.
Some marketers do not want to use a spokesperson. When I have
a client taking this position, I honor their decision. But I stress that
their campaign should at least be tested with a
 
spokesperson.
I almost always see a spokesperson being effective. Though I
admit, on rare occasions, it doesn’t work well. In fact, it’sembarrassing to have to tell a company president that his or her
image depresses response.
But usually, it helps.
Charles Schwab once said that the best thing he did was use his
image in all the marketing for his company –
   
it gave him a
competitive
 
advantage.
Who Should You Choose as
Your Spokesperson
Depending on your product or service, you should choose your
spokesperson strategically.
For some clients, I recommend that they choose the company’s
president, such as clients using a marketing campaign to raise
capital for their venture.
For companies selling an alternative health product,
 
you may
want to use a doctor, even if they are not part of the company. It
brings credibility to your message.
For companies selling a financial service, you may want to use
an outside, independent certified public accountant (CPA) or
financial writer.
For companies selling a food or beverage product, you may want
to use a chef, sommelier or other  type of
 
specialist.
Be creative. There are some types of spokespersons I do not
recommend,
 
however.
I do not typically recommend celebrities, unless they are highly
relevant to your product or service. They are seldom worth the
price. I also do not recommend your vice president of marketing or
sales. Those titles alone
 
will depress response.
Consider what kind of spokesperson will provide the mostcredibility and build relationships with your prospects. Remember,
your spokesperson must look and seem like a “real” person, not like
an overly polished actor who isn’t
 
relatable.
Personality: The Little-Known Way to Increase Response
It may seem controversial or even counterintuitive, but you may
want to feature your spokesperson on all of your marketing
materials – such as the landing page, magalog, direct mail envelope
and digital ads.
It’s been proven time and time again that one of the little-known
ways to increase response with consumers or business-to-business
campaigns is to have a personality who represents your marketing
campaign.By using a photo of your spokesperson, you will
build trust in your service or product with your prospects and customers.
    Below, see an example of a Thank you page I created for an investment
newsletter service, with the investment newsletter writer.
    
These types of marketing materials get great response for my clients …
and proved that the seemingly risky choice of using a spokesperson was the
right one.     
    Your spokesperson is critical to your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign. Consider this choice carefully as you develop your content and
your approach.CHAPTER 27
Video: A Critical, Powerful Key to Your Multichannel, Integrated
Marketing Campaign – 21 Critical Rules
Video communicates your offer unlike any other market
medium.
Video brings your product or service to life with demonstrations,
testimonials and benefits in action. It’s a powerful way to deliver
your message to prospects  –
   
and generate leads and
 
sales.
Video also lends credibility to your offer, a critical key to earning the trustof potential customers.
I love video. In fact, I 
started 
my career in 
TV 
commercials, and I’ve
created over 400 videos and TV commercials (including 13 infomercials). I
have seen the effectiveness and power of this media, again and again.
For a multichannel, integrated marketing campaign, I create video to be
used on the landing page, digital ads, pre-roll video ads, email and in some
cases, direct response
 
TV.
In this chapter, you’ll discover how to create persuasive, high-impact
video.
You’ll also learn about using this video in different ways, including in pre-
roll ads and for direct response TV.
After creating hundreds of videos for clients, I’ve developed specific
strategies and insights for creating effective, response-boosting video content.
Here are 21 critical rules for video that will help you produce outstanding
results and get the response you’re looking for.
Rule #1: The first few seconds of your video are key.
You’ve got to capture the attention of your prospect immediately. It’s easy
to skip a video, so make sure  the first few seconds are powerful, and deliver
your message
 
clearly.
Don’t start with a fade-in from a black screen – instead, use vibrant,
colorful images to immediately engage the viewer.
Rule #2: Use only direct response copy and art  in your script.
Your script should have one clear theme. It must be benefit-oriented and
guide your viewer through the principles of AIDA: It should draw attention,
attract interest, develop desire and compel
 
action.
Remember, the video needs to use direct response copy to produce a high
response. This is not the time to use journalistic or traditional advertising
copy. That would kill the sale. Your video is a story designed to get people to
buy your product or service, or generate that
 
lead.
Likewise, use only direct response art. In a video, direct response art
includes:
•
     
No 
reverse 
type: White text 
on 
a 
black 
background decreasesreadability and
 
response.
•
     
Readability: Make sure that any text is easy for your prospect to
read and understand quickly. Bullet points are an effective way to
communicate information
 
quickly.
•
     
Avoid navigation distractions: Don’t distract your viewers with
options to navigate away from the video. Your video has one goal:
To drive prospects to respond to a call-to-action (CTA).
Rule #3: Use a credible spokesperson to demonstrate benefits.
Seeing the benefits in action – and hearing the opportunity discussed by
the spokesperson – are powerful.
A spokesperson can be more effective than sheer entertainment … but that
doesn’t mean your video can’t be 
fun. For example, I cast a 4-year old as “the
world’s greatest investment trader” in a client’s online video. It was
entertaining, informative and effective.
Rule #4: Repeat your unique selling proposition (USP).
      Just as you should feature your USP at the beginning, in the middle and at
the end of every print campaign, you also need it in your video. Be sure it’s
consistent with the rest of your branding and collateral materials.
Rule #5: Don’t distract your viewers.
       Don’t distract your prospects with effects or details that might be
“entertaining,” but don’t cause them to respond to your offer.
    Keep your video simple. It should clearly communicate your Unique
Selling Proposition (USP) and compel your viewer to action.
Rule #6: PowerPoint v. action.
       The video style that is the most effective for a  target audience is a video
with PowerPoint words, or something called a “storybook” video. Using text
with video increases retention and response. For Facebook, this strategy also
gives you an advantage in increasing your reach.
Rule #7: Use text.Whether 
you’re 
using 
a 
live 
personality 
or 
a PowerPoint, you
can use on-screen text to lengthen the time that a prospect will
watch a video – and how likely they are to respond to your offer.
Make sure that
 
the words properly reflect what’s being said, are
easy to read and stay in one
 
location.
Facebook actually says that using printed words increases video
engagement by an average of 12%. If you’re not sure how to add
text to your video, Facebook has a tool that makes it easy to add
word captions to your videos.
Rule #8: Use testimonials and/or reviews with ratings.
Testimonials are one of the most powerful sales tools in
existence. But remember, prospects want to see real people who
like your product.
Showing a person who is not a professional actor or model –
someone who seems uncomfortable and whose story is not overly
rehearsed – actually increases your
 
response.
When you’re filming customer testimonials, shoot them several
times so you can edit exactly what you want from the answers.
iPhone testimonials are great, too!
Rule #9: Connect the script with the prospect quickly and dramatically.
       Like the copy you use for direct mail, email and other marketing
materials, a powerful direct response script will hit hard immediately.
        Drama. Suspense. Surprise. No warm-up. No introduction. Command
attention.
     Remember … 47% of the value of a video is delivered within the first
three seconds, and 74% in the first 10.
Rule #10: Length – fear not.
     Do not be afraid of a longer video. Some of the most powerful videos are
12 minutes long. When considering video length, 
ask yourself the following
questions: How complicated are your benefits to explain? How easy is it toovercome objections?
      For a multichannel, integrated campaign, I normally create three-to-12
minute videos.
Rule #11: Get a model release.
      Always get a model release from those you’re filming
so you have the right to use your footage wherever you want to, whether that
be on your landing page, Facebook, banner ads or elsewhere. You may also
want to use footage in creative ways, for example using a still photo and an
excerpt from the testimonial in a brochure.
Rule #12: Have a strong call-to-action (CTA).
Your job is to make it as easy as possible for the viewer to
respond … whether you show a phone number, email address, URL
or mailing address.
Rule #13: Graphics add power.
The addition of graphics in the right places will increase viewer
retention and reinforce your message. Every image must reflect the
value of your offer.
Rule #14: Optimize your video for silent mode.
Believe it or not, 85% of people watch Facebook videos on
silent. That means that you’ll have to create drama and impact
without relying on a voiceover or background music.
Instead, communicate your message with powerful action and
show important words as text on screen.
Rule #15: Clean and simple win on small screens.
Remember that many of your prospects will be watching your
video on mobile screens. Avoid small text and detailed visuals, and
keep your graphics simple and bold. This is a key detail when
choosing your thumbnail image, which should be clean and bright
to
 
catch the eye of your viewers.
     Your title doesn’t need to be included in the thumbnail
–   you can attach metadata to the file when you share  it online.Rule #16: The camera is unforgiving.
Consider how the subjects you’re filming appear
through the lens. Don’t neglect wardrobe considerations. An
outrageously patterned tie or an electric blue dress can distract
viewers from the content.
Take extra time to see what doesn’t belong in the shot. For
example, a newspaper or magazine  showing a headline can
immediately date your production and limit its use.
Rule #17: Remember Murphy’s Law. If something can go wrong, it will.
Plan, plan, plan! If you don’t bring it to your video shoot, you’re
sure to need it. If you don’t have a Plan B, you’ll need one. Outline
everything you’ll need, including rolls and rolls of duct tape, and
take special care with cameras and other equipment that may
become victims of
 
carelessness.
Look into getting insurance for the day of the shoot that includes
weather, equipment and both personal and corporate liability.
Rule #18: Allow for extra shots.
Always shoot more footage than you need, since you’ll always
need more than you thought. Even if you think a scene is “perfect,”
shoot a backup so you can pick from the best material as you edit.
Make time for “establishing shots” – shots that show the context
of what’s being sold. Shoot “reaction shots” to show one person
reacting to another’s comments. This is called “B-roll” footage,
which can be invaluable during editing.
Rule #19: Maximize its use.
Brainstorm 
multiple uses for your video – as a premium, as a
download or to drive prospects to your URL. Use a screenshot of
your video for emails, banner ads and native ads. You’ll want to
choose a screenshot
 that teases with powerful words that increaseclick- through.
Rule #20: Enlist the right crew.
Remember, it was direct response marketers who perfected the
infomercial. And the infomercial is still highly effective today.
It’s important to use direct response marketing professionals, not
video professionals or general ad agencies, to get the most out of
your video.
Rule #21: Have a transcript “read-through.”
Provide a transcript of your video so that prospects have the
option of reading through the video content as 
well as watching it.
A written transcript increases the impact of the video – and
multiplies
 
response.
With these rules, you’ll be ready to create your video component
of your integrated, multichannel campaign.
Video 
will 
be an 
essential component 
of your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign. It’s a powerful way to
communicate your offer, increase response, gain credibility and win
new leads and prospects.CHAPTER 28
                  
          Testing to Maximize Results
Imagine that you’ve developed and deployed your multichannel,
integrated marketing campaign – including a landing page, direct
mail package, email, Facebook and banner ads, video and
retargeting strategy.
But you’re not finished yet…
Now comes one of the most decisive parts of your campaign:
Testing.
Testing can make the difference between marketing
 
efforts that
disappoint and marketing efforts that produce outstanding, profit-
boosting
 
results.
Testing is the cornerstone of any direct response 
marketing
campaign. Every component 
of 
direct 
marketing media must be
accountable and measurable.
That’s 
why 
I 
call 
direct response marketing 
“Accountable
Advertising” or “Scientific Advertising.”
Always test.
Testing reduces your risk, gives you valuable marketing
intelligence for the future and allows you to constantly increase
your response
 
rate.
By testing, you’ll learn the following key details:
•
     
You will always know when you spend a dollar and when
you receive or earn a dollar … or 75¢ or
 
$1.50.
•
     
You always know your
 
cost-per-lead.
•
     
You always know your
 
cost-per-sale.With any kind of media – direct mail, Facebook, banner ads,
email – you’ll always know the cost and return on the investment.
Testing for Your
Multichannel,
Integrated
Marketing
Campaign
It’s absolutely essential to test every element of your
multichannel, integrated marketing campaign, using A/B tests to
determine the kind of copy, imagery, and other variables that get
the most favorable response.
You can test headlines, components, email subject lines, different
landing pages, landing page headlines, banner ads, different email
lists, even price points … hundreds of variables.
When I put together a campaign, I always choose carefully what
to test.
In the following pages, I’ll show you four different tests that
reveal how changing a variable can affect response.
Direct Mail Campaign: Postal List and Envelope Test
Here is a powerful example of an envelope test I performed for a
direct mail campaign.
This test consisted of about 60,000 pieces.
In this example, I tested two essential response boosters of the
campaign:1.
   
The postal lists I
 
used
2.
    
The envelope copy, or teaser copy, for which I created two
versions: Version A and Version B
I sent two versions of teaser copy to nine different lists.
•
     
60,000-piece mailing, nine different
 
lists
•
     
30,000 version “A” vs. 30,000 version “B”
•
 
Universe of potential names: 2,965,422
Here are the results of the test
 (shown on the next
page).
Teaser Version
A
response rate %
Teaser Version
B
response rate %
List
1
.61
.69
List
2
.40
.34
List
3
.60
.73
List
4
.55
.60
List
5
.36
.46
List
6
.42
.55
List
7
.71
.79List
8
.65
.72
List
9
.69
.78
Average
List: A 55.4%
List B: 62.8%
As you can see, Version B produced more returns … and became
the “control.”
With this test, I identified which were the best- performing
mailing lists and which version of the teaser copy worked
 
best.
Let’s say that first, you required a .55 to  justify your campaign,
and then you only use those list cells performing above a
 
.60.
Second, you can see that Version B significantly outperformed
Version A. So, you’ll mail Version B and forget about Version
 
A.
     Based on what you learn, you’ll create a new Version “C” to beat Version
“B.”
American Express Publishing: Adjusting the Price to Increase
Response
One of the reasons it’s so important to test different variables is
that the results of a test may surprise you.
Here’s a test that American Express Publishing performed for
one of their publications:
Starting with a control price of $19.95, American Express
compared these three price points to its control price.
•
     
$19.97
•
     
$19.99
•
     
$19.49
The average customer might guess that the cheapest price got the
highest response rate – $19.49.
But in reality, the highest price got the most
 
response.
Results: If you guessed $19.99 you are right! Offered at thatprice, compared to the control price of $19.95, the price of $19.99
resulted in 10% better sales. The worst
 
price
 
point
 
was
 
actually
 
the
lowest
 
price:
 
$19.49.
Magalog Cover Test: SurfControl Security Software
SurfControl is a provider of corporate security software that
came to me with a challenge: Help them sell their product,
SuperScout, in a competitive market with such heavy hitters as
Norton.
To set SuperScout apart, we created a magalog that persuaded
the CEO/CFO/top-level corporate prospects of the value  and
specific
 
benefits  of using SuperScout.
But to ensure the best possible results for SurfControl, we
produced
 
two
 
different
 
covers
 
to
 
test
 
in
 
the
 
market.Here is cover A:
And, cover B 
(Next Page)
:
In this case, both the headline and graphics were
different on each cover.
Cover A says, “How Fortune 1000 Companies are
Losing Billions to
 
Cyberslackers.”Cover B says, “How an email joke cost Chevron $2.2 million
dollars.”
The winner?
Cover B outperformed Cover A by more than 24%.
With this valuable knowledge, we were then able to
 
print and
mail more “Cover B” magalogs to produce
 
more leads and sales for
SurfControl.Harry and David: Shopping Cart Icon Test
Harry and David conducted this test on the shopping cart icon on
their website during their busiest season, in
 
December.
They created two versions of their site header, which included a
search box and cart icon:
Version A had the word “Keyword” written inside the search
field, a magnifying glass search button and a cart icon with the
words “Your Cart” next to
 
it.
Version B had the word “Search” above an empty search field,
an arrow for its search button and the word “Cart” for the cart icon.
Version A outsold Version B by double
 
digits.
This test shows just how important it is to test small details that
you might consider insignificant. Small tweaks can produce major
impact.
Version A may have done better because of its more
conventional design – people were familiar with the way the search
box and cart button looked, and so they used
 
them.
   Version B may have been too unorthodox and new. The lesson from the
story: Test everything.
Testing is critical to refining your strategy and gaining valuable
leads. Don’t skip this critical step. It could make a massive
difference in the results of your campaign.                                              
CHAPTER
29
Addressable TV: Revolutionary New Strategy for Cutting Through
Clutter and Targeting Your Prospects
Television is a powerful marketing medium for reaching your
prospects.But television has changed.
Over the last several years, cable TV viewing rates have
plummeted. Between the years of 2010 and 2018, traditional pay-
TV subscribers dropped by more than10 million households.
In its place, viewers are turning to streaming TV: platforms like
Hulu, Roku and Amazon Prime.
Why?
Streaming TV allows viewers to watch what they want, when
they want.
Between 40 and 50 million households in America are now
watching TV on streaming services, accounting for roughly 128
million individuals.
And that number only continues to rise.
With 75% of all Americans owning two or more streaming
devices, that adds up to a significant amount of viewing time.
What does this mean for advertisers?
For one, it means advertising slots on cable TV will drop in price
– meaning running still-powerful infomercials is more cost-
effective than ever (see Chapter 12).
But streaming TV also poses a powerful new opportunity:
addressable TV, or television that allows advertisers to target
specific prospects.
Addressable TV vs. Traditional
TV Advertising
Traditionally, advertisers have had to “cast a wide net” in order
to reach potential buyers on cable TV.They run a commercial, and hope that their ad will be relevant to
viewers.
That means that audiences often end up watching commercials
that aren’t of any interest to them: Teenagers watching commercials
for baby shampoo, or young adults
 
watching
 
ads
 
for
 
blood
pressure
 
medication.
The result is wasted time and money, and audiences that are
bored and uninterested.
But addressable TV allows marketers to run ads to targeted
prospects and audiences only.
That means a few things:
•
     
Two different households might be watching the same
program…but
 
will
 
view
 
different
 
ads…
•
     
Advertisers spend their money only on likely buyers….
•
     
And viewers get to exclusively watch ads that are relevant
and interesting to them.
It’s a win-win for everybody.
Addressable TV: How it
Works
        
Just like you can on Facebook, Google, Amazon and other
advertising platforms, addressable TV allows you to target
specific prospects or audiences with your
 
ads.
There are two strategies you can use for addressable
 
TV:
a)
       
You can upload a custom list – for example of hot leads, or
existing customers – and target them right on their streaming
devices.
b)
       
Or, you can create a look-alike audience of prospects thatlook and behave just like your best prospects – and target
 
them.
The result?
You have 
the captive 
attention 
of an 
engaged 
audience…and
you’re not competing with other ads simultaneously.
Your audience can watch your ad on any one of their streaming
devices, including their television screen, phone, tablet, or laptop or
desktop
 
computer.
It’s powerful.
In fact, right now, I’m testing addressable TV for an investment
newsletter client.
And we’re getting great results.
Addressable TV: 4 Strategies
to Know
Addressable TV could just become one of your most effective
channels for your multichannel, integrated marketing campaign.
Imagine: Your prospects see your targeted ads on their Facebook
newsfeeds, in their email inboxes, mailboxes… and finally, during
a break in their favorite TV show.
But there are a few best practices to know before getting
started…
#1: Keep your ad to 30 seconds.
Addressable TV slots are typically 30 seconds long.
So make sure your ads are powerful, get to the point quickly and
have a strong call-to-action.In direct response TV, 60-second commercials do better than 30-
second commercials, and 120-second commercials do better than
60-second commercials.
However, the inventory for 60-second ads and above is rare.
Therefore, it’s best to make sure you rely upon 30-second ad slots.
If you’re fortunate enough to get longer time slots, that’s great.
#2: Use direct response tactics.
As with any marketing asset you create, use direct response copy
and art for your ad.
Display the text on screen, and speak directly to the
 
viewer.
For more best practices on creating video, go to Chapter 27.
#3: Addressable TV is
especially powerful during
election season.
During political elections, traditional ads get pre- empted and
bumped on cable TV.
Addressable TV is an effective way to get strong viewership
even when your audience is inundated with political ads.
#4: Keep your marketing
message and offer the same.
Remember, your addressable TV ads work just like all 
other
marketing assets in your multichannel, integrated marketing
campaign.
Keep your messaging and offer the same to maximize response.Addressable TV has exciting potential to transform your
marketing – and to become one of your most valuable channels in
your multichannel, integrated marketing
 
campaign.
     It’s a powerful strategy for capturing the attention
of targeted prospects…and getting on one of the most quickly growing
mediums of entertainment in the world: streaming TV.Now What?
My company, CDMG Inc., has pioneered multichannel,
integrated marketing, combining advanced targeting strategies with
direct mail, email, pre-roll and digital marketing to the same target
audience to produce amazing
 
results.
I take a methodical approach to marketing that is different from
branding or awareness, targeting prospects with
 
direct
 
response
marketing
 
for
 
maximum
 
response
… and profits.
These principles have turned small startups into successful,
medium-sized businesses … and medium- sized businesses into
multimillion-dollar
 
companies.
So, here’s what I suggest:
1.
        
Call Caleb Huey at (615) 490-8823 or email him at
caleb@cdmginc.com. 
Let’s start a dialogue, discuss your goals and
outline a strategic plan. If you would like, you are welcome to come
to our offices in Torrance, California, or Nashville, Tennessee, and
see our work, staff and 90 awards my team and I at Creative Direct
Marketing Group have won for creating successful, winning
campaigns.
But if you can’t visit us in person, that’s okay. Over 75% of my
clients have never been to our office.
2.
        
I can then send you a very tight proposal on the project: costs,
strategy and schedule. The good  news: I will reduce your risk and help you
succeed in raising
 
capital.
I look forward to talking with you. Answering your questions. Helping you
generate new capital. Creative
 
Direct Marketing Group is here to help. So,
give us a call at (615) 814-6633 or email Caleb at 
caleb@cdmginc.com.Order Your Copy of The New
Multichannel, Integrated Marketing:
29 Trends for Creating a
Multichannel, Integrated Campaign to
Boost Your Profits Now
First-Time Buyers Receive 20% Off
Order More Than One Book and Receive
30% Off
Visit
www.multichannelintegratedmarketingbook.com
to
purchase a copy online today.