AI for Manufacturing 
Marketing Blueprint
Sponsored By
© 2023, Marketing AI Institute, All Rights Reserved.
Published July 20232  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  3  Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for Manufacturing Marketing and Sales
5  What Is AI, Really?  
 3 Core AI Applications  6
7  How to Determine the Right AI Use Case 
 Top Marketing AI Use Cases in Manufacturing   7
9  Top Companies Using AI for Manufacturing Marketing 
 Security Equipment Manufacturer Increases Email Capture Rate By 3X   9 
 Global Fortune 500 Manufacturer Boosts Net-New Leads and Customer Satisfaction   9 
11  Top Marketing AI Tools for Manufacturing
14  Why Manufacturing Marketing of the Future Depends on AI
 About Marketing AI Institute  14
 About Drift  14
 Table of Contents3  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
The world’s manufacturers have faced extraordinary obstacles in the last few years—shaky supply 
chains, an uncertain global economy, and labor shortages, to name a few.
Still, customer demand has spurred unexpected growth in the industry. Now, manufacturers are 
tentatively leaving pandemic-era struggles in the rearview mirror and shifting their focus to leaping 
ahead of competitors.
For industry leaders, this means digital transformation. Yet, as the industry progresses toward “smart 
factory” transformations on the manufacturing floor, many manufacturing marketers still find 
themselves stuck in place when it comes to marketing technology.
Despite improved online experiences having a direct positive impact on customer satisfaction,  
revenue and retention, and an industry shift toward e-commerce, 92% percent of manufacturers  
report that their digital experiences are behind customer expectations. Competition is surging, 
demand is high, and yet, the majority of manufacturers are unsatisfied with how their website 
captures and nurtures leads. 
Many are also unprepared to navigate a seller-free sales experience. Sales reps today are only 
getting 5% of a customer’s time during the B2B buying journey. Instead of relying on in-person 
introductory meetings, customers are turning to company websites and digital channels to do 
research and determine product fit.
Customers don’t want to waste time finding information, waiting for responses, digging through 
emails, or sitting on calls. They want immediate answers and information at their fingertips. They 
want personalized, relevant experiences on the channels of their choosing.
Artificial intelligence (AI) can help. Gartner predicts that 75% of B2B sales organizations will 
augment their traditional sales playbooks with AI-guided selling solutions by 2025, and marketers in 
neighboring industries are reaping the rewards of AI for things like:
• Saving time by generating high-quality content, outlines, summaries, and ideas.
• Providing data-driven recommendations on which marketing assets will perform best.
• Personalizing marketing campaigns for each member of their audience at scale.
•  Segmenting users based on their individual behaviors and interactions, and predicting what 
they’ll do next.
•  Conversing with multiple customers in real time and answering their questions with subject-
matter expertise at scale.
• Increasing customer engagement and revenue with content and product recommendations.
•  Moving leads through the funnel more efficiently, for higher customer satisfaction and shorter 
time to revenue (TTR).
… And many, many more. 
 
Powerful AI tools are commercially available to all manufacturing teams, and they’ve become easier 
to use, regardless of technical background. In fact, your competitors are likely already harnessing the 
power of AI to increase their marketing teams’ productivity, efficiency, and mission-critical ROI.
 
Why Artificial Intelligence  
Is a Must for Manufacturing  
Marketing and Sales
Customers 
don’t want 
to waste 
time finding 
information, 
waiting for 
responses, 
digging 
through 
emails, or 
sitting on 
calls.4  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
If you’re not already using AI in multiple facets of your marketing strategy, you need to be.  
Marketing your business without AI puts you at risk of becoming obsolete.
Good news: You don’t need a degree in data science or machine learning to take advantage 
of AI. You just need to understand:
 
• What AI is and what it is capable of doing.
•  What AI use cases are available for manufacturing marketing, and how to find the 
use cases that make sense for your organization.
• Which specific AI tools can create real business outcomes for you.
 
With this guide, you’ll uncover all three. You’ll see real-life examples of companies like 
yours succeeding with AI, gain the confidence to move forward using AI for your marketing 
strategy, and begin reaping the benefits of AI for your business.Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for Manufacturing Marketing and Sales
You don’t need 
a degree in 
data science 
or machine 
learning to take 
advantage of AI. 5  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  Our favorite definition of AI is simple. It comes from Demis Hassabis, Co-Founder and CEO of Google 
DeepMind, a major player in AI: AI is “the science of making machines smart.”
 
Smart machines enhance human knowledge and capabilities. 
But what does it mean for a machine to be smart?
It means that AI uses machine learning to determine its own pathways toward achieving an overall goal 
(e.g. drive more sales). 
First, humans train the machine by showing it data and teaching it to recognize patterns in that data. 
Using those patterns, the machine learns how to achieve the goals programmed into it. After a certain 
period of time, the machine starts to recognize those patterns, achieve its goals without human 
influence, and even iterate on its performance based on feedback.
To illustrate what we mean, let’s compare how AI software would handle online support cases 
compared to the traditional software you may use today. 
Imagine you want to start offering an option for your prospects and customers to get their questions 
answered online versus only over the phone. You’d probably take the following steps: 
1. Manually create a Contact Us web page and form on your website where site visitors can 
submit their requests.
2. Wait for the questions to come in, and then manually route those inquiries to the 
appropriate person on your team who will follow up in an email. 
3. Maybe you add a live chat function to your website and staff your team with live support 
agents. Your agents then manually answer each question as they come in.
There are probably a number of tools in your tech stack that would help you with this process, but it’s 
still not very sophisticated. Every step of the way, you have to have a human at their computer giving 
the software instructions on what to do. It’s tedious, and it’s inefficient.
What if you added AI to your tech stack?
AI-powered marketing technology would:
1. Instantly recognize how a person landed on your site as well as their previous interactions 
with your company to send a personalized greeting.
2. Gather initial information about the individual and their question, and ask for follow up 
details as relevant. 
3. Pre-populate known information, such as email addresses, from your contact management 
system into questions and responses.
4. Automatically answer simple support questions.
5. Route the individual to the most appropriate sales rep along with the context of the inquiry 
for more complex questions.
6. Schedule meetings for sales reps if they are unable to chat live.
What Is AI, Really?  6  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
And the best part? AI learns with every interaction it has on your site, so it gets better over time. 
Whenever a chat conversation is successfully completed, the machine remembers what worked well. It instantly 
applies these learnings to the next campaign and incrementally improves the playbook instantly and at scale. 
Or take another example: If the same question continues to come up, AI suggests topics so that you can build 
immediate responses around what customers care about most and alleviate reps from redundant questions. 
 What Is AI, Really?  
Machine learning isn’t the only term you’ll 
hear in discussions of AI. You’ve probably 
read or heard people using terms like:
 
Deep learning:   A subset of machine 
learning that recognizes and brings 
together complex patterns in pictures, 
text, sound, and other data by 
mimicking how the human brain works. 
Reinforcement learning: A type 
of machine learning model that 
uses environmental signals (such 
as rewarding a machine for certain 
outcomes) to optimize toward a long-
term goal. 
Neural networks: A collection of 
interconnected artificial neurons that 
power deep learning. 
Topic modeling: When AI identifies 
how words relate to each other and 
group with each other, enabling all 
sorts of capabilities like generating 
language and identifying recurring 
themes in content.
Robotics: Robotics combines image 
recognition, facial recognition, and 
computer vision to power a physical 
machine. It is not AI, but rather 
powered by AI. 
 
There’s a lot of AI jargon out there, but 
for the sake of manufacturing marketing, 
there are only three AI applications 
you really need to pay attention to: 
Language, Vision, and Prediction. Language AI—The ability for machines 
to understand and generate written and 
spoken words. 
Language AI technologies and terms you 
may encounter include:
 
• Natural language generation
• Voice recognition
• Natural language processing
• Text analysis and summarization
• Sentiment analysis
 
An example of Language AI is Gmail’s 
Smart Compose feature. You type 
an email, and Gmail predicts how to 
complete your next sentence.
In manufacturing, Language AI can be 
used to write and edit any type of copy 
across product lines and offerings—from 
emails and blog posts to landing pages 
and social media posts.
Vision AI—The ability for machines 
to analyze and understand data 
from still images and videos. Vision 
AI technologies and terms you may 
encounter include:
 
• Object recognition
• Emotion generation
• Image generation
• Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
• Video generation
 
An example of Vision AI is the facial 
recognition feature on iPhones. Vision AI 
determines if the face it is seeing is the owner of the phone’s and, if it is, grants 
them access to the device.
In manufacturing, Vision AI can create 
compelling, original images for use in 
presentations, ebooks, and social media.
 
Prediction AI—The ability for machines 
to predict future outcomes based on 
historical data. The better the data 
that goes in (the inputs), the better the 
predictions that come out (the outputs). 
Prediction AI you may already be familiar 
with include:
 
• Personalization
• Pattern recognition
• Forecasting
• Recommendation
 
An example of Prediction AI is credit 
card fraud alerts. The AI is trained on 
your historical data, and, based on your 
buying history, can predict fraudulent 
transactions. It then automatically notifies 
you of those data anomalies.
In manufacturing, Prediction AI can help 
personalize your brand experience for 
every audience member, at scale—and 
make changes in real-time based on 
mountains of data.3 Core AI Applications7  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
Between Language AI, Vision AI, and Prediction AI use cases, it’s easy to wonder where to even begin. 
We recommend starting your AI journey by taking a holistic view of your marketing programs and 
asking yourself three main questions.
For each task, consider:
 
Is it data-driven? Are you using data to do the task? Alternatively, do you have data you should be 
using to do the task, but you’re not? Consider anytime you analyze customer demographics, product 
sales, browsing behavior and other data points. 
 
Is it repetitive? Do you do the same thing over and over again to accomplish the task? Is there a list 
of defined steps that you follow to get the task done? Weekly or monthly reporting on your product 
sales could fall into this category.
 
Is it making a prediction? Are you trying to forecast an outcome or behavior? AI is really good at 
identifying patterns based on large sets of data. It then uses these patterns to make predictions on 
likely outcomes or the next best action. 
 
You don’t have to answer “yes” to all three questions to have an AI use case, but these questions are 
a great framework for creating your AI roadmap and prioritizing where to focus first to see the most 
impact from AI.  
Top Marketing AI Use Cases in Manufacturing
 
Manufacturing marketing is rife with opportunity for AI implementation. Top manufacturers have 
already begun expanding use of this technology from the factory floor to their marketers’ offices. Here 
are just a few examples of real use cases.
Analytics  
• Synthesize data for patterns and emerging trends in real-time. 
•  Continuously pull relevant data points and measure performance on all marketing activities in 
visually appealing dashboards and interactive reports, proving ROI for each expense in the strategy.
•  Provide better personalization with a clearer view of your customers and distributors, 
informed by data.
Content
 
• Create visuals, like static images or video, that show how complex systems and parts work.
•  Automatically surface the content that will most likely help a prospect take a desired next 
step toward purchase, like converting into a qualified lead.
•  Implement personalization into websites with dynamic content that helps users find the 
product or part they’re looking for based on their job title, industry, or product lines they’ve 
purchased from in the past. 
•  Proactively recommend content and products based on common replacement or upgrade 
timelines—and automatically improve these recommendations over time.
How to Determine the  
Right AI Use Case8  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
Sales
•  Predict the accounts that will buy based on your top existing customers and help team members 
dedicate their time to following those leads.
•  Likewise, predict the accounts that will churn and flag these risks for team members to nurture  
the relationship.
•  Automatically identify cross-sell and upsell opportunities that make sense for a particular buyer based on 
purchase history.
•  Expedite the RFP process with predictive text and generative writing programs. 
•  Predict what will be in scope and out of scope for the deals you’re working on.
•  Have one-to-one conversations with website visitors and personalize recommendations, resources, and 
suggestions at scale.
•  Draft compelling sales content, sales presentations, and proposals.
•  Allow visitors to automatically set up meetings with the right person on your team and avoid the back 
and forth of scheduling with field teams. 
Social
•  Automatically generate social shares from text prompts or from past work your human content teams 
have produced.
•  Automatically schedule social shares to post on the days and times that your audience is most likely to engage. 
• Create compelling images and videos for social posts. 
•  Serve different variations of social shares to different audiences based on their preferences, motivations, 
and needs.
Website Conversion and Support
•  Better engage visitors with contextual greetings via AI-powered chatbots and personalized website content. 
•  Execute A/B tests of site landing pages, headlines, images, offers, calls to action and more, learn from 
the results, and automatically apply the learnings into future content.
•  Deflect service requests with AI-powered chatbots that can provide relevant answers immediately. Point 
site visitors to relevant web resources or route them to the best-available human. 
•  Provide dynamic and personalized pricing based on customer behavior, competitor prices, and market 
demand to incentivize conversions. How to Determine the Right AI Use Case9  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  You have a fundamental understanding of AI and you know how it can be used in your business. Now, 
let’s look at how real manufacturers are using AI technology to push their marketing—and revenue—
ahead of the competition.
Security Equipment Manufacturer Increases Email Capture Rate By 3X
 
Plenty of marketers in the manufacturing space rely on account-based marketing (ABM) to help land 
target accounts.
 
But for this manufacturer, ABM was just the beginning.
 
The former STANLEY Security, now Securitas Technology, used ABM with some success. It quickly 
realized there was an opportunity to not only catch the attention of its VIP prospects, but to engage 
them in a personalized experience that continues even after they had become customers.
 
The key? Account-based engagement (ABE).
 
The goal of ABE is to personalize each experience a target has with your brand in an engaged way, not 
a passive way. It focuses on creating a highly personalized pre- and post-sales experience based on the 
customer’s intent, with the goal of initiating and growing one-on-one relationships.
Securitas Technology leaned on Drift, an AI-powered conversation cloud that personalizes 
conversations at every stage of the buyer’s journey, to transform its customer experience with ABE.
 
It deployed a Drift chatbot to pinpoint intent. The intelligent chatbot starts a conversation where the 
customer says exactly what they want. Using Drift on its website, Securitas Technology designed one-
on-one AI-powered experiences using conversational and firmographic data.
 
The chatbots were customized so they responded to a specific buyer’s needs, whether based on 
industry, the page they are browsing, or where they are in the buying journey.
 
But the experience goes even deeper than an engaging greeting. Using the data collected from 
its conversations, Securitas Technology optimized its conversation flow to ensure the best service 
possible, such as knowing how many sales reps to have available based on seasonal intent.
 
The result?
 
With Drift, Securitas Technology has had more than 55,000 conversations across the globe and 
uncovered more than 2,300 opportunities. Securitas Technology marketers also found that, with a 
personalized experience, their email capture rate was 3X higher than with a generalized experience.
Global Fortune 500 Manufacturer Boosts Net-New Leads and Customer 
Satisfaction
 
Emerson is a global technology, software, and engineering company that has 170 manufacturing 
locations and more than 86,000 employees.
Top Companies Using AI  
for Manufacturing Marketing10  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
It was seeking to elevate the digital experience on its website, which drew millions of visits annually. The Emerson 
team wanted to get customers and prospects answers to their questions faster—replacing form fills, and delivering 
high-value leads directly to their product experts. 
But, it faced some challenges: particularly related to the company’s size, personnel depth, and geographic diversity. 
The company needed AI to quickly adapt to each customer’s needs and direct each individual to the right Emerson 
expert or self-service resource. 
With Drift’s Conversational AI, Emerson business development representatives, customer care technicians and 
technical specialists are all able to quickly book meetings, live chat with customers and prospects, and leverage AI 
to solve an array of customer needs. 
For example, site visitors can simply click “Talk to an Expert,” and a Drift chatbot will immediately connect them to 
the right Emerson resource, increasing inbound conversion rates. 
As a result, Emerson has been able to shorten its sales cycle, lower its cost of service, drive qualified conversations 
and net-new leads, and offer unmatched customer service. 
In the six months since implementation, Emerson exceeded its ROI projections with Drift’s chatbot booking more 
than 600 meetings and driving upward of one new contact per business development rep, per week. On top of the 
sales growth, customers have never been happier! 
 Top Companies Using AI for Manufacturing Marketing11  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  Ready to try out AI for yourself? AI options for manufacturers run the gamut, but we’ve listed a few of 
the best of the best for you here.
 
Drift’s Conversation Cloud increases lead generation and efficiently grows revenue by connecting with 
website visitors instantly to share content, answer questions, and book meetings 24/7/365.
 
Manufacturers who provide great digital experiences are two times as likely to be selected over a 
competitor. With an AI-powered online concierge like Drift, you can recognize visitors, serve relevant 
content, and get insights on what your customers care about most.
 
Drift’s key capabilities include:
•  AI Chatbot: Answer questions, share relevant content, and capture email 
addresses 24/7 to grow your pipeline of qualified leads.
•  Book a Meeting: Allow customers to schedule sales meetings so your 
business development team never misses an opportunity.
•  Target Account Notifications: Get real-time ABM alerts when target 
accounts and key buying committees visit your site. Engage when intent 
is highest.
•  Live Chat: Immediately connect website visitors with the right product 
experts, business development reps, and support agents.
•  Integrations: Connect Drift to your technology stack to offer more 
personalized outreach with context from your existing data—that means if 
someone asks for information that doesn’t live on your website, the Drift 
webhooks API can pull it straight from your ERP instead.
•  Reporting and AI Topics: Measure performance and ROI. Uncover 
trending chat topics to improve experiences across the customer lifecycle.
Top Marketing AI Tools  
for Manufacturing
Want to try it out? 
START HERE12  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
Top Marketing AI Tools for Manufacturing
6sense uses AI to capture “intent signals,” or indicators that identify people who are likely to take a 
desired action, to help businesses improve their communication efficiency and productivity. 
 
AiAdvertising is a cloud-based Artificial Intelligence-as-a-Service (AIaaS) advertising platform that 
allows marketers to easily plan, predict and execute hyper-personalized advertising campaigns with full 
transparency, while gaining the intelligence they need to prove advertising’s impact on the bottom line. 
This means powerful, high-impact ads that convert. 
Demandbase is a go-to-market platform built around Account Intelligence, which combines your sales 
and marketing data with its validated external B2B data to help you find and engage with the accounts 
most likely to buy from you. It uses AI to make sense of everything, and then it helps you put it into 
action with Demandbase One™.
The result? Your team can spot opportunities faster and better understand where to focus their time 
and money. 
 
Descript uses AI to put professional-grade video and audio production in your hands. The tool’s simple 
UI makes it easy for anyone to produce videos, audio clips, transcripts, and more. It’s perfect (and 
affordable) for podcast, webinar, and course production. And you don’t need to hire pricy production 
firms to create multimedia content assets.
 
MarketMuse is an AI platform that identifies your top content opportunities. The platform uses AI to 
tell you which topics to target and how to rank for them, and it even generates content briefs for those 
suggested topics. Plus, it can show you what other pieces of content are on Page 1 of SERPs missed, 
so you can beat out your competitors.13  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
Top Marketing AI Tools for Manufacturing
 
Mutiny is a no-code AI solution that allows you to personalize your website by just pointing and
clicking. This makes it quick and easy to roll out personalization changes and experiments without 
developers. You can use these capabilities to better personalize your website for individual visitors. 
For example, you can create personalized landing pages at scale for ABM / ABE and paid advertising 
campaigns.
 
The Persado platform combines natural language generation, machine learning, and experimental 
design to tailor marketing messaging to be in a language and tone that it knows will motivate 
individual users the most—turning words into growth levers for your business.
Salesforce Einstein—a layer of intelligence within the Lightning Platform—allows admins and 
developers to use the rich set of platform services to build customized, AI-powered apps. 
Salesloft is a sales-engagement platform designed to provide relationship managers a central place to 
execute digital selling tasks, communicate with buyers, forecast, as well as get coaching and insights. 
A few of its AI-based features include meeting and call analysis and insights, in which transcribed and 
video recorded calls are analyzed to better understand buyer engagement and guide sales coaching, 
and email templates, in which generative AI is used to create effective outreach emails at scale.
 
Writer is an AI writing platform built for teams. Unlike other GPT-powered applications, Writer is trained 
on your data—your best-performing blog posts, landing pages, social media posts, as well as your 
brand style guide. 14  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  Manufacturers that refuse to evolve and embrace the latest technology often get left behind. That’s 
been true for centuries, and it’s true of marketers, too.
 
AI gives manufacturing marketers the power to do more with less. It increases your team’s efficiency 
and makes your marketing campaigns more effective. On top of saving time and money, AI can also 
help increase pipeline by creating a personalized buying experience for every single lead, at scale. It’s a 
win-win! 
 
Harness the power of AI for your own organization, or risk becoming obsolete. AI’s capabilities are 
rapidly improving, and its cost is dropping.
 
You have the understanding. You have the use cases. And the technology is available and affordable.
 
It’s time to get to work.
About Marketing AI Institute
 
Marketing AI Institute is a media, event, and education company founded in 2016 that makes AI 
approachable and actionable for marketers and business leaders.
 
The Institute owns and operates the Marketing Artificial Intelligence Conference (MAICON), AI for 
Writers Summit and AI for Agencies Summit; hosts The Marketing AI Show podcast; runs the AI 
Academy for Marketers featuring dozens of on-demand courses; and published Marketing Artificial 
Intelligence: AI, Marketing, and the Future of Business (Matt Holt Books, 2022).
 
Learn more at www.marketingaiinstitute.com.
 
About Drift
 
Drift, the Conversation Cloud company, helps businesses connect with people at the right time, in the 
right place with the right conversation.
 
Using the Drift Conversation Cloud, businesses can personalize experiences that lead to more quality 
pipeline, revenue and lifelong customers. Drift brings Conversational Marketing, Conversational Sales 
and Conversational Service into a single platform that integrates chat, email and video, and powers 
personalized experiences with AI at all stages of the customer journey.
 
More than 5,000 customers, including 200+ manufacturers, use Drift to deliver a more enjoyable and 
more human buying experience that builds trust and accelerates revenue. Manufacturing customers 
include STANLEY Security (now Securitas Technology), Cornerstone Building Brands, Advanced 
Instruments, 3D Systems and Mirion Technologies, among others. 
Representing less than 1% of unicorns led by Latino founders, Drift is building an equitable, enduring 
company to transform the way businesses buy from businesses.
 
For more information, visit www.drift.com and follow @drift.
Why Manufacturing Marketing  
of the Future Depends on AI15  |  AI for Manufacturing Marketing Blueprint  
