AI for Advertising  
Blueprint
Sponsored By
© 2023, Marketing AI Institute, All Rights Reserved.
Published October 2023
2  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint3  Why Artificial Intelligence Is a Must for Advertisers
4   A Quick Introduction to AI for Advertising 
What Is AI?  4 
Machine Learning and the Core Types of AI  5 
7   How to Find AI Use Cases in Advertising 
8  Top AI Use Cases in Advertising   
11   Top Companies Using AI for Advertising 
Construction Leader Achieves More Than 10x ROAS  11 
Educational Group Bolsters Public Perception With AI-Powered Ad Campaign  11 
Cause-Based Organization Saves 78% on Ad Spend with AiAdvertising  12 
13   Top Marketing AI Tools for Advertisers 
AiAdvertising  13 
Attention Insight  14 
Celtra  14 
GumGum  14 
Intellimize  14 
Midjourney  15 
Pathmatics from SensorTower  15 
QuantPlus  15 
Runway  15
16   Why the Future of Advertising Depends on AI 
About Marketing AI Institute  17 
About AiAdvertising  17 Table of Contents3  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Advertisers are often the tip of the spear: A brand’s first, best chance to make an impression and reach new audiences. 
Today, advertising takes up the largest slice of global marketing spend as organizations strive to increase awareness 
when customers have more choices than ever (Salesforce 2023 State of Marketing Report). But even with a budget, it’s no 
easy feat. 
Consumers are walking around with multiple devices strapped to them. Plus, they’re savvy — they expect high relevance 
and heightened privacy. Cookies are crumbling; companies understand that they need to implement a zero-party data 
strategy for CRM optimization and audience targeting. Creative quickly grows stale. Ad fraud — which already costs 
advertisers billions — is on the rise.
The truth is, it’s never been harder — or more complex — to be an advertiser. 
Between programmatic advertising and an ever-expanding list of digital channels, advertisers have the ability to reach 
consumers across dozens of platforms, and millions of sites. They can target audiences with pinpoint accuracy, overlaying 
hundreds and thousands of demographic and behavioral data points. 
On top of this, they can test an infinite number of variations of different ads to see what performs best, all while 
maintaining brand consistency, managing vast data sets, and reporting in detail on return on ad spend (ROAS) — for 
budgets sometimes running into the millions of dollars.  
It’s incredible, and impossible. No advertising team has the bandwidth or brainpower to test, evaluate, analyze, and 
optimize every element of every ad across every channel for every. single. campaign. 
That’s where AI comes in. Simply put, AI is essential if you want to win in the new landscape of modern 
programmatic advertising.
AI can do all of these things and more. That’s why forward-thinking companies are using AI to:
• Leverage customer data to uncover behavioral insights
• Develop rich behavioral-driven persona profiles to predict what resonates 
• Engineer prompts based on segmented persuasion tactics and triggers 
• Personalize and scale messaging, creative, and media mix for campaigns
• Measure and prove performance of key performance indicators (KPIs)
• Optimize full-funnel attribution and continually improve ROI
• Allocate and adjust advertising budgets across channels and audiences automatically
• Find new audiences and revenue-generating opportunities
• Gain insight into competitors’ ad spend, messaging, creative, and advertising strategies 
• Predict ad performance before launching campaigns
• And much more.
We’re here to cover what you need to know: What AI is, how to identify use cases for your advertising strategy, and 
which tools to shortlist. 
Why Artificial Intelligence  
Is a Must for Advertisers4  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
A Quick Introduction to  
AI for Advertising
Ready to explore AI in your business and career? The first step is to understand how the technology works. But don’t 
worry; no knowledge of code, data science, or training models is required here. Instead, we’ll stick with the fundamentals 
of what AI is and how it works. 
What Is AI? 
AI is, in short, the science of making machines smart. It’s software, but unlike software you’ve used before — which is coded 
to perform specific functions, based on set rules — AI is software with the ability and flexibility to create its own paths to 
achieve a goal.
What’s even more incredible is that AI learns from past attempts, successes, and failures, and 
improves its ability to complete a task. 
So, what does this all mean? Let’s get away from the abstract, and ground it in a real-world 
example: Advertisers pulling together a campaign for a new product launch. 
To get started, they conduct market research: reviewing similar projects and campaigns, maybe 
analyzing sales and marketing data, or gathering feedback from surveys or focus groups.
Then, they build the campaign: selecting the channels, ad network, targeting, and budget. 
They might select these based on past performance, guesswork, gut instinct, creative 
inspiration, and available resources. Meanwhile, they pull in the creative team, where they 
go back and forth on revision rounds over the visuals and ad copy. Then, the finalized ad is 
formatted to each platform’s specifications.  
Once launched, the advertiser reviews and optimizes the campaign based on incoming 
data. Even with dynamic tools, the analysis may be lagging and the changes reactive. The campaign’s success is often 
determined months afterward, once all reporting is in, customer records are reconciled, and data is analyzed. 
Sound familiar? 
Now what if the advertiser could run this same campaign, but better, faster, and cheaper? Sound impossible? 
Not anymore! It might look something like this: 
•  AI analyzes massive amounts of data — interactions, transactions, sales, online behavior, social sentiment, and 
engagement — to predict consumer interests, motivations, demand, and forecast trends. 
•  The creative team works with AI tools to create assets with a single prompt that’s driven by customer motivations, 
then generates dozens of messages and creative variations to test elements and meet each ad spec.  
•  The advertiser uses AI to build sophisticated ad targeting based on first- and third-party data, layering in user 
behavior, past purchases, and other contextual factors. 
•  AI-powered tools run complex and dynamic campaigns, delivering personalized ad creative and placement to 
increase each buyer’s chances of converting. The campaigns are responsive and adaptive, continuously running 
multivariate tests, optimizing based on real-time performance, and delivering instant insights. 
•  Campaign conversion rates and efficiencies are at all-time highs, while smarter ad fraud detection prevents inflated 
clicks. As a result, the team delivers unprecedented ROI on the campaign and a wealth of insights for future campaigns. AI is the science of 
making machines 
smart. It’s software, 
but it’s software 
with the ability and 
flexibility to create 
its own paths to 
achieve a goal. 5  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
High fives all around!
Now, that’s impressive on its own, but it gets better: AI learns each time to achieve your advertising goals. Whether your 
goal is to:
• Find and convert new customers
• Increase return on ad spend (ROAS) and reduce customer acquisition costs (CAC)
• Optimize funnel conversions with no interaction history
• Boost brand position and quality score
• Increase time on site and overall engagement 
• Decrease sales cycle length 
• Increase average order values and cross-sell / upsell revenue 
• Build loyalty, frequency, and wallet share
• Develop deeper relationships to build zero-party data 
In fact, each time you use AI in advertising, it learns more about what your customers like best and how they are 
motivated to take action.
Also, notice how the advertiser and creative team aren’t removed from the equation. They’re asking the right questions, 
guiding, gut-checking, and making decisions all along the way. They’re far from absent — they’re empowered to do far 
more when assisted by AI tools. 
And we’re talking tools with the ability to unlock exponential performance gains the more you use them. That’s what 
makes AI so powerful.
Machine Learning and the Core Types of AI
Let’s dive a bit deeper into how AI works before bringing it back to advertising. 
AI isn’t a single tool or technique. It’s a category of technology and a broad suite of techniques that leverage smart 
machines in different ways.
For most, though, the magic is in “machine learning.” This is the primary subset of AI technology, and how AI tools learn 
from past attempts to achieve a (human-defined) goal. 
In your research, you’ll also probably read or hear people using terms like:
• Deep learning
• Reinforcement learning
• Neural networks
• Topic modeling
• Robotics
You’ll quickly notice there’s a lot of AI jargon out there, but to understand how AI works, you only really need to pay 
attention to three main applications: Language, Vision, and Prediction.
Language 
The ability for machines to analyze, understand, and generate language. This includes the written and spoken word. 
Common terms that fall under Language AI include: 
• Natural language generation (NLG)
• Voice recognition
• Natural language processing (NLP)
• Text analysis and summarization
• Sentiment analysisA Quick Introduction to AI for Advertising6  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
For example, Language AI can analyze user-generated content around a brand’s product line: comments, reviews, and 
discussions across blogs, forums, and social media sites. By categorizing sentiments and identifying specific themes or 
topics of discussion, advertisers can create ad campaigns that align with the most positive words, themes, and ideas.
Vision 
The ability for machines to analyze and understand data in images and videos.  
Common terms that fall under Vision AI include: 
• Object recognition
• Emotion generation
• Image generation
• Optical character recognition (OCR) 
• Video generation
For example, an advertising team might use Vision AI to evaluate brand exposure from a sports sponsorship. AI could 
scan hours of a televised event to detect and count every instance a brand’s logo is visible — on banners, jerseys, 
merchandise, etc. — and how long it was on screen. This data could help a brand quantify their exposure and ROI of the 
sponsorship deal. 
Prediction
The ability for machines to predict future outcomes based on data. 
Common terms that fall under Prediction AI include: 
• Personalization
• Pattern recognition
• Forecasting
• Recommendation
An example of Prediction AI is ad campaign forecasting. Before launching a campaign, AI could evaluate and 
forecast how the advertisement will perform across channels. By analyzing competitor performance, past campaigns, 
current market trends, and more, AI may predict the format (short videos), platform (trending social media sites), and 
demographic (U.S. adults aged 35-45) that would yield the greatest ROI.  A Quick Introduction to AI for Advertising7  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
How to Find AI Use  
Cases in Advertising 
Let’s recap: AI can help advertisers better understand and target their audiences, then turn around and better report on 
the results. But there are lots — and we mean lots… like hundreds — of ways to insert AI into your organization. 
If you’re overwhelmed by where to begin, we recommend looking at your advertising program and asking these 
four questions: 
1. Is it data-driven? Are you already using data to do this task — or could you? AI excels at crunching 
incomprehensible data sets at lightning speeds.  
 
This means that any task reliant on data (customer demographics, transaction history, browsing behavior, etc.) should 
rise to the top of your list of possible use cases. Also, consider your most robust and reliable sources of marketing 
and customer data. The more data you have, and the more essential the task, the better.  
2. Is it repetitive?  Is the task clearly defined, highly structured, and repeatable? For example, when pulling a weekly 
ad spend report, you can leave the one-off assignments and open-ended tasks to your creative team members, and 
offload the mundane, repetitive tasks to AI.  
3. Is it making a prediction?  Looking to improve the performance of an ad, channel, or campaign? Have historical 
data to learn from?  
 
In AI, prediction is always the name of the game. Machine learning works by learning what’s worked in the past, 
breaking down the patterns or shared characteristics, and predicting an approach that will repeat or beat that 
historical performance.  
 
It follows then, that AI is great at making predictions. AI can help you uncover patterns, unearth new insights, and 
better predict which elements of your marketing will perform best.    
4. Is it generative?  AI has shown remarkable proficiency in generating content across various domains, including text, 
images, audio, video and code. 
If you can answer “yes” to any one of these questions, you’ve identified an opportunity to boost your organization’s 
productivity and performance with AI. And if you’ve answered “yes” to all four, nice work — you’ve just found your first 
AI pilot project. 8  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Top AI Use Cases in Advertising 
You probably already have a list of use cases for your advertising program. Here are other common ways advertisers can use AI.
Segmentation and Strategy  
• Run predictive analysis to determine which ad content and creative will work before you launch.
• Complete sophisticated customer journey mapping to serve up the right ads at the right time. 
•  Set up and more precisely target different audience segments based on firmographic, technographic, first-party, or 
third-party data to dynamically serve the right content to each audience.
• Unify customer data for richer behavioral profiles, better segmentation, and more targeted ads.
• Analyze competitors’ ad campaigns to uncover winning strategies.
• Intelligently segment prospects to personalize ad messaging to a user’s specific needs or goals. 
• Create comprehensive profiles of valuable users and customers to compile valuable lookalike audiences.
•  Automatically identify cross-sell and upsell opportunities that make sense for each individual buyer based on 
purchase history.
• Uncover less obvious channels and platforms to find new audiences interested in your ads.
Ad Creative 
•  Automatically generate different variations of product listings and images at scale to fit the standards of different 
channels and ad networks.
• Scale one piece of creative across platforms, languages, and regions.
•  Run cross-channel marketing. Dynamically update ad creative and copy to be consistent for users across channels 
and devices. 
• Generate video advertisements using AI-assisted scriptwriting, graphics, voiceover, and even AI actors. 
•  Mine user-generated content like search queries, customer reviews, and social media posts to better understand 
buyer intent, challenges, and preferences, and craft more effective ad copy.
•  Maximize the value of your data by unlocking information trapped in product descriptions, reviews, or other 
unstructured text to generate more relevant ads.
• Create more relevant ads based on contextual variables, such as device type, location, or time of day.
Targeting and Personalization
•  Match products to a user’s needs, desires, motivations, and interests to identify cross-sell and upsell opportunities, 
then run personalized ad delivery campaigns.
• Improve retargeting and remarketing campaigns by better predicting what users want to see, do, read, or buy next.
•  Create a product recommendation engine that intelligently recommends content and products based on consumer 
preferences and behaviors.
• Personalize product descriptions and reviews based on demographic or contextual data, like search queries.
• Use AI to analyze product metadata and provide smarter product recommendations to users from your catalog.
• Recommend trending products — those gaining popularity among users at the fastest pace.9  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Conversion Rate Optimization and Eliminating Guesswork in A/B Testing
•  Use A/B or multivariate testing to identify ad copy that resonates with your target audience, and test even more 
variations more quickly using AI.
•  Automatically serve different site versions to each visitor, aligning the experience with the ad to maintain brand 
consistency and optimize conversions. 
•  Execute A/B tests of ad campaign landing pages, headlines, images, offers, calls to action and more, learn from the 
results, and automatically apply the learnings to future campaigns.
• Allocate budget to the right audiences and channels. 
• Automatically and proactively manage, adjust, and optimize ad budget.
•  Run dynamic pricing campaigns, and provide personalized pricing based on customer behavior, competitor prices, 
and market demand to incentivize conversions.
• Put ad placement optimization on autopilot.  
• Save money with more sophisticated and accurate ad fraud detection.
Analytics and Reporting 
• Use visual AI to identify the colors, copy, and visual elements that perform best. 
•  Run sentiment analysis on ad creative to optimize future messaging and campaigns based on your audience’s 
reactions.  
• Get real-time analytics and instant reporting insights to augment your own analysis.
•  Continuously pull relevant metrics and illustrate performance in dashboards and interactive reports, calculating ROI 
for each campaign.
• Synthesize massive data sets for patterns and emerging trends that can inform future ad campaign strategies.Top AI Use Cases for Advertising10  |  AI for Advertising  BlueprintTop AI Use Cases for Advertising
Looking for ideas unique to your business? We’ve 
rounded up some industry-specific ways that AI can 
supercharge your advertising.
Manufacturing & Distribution
•  Forecast demand and adjust advertising campaigns 
based on supply chain predictions.
•  Identify the companies that best fit your target customer 
profile and run targeted ads as part of an account-based 
marketing strategy.
•  Advertise specific products to businesses based on 
their unique needs, purchase history, location, product 
lifecycles, and more.
•  Implement personalization into websites with dynamic 
pop-up ads that help users find the product or part 
they’re looking for based on their job title, industry, or 
product lines they’ve purchased from in the past.
•  Personalize product recommendation ads to equipment 
buyers in specific industries and use cases. 
•  Proactively advertise products based on common 
replacement or upgrade timelines.
 
Hospitality 
•  Adjust advertised hotel room rates dynamically and in 
real time based on occupancy rates, seasonal trends, 
local events, and competitor pricing.
•  Tailor ads to provide more personalized packages or 
experiences to potential guests.
•  Respond to booking inquiries and advertise special 
deals via AI-powered chatbots.
•  Adjust and align advertising messages based on recent 
guest feedback and top reviews.
•  Serve ads with the most relevant photos and reviews to 
increase bookings. 
•  Create more dynamic menus, provide better delivery options, 
and develop a portfolio of ancillary offers to advertise. 
•  Recommend experiences based on activity or destination 
preferences, seasonality, and trending destinations.Financial Services
•  Personalize ad copy to a user’s specific financial data 
or goals, making it highly relevant to audiences with 
different incomes, financial targets, or product interests.
•  Automatically categorize transactions to advertise the 
right financial product at the right time. 
•  Intelligently segment users to personalize ads based on 
their buyer journey. 
•  Identify patterns in financial behaviors, web browsing 
history, or social data that indicate major life events 
like getting married, buying a home, having a child, or 
nearing retirement. Then, serve timely ads for relevant 
products (home loans, child savings accounts), or 
services (retirement planning).
•  Flag signs that a customer is at risk of churning, giving 
advertisers the opportunity to engage potentially at-risk 
customers with personalized offers or content to retain them.
•  Bridge the gap between customer service and 
advertising with educational AI-driven chatbots that 
can interact with, educate, and recommend financial 
products to inquiring site visitors.
 
Direct-to-Consumer (D2C) Retail
•  Spotlight products based on individual browsing 
and purchase history to provide more personalized 
shopping experiences.
•  Anticipate which products will be in demand based on 
current inventory, and run advertising based on supply. 
•  Use AI to analyze reasons for cart abandonment and 
retarget those customers with personalized reminders.
•  Recommend products, upsells, and cross-sells in real 
time, as well as popular or similar items based on a 
user’s past interactions. 
•  Increase average order value by promoting items likely 
to increase order size.
•  Personalize search results and recommendations to 
increase click-through rates, reduce cart abandonments, 
and increase customer loyalty. Industry Specific Technologies and Use Cases
11  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Top Companies Using  
AI for Advertising
Now, let’s look at how forward-thinking organizations are driving revenue and ad budget efficiency with AI.
Construction Leader Achieves More Than 10x ROAS 
The team at HOLT CAT San Antonio, one of the oldest and largest Caterpillar dealerships in the U.S., knew they could 
squeeze more value out of their ad spend by better aligning media and messaging to resonate with their audience. 
As a company that sells, services, and rents heavy equipment, along with carrying a large inventory of replacement parts 
for sale, HOLT CAT needed to both reach new buyers and retarget existing ones with fresh and relevant offers. So, they 
teamed up with AiAdvertising. 
Step one was to unlock insights from HOLT CAT’s CRM data to deeply understand their current customers. After 
aggregating CRM data into a unified data lake, the teams analyzed the demographics and purchasing motivations of 
buyers. 
Blending three distinct behavioral psychology models — Big Five OCEAN Personality, 
Diffusion of Innovation (DOI) Theory, and Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotion — and owned 
customer data, they identified persona profiles that had distinct interests, behaviors, and 
preferred products, and segmented their CRM to pinpoint the characteristics of each one. 
This determined whom to target (also jump-starting their lookalike audiences) and how to 
approach them.
From there, HOLT CAT was ready to develop hyper-targeted assets aimed at their ideal 
customers. They launched a digital ad campaign across platforms; search ads and keywords 
aligned perfectly with active shoppers’ habits. Creative was tailored to each persona, then 
further optimized as multiple iterations were run through multivariate testing. 
All the while, AiAdvertising’s Campaign Targeting Platform (CTP) was learning what was 
working — and where.
The target? HOLT CAT wanted to see an even greater return than their current 3x ROAS.
The result? A whopping 14x return on ad spend, 37x ROI, with more than $6 million in won 
revenue and $6 million in pipeline leads.
More focused, more targeted, more efficient wins every time.
Educational Group Bolsters Public Perception  
With AI-Powered Ad Campaign
A leading charter school was making a splash in its community. As the educational group 
expanded, it attracted a fervent following — of both supporters and detractors. The school 
partnered with AiAdvertising to better understand its community’s attitudes and improve 
public sentiment toward the educational solution the school offered. 
First, AiAdvertising ran baseline surveys to collect data on public perception of charter 
schools generally, and their brand specifically. “ AiAdvertising 
has helped 
us to do two 
things better: 
reach the right 
customers 
with the right 
message, 
and track the 
results back to 
real financial 
metrics 
beyond just 
impressions 
and clicks.” 
 
      -  Mike Colglazier, 
Director of Marketing, 
HOLT CAT12  |  AI for Advertising  BlueprintTop Companies Using AI for Advertising
Next, they dug into their audience. This is where AiAdvertising’s persona-based and behavioral psychology-backed 
methodology was able to shine. Dissecting the market research data to deeply understand the various cohorts and 
motivations of the community, the charter school built out personas for each of these groups. 
Their proprietary techniques told them not just who, but how: What messaging and communication channels would 
resonate best with each group?
From there, they built out focused audiences and laser-targeted messaging. They ran the sophisticated statewide digital 
campaign — across search, social, native, connected TV, and audio platforms — matching the media mix to each cohort’s 
platform preferences. 
Follow-up surveys measured the impact, and AiAdvertising’s interactive dashboards laid out the results in stunning detail.
The outcome? 
The campaign increased positive brand sentiment by 9% and reduced negative sentiment by 12%. They saw double-
digit swings in media coverage — a 10% increase in positive brand stories and a 20% decrease in negative ones. 
Not only did the team achieve their goal of improving public sentiment and coverage overall, but they also enjoyed a 
(not-insignificant) lift in interest. Website traffic and new visitors went up substantially in the wake of these campaigns. 
Year-over-year numbers were up 140% and 134%, respectively.
The takeaway is simple, but game-changing: by pausing to deeply understand their audience first, the school was able to 
drive brand awareness in a way that truly aligned with and appealed to them. 
Cause-Based Organization Saves 78% on Ad Spend with AiAdvertising 
A faith-based organization sought to increase its reach and impact. With over 200 chapters in more than 30 countries, 
they served a broad and diverse audience — all at different points in their faith journeys. 
To grow and nurture their followers, they needed to speak to their unique needs. They knew in order to achieve this, 
there was only one partner to choose: AiAdvertising. 
By examining existing first-party member data, AiAdvertising and the organization were able to build out four distinct 
personas and deduce their motivations for seeking out faith-based education and community. 
Personas detailed each group’s unique motivations, triggers, and journey. Then, they segmented their audience based 
on these criteria. 
The team reviewed existing creative, analyzing elements to inspire new, even more resonant ads. Targeted messaging 
was run alongside persona-tailored images — matching motivation, copy, and creative to each persona’s specificities for 
maximum relevance and conversion.
And guess what? This approach knocked it out of the park. 
The organization saw astounding results in cost savings — up to 78% — and significantly decreased cost per 
engagement across all four personas.
Now the team has interactive dashboards tracking cost per engagement to help inform future budget decisions, and 
ensure that their ads continue to connect with their audience. 
By reaching the right people with the right message, more efficiently, this organization is poised to stretch its donations 
further and better serve its faith community. 
Together with AiAdvertising, they took a data-driven approach to reduce wasted budget, ultimately driving more reach 
and engagement for every dollar spent. Smart.13  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Top Marketing AI Tools  
for Advertisers 
Ready to try out AI for yourself? There’s already a wide range of AI tools on the market that can benefit advertisers, from 
analytics and prediction platforms, to personalization and conversion rate optimization (CRO) software, to end-to-end ad 
management solutions.
Here are some of the leading AI solutions for advertising to try today:
AiAdvertising
 
AiAdvertising is an AI-powered agency specializing in targeting strategies that harness the power of AI and machine 
learning to eliminate waste and maximize return on ad spend.
By employing the industry’s most scientifically advanced, patent-pending AI targeting process, we transform marketing 
and customer experiences by personifying our clients’ data and scientifically targeting their ideal customers with 
hyper-personalized campaigns. We empower brands to easily target, predict, create, scale, and measure campaign 
performance and reduce waste. 
As an AI agency, we leverage people, processes, and technology within our Campaign Targeting Platform to maximize 
advertising dollars, predict creative that works, and find new customers, all while growing revenue.
And that means dramatically higher productivity, efficiency, and performance!
It features:
•  Unified Data Lake: Through API integrations, the platform aggregates, cleans, and consolidates data from systems 
like CRM, eCommerce, websites, forms, and social platforms.
•  Marketing Calendar: Accessible marketing calendars provide transparency and make it easy to collaborate on 
advertising campaigns.
•  Persona AI Analysis: Data is clustered by similar behaviors, interests, triggers, and events uncovering signals and 
insights that influence audience personalization. Personas are integrated with third-party data, online intent data, 
and psychographic models to generate new look-a-like audiences.
•  Predicted Creative Variety: Predictions match the most relevant images, animations, video, keywords, headlines, 
and messages to the right audience.
•  Dynamic Creative at Scale: Selected ads are automatically scaled for multi-variant execution accounting for sizes, 
mediums, channels, imagery, motion, messages, and/or offers.
•  Omni-channel Activation: Digital ads are deployed across search, social, display, video, mobile, connected TV 
(CTV), digital out-of-home (DOOH), email, and website landing pages.
•  ROI Dashboard: Drill into media spend, impressions, conversions, and revenue earned on the interactive 
dashboard.
•  Campaign Performance Tracking: Measure ROI by campaign, persona, channel, and overall, connecting the dots 
between ad spend and sales revenue.
A partnership with AiAdvertising eliminates guesswork and allows marketing and advertising professionals to optimize 
advertising spend, discover new customers, predict winning creative, and scale revenue.
So, who’s a good fit for AiAdvertising?14  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Top Marketing AI Tools for Advertisers
You’re probably a great fit for AiAdvertising if you:
•  Are a D2C or B2C or B2B brand that wants to squeeze the maximum ROI from your advertising budgets, and 
ensure no dollar is wasted.
•  Regularly launch new campaigns and need predictive analytics to determine which creative assets will resonate 
most with audiences.
• Need to extract actionable insights from comprehensive data sources to inform your advertising program.
•  Are interested in breaking down audiences into detailed personas, leveraging behavior, interests, and triggers to 
inform advertising strategy.
• Require a solution that can dynamically tailor and scale advertisements, ensuring personalization at scale.
•  Advertise across a variety of digital touchpoints, from search, social, and display to connected TV and digital out-of-
home platforms.
• Need a platform that can discover and target new customer segments or look-a-like audiences to fuel growth.
• Have cross-functional teams and need to synchronize efforts across campaign planning and execution.
Sound like you? Give AiAdvertising a try today. 
Attention Insight
Instantly create AI heatmaps with the most eye-catching parts of your design. Attention Insight’s AI-powered platform 
can produce eye-tracking heatmaps that are 90-96% accurate without any human participants involved. Within 
minutes, accurately predict where people will look, so you can roadtest your ads, landing pages, and product pages 
before you launch.
Celtra
Celtra’s cloud-based software solutions empower brands, media owners, and agencies to leverage creative automation 
technology to drive the efficiency, speed, and quality of their digital advertising production. Dynamic Product Ads 
optimize ecommerce ad engagement, reach, and ROAS with custom Data Processing Agreement templates and feed-
powered personalization. 
With a state-of-the-art ad builder, trafficking templates, and comprehensive, customizable reports, Celtra Ad Suite makes 
every impression work harder for your bottom line. 
GumGum
Use GumGum to grab people’s attention, deliver beautiful ads, and reach them when and where they’re most primed to 
buy — all without the use of personal data.
Leverage Verity™, GumGum’s contextual intelligence platform, which scans digital content to determine where to 
effectively place ads online. It relies on context, instead of third-party data, for contextual targeting, brand safety, 
and suitability.Learn more about AiAdvertising and get started today.
LEARN MORE15  |  AI for Advertising  BlueprintTop Marketing AI Tools for Advertisers
Intellimize
Intellimize is a codeless SaaS platform that uses AI to optimize for 1:1 personalized website experiences across the entire 
buyer’s journey. Marketing teams gain a competitive edge when using Intellimize to drive efficient pipeline and revenue 
growth in a cookieless world. Leading marketing teams at Gong, Mercari, Okta, Dermalogica, Drift, Sumo Logic, and 
more trust Intellimize to inspire, test, and learn faster, drive revenue, and be more efficient.
Leverage Intellimize to personalize landing and product pages so your ad campaigns convert. 
Midjourney
Midjourney is a generative AI program that generates images from prompts. Instead of relying on stock photos or 
photoshoots, you can use Midjourney to create custom imagery that meets the exact needs of your ad campaign. 
Pathmatics from SensorTower
Pathmatics empowers brands with the digital marketing intelligence needed to seize new digital opportunities and drive 
business growth. It shows you the spend, impressions, and creatives for your competitors, which helps you find the 
RIGHT prospects, prioritize leads, tailor new business pitches, increase share of wallet, and do it all faster. This can help 
lead to more deals, expanding accounts, and increasing efficiency.
QuantPlus
QuantPlus is worldfirst in AI-driven data insights. Its reporting system breaks down advertising creative performance at an 
“elemental” level and has boosted campaign ROI by 300%.
QuantPlus has analyzed more than 100 billion ads across 55 countries within the education industry to unlock the secrets 
of what creative elements in ads drive maximum enrollments. Ads can be pre-optimized using text, imagery, colors, 
and calls to action that are linked to known performance before a single impression has been served. Industries like 
automotive, charity, higher education, and recruitment are available as of time of writing, but others like finance, travel, 
entertainment, and more are coming soon.
Runway
Runway enables you to create compelling images with prompts; easily remix the style and composition of existing 
images; turn text prompts, images and videos into film, and more. Using it, you can create high-quality images and 
videos for your ad campaigns at scale, explore various visual directions, and adjust existing creatives to better resonate 
with audiences. 16  |  AI for Advertising  Blueprint
Why the Future of Advertising  
Depends on AI 
Salesforce’s 2023 survey of 4,000 marketing leaders worldwide found that nearly two-thirds 
of marketing organizations are using AI today.
But according to our latest research, 58 percent of marketers say they’re still learning how 
AI works and exploring its applications and potential value.
And as our founder Paul Roetzer has said, “the generative AI tools you are experiencing 
today represent the least capable AI you will ever use.” The technology is going to 
continue to improve exponentially. 
In other words: It’s not too late. In fact, this is just the beginning. 
AI is poised to become better, faster, smarter, and more accessible to marketers and 
advertisers everywhere. This presents you with an immense opportunity to transform your 
company and your career. 
Will you dive in, or be left behind?  “ The generative 
AI tools you are 
experiencing 
today 
represent the 
least capable 
AI you will ever 
use. That fact 
has profound 
implications 
for the future 
of business, 
education, 
society, and 
your career.”  
 
      -  Paul Roetzer, Founder, 
Marketing AI Institute 17  |  AI for Advertising  BlueprintAbout Marketing AI Institute
Marketing AI Institute is a media, event, and education company founded in 2016 that makes AI 
approachable and actionable for marketers and business leaders. The Institute owns and operates 
the Marketing Artificial Intelligence Conference (MAICON), AI for Writers Summit, AI for Agencies 
Summit and AI for B2B Marketers Summit; hosts The Marketing AI Show podcast; runs the AI 
Academy for Marketers featuring dozens of on-demand courses; and published Marketing Artificial 
Intelligence: AI, Marketing, and the Future of Business (Matt Holt Books, 2022).  
 
Learn more at www.marketingaiinstitute.com. 
About AiAdvertising 
AiAdvertising, Inc. is an AI-powered agency employing the industry’s most scientifically advanced, 
patent-pending AI targeting process to transform marketing and customer experiences allowing 
marketers to personify client data and scientifically target their ideal customers with hyper-
personalized campaigns. By harnessing artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML), we 
empower brands to easily target, predict, create, scale, measure campaign performance and reduce 
waste while gaining the intelligence they need to prove advertising’s impact on the bottom line. This 
means more engaging, higher-impact campaigns that drive conversions.  
 
Learn more at aiadvertising.com.DARE TO BE 
DIFFERENT!
AiAdvertising helps  
marketers like you stand  
out from the crowd.
Photo created with our generative Ai process
We use AI to optimize campaigns by 
gaining deep customer insights, drawing 
out motivations and behaviors, enabling 
intelligent targeting and ensuring messages 
hit the mark. Stop wasting time, money, and 
resources. Let AiAdvertising take charge 
while you take the credit!Start winning with 
AiAdvertising’s innovative 
approach to maximizing 
ROAS & performance — 
AiADVERTISING.COM
