Copyright © 2018, 2023 by Lean Marketing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior written consent of the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations, embodied in reviews and articles.
ISBN
 978-1-989025-01-7 (paperback)
ISBN
 978-1-941142-98-1 (ebook)
Published by Page Two
Printed and bound in Canada
Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books
Distributed in the 
US
 and internationally by Macmillan
23 24 25 26 27 16 15 14 13 12
1
pmp.comContents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION
ACT I: THE “BEFORE” PHASE
CHAPTER 1
: Selecting Your Target Market
CHAPTER 2
: Crafting Your Message
CHAPTER 3
: Reaching Prospects with Advertising Media
ACT II: THE “DURING” PHASE
CHAPTER 4
: Capturing Leads
CHAPTER 5
: Nurturing Leads
CHAPTER 6
: Sales Conversion
ACT III: THE “AFTER” PHASE
CHAPTER 7
: Delivering a World-Class Experience
CHAPTER 8
: Increasing Customer Lifetime Value
CHAPTER 9
: Orchestrating and Stimulating Referrals
CONCLUSION
ABOUT THE AUTHORI
Acknowledgments
“If I have seen further than others, it is by standing upon the shoulders of
giants.”
ISAAC NEWTON
WISH I COULD
 tell you all the ideas in this book were my inventions
and that I’m some kind of marketing and business genius. The truth
is, though I’m a collector of elegant ideas, I rarely invent anything,
and when I do, it’s rarely worth writing about.
An early business mentor of mine, Mal Emery, would often say,
“I’ve never had an original idea in my life—it’s just too bloody
dangerous.” Yet he was and continues to be an extremely successful
businessman and marketer. The secret of his success, and subsequently
mine, was to just model things that were known to reliably work rather
than trying to reinvent the wheel.
Reinventing the wheel requires you to be a genius, and even then, it
carries with it a high probability of failure. I’m no genius and I hate
failing, so I prefer to just closely copy the things that made others
successful—at least until I’ve got a very good handle on the basics. This
tilts the odds in my favor and gives me a high probability of success.
While I did create the system that has become the 1-Page Marketing
Plan (
1PMP
), many of the direct response marketing concepts that make
it work are the inventions and ideas of other great business leaders and
marketers.
Perhaps I flatter myself but the aphorism “Good artists copy; great
artists steal,” repeated by Steve Jobs and attributed to Pablo 
Picasso, is
certainly a philosophy I’ve held in mind when collecting these elegant
ideas over the years and writing this book. Regardless of whether you
consider me a “great artist” or a thief, I want you to benefit from the
treasure trove of the proven business-building ideas that follow.
Certainly, there’s a place for creativity and invention but in myopinion, this should come after you’ve first mastered the basics. This
book contains many of those basics. Some come from my own
experiences but most come from people who’ve been “giants” in my
business life and on whose shoulders I’ve stood. In no particular order,
I’d like to acknowledge:
Mal Emery
Dean Jackson
Joe Polish
Pete Godfrey
Dan Kennedy
James Schramko
Jim Rohn
Frank Kern
Seth Godin
Some have been personal mentors to me, while others have been
mentors to me through publications and other works they’ve produced.
I try to credit them when, as far as I know, an idea I’m presenting has
originated from one of them. However, I’m certain that I’ve left other
people out or not acknowledged enough of the ideas of the people
above. When you collect ideas over a period of many years it can
sometimes become a blur when trying to recall where one originated.
For that I apologize in advance.
The 1-Page Marketing Plan is an implementation breakthrough
rather than a new marketing innovation or concept. It’s by far the
easiest way for a small business to go from knowing nothing about
marketing to creating and implementing a sophisticated direct
response marketing plan for their business. The plan is literally reduced
to a single page.
Please enjoy the ideas in this book and, more importantly,
implement
 them in your business. Remember, knowing and not doing
is the same as not knowing.Important:
This book is designed to be interactive. For this reason, you’ll find signposts along
the way in this book that will lead you to a special resources section of 
The
 
1-Page
Marketing Plan
 website.
These resources are exclusively available to readers of this book and are
designed to go hand-in-hand with it. They include the 1-Page Marketing Plan
canvas and examples, as well as links, videos and articles referenced throughout
this book.
Access these resources at 
1pmp.comI
Introduction
What’s This All About?
F I HAD
 to summarize the essence of this book in one phrase it
would be, “
the fastest path to the money
.” I’ve purposely put this as
early as humanly possible in the book because I don’t want to waste
your time.
I know for a certainty that this opening sentence will be off-putting
to a large number of people and frankly I’d much prefer they read
someone else’s business book full of ear-tickling clichés like “follow
your passion,” “work hard,” “hire the right people,” blah blah blah.
If that’s what you’re after, then search Amazon. There’ll be a
gazillion business books there for you on all these airy-fairy concepts
and much more, mostly written by professional authors and
researchers who’ve never actually built a high-growth business.
This book is blatantly and unashamedly about growing your business
fast and reaping the rewards of that kind of success.
Running Out of Oxygen Really
Sucks
As Zig Ziglar famously said, “Money isn’t everything... but it ranks
right up there with oxygen.”
Yup, nothing—
NOTHING
—kills a business faster than a lack of
“oxygen” (
AKA
 money).Why am I so unashamedly focused on the money getting? There are
a few good reasons
.
Firstly, there’s almost no business problem that can’t be solved with
more money. Which is handy because almost every business I know of
is full of problems. Money helps you solve the vast majority of things
that make business a pain in the backside.
Secondly, when you’ve taken care of yourself, you have a chance to
help others.
If you didn’t go into business to make money then you’re either
lying or you have a hobby, not a business. And yes, I know all about
delivering value, changing the world and so on, but how much of that
are you going to do if you’re broke? How many people can you help?
When you board an airplane and they’re going through all the safety
procedures, the airline attendant will inevitably get to a point that goes
something like this:
Should the cabin experience sudden pressure loss, oxygen masks will
drop down from above your seat. Place the mask over your mouth and
nose and pull the strap to tighten. If you are traveling with children or
someone who requires assistance,
 
make sure that your own mask is
on first before helping others.
Why fit your own mask before helping others? Because if you’re
slumped over your seat suffering from a lack of oxygen:
1.
you can’t help anyone else; and even worse,
2.
we now have to deploy scarce resources to come and help you,
otherwise you’ll soon be dead.
Knowing What to Do
In his book titled 
The Book of Survival
, Anthony Greenbank wrote:To live through an impossible situation, you don’t need to have the
reflexes of a Grand Prix driver, the muscles of a Hercules, the mind of
an Einstein. You simply need to know what to do
.
The statistics vary on exactly what percentage of businesses fail
within the first five years. Some estimates put it as high as 90%.
However, I’ve never seen this statistic being quoted as anything less
than 50%. That means that if we’re being super-optimistic you have a
50 /50 chance of still having your doors open after five years.
However, here’s where it really gets worse. The statistics take into
account only businesses that completely cease trading. They don’t take
into account the businesses that plateau at a low level and slowly kill or
make the lives of their owners miserable.
Have you ever wondered why most small businesses plateau at a
mediocre level?
At one end of the spectrum there’s Pete the plumber who works
sixteen-hour days, weekends and never takes holidays while barely
making enough to keep his head above water. On the other end of the
spectrum there’s Joe who runs a plumbing company with twenty
plumbers working for him. It seems like his primary business activity is
counting the huge sums of money that keep rolling in.
It’s very common for small businesses never to grow past the point
at which they generate just enough profit for the owner(s) to make a
modest living. It seems that no matter how hard the owner(s) try, their
efforts to get to the next level just lead to frustration. At this point, one
of two things happens. Either they get disillusioned or they just accept
their fate—that their business is nothing more than a low-paid, self-
created job.
In fact, the reality is that many business owners would probably be
better off just finding a job in their industry. They would likely work
fewer hours, have less stress, enjoy more benefits and have more
holiday time than in the prison they have created for themselves. On
the flip side, there are a few business owners that just seem to have it
all. They work reasonable hours, have a fantastic cash flow from their
enterprise and enjoy continuous growth.Many business owners who are struggling blame their industry. It’s
true some industries are in decline. If you are in one of these dead or
dying industries, it may be time to cut your losses and move on rather
than torture yourself to death financially. 
This may be particularly
difficult if you have been in the industry for a long time.
However, for the most part, when people blame their industry they
are just playing the blame game. Some of the most common industry
complaints I hear are:
•
It’s too competitive.
•
The margins are too low.
•
Online discounters are taking customers away.
•
Advertising no longer works.
However, it’s rarely the industry that is truly to blame; after all there
are others in that same industry that are doing very well. So, the
obvious question is, what are they doing differently?
Many small business owners fall into the trap described in Michael
Gerber’s classic book, 
The E-Myth Revisited
. That is, they are a
technician, for example, a plumber, hairdresser, dentist and so on, and
they are good at what they do. They have what Gerber describes as an
“entrepreneurial seizure” and they start to think to themselves, “Why
should I work for this idiot boss of mine? I’m good at what I do—I’ll
start my own business.”
This is one of
 
THE
 major mistakes made by most small business
owners
. They go from working for an idiot boss to 
becoming
 an idiot
boss! Here is the key point—just because you’re good at the technical
thing you do doesn’t mean that you are good at the 
business
 of what
you do.
So going back to our example, a good plumber is not necessarily the
best person to run a plumbing business. This is a vitally important
distinction to note and is a key reason that most small businesses fail.
The owner of the business may have excellent technical skills but it’s
his lack of business skills that causes his business to fail.
This is not meant to discourage people from starting their own
businesses. However, you must resolve to become good at the businessof what you do—not just the technical thing you do. A business can be
an amazing vehicle for achieving financial freedom and personal
fulfillment—but only for those who understand and master this vital
distinction and figure out what they need to do to run a successful
business
.
If you’re good at the technical thing of what you do but feel like you
could benefit from some help on the business side, then you’re in the
right place at the right time. The whole point of this book is to take you
from confusion to clarity—so you know exactly what to do to have
business success.
Professionals Have Plans
As a kid my favorite 
TV
 show was 
The A-Team
. In case you’ve never
watched it, I’ll give you the executive summary of 99% of the episodes:
1.
Bad guys harass and threaten an innocent person or group.
2.
The innocent person or group begs and pleads with the A-Team to
help them.
3.
The A-Team (a motley bunch of ex-soldiers) fight, humiliate and
drive away the bad guys.
Episodes would invariably end with Hannibal (the brains of the A-
Team) chomping down on his cigar and triumphantly mumbling, “I
love it 
when a plan comes together.”Look at any profession where the stakes are high and you’ll see a
well-thought-out plan being followed.
 Professionals never just wing it
.
•
Doctors follow a treatment plan.
•
Airline pilots follow a flight plan.
•
Soldiers follow a military operation plan.
How would you feel about engaging the services of any of the above
professions if the practitioner were to say to you, “Screw the plan. I’ll
just wing it.” Yet, this is exactly what most business owners do.
Invariably, when someone makes a mess of something it often
becomes clear in the aftermath that they didn’t have a plan. Don’t let
that be you and your business. While no one can guarantee your
success, having a plan dramatically increases your probability of
success.
Just like you wouldn’t want to be on a plane where the pilot hadn’t
bothered with a flight plan, you don’t want you and your family relying
on a business for which you haven’t bothered with a business plan.Often the stakes are almost as high. Marriages, partnerships, jobs and
more are often the casualties of failed businesses.
It’s more than just your ego on the line so it’s time to “go pro” and
create a plan.
The Wrong Kind of Plan
Early into my first business, I was smart enough to identify that a
business plan was going to be important to my success. Unfortunately,
that’s where my smarts ended.
With the help of a business consultant (who’d never actually run a
successful business of his own), I ended up many thousands of dollars
poorer but had a document that most business owners never bother
with—a 
business plan
.
My business plan was many hundreds of pages long. It had graphs,
charts, projections and much, much more. It was an awesome-looking
document but essentially was a bunch of nonsense
.
After it was written, I shoved it in the top drawer of my desk and
never saw it again until the day we were moving offices and I had to
clean out my desk.
I dusted it off, flicked through it and tossed it in the trash, angry at
myself about the money I’d wasted on that phony-baloney consultant.
However, later when I thought about it more carefully, I realized
that while the document itself was a bunch of nonsense, the process I
went through with the consultant was valuable in clarifying some of the
key elements in my business, particularly one key section of it called
“the marketing plan.”
In fact, a lot of what we did to create the marketing plan shaped the
business and created much of our future success.
More on this in a moment, but for now let me introduce a man and
his concept that’s going to be the key to your business success.My Friend Vilfredo Pareto and
the 80/20 Rule
I never had the privilege of meeting Vilfredo Pareto, mostly because he
died over half a century before I was born, but I’m sure we would have
been best buds.
Pareto was an Italian economist who noticed that 80% of the land in
Italy was owned by 20% of the population. Hence the Pareto Principle,
commonly known as the 80 /20 rule, was born.
It turns out, the 80 /20 rule holds true for more than just land
ownership in Italy. It holds true for almost anything you care to think
of. Some examples:
•
80% of a company’s profits come from 20% of its customers.
•
80% of road traffic accidents are caused by 20% of drivers.
•
80% of software usage is by 20% of users.
•
80% of a company’s complaints come from 20% of its customers.
•
80% of wealth is owned by 20% of people.
•
Woody Allen even noted that 80% of success is showing up
.
In other words,
 the Pareto Principle predicts that
 
80% of effects
come from
 
20% of causes
.
Maybe it’s just my laziness talking but this gets me seriously excited.
It’s often said that necessity is the mother of invention but I’d argue
that laziness is, and my friend Vilfredo is my mentor in that pursuit.
So essentially, you can cut out 80% of the stuff you’re doing and sit
on the couch eating nachos instead and you’ll still get most of the
results you’re getting.
If you don’t want to sit on the couch chowing down on nachos 80%
of the time, then doing more of the 20% stuff is your fast track to
success. And in this context, success = more money while doing less
work.The 64/4 Rule
If you think the 80 /20 rule is exciting, the 64 /4 rule will blow your
mind. You see we can apply the 80 /20 rule to the rule itself. So we
take 80% of 80 and 20% of 20 and end up with the 64 /4 rule.
So 
64% of effects come from
 
4% of causes
.
Put another way, the majority of your success comes from the top
4% of your actions. Or put yet another way, 
96% of the stuff you do is a
waste of time
 (comparatively).
The most surprising thing is that the 80 /20 rule and 64 /4 rule still
hold up in a remarkably accurate way. If you look at wealth distribution
statistics from the last century, you’ll notice that the top 4% own about
64% of the wealth, and the top 20% own about 80% of the wealth. This
is despite this being the “information age.” You’d imagine that a
hundred years ago only the wealthy had good access to information,
hence it’s understandable why 
they held 80% of the wealth. Yet this
wealth distribution statistic still holds up today, an age where
information has been democratized and where even the poorest people
have pretty much the same access to information as the wealthiest
people.
This proves that lack of information isn’t the issue holding back the
bottom 80% of business owners—it’s human behavior and mindset.
That certainly hasn’t changed in the last 100 years.
The Best Kept Secret of the
Rich
In my observation of and work with numerous business owners around
the world, there’s one thing that differentiates the wildly successful
and wealthy ones from the struggling and broke.Struggling business owners will spend time to save money, whereas
successful business owners will spend money to save time. Why is that
an important distinction? Because you can always get more money, but
you can never get more time. So you need to ensure the stuff you spend
your time on makes the biggest impact.
This is called leverage and 
leverage is the best kept secret of the
rich
.
These big impacting, leveraged activities are the things that make up
the key 20% of the 80 /20 rule and the 4% of the 64 /4 rule.
If you want more success, you need to start paying attention to and
expand the things that give you the most leverage.
There are various areas of your business where you could start
looking for leverage points. You may look at getting 50% better at your
negotiation skills. This, in turn, may help you renegotiate with key
suppliers and get an incremental improvement in your buy price.
While this is great, at the end of the day after all that time and effort
you’ve still just improved your bottom line incrementally. This is not
what I’d call massive leverage. We want exponential improvement, not
incremental.
By far the biggest leverage point in any business is marketing
. If
you get 10% better at marketing, this can have an exponential or
multiplying effect on your bottom line
.
Willie Sutton was a prolific American bank robber. During his 40-
year criminal career he stole millions of dollars and eventually spent
more than half of his adult life in prison—and also managed to escape
three times. Sutton was asked by reporter Mitch Ohnstad why he
robbed banks. According to Ohnstad, he replied, “Because that’s where
the money is.” When it comes to business the reason we want to focus
so heavily on marketing is the same—because 
that’s where the money
is
.Applying the 80/20 and 64/4
Rules—Your Marketing Plan
Back to my earlier story about the wrong type of business plan. While
my business plan document ended up being a useless mess of
management speak and nonsense, the part of the business planning
process that proved hugely valuable to me was creating the marketing
plan.
The marketing plan ended up being the 20% part of the business
planning process that produced 80% of the result.
This has been the case in every business I’ve started and run since
then.
With this in mind when I started coaching small business owners, a
large part of my focus was getting them to create a marketing plan.
Guess what? Very few of them ever carried through with it. Why?
Because creating a marketing plan was a complex, laborious process
that most small business owners simply won’t do.
So, again, laziness becomes the mother of invention. I needed a way
to take the core essence of the marketing planning process and make it
simple, practical and useful to small business owners. The 1-Page
Marketing Plan was born.
The 1-Page Marketing Plan is the 4% of effort that generates 64% (or
more) of the result in your business. It’s the 64 /4 rule applied to
business planning. Using this process, we can boil down hundreds of
pages and thousands of hours of traditional business planning into a
single page that can take as little as 30 minutes to think about and fill
in
.
Even more exciting is that it becomes a living document in your
business. One that you can stick on the wall of your office and refer to
and refine over time. Most of all, it’s practical. There’s no management
speak or jargon to understand. You don’t need an 
MBA
 to create it or
understand it.
The 1-Page Marketing Plan has been a marketing implementationbreakthrough. I’ve seen compliance rates among coaching clients
significantly improve. Small business owners who would have never
had the time, money or know-how to create a traditional marketing
plan now have one. As a result, they’ve reaped the massive benefits that
come from having clarity on their marketing.
I’ll introduce the 1-Page Marketing Plan shortly, but first I think it
would be valuable to start at the beginning and not assume anything.
Marketing itself is a vague term that is poorly understood even by so-
called professionals and experts in the industry.
So let’s get a quick and simple understanding of what marketing
actually is.
What Is Marketing?
Some people think marketing is advertising or branding or some other
vague concept. While all these are associated with marketing, they are
not one and the same.
Here’s the simplest, most jargon-free definition of marketing you’re
ever likely to come across:
If the circus is coming to town and you paint a sign saying “Circus
Coming to the Showground Saturday,” that’s 
advertising
.
If you put the sign on the back of an elephant and walk it into town,
that’s 
promotion
.
If the elephant walks through the mayor’s flower bed and the local
newspaper writes a story about it, that’s 
publicity
.
And if you get the mayor to laugh about it, that’s 
public relations
.
If the town’s citizens go to the circus, you show them the many
entertainment booths, explain how much fun they’ll have spending
money at the booths, answer their questions and, ultimately, they
spend a lot at the circus, that’s 
sales
.
And if you planned the whole thing, that’s 
marketing
.Yup, it’s as simple as that—marketing is the 
strategy
 you use for
getting your ideal target market to know you, like you and trust you
enough to become a customer. All the stuff you usually associate with
marketing are 
tactics
. We’ll talk more about strategy vs. tactics in a
moment.
However, before we do that you need to understand that a
fundamental shift has occurred in the last decade and things will never
be the same.
The Answers Have Changed
Albert Einstein was once giving an exam paper to his graduating class.
It turned out that it was the exact same exam paper he had given them
the previous year. His teaching assistant, alarmed at what he saw and
thinking it to be the result of the professor’s absentmindedness, alerted
Einstein.
“Excuse me, sir,” said the shy assistant, not quite sure how to tell the
great man about his blunder.
“Yes?” said Einstein.
“Um, eh, it’s about the test you just handed out.”
Einstein waited patiently.
“I’m not sure if you realize it, but this is the same test you gave out
last year. In fact, it’s identical.”
Einstein paused to think for a moment, then said, “Yes, it is the
same test but the answers have changed.”
Just as the answers in physics change as new discoveries are made,
so too do the answers in business and in marketing.
Once upon a time, you placed a few ads, paid a truckload of money
and your marketing for the year was done. Now you have search
engines, social media, podcasts, websites and a myriad of other thingsto think about.
The Internet has literally opened up a world of competitors.
Whereas previously your competitors may have been across the road,
now they can be on the other side of the globe.
As a result of this, many who are trying to market their business
become paralyzed by the “bright shiny object syndrome.” This is where
they get caught up in whatever the currently “hot” marketing 
tactics
are like 
SEO
, video, podcasting, pay-per-click advertising and so on.
They get caught up with tools and tactics and never figure out the
big picture of what they’re actually trying to do and why.
Let me show you why this will lead to a world of pain.
Strategy vs. Tactics
Understanding the difference between strategy and tactics is absolutely
key to marketing success.
Strategy is the big-picture planning you do prior to the tactics.
Imagine you’ve bought an empty block of land and want to build a
house. Would you just order a pile of bricks and then just start laying
them? Of course not. You’d end up with a big old mess that likely
wasn’t safe.
So what do you do instead? You hire a builder and an architect first
and they plan everything out from the major stuff like getting building
permits, down to what kind of tap fittings you’d like. All of this is
planned prior to a single shovel of dirt being moved. 
That’s strategy
.
Then, once you have your strategy, you know how many bricks you
need, where the foundation goes and what kind of roof you’re going to
have. Now you can hire a bricklayer, carpenter, plumber, electrician
and so on. 
That’s tactics
.
You can’t do anything worthwhile successfully without both
strategy and tactics.
Strategy without tactics leads to paralysis by analysis. No matterhow good the builder and the architect are, the house isn’t going to get
built until someone starts laying bricks. At some stage they’re going to
need to say, “Okay, the blueprint is now good. We’ve got all the
necessary approvals to build so let’s get started.
”
Tactics without strategy leads to the “bright shiny object
syndrome.” Imagine you started building a wall without any plans and
then later found out that it was in the wrong place, so you start pouring
the foundation and then you find out it’s not right for this type of
house, so you start excavating the area where you want the pool but
that isn’t right either. This clearly isn’t going to work. Yet this is
exactly how many business owners do marketing. They string together
a bunch of random tactics in the hope that what they’re doing will lead
to a customer. They whack up a website without much thought and it
ends up being an online version of their brochure or they start
promoting on social media because they heard that’s the latest thing
and so on.
You need both strategy and tactics to be successful but strategy
must come first and it dictates the tactics you use. This is where your
marketing plan comes in. Think of your marketing plan as the
architect’s blueprint for getting and retaining customers.
I Have a Great Product or
Service, Do I Really Need
Marketing?
Many business owners fool themselves into thinking that if their
product is excellent, the market will buy. While the concept “if you
build it, they will come” makes a great movie plot, it’s a terrible
business strategy. It’s a strategy that’s expensive and comes with a high
rate of failure. History is littered with technically superior products thatcommercially failed.
Good, even great products are simply not enough. Marketing must
be one of your major activities if you’re to have business success.
Ask yourself, when does a prospect find out how good your product
or service is? The answer of course is—when they buy. If they don’t
buy, they’ll never know how good your products or services are. As
Thomas Watson from 
IBM
 famously said: “Nothing happens until a sale
is made.
”
Therefore we need to clearly understand an important concept: 
a
good product or service is a customer-retention tool
. If we give our
customers a great product or service experience, they’ll buy more from
us, they’ll refer other people to us and they’ll build up the brand
through positive word of mouth. However, before customer 
retention
,
we need to think about customer 
acquisition
 (
AKA
 marketing). The
most successful entrepreneurs always start with marketing.
How to Kill Your Business
I’m about to reveal to you one of the easiest and most common ways to
kill your business—in the earnest hope that you 
won’t
 do it. It’s
absolutely the biggest mistake made by small business owners when it
comes to marketing.
It’s a widespread problem, and it’s at the heart of 
why most small
business marketing fails
.
If you’re a small business owner, you’ve no doubt given some
thought to marketing and advertising. What approach are you going to
take? What are you going to say in your advertising?
The most common way small business owners decide on this is by
looking at large, successful competitors in their industry and
mimicking what they’re doing. This seems logical—do what other
successful businesses are doing and you will also become successful.
Right?In reality this is the fastest way to fail and I’m certain it’s responsible
for the bulk of small business failures. Here are the two major reasons
why.
#1 Large Companies Have a Different Agenda
Large companies have a very different agenda when it comes to
marketing than small businesses do. Their strategies and priorities
differ from yours significantly.
The marketing priorities of a large company look something like this:
1
.
Pleasing the board of directors
2.
Appeasing shareholders
3.
Satisfying superiors’ biases
4.
Satisfying existing clients’ preconceptions
5.
Winning advertising and creative awards
6.
Getting “buy in” from various committees and stakeholders
7.
Making a profit
The marketing priorities of a small business owner look something like
this:
1.
Making a profit
As you can see, there is a world of difference in the marketing
priorities of small and large companies. So naturally there would have
to be a world of difference in strategy and execution.
#2 Large Companies Have a 
VERY
 Different Budget
Strategy changes with scale. This is very important to understand. Do
you think someone investing in and building skyscrapers has a different
property investment strategy than the average small property investor?
Of course.
Using the same strategy simply won’t work on a small scale. You
can’t just build one floor of a skyscraper and have a success. You need
all 100 stories.
If you have an advertising budget of 
$
10 million and three years to
get a profitable result, then you’re going to use a very different strategy
compared with someone needing to make a profit immediately with a$
10,000 budget.
Using a large company marketing strategy, your 
$
10,000 is going to
be a drop in the ocean. It will be totally wasted and ineffective because
you’re using the wrong strategy for the scale that you’re operating at.
Large Company Marketing
Large company marketing is also sometimes known as mass marketing
or “branding.” The goal of this type of advertising is to remind
customers and prospects about your brand as well as the products and
services you offer.
The idea is that the more times you run ads from your brand, the
more likely people are to have this brand at the top of their
consciousness when they go to make a purchasing decision.
The vast majority of large company marketing falls into this
category. If you’ve seen the ads from major brands such as Coca-Cola,
Nike and Apple you’ll have experienced mass marketing.
This type of marketing is effective; however, it is very expensive to
successfully pull off and takes a lot of time. It requires you to saturate
various types of advertising media, such as broadcast, print, outdoor
and digital, on a very regular basis and over an extended period of time.
The expense and time involved are not a problem for the major
brands as they have massive advertising budgets and teams of
marketing people, and product lines are planned years in advance.
However, a major problem arises when small businesses try to
imitate the big brands with this type of marketing.
The few times they run their ads is like a drop in the ocean. It’s
nowhere near enough to reach the consciousness of their target
market, which is bombarded with thousands of marketing messages
each day. So they get drowned out and see little or no return for their
investment. Another advertising victim bites the dust.
It’s not that the small businesses aren’t good at “branding” or massmedia ads. It’s that they simply don’t have the budget to run their ads
in sufficient volume to make them effective.
Unless you have millions of dollars in your marketing budget, you
have a very high probability of failure with this type of marketing.
Branding, mass marketing and ego-based marketing is the domain of
large companies. To achieve any kind of cut-through requires an
enormous budget and the use of expensive mass media.
Following the path of other successful businesses is smart, but it’s
vital that you understand the full strategy you’re following and that
you’re able to execute it.
Strategy from an outside observer’s perspective can be very different
from the reality. If you’re following a strategy that has different
priorities than you, or has a vastly different budget, then it’s highly
unlikely it will generate the kind of result you’re hoping for
.
Now let’s look at what successful small to medium business
marketing looks like.
Small and Medium Business
Marketing
Direct response marketing is a particular branch of marketing that
gives small businesses cut-through and a competitive edge on a small
budget. It’s designed to ensure you get a return on investment that is
measurable.
If 
$
10 bills were being sold for 
$
2 each, how many would you buy?
As many as you could get your hands on, naturally! The name of the
game with direct response marketing is “money at a discount.” For
example, for every 
$
2 spent on advertising, you get 
$
10 out in the way
of profits from sales.
It’s also a highly ethical way of selling. It’s focused on the specific
problems of the prospect and aims to solve these problems witheducation and specific solutions. It is also the only real way for a small
business to affordably reach the consciousness of a prospect.
When you turn your ads into direct response ads, they become lead
generating tools rather than just name recognition tools.
Direct response marketing is designed to evoke an immediate
response and compel prospects to take some specific action, such as
opting in to your email list, picking up the phone and calling for more
information, placing an order or being directed to a web page. So what
makes a direct response ad? Here are some of the main characteristics:
It’s trackable.
 That is, when someone responds, you know which ad
and which media was responsible for generating the response. This is
in direct contrast to mass media or “brand” marketing—no one will
ever know what ad compelled you to buy that can of Coke; heck, you
may not even know yourself.
It’s measurable.
 Since you know which ads are being responded to
and how many sales you’ve received from each one, you can measure
exactly how effective each ad is. You then drop or change ads that are
not giving you a return on investment
.
It uses compelling headlines and sales copy.
 Direct response
marketing has a compelling message of strong interest to your chosen
prospects. It uses attention-grabbing headlines with strong sales copy
that is “salesmanship in print.” Often the ad looks more like an
editorial than an ad (hence making it at least three times more likely to
get read).
It targets a specific audience or niche.
 Prospects within specific
verticals, geographic zones or niche markets are targeted. The ad aims
to appeal to a narrow target market.
It makes a specific offer.
 Usually, the ad makes a specific value-
packed offer. Often the aim is not necessarily to sell anything from the
ad but to simply get the prospect to take the next action, such as
requesting a free resource. The offer focuses on the prospect rather
than on the advertiser and talks about the prospect’s interests, desires,
fears and frustrations. By contrast, mass media or “brand” marketing
has a broad, one-size-fits-all marketing message and is focused on the
advertiser.It demands a response.
 Direct response advertising has a “call to
action,” compelling the prospect to do something specific. It also
includes a means of response and “capture” of these responses.
Interested, high-probability prospects have easy ways to respond, such
as a phone number, an email address or a landing page. When the
prospect responds, as much of the person’s contact information as
possible is captured so that they can be contacted beyond the initial
response.
It includes multi-step, short-term follow-up.
 In exchange for
capturing the prospect’s details, valuable education and information on
the prospect’s problem is offered. The information should carry with it
a second “irresistible offer”—tied to whatever next step you want the
prospect to take, such as calling to schedule an appointment or coming
into the showroom or store. Then a series of follow-up “touches” via
different media such as email, text message, postal mail and phone are
made. Often there is a time or quantity limit on the offer.
It incorporates maintenance follow-up of unconverted leads.
People who do not respond within the short-term follow-up period
may have many reasons for not “maturing” into buyers immediately.
There is value in this bank of slow-to-mature prospects. They should be
nurtured and continue hearing 
from you regularly.
Direct response marketing is a very deep topic with many facets.
The 1-Page Marketing Plan is a tool that helps you implement direct
response marketing in your business without needing to spend years
studying to become an expert.
It’s a guided process that helps you quickly and easily create the key
elements of a direct response campaign for your business.
The 1-Page Marketing Plan
The 1-Page Marketing Plan (
1PMP
) canvas is designed so that you can fill
it in in point form as you read this book and end up with a personalizedmarketing plan for your business. Here’s what a blank 
1PMP
 canvas
looks like:There are nine squares split up into the three major phases of the
marketing process. Most great plays, movies and books are split up into
a three-act structure and so too is good marketing. Let’s take a look into
these three “acts.”
Download your copy of the 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas at 
1pmp.com
The Three Phases of the
Marketing Journey
The marketing process is a journey we want to guide our ideal target
market through. We want to guide them from not knowing we exist
right through to becoming a raving fan customer.
Through this journey there are three distinct phases that we guide
them through. These phases are the 
Before
, 
During
 and 
After
 phases
of your marketing process. The following is a brief overview of each of
these phases.
Before
We label people going through the before phase as 
prospects
. At the
beginning of the “before” phase, prospects typically don’t even know
you exist. The successful completion of this phase results in the
prospect knowing who you are and indicating interest.
Example:
 Tom is a busy business owner and is frustrated that his
data is scattered across multiple applications and software tools that are
never in sync. He searches for a solution and comes across an ad with
the headline “Save Hours of Manual Work—Effortlessly Connect,
Share and Manage All Your Data.” Tom clicks 
on the ad and is taken toa form where he must enter his email address in order to download a
free white paper. Tom sees value in what it has to offer, so he enters his
email address.
During
We label people going through the during phase as 
leads
. At the
beginning of the “during” phase, leads have indicated some interest in
your offer. The successful completion of this phase results in the
prospect buying from you for the first time.
Example:
 Tom gets a lot of value from the white paper he has
downloaded. It has some genuinely good insights and he’s already
started implementing some of the ideas from it. What’s more, the
company that wrote the white paper has been emailing him additional
valuable tips and information. They offer Tom a free comprehensive
audit of his systems. Tom takes them up on this offer. The audit is
thorough and professional and reveals to Tom that his current systems
are inefficient and error-prone. More concerningly the audit reveals
that some of Tom’s business data is poorly secured and vulnerable to
theft or attack. They offer to address all the issues identified during the
audit, at a heavily discounted rate. Tom takes them up on this offer.
After
We label people in this phase as 
customers
. Depending on what type of
business you’re in, this label could be customer, client or patient. At
the beginning of the “after” phase, customers have already given you
money. The after phase never ends and, when executed correctly,
results in a virtuous cycle where the customer buys from you
repeatedly and is such a fan of your products or services that they
consistently recommend you and introduce you to new prospects.
Example:
 Tom is extremely impressed with the professionalism of
the consultant who fixed his problems. The consultant was highly
knowledgeable 
and explained everything to Tom in plain English.
Importantly, he follows through on his company’s promise of “Fixed
First Time or It’s Free.” Someone from headquarters follows up with
Tom the next day to ensure he’s satisfied with the service he received.Tom indicates that he is very satisfied. During this follow-up call, Tom
is offered a package where a qualified expert will proactively look after
his systems for a fixed monthly fee. It also includes unlimited technical
support so if Tom is stuck at any time, he can call, chat or email and get
immediate help. Tom takes up this offer. The live support alone is of
huge value to him as he frequently gets frustrated with his 
IT
 system
and loses productive time trying to figure out a fix. Tom even refers
three of his friends who run their own businesses to this company
because of the great service he’s experienced.
In summary, if we were to describe the three phases in table form, it
would look like this:
PHASE
STATUS
GOAL
 
OF
 
THIS
 
PHASE
Before
Prospect
Get them to 
know you
 and indicate
interest
During
Lead
Get them to 
like
 
you
 and buy from you
for the first time
After
Customer
Get them to 
trust
 
you
, buy from you
regularly and refer new business to you
Now that we’ve got a good bird’s-eye view of the overall structure,
it’s time to dive in and look in depth at each of the nine squares that
make up your 1-Page 
Marketing Plan.
Important:
Download your copy of the 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas at 
1pmp.comThe “Before” Phase Section Summary
In the “before” phase, you’re dealing with prospects. Prospects are people who may not
even yet know you exist. In this phase, you’ll identify a target market, craft a compelling
message for this target market and deliver your message to them through advertising
media.
The goal of this phase is to get your prospect to 
know you
 and respond to your message.
Once they’ve indicated interest by responding, they become a lead and enter the second
phase of your marketing process.1
SELECTING YOUR
TARGET MARKET
Chapter 1 Summary
Selecting your target market is a crucial first step in the marketing process. Doing so will
ensure your marketing message resonates better, which in turn will make your marketing
far more effective. By focusing on the right target market for your business, you’ll be able
to get a better return on the time, money and energy you invest.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why targeting everyone with your product or service is a terrible idea
•
Why mass marketing can be harmful to your business and cost you far more than it
makes you
•
How to use the “
PVP
 index” to select your perfect target market
•
Why you should focus on a niche and become a big fish in a small pond
•
How to make price irrelevant
•
Why you should stop advertising a long list of products and services
•
How to go deep into the mind of your prospect so you can understand exactly what
they wantW
Selecting Your Target Market
It’s Not Everyone
HEN I ASK
 business owners who their target market is, many
tend to respond with “everyone.” In reality this means no one.
In their zeal to acquire as many customers as possible, many
business owners try to serve the widest market possible.
On the face of it this seems logical. However, this is a huge mistake.
Many business owners worry about narrowing down their target
market because they don’t want to exclude any potential customers.
This is a typical newbie marketing mistake. In this chapter we’re
going to examine why excluding customers is actually a good thing.
As discussed in the Introduction, most large company advertising
falls into a category called mass marketing, sometimes also referred to
as “branding.” With this type of marketing, business owners are like an
archer in the middle of a dense fog, shooting arrows in every direction
in the hope that one or more of them will hit the intended target.
The theory behind mass marketing is that you want to “get your
name out there.” I’m not really sure exactly where “there” is or what’s
supposed to happen when your name arrives “there.” Regardless, the
theory is that if you broadcast your message enough times, you’ll by
chance get an audience with your prospects and some percentage of
them will buy from you.
If that sounds a lot like our disoriented archer, flailing about in the
fog, shooting his arrows in random directions and hoping for the 
best,
then you’d be right. However, you might be thinking—“If he just
shoots enough arrows in all directions, surely he’s bound to hit his
target. Right?” Maybe, but for small- to medium-sized businesses at
least, that’s the stupid way of marketing because they’ll never have
enough arrows (in other words, money) to hit their target enough timesto get a good return on their investment.
To be a successful small business marketer you need laser-like focus
on a narrow target market, sometimes called a niche.
Niching—Harnessing the Power
of Focus
Before going any further, let’s define what a business niche is.
A niche is a tightly defined portion of a subcategory. For example,
think of the health and beauty category. This is a very wide category. A
beauty salon can offer a wide variety of services, including tanning,
waxing, facials, massage, cellulite treatment and much more. If, for
example, we take one of these subcategories—let’s say cellulite
treatment—this could be our niche. However, we could tighten it up
even further by focusing on cellulite treatment for women who’ve just
had a baby. This is a tightly defined niche. Now you may be thinking,
“Why on earth would we want to limit our market so much?” Here’s
why:
1.
You have a limited amount of money. If you focus too broadly, your
marketing message will become diluted and weak.
2.
The other critical factor is relevance. The goal of your ad is for your
prospects to say, “Hey that’s for me.”
If you’re a woman who’s just had a baby and are concerned about
cellulite, would an ad targeting this specific problem grab your
interest? Most certainly. How about if the ad was a general ad for a
beauty salon which reeled off a long list of services, one of which was
cellulite treatment? Likely it would get missed in the clutter.
A 100 watt light bulb, like the kind of light bulb we normally have in
our homes, lights up a room. By contrast, a 100 watt laser can cut
through steel. Same energy, dramatically different result. The
difference being how the energy is focused. The exact same thing istrue of your marketing.
Take another example of a photographer. If you look at ads from
most photographers, you’ll often see a laundry list of services like:
•
Portraits
•
Weddings
•
Family photography
•
Commercial photography
•
Fashion photography
The technical way photography is done may not change very much
from situation to situation, but let me ask you a question. Do you think
someone looking for wedding photography would respond to a
different ad than someone who’s after commercial photography?
Do you think a bride-to-be looking for a photographer for her special
day might be looking for something radically different than a
purchasing manager from a heavy machinery distributor looking to
photograph a truck for a product brochure? Of course.
However, if the ad just reels off a laundry list of services, then it’s
not speaking to either prospect, therefore it’s not relevant, and it will
likely be ignored by both market segments.
That’s why you need to choose a narrow target market for your
marketing campaign.
Being all things to all people leads to marketing failure. This doesn’t
mean you can’t offer a broad range of services, but understand that
each category of service is a separate campaign.
Targeting a tight niche allows you to become a big fish in a small
pond. It allows you to dominate a category or geography in a way that is
impossible by being general.
The type of niches that you want to go after are “an inch wide and a
mile deep.” An inch wide meaning it is a very highly targeted
subsection of a category. A mile deep meaning there’s a lot of people
looking for a solution to that specific problem. Once you dominate one
niche, you can expand your business by finding another profitable and
highly targeted niche, then 
dominate that one also.
Now you can have all the advantages of being highly targetedwithout limiting the potential size of your business.
Niching Makes Price Irrelevant
If you had just suffered a heart attack, would you prefer to be treated by
a general doctor or a heart specialist? Of course you’d choose the
specialist. Now if you had a consultation with the heart specialist,
would you expect them to charge you more than a general doctor? Of
course.
Your bill with the specialist would likely be much higher than with
your general practitioner, yet you’re not shopping on price.
How did price suddenly become irrelevant? That is the beauty of
serving a niche. Whether you do heart surgery or offer cellulite
treatment, you can now charge far more for your services than by being
a generalist. You’re perceived differently by your prospects and
customers. A specialist is sought after rather than shopped on price. A
specialist is much more highly respected than a jack-of-all-trades. A
specialist is paid handsomely to solve a specific problem for their target
market.
So figure out the one thing your market wants a solution to,
something that they’ll pay you handsomely for. Then enter the
conversation they’re having in their mind, preferably something they
go to bed worrying about and wake up thinking about. Do this and your
results will dramatically improve.
Trying to target everyone really means that you’re targeting no one.
By going too broad you kill your “specialness” and become a
commodity bought on price. By narrowly defining a target market that
you can wow and deliver huge results for, you become a specialist.
When you narrow down your target market, you naturally decide
who you’re going to exclude. Don’t underestimate the importance of
this. Excluding potential customers scares many small business owners.
They mistakenly believe that a wider net is more likely to 
capture morecustomers. This is a huge mistake. Dominate a niche, then once you
own it, do the same with another and then another. But never do so all
at once. Doing so dilutes your message and your marketing power.
How to Identify Your Ideal
Customer
Given that you’ve now seen the power of choosing a narrow target
market, it’s time to select yours. As with most businesses, you may
currently serve multiple market segments. For example, back to our
photographer friend, he might do:
•
Weddings
•
Corporate photography
•
Photojournalism
•
Family portraits
These are vastly different market segments. A great way of figuring
out your 
ideal
 target market is to use the 
PVP
 index (
P
ersonal
fulfillment, 
V
alue to the marketplace and 
P
rofitability) and give each
market segment you serve a rating out of 10.
P—Personal fulfillment:
 how much do you enjoy dealing with this
type of customer? Sometimes we work with “pain in the butt” type
customers just because of the money. Here you rate how much you
enjoy working with this market segment.
V—Value to the marketplace:
 how much does this market segment
value your work? Are they willing to pay you a lot for your work?
P—Profitability:
 how profitable is the work you do for this market
segment? Sometimes, even when you are charging high fees for your
work, when you look at the numbers it may be barely profitable or even
loss-making. 
Remember it’s not about the “turnover,” it’s all about
the “left over.”For 
our photographer example, his 
PVP
 index may look as follows:
WEDDINGS
Personal fulfillment = 5
Value to the marketplace = 7
Profitability = 9
Total score: 21
PHOTOJOURNALISM
Personal fulfillment = 9
Value to the marketplace = 7
Profitability = 2
Total score: 18
CORPORATE PHOTOGRAPHY
Personal fulfillment = 3
Value to the marketplace = 6
Profitability = 9
Total score: 18
FAMILY PORTRAITS
Personal fulfillment = 9
Value to the marketplace = 8
Profitability = 9
Total score: 26
The 
ideal
 customer for the photographer is people wanting family
portraits. They are the most fun and profitable, highest-value and best-
paying types of customers. There’s likely to be a standout market
segment for you too.
This doesn’t mean that you can’t take on work outside your ideal
target market; however, for now, our marketing efforts will be directed
at one 
ideal
 market segment. We want to be laser focused. Once we
dominate this market segment, we can go on and add others. If we are
too broad initially and target a laundry list of market segments, then
our marketing efforts will be ineffective.
Who is your ideal target market? Be as specific as possible about all
the attributes that may be relevant. What is their gender, age,
geography?
Do you have a picture of them? If so, cut out or print a picture of
them when you think about and answer the following questions:
•
What keeps them awake at night, indigestion boiling up in their
esophagus, eyes open, staring 
at the ceiling?
•
What are they afraid of?
•
What are they angry about?•
Who are they angry at?
•
What are their top daily frustrations?
•
What trends are occurring and will occur in their businesses or
lives?
•
What do they secretly, ardently desire most?
•
Is there a built-in bias in the way they make decisions? For example,
engineers are exceptionally analytical.
•
Do they have their own language or jargon they use?
•
What magazines do they read?
•
What websites do they visit?
•
What’s this person’s day like?
•
What’s the main dominant emotion this market feels?
•
What is the 
ONE
 thing they crave above all else?
These are not theoretical, pie-in-the-sky questions. They are key to
your marketing success. Unless you can get into the mind of your
prospect, all your other marketing efforts will be wasted—no matter
how well you execute them.
Unless you belong to your target market, then a large part of your
initial marketing efforts should be directed at in-depth research,
interviews and careful study of your target market.
Create an Avatar
One of the best tools for getting into the mind of your prospect is to
temporarily 
become
 them by creating an avatar. Don’t worry, I’m not
going to get all woo-woo on you here.
An avatar is a detailed exploration and description of your target
customer and their life. Like a police sketch artist, you piece together a
composite that creates a vivid picture of them in your mind. It helps
tell their story so that you can visualize life from their perspective.
It’s also important to create avatars for each type of decision maker
or influencer you might encounter in your target market. For example,if you’re selling 
IT
 services to small companies in the 
financial services
industry, you might be dealing with both the business owners and their
assistants.
Here’s an example of avatars for Max Cash, the owner of a
successful financial planning firm, and his personal assistant, Angela
Assistant.
Max Cash:
•
Max is 51 years old.
•
He owns a successful financial planning business that has grown
steadily over the past ten years. Previously, he had a career working
for 
KPMG
 and some other large corporations before he went out on
his own.
•
He has a bachelor’s degree and an 
MBA
.
•
He’s married and has two teenage daughters and a younger son.
•
He lives in an upper-middle-class suburb in a five-bedroom house
that he’s been in for about four years. He drives a two-year-old
Mercedes S-Class.
•
He has eighteen staff members and operates from an office building
that he owns. His office is a 15-minute drive from home.
•
The business has an annual turnover of 
$
4.5 million, which is
predominantly service-based revenue.
•
He has no 
IT
 support person on staff and delegates most of the 
IT
and tech responsibilities to his 
PA
, Angela Assistant.
•
He spends about 
$
4,000 per month on the various pieces of
software that are used in his industry and give him access to the
most current financial data. He knows the software helps him and
his clients, but he also knows that there are many features that are
going underutilized.
•
His 
IT
 systems are a hodgepodge of various databases, software tools
and cloud-based servers. Most have been installed by his software
vendors and have had very little maintenance since installation. The
backup systems are archaic and have never actually been tested.
•
He’s a golf nut. His office is decorated with golf memorabilia. There
are photos of him playing golf throughout. The desktop background
on his computer is a beautiful panoramic photo of Pebble Beach GolfLinks
.
•
In his spare time, unsurprisingly, he likes to play golf with his
friends and business associates.
•
He reads the
 Wall Street Journal
 and 
Bloomberg News
, and
subscribes to niche industry publications.
•
He uses an iPhone but it’s mostly used for phone calls, text
messages and emails.
See how this can give us a valuable insight into what the life of our
prospect looks like? Now let’s look at the avatar for another influencer
within our target market:
Angela Assistant:
•
Angela is 29 years old.
•
She’s single and lives in a two-bedroom rented apartment with her
cat, Sprinkles. She takes public transport to work and commutes
daily for about 30 minutes.
•
Angela is organized, always smartly dressed and very enthusiastic.
•
Angela has been Max’s 
PA
 for the last three years when the growth
of the company has really started to accelerate. She’s his right hand
and he’d be totally lost without her.
•
She organizes Max’s calendar, sets up his laptop and phone, makes
and takes calls on his behalf and much, much more. She’s the glue
that holds Max’s business together and she does a bit of everything
from ordering stationery to 
IT
 to 
HR
.
•
Although her title says 
PA
, she’s more than that. She’s really the
office manager and probably even to some extent the general
manager. She’s the one who staff go to when something needs to be
fixed, ordered or organized.
•
She’s tech savvy but really out of her depth when it comes to the
more technical and strategic aspects of 
IT
 systems.
•
After work, she usually hits the gym for a workout and loves
consuming true crime shows and podcasts. On weekends she
catches up with friends and loves the nightlife.
•
She spends a lot of time following beauty and fashion influencers
and content creators.•
Angela spends most of her discretionary income on going out,
entertainment 
and online shopping, which is like an addiction for
her. Even though Angela is quite well paid, she always overspends,
which has resulted in her having a lot of credit card debt. She knows
she needs to be better with money but there always just seems to be
too many temptations for her to resist.
•
She’s always glued to her phone, constantly texting and on social
media.
To take a step further, find an actual image to visually represent your
avatar and have it in front of you whenever you’re creating marketing
material for them.
Hopefully, by now, you can see how powerful avatars are. They are
the marketing equivalent of method acting. They get you right into the
mind of your prospect, a perspective that is going to be absolutely
crucial when it comes to crafting your message to your target market.Chapter 1 Action Item:
Who Is Your Target Market?
Fill in square #1 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.2
CRAFTING YOUR MESSAGE
Chapter 2 Summary
Most marketing messages are boring, timid and ineffective. To stand out from the crowd,
you need to craft a compelling message that grabs the attention of your target market.
Once you have their attention, the goal of your message is to compel them to respond.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why most advertising is totally useless and what to do instead
•
How to stand out from the crowd even when you’re selling a commodity
•
Why you should never compete solely on price
•
How to craft a compelling offer for your target market
•
Examples of some of the most successful advertising headlines in history
•
How to enter the mind of your prospect and join the conversation going on in there
•
How to effectively name your business, product or serviceI
Crafting Your Message
An Accident Waiting to Happen
SPEND A LOT
 of time looking through various forms of local and
national media—not for articles but for advertisements. Having done
this for several years, with very few exceptions, I’m absolutely
amazed how boring, similar and useless most advertising is. The waste
going on is staggering. Wasted money and wasted opportunity.
You could summarize the structure of most ads from small
businesses as follows:
Company name
Company logo
A laundry list of services offered
Claims of best quality, best service or best prices
Offer of a “free quote”
Contact details
It’s basically name, rank and serial number. Then they hope and pray
that on the very day their ad runs, a prospect in immediate need of
their product or service stumbles across it and takes action. This is
what I call “marketing by accident.” A qualified prospect happening
upon the right ad at the right time sometimes results in the happy
accident of a sale taking place.
If these “accidents” never happened then no one would ever
advertise. But as it happens the occasional random sale or lead 
will
come from this type of advertising. While the ad generally loses them
money, they fear not running it because some dribs and drabs of new
business have come out of it—and who knows, next week it may bring
in that big sale they’ve been hoping for.
It’s like these businesses are visiting a slot machine in a casino. Theyput their money in, pull the handle and hope for a jackpot—but most of
the time the house just takes their money. Occasionally they’ll get a
few cents on the dollar back, which raises their hopes and emboldens
them to continue.
It’s time to start marketing on purpose—treating advertising like a
vending machine where the results and value generated are
predictable, rather than like a slot machine where the results are
random, and the odds are stacked against you.
To start marketing on purpose, we need to look at two vital
elements:
1.
What is the purpose of your ad?
2.
What does your ad focus on?
When I ask business owners what the purpose of their ad is, I
usually get a list like:
•
Branding
•
Getting my name out there
•
Letting people know about my products and services
•
Making sales
•
Getting people to call in for a quote
These are all very different, and you cannot possibly do all of these
with one ad. In typical small business style, they’re trying to get
maximum bang for their buck. But by trying to do too much, they end
up achieving none of their objectives.
My rule of thumb is one ad, one objective. If something in the ad
isn’t helping you achieve that objective, then it’s detracting from it, and
you should get rid of it. That includes sacred cows like your company
name and company logo. Advertising space is valuable and these things
taking up the prime real estate in your ad space often detract from your
message rather than enhance it
.
Rather than trying to sell directly from your ad, simply invite
prospects to put their hand up and indicate interest. This lowers
resistance and helps you build a marketing database—one of the most
valuable assets in your business.
Once your objective is clear, you need to communicate it to youraudience. What exactly do you want them to do next? Do they visit
your website to request a free sample? Do they schedule a call with
someone from your team? Do they download a free resource? You need
a very clear call to action—not something wimpy and vague like “don’t
hesitate to call us.”
You need to be clear about what they should do next and what they
will get in return. Also, give them multiple ways to take that action. For
example, if the call to action is to see a demo of your product, give
them the ability to watch a video themselves or have someone on your
team give them a guided demo. Different people have different
preferences when it comes to the modality of communication. Give
them multiple means of response so they can choose the one they are
most comfortable with.
Have you ever been to a party or gathering and been seated next to
someone who just spends the whole night talking about themselves? It
gets old pretty fast. You keep giving half-hearted smiles and polite nods
but your mind is elsewhere, and that exit sign is calling your name.
Similarly, most advertising by small businesses is self-focused.
Instead of speaking to the needs and problems of the prospect, it is
focused on self-aggrandizement. The prominent logo and company
name, the laundry list of services, the claims of being the leading
provider of that product or service. All of these things are shouting,
“Look at me!”
Unfortunately, you’re in a crowded market, and with everyone
shouting “look at me!” at the same time, it just becomes background
noise. By contrast, direct response marketing focuses heavily on the
needs, thoughts and emotions of the target market. By doing this, you
enter the conversation already going on in the mind of your ideal
prospect. You will resonate at a deeper level with your prospect, and
your ad will stand out from 99% of other ads that are just shouting and
talking about themselves.
Don’t be the advertising equivalent of that guy at the party
obliviously talking about himself the whole night while his uninterested
audience looks for the exit. Also, don’t leave anything to chance. Know
exactly what you want your ad to achieve and the exact action you wantyour prospect to take.
Developing a Unique Selling
Proposition
Many small businesses don’t have a reason to exist. Take away their
name and logo from their website or other marketing material, and
you’d never know who they are. They could be any of the other
businesses in their category. Their reason for existence is to survive
and pay the bills of the owner who is usually only just getting by or
possibly not even.
From a customer’s perspective, there is no compelling reason to buy
from them and they make sales just because they happen to be there.
You see a lot of these businesses in retail. The only sales they get are
through random walk-in traffic. No one is seeking them out. No one
actively desires what they have to offer and if they weren’t there no one
would miss them. Harsh but true.
The problem is that these businesses are just another “me too”
business. How did they decide on the price? How did they decide on
the product? How did they decide on marketing? Usually, the answer is
they just had a look at what their nearest competitor was doing and did
the same thing or slightly changed something. Don’t get me wrong,
there’s nothing wrong in modeling something that’s already working.
In fact, that’s a very smart thing to do. However, it’s likely the
competitors they are modeling are in the same boat they are in—
struggling to win business with no compelling reason why you should
buy from them. They based their most important business decisions on
guesses and on what their mediocre competitors are doing. It’s the
blind leading the blind.
After some time of torturing themselves to death—making just
enough money to survive but not enough money to do well—many ofthese businesses finally decide to “try marketing.” So they 
start
marketing their “me too” business with an equally boring “me too”
message. As expected, it doesn’t work. Any profit from additional sales
they do bring in often don’t even cover their marketing costs.
Here’s the thing: the chance of you getting your marketing perfectly
right—message to market and media match—on the first go is
impossibly small. Even the most experienced marketer will tell you
they hardly ever hit a home run on their first go. It takes several
iterations. It takes testing and measuring to finally get your message to
market and media match right.
Yet these guys can’t afford the time, money and effort needed to get
it right. Worse still, with a “me too” style of offer, they don’t have a
hope.
Think of marketing as an amplifier. Here’s an example. You tell one
person about what you do, and they don’t get excited. You then try
telling ten people about what you do, and they don’t get excited either.
If you amplify this message through marketing and tell 10,000 people,
what makes you think that the result will be any different?
If you haven’t first clarified in your mind why your business exists
and why people should buy from you rather than your nearest
competitor, marketing will be an uphill battle.
You need to develop your 
unique selling proposition
 (
USP
). This is
where a lot of people get stuck. They say something like “I sell coffee.
There’s nothing unique about that.”
Really? Then why aren’t we all just getting our 
$
1 coffee from 7-
Eleven? Why do we queue up to spend 
$
4 to 
$
5 to buy our coffee from
some hipster who looks like he’s in urgent need of a bath? Think about
it. You regularly pay 400% to 500% more for the same commodity.
Think about water—one of the most abundant commodities on
earth. When you buy this commodity, in bottled form at either a
convenience store or from a vending machine, you happily pay 2,000
times the price compared with getting it from your tap at home.
See how the commodity in both examples hasn’t changed, but the
circumstances and things around the commodity have changed, or the
way they are packaged and delivered has changed
?The entire goal of your 
USP
 is to answer this question: 
Why should I
buy from you rather than from your nearest competitor?
Another good test is this: if I removed the company name and logo
from your website, would people still know that it’s you or could it be
any other company in your industry?
The common place that people go wrong with developing their 
USP
is they say “quality” or “great service” is their 
USP
. There are two
things wrong with that:
1.
Quality and great service are expectations; they are just part of good
business practice—not something unique.
2.
People only find out about your quality and great service 
after
they’ve bought. A good 
USP
 is designed to attract prospects 
before
they’ve made a purchasing decision.
You know you’re marketing your business as a commodity when
prospects start the conversation by asking you about price.
Positioning yourself as a commodity and hence being shopped on
price alone is a terrible position for a small business owner to be in. It’s
soul crushing, and this race to the bottom is bound to end in tears.
The answer is to develop a unique selling proposition. Something
that positions you differently, so that prospects are forced to make an
apples-to-oranges comparison when comparing you with your
competitor.
If they can do an apples-to-apples comparison of you and your
competitors, then it comes down to price, and you’re toast. There’s
always someone willing to sell cheaper than you.
There’s Nothing New under the
Sun
Very few if any businesses or products are truly unique, so the common
question is, “If there’s nothing unique about my business, how do Idevelop a 
USP
?”
There are two questions I ask my clients when helping them develop
their 
USP
. Answering these two questions is the path towards
marketing and financial success in your business
.
So the two questions you must ask yourself and answer are:
1.
Why should they buy?
2.
Why should they buy from me?
These are questions that should have clear, concise and quantifiable
answers. Not wishy-washy nonsense like “we are the best” or “we have
the highest quality.”
What is the unique advantage you are offering? Now, the
uniqueness doesn’t have to be in the product itself. In fact, it’s fair to
say that there are very few truly unique products. The uniqueness may
be in the way it is packaged, delivered, supported or even sold.
You need to position what you do in such a way that even if your
competitor was operating directly opposite you, customers would cross
the road to do business with you instead of your competitor.
Do it really well, and they may even stand in line overnight to do
business with you instead of your competitor, like they do with Apple
products.Getting into the Mind of Your
Prospect
We want to get into the mind of our prospect. What do they really
want? It’s rarely the thing you are selling; it’s usually the result 
of the
thing you are selling. The difference may seem subtle, but it’s huge.
For example, someone buying a 
$
50 watch is purchasing something
very different than a person buying a 
$
50,000 watch. In the latter case,
they are likely buying status, luxury and exclusivity. Sure, they want it
to tell the time, just like the buyer of the 
$
50 watch does, but that’s
unlikely to be their core motivation.
So, to get into the mind of the prospect, we need to discover what
result they are actually buying. Once you understand this, you then
need to craft your unique selling proposition based on the result your
prospects want to achieve.For example, if you’re a printer, you’re in a commodity business.
You want to get out of the commodity business as quickly as possible. I
don’t mean get out of the industry, but you do need to change how you
position yourself.
Stop selling business cards, brochures and printing, and start asking
open-ended questions, such as, “Why are you coming to a printer?
What is it that you want to achieve?” The prospect doesn’t want
business cards and brochures. They want what they think business
cards and brochures are going to do for their business.
So, you could sit down with them and say, “What are you trying to
accomplish? Let’s do a printing audit and evaluate all of the things
you’re trying to use printing for.” By taking them through the process,
you can charge them to do a printing audit. Then, if they end up hiring
you to do their printing, you can apply that consulting fee towards
printing. This way you’re no longer viewed as a printer anymore.
You’re now viewed as a trusted advisor that’s serving their needs.
If You Confuse Them, You Lose
Them
Understand that your prospect has essentially three options:
1.
Buy from you
2.
Buy from your competitor
3.
Do nothin
g
You may think your competitors are your biggest problem, but in
reality, it’s more likely to be a fight against inertia. Therefore, you need
to first answer the question of why they should buy. Then, you need to
answer the question of why they should buy from 
you
.
We live in a time where nuance doesn’t get much airtime. Sound
bites and fast-moving social media content flood us with thousands of
messages each day. The importance of crafting your message in animmediately understandable and impactful way has never been more
important.
Can you explain your product and the unique benefit it offers in a
single short sentence?
You must understand a very important concept: confusion leads to
lost sales. This is especially so when you have a complex product. Many
business owners erroneously think that a confused customer will seek
clarification or contact you for more information. Nothing could be
further from the truth. 
When you confuse them, you lose them
.
People have too many options and too much information coming at
them constantly, and they’re rarely motivated enough to wade through
a confused message.
How to Be Remarkable When
You Are Selling a Commodity
How do you charge high prices for your products and services while
having your customers thank you for it? In short, by being remarkable.
When given this answer, the first thing many business owners do is
mutter under their breath something like “easier said than done.”
Perhaps this is because being remarkable evokes visions of being
unattainably unique or creative—something that others far more
talented do.
The café owner says, “Dude, I just sell coffee. How am I supposed to
be remarkable?” That raises a common question: how can you be
remarkable when you sell a commodity
?
Let’s look at a few examples.
When I talk about being remarkable, I don’t necessarily mean that
the product or service you sell is unique. Far from it. In fact, being
unique is a dangerous, difficult and expensive place to be. However,
you must be different. How can our café owner be different? Checkthis out:
How much extra did it cost the café to serve art with its coffee?
Pretty close to zero, I would expect. Maybe some extra training for the
barista and a few extra seconds of time per cup.
But how many people will each customer tell or, better still, bring into show? Could this 
café owner charge 50¢ more per cup than the café
down the road? For sure. That’s 50¢ of pure profit multiplied by
hundreds of thousands of cups per year straight to the bottom line.
Yet, is the product unique? Not by a long shot! It’s just slightly
different—different enough to be remarkable.
Here’s another example. Most e-commerce sites send the same
boring confirmation email when you buy from them. Something along
the lines of, “Your order has been shipped. Here’s your tracking link.
Thank you for your business.”
But have a look at how 
CD
 Baby created a remarkable experience for
the customer and a viral marketing opportunity for themselves instead
of a normal, boring confirmation email:
Your
 
CD
 has been gently taken from our
 
CD
 Baby shelves with
sterilized, contamination-free gloves and placed onto a satin pillow.
A team of
 
50 employees inspected your
 
CD
 and polished it to make sure
it was in the best possible condition before mailing.
Our packing specialist from Japan lit a candle, and a hush fell over the
crowd as he put your
 
CD
 into the finest gold-lined box that money can
buy.
We all had a wonderful celebration afterwards, and the whole party
marched down the street to the post office, where the entire town of
Portland waved “Bon Voyage!” to your package, on its way to you, in
our private
 
CD
 Baby jet on this day, Friday, June
 
6th.
I hope you had a wonderful time shopping at
 
CD
 Baby. We sure did.
Your picture is on our wall as “Customer of the Year.” We’re all
exhausted but can’t wait for you to come back to
 
CDBABY
.
COM
!!
This order confirmation email has been shared countless times.
Derek Sivers, the founder of 
CD
 Baby, credits this remarkable order
confirmation message for creating thousands of new customers.Again, nothing unique about the product, but the transformation of
something ordinary and boring gives the customer a smile and creates
free viral marketing for the business
.
Here’s one more example from another highly competitive,
commodity industry—consumer electronics.
When Apple first launched their legendary music player, the iPod,
they could have talked about the five-gigabyte storage capacity or other
technical features like all the other manufacturers of music players of
the day did. But instead, how did they promote it?
“
1
,000 songs in your pocket.”
Genius! Five gigabytes doesn’t mean a thing to most consumers.
Neither does a bunch of technical jargon, but “
1
,000 songs in your
pocket”—anyone can instantly understand that and the benefits it will
offer.
The iPod was by no means the first portable music player on the
market or even the best, but it was by far the most successful because
of Apple’s ability to quickly and easily convey the reasons why you
should buy.
Notice, in all three of these examples, the actual product being sold
is a commodity and what makes it remarkable is something totally
peripheral to what you are buying.
Yet, the seller can and does command premium pricing because
they are selling a remarkable experience. Not only is the customer
happy to pay the premium but also rewards the seller by spreading the
message about their product or service. Why? Because we all want to
share things and experiences that are remarkable.
What can you do in your business that’s remarkable? Your clarity on
this factor will have a huge impact on the success of your business.
Lowest Price
I’m sometimes asked, “Can’t lowest price be my 
USP
?” Sure it can, butcan you absolutely guarantee that everything you sell will be priced
lower than all your competitors, including the behemoths like Costco
and Walmart? Unlikely.
There’ll always be someone willing to go out of business faster than
you. I suggest you 
not play that game.
A 
USP
 that promises the lowest prices on some things, some of the
time is not quite so compelling.
The fact is, if you’re a small or medium business, you’re unlikely to
beat the big discounters at the lowest price game.
Truth be told, you probably don’t want to. By charging higher
prices, you attract a better quality client. As counterintuitive as it may
seem, you get far less grief from high-end customers than you do from
low-end ones. I’ve seen and experienced this in multiple businesses
across multiple industries.
A better option than discounting is to increase the value of your
offering. Bundling in bonuses, adding services and customizing the
solution can all be of genuine value to your customer but can cost you
very little to do.
This also helps you create that valuable apples-to-oranges
comparison that gets you out of the commodity game.
Don’t hate the player; hate the game. So, as hard as it may be to
resist, don’t play the commodity/price game. Develop your 
USP
,
deliver on it and make those you deal with play your game, on your
terms.
Create Your Elevator Pitch
As a business owner, being able to succinctly convey what problem you
solve is a real art, especially if you’re in a complex business.
A great way of distilling your 
USP
 is by crafting an “elevator pitch.”
An elevator pitch is a concise, well-rehearsed summary of your
business and its value proposition, which can be delivered in the timespan of an elevator ride, in other words, 30 to 90 seconds.
Yes, it’s cheesy and you may not even really use it often as an
elevator pitch, but it can really help you clarify your message and your
USP
. This will become extremely valuable when you get to crafting your
offer, which we’ll cover shortly.
The 30 seconds that follow the question, “What do you do?” is one
of the most commonly wasted marketing opportunities. The response
is almost always self-focused, unclear and nonsensical
.
This is where many people reply with the highest-sounding title
they can get away with, as they feel the inquirer’s judgment of their
worth will depend on the answer. “I’m a waste management
technician,” says the janitor.
I once asked a woman what she did for a living and she replied, “I’m
a senior event builder.” None the wiser about what she did, I
continued probing until I finally came to understand that she arranges
seating for concerts and large events in stadiums.
While it’s true some shallow people judge a person’s worth by their
job title or line of business, there’s a much better way to respond to
this question—one that doesn’t require you to raid a thesaurus in order
to inflate or obfuscate what you really do.
The next time someone asks what you do for a living, it’s your cue to
deliver an elevator pitch. It’s a perfect opportunity to convey your
marketing message on a regular basis in many different settings.
Obviously, you don’t want to come across as a pushy, obnoxious
salesperson, so it’s important to structure your elevator pitch properly.
Most elevator pitches suffer from the same problem as overinflated job
titles. It leaves the recipient confused or thinking “what a douchebag”
rather than the intended effect of impressing them.
Bad marketing is highly product-focused and self-focused.
 Good
marketing, especially direct response marketing, is always customer
and problem/solution focused
, and that’s exactly how we want our
elevator pitch to be. We want to be remembered for what problem we
solve rather than for some impressive but incomprehensible title or line
of business.
Good marketing takes the prospect through a journey that coversthe problem, the solution and, finally, the proof. Your elevator pitch
should be no different.
So how do you effectively communicate these three components in
the space of about 30 seconds? The best formula I’ve seen is:
You know [problem]? Well, what we do is [solution]. In fact, [proof]
.
Here are a few examples:
Insurance Sales:
 “You know how most people rarely review their
insurance coverage when their circumstances change? Well, what I do
is help people have peace of mind by making sure their insurance
coverage always matches their current circumstances. In fact, just last
week a client of mine was robbed, but he was able to recover the full
cost of the items he’d lost because his insurance coverage was up to
date.”
Electrical Engineering:
 “You know when there are power outages
that bring down critical systems in large businesses? Well, what I do is
install backup power systems for companies that rely on having a
continual supply of power for their operations. In fact, I installed the
system at 
XYZ
 Bank, which has resulted in them having 100% uptime
since the system was installed.”
Website Development:
 “You know how most company websites
are out of date? Well, what I do is install software that makes it easy for
people to update their own websites, without the need to pay a web
designer each time. In fact, I installed the software for one of my clients
recently, and they saved 
$
2,000 a year in web development costs.”
This gives you a reliable formula to craft your elevator pitch while
being customer/problem focused rather than you/product focused.
Crafting Your Offer
This part is absolutely crucial, and this is where a lot of people get lazyby offering something boring, price discounting or copying what their
nearest competitor is doing.
Remember, if you don’t give your ideal target market a compelling
reason why your offer is different, they will default to price as the main
criteria for making their decision. After all, if vendor A is selling apples
for 
$
1 a pound and vendor B is selling seemingly the same apples for
$
1.50 a pound, which would you buy based on the 
information you have
at hand?
It’s your job to create an exciting and radically different offer from
that of your competitors.
Two great questions to think about when you’re crafting your offer
are:
1.
Of all the products and services you offer, which do you have the
most confidence in delivering? For example, if you only got paid if
the client achieved their desired result, what product or service
would you offer? Phrasing it another way, what problem are you
sure that you could solve for a member of your target market?
2.
Of all the products and services you offer, which do you enjoy
delivering the most?
Some supplemental questions that can help you craft your offer
include:
•
What is my target market really buying? For example, people don’t
really buy insurance; they buy peace of mind.
•
What’s the biggest benefit to lead with?
•
What are the best emotionally charged words and phrases that will
capture and hold the attention of this market?
•
What objections do my prospects have and how will I solve them?
•
What outrageous offer (including a guarantee) can I make?
•
Is there an intriguing story I can tell?
•
Who else is selling something similar to my product or service, and
how?
•
Who else has tried selling this target market something similar, and
how has that effort failed?
One of the main reasons marketing campaigns fail is because the
offer is lazy and poorly thought out. It’s something crappy andunexciting like 10% or 20% off.
The offer is one of the most important parts of your marketing
campaign, and you need to spend much of your time and energy on
structuring this correctly
.
What Does My Target Market
Want?
Putting the right stuff in front of the wrong people or the wrong stuff in
front of the right people is one of the first marketing mistakes made by
business owners.
That’s why the first, and arguably most important, square of the 1-
Page Marketing Plan is all about identifying a specific target market for
our marketing efforts.
Now that we’ve laid that groundwork, we want to structure an offer
that will excite this target market. One that will have them ready to
whip out their wallet and one that will stand out from all the boring,
lazy offers from our competitors.
One of the easiest methods of finding out what your prospects want
is simply by asking them. You can do so through a survey or through
more formal market research.
It should also be noted that most people don’t know what they want
until they’ve actually been presented with it. Also, when people are
doing surveys or responding to market research, they do so with logic;
however, 
purchasing is done with emotions and justified with logic
after the fact
. So you need to supplement asking with observing.
If you asked those in the market for expensive luxury cars what they
wanted, you’d typically get logical (and untrue or half true) answers like
quality, reliability, comfort. In reality what they really want is status.
A quote often attributed to Henry Ford puts it well: “If I had asked
people what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.”One of the ways I recommend doing market research is by analyzing
what your target market is actually buying or looking for.
Look at products and categories that are trending on marketplaces
like Amazon.
Find out what people are searching for online using a search engine
keyword tool.
Lastly, see what topics are trending on social media and industry
news sites. What are people commenting on and reacting to
?
Using these tools is almost like tapping into the global
consciousness and will give you a good idea of what is currently in
demand and being talked or thought about.
Create an Irresistible Offer
Now that you know what your market wants, you need to package it up
and present it as an irresistible offer. Here are some of the essential
elements:
Value:
 first you need to think, what is the most valuable thing you
could do for your customer? What is the result that takes them from
point A to point B which you can take them through while making a
good profit?
This really is the crux of your offer.
Language:
 if you’re not a member of your target market, you need to
learn the language and jargon that your target market uses. If you’re
selling 
BMX
 bikes, you need talk about “endos,” “sick wheelies” and
“bunny hops,” not features, benefits and specifications. If you’re selling
golf clubs, you need to talk about “hooks,” “slices” and “handicaps.”
Reason why:
 when you have a great offer, you need to justify why
you’re doing this. People are so used to being shortchanged that when
someone makes a strong, value-filled offer, they become skeptical and
look for the catch.
I’ve personally experienced this in one of my businesses when wewere offering a much better service at a price that was about half that of
our competitors. People kept ringing into the sales line to recap the
offer featured on the website and to ask what the catch was.
I don’t suggest you fabricate reasons for your offer, but be ready to
have a solid reason why you are offering a great deal; for example,
clearing old stock, damaged inventory, overstock, moving your office
or warehouse and so on.
Value stacking:
 packing in many bonuses can make your offer seem
like a no-brainer. This is a very smart move and can dramatically
increase conversions. In fact, I advocate 
to make the bonuses more
valuable than the main offer whenever possible. Infomercials do this
very well. “We’ll double your offer”; “That’s not all...”; and so on.
Upsells:
 when your prospect is hot, and in the buying frame of
mind, it’s the prime time to offer a complementary product or service.
This is the perfect opportunity to tack on a high-margin item, even if
the primary product you are selling is low margin. It’s the fries with the
burger, the extended warranty, the car rustproofing. It gives the
customer added value and gives you more profit per transaction.
Payment plan:
 this one is absolutely critical for high-ticket items
and can mean the difference between the customer balking and walking
away or making the sale.
If something costs 
$
5,000, presenting it as 12 easy payments of 
$
497
makes the price a much easier pill to swallow. People generally think of
their expenses on a monthly basis and 
$
497 per month feels much
easier than 
$
5,000 in one lump sum.
Also, notice that 12 × 
$
497 adds up to more than 
$
5,000. In fact, it
makes it almost 
$
6,000. The first reason you want to do this is to cover
your finance costs if you’re financing the sale.
Second, you want to incentivize the people who can pay in a lump
sum to receive a “discount” by paying up front.
Guarantee:
 as discussed previously in this chapter, you need an
outrageous guarantee. One that totally reverses the risk of doing
business with you. People have been disappointed so many times that
they don’t trust any of the claims you make. It’s nothing personal.
That’s just the way it is. You need to make dealing with you a risk-freetransaction, one where the risk is on you should you fail to deliver on
your promises. “Satisfaction guaranteed” is weak and ineffective.
Scarcity:
 your offer needs to have an element of scarcity, a reason
why people need to respond immediately. People respond much more
to a fear of loss than the prospect of gain. However, again, you need a
good “reason why” the scarcity exists, as you don’t want to be
disingenuous with your scarcity claims.
You have a limited supply, limited time, limited resources. Use this
to your advantage in your marketing. If you can have a running
countdown of time or available stock, this can further turn up the heat
on the fear-of-loss emotion
.
As you’ve seen, there are many components to crafting a compelling
offer. Taking the lazy, ill-thought-out road of “10% off” or similar
crappy offers is akin to throwing your marketing dollars in the trash.
Take the time to craft a compelling, well-thought-out offer. Your
conversion rate will skyrocket and so will your bottom line.
Target the Pain
You’ve got a splitting headache. You open your medicine cabinet and
start riffling through your museum of half-used tablets, creams and
vitamins only to realize you’re totally out of pain relief medication. So
you rush down to your local pharmacy in the hope of getting the tablet
that’s going to give you the relief you so desperately need.
Do you worry about the price? Does it even enter your mind to shop
around and see if you can buy the same product cheaper at another
pharmacy? Unlikely. You’re in pain, and you need immediate relief.
Even if the tablets were priced at double or triple the normal cost,
you’d probably still buy.
The usual ways of shopping get thrown out the window when we’re
in pain. The exact same is true for your customers and prospects. So
many times businesses talk about features and benefits rather thanspeaking to the pain that the customer already has. How much selling
does a pharmacist need to do to convince someone with a splitting
headache to buy pain relief medication? Very little, I suspect.
The same is true whether you sell 
TV
s, cars or consulting. You have
prospects and customers who are in pain. They want pain relief, not
features and benefits. If you’re selling me a 
TV
, you could try to sell me
features and benefits by telling me it’s got four 
HDMI
 ports and 
8K
resolution. This will mean very little to most people. Imagine instead
you target my pain point, which is bringing it back home, unpacking it
and spending an infuriating number of hours trying to get it working
properly with all my other devices.
Instead of price discounting and positioning yourself as a
commodity, why not offer to deliver it to my house, mount it on the
wall, ensure the picture quality is spectacular 
and verify that it works
perfectly with all my peripherals. Now you’re giving me pain relief, and
price becomes less important than if you’re selling me a commodity
with a list of features and benefits.
In the above example, even though you might be selling the exact
same 
TV
 as your competitor, if you package it up in a way that takes
away my pain, then you’ve won my business. It’s also much more likely
I’ll become a raving fan and refer others to you because you weren’t
just the vendor of a commodity. You were a problem solver. Now it’s
an apples-to-oranges comparison. How do you compare this to “it’s got
four 
HDMI
 ports and 
8K
 resolution”?
Selling features and benefits is the best way to turn your prospects
into price shoppers who view your product as a commodity bought
solely on price. Your goal is to be a problem solver and pain reliever
and to turn any comparison with your competition into an apples-to-
oranges comparison. Remember, people are much more willing to pay
for a cure than for prevention. Targeting existing pain rather than
promising future pleasure will result in much higher conversion, much
higher customer satisfaction and lower price resistance. Look for pain
points in your industry and become the source of relief.Copywriting for Sales:
You Can’t Bore People into
Buying
Almost no other skill will reward you as richly as being able to write
compelling words. Being able to clearly articulate why a prospect
should buy from you rather than your competitors, in a way that creates
emotion and motivates them to action, is the master skill of marketing.
Earlier in this book, we touched on the fact that direct response
marketing uses very different copywriting techniques. In direct
response marketing, we use copy that is designed to push the
emotional hot buttons of the target audience.
Rather than using the conventional, boring, “professional” sounding
copy, we use copy that is like a car accident—no matter how much you
don’t want to, you can’t help but look
.
Emotional direct response copywriting uses attention-grabbing
headlines, strong sales copy and compelling calls to action. It’s what’s
known as “salesmanship in print.”
Many businesses, especially those that sell products and services to
professional or business customers, feel like this type of copy is not
appropriate for their market. And while it’s true we should tailor our
approach to this market (as we would for any target market), it would
be a major mistake to discount emotional direct response copywriting.
Whether you’re the 
CEO
 of a Fortune 500 company or the janitor,
we’re all big bags of emotion, and our buying decisions are made with
emotion and then justified with logic later. “Hey honey, I bought that
Porsche 911 because of safety and German cars are really reliable too.”
Yeah right.
So many times when I meet business owners in person, I find their
personality is completely different from the personality displayed in
their marketing. Truth be told, most display no personality at all in
their marketing because they think they need to look “professional.”Their marketing is often bland and generic, and if you swapped out
their logo and name from their marketing material, it could be anyone
else in their industry. It’s such a shame because if only they
communicated in their marketing the way they do in person, they’d
have much more success.
When you meet them in person, these people are often highly
intelligent, interesting to listen to and passionate about what they do,
yet when it comes to their marketing material and sales copy it’s like
they freeze up. All of a sudden, they try to sound “professional” and
start using weasel words and phrases they would never normally use in
conversation. You know the sort of words and phrases I mean: “best-
of-breed products,” “synergistic,” “strategic alignment” and so on.
Words they’d never use in a real conversation with their friends or
colleagues.
The fact is, people buy from people, not from corporations. Building
relationships and rapport is well understood in the world of one-to-one
sales; however, for some reason when it comes to the one-to-many
position of being a marketer, many business owners 
think they need to
put their personality aside and behave like a faceless corporation.
Copywriting is salesmanship in print. You need to write your sales
copy as though you were talking directly to a single person.
Using monotone, boring, “professional” sales copy is the fastest way
of losing the interest of your customers and prospects. Meaningless
clichés and claims of being the leading provider in your category make
you look like a “me too” business. “Me too” businesses attract the
lowest-common-denominator clients who by necessity shop based on
price, as they have nothing else to differentiate you by.
People love authenticity, personality and opinion. Even if they don’t
agree with you, they’ll respect you for being real and open. Being
yourself and bringing out your personality will help you stand out in a
sea of sameness and monotony. Just have a look at one of the most
consistently enduring news formats—the talking head. Why waste
such a large percentage of airtime on showing the face of the presenter?
Using just their voice-over would mean that a lot more content and
visual footage of news stories could be broadcast.However, the reason so much time is allocated to just the talking
head is that it adds personality to topics that are often bland. It also
lends authority and feels like a one-on-one conversation with a trusted
source. People respond to pictures and videos of other people. It’s no
accident that the biggest online media properties in the world are ones
based on user-generated content. We’re extremely interested in what
other people are doing and saying.
You can easily take advantage of this in your business. One example
is by adding a video to your website. It can be as simple as a talking-
head video of you describing your products and services, which you
can shoot and upload in the space of five minutes using a handheld
camera or even a smartphone. Another example is using social media as
a two-way communication medium for engaging with customers and
prospects. Doing just these two things will create deeper connections
because you’ll be adding personality to your business.
Don’t use your marketing material as a screen to hide behind. Use it
to give opinion, insight, advice and commentary, and above 
all, be
yourself and be authentic. This will instantly create rapport and
differentiate you from all the other boring and bland marketing material
around you.
People open their mail above a wastepaper basket and have their
index finger hovering above the delete button when reading email.
They sort their mail in two piles: the first gets opened and read and the
second goes into the trash, often unopened. People are craving
something new, something entertaining, something different. When
you give that to them, you get their attention. When your copy is
“professional,” it’s boring, monotone and ignored. The fact is that most
businesses are too afraid to send out copy that will get them noticed.
They fear what their friends, relatives, industry peers and others will
think or say.
So, they send out letters and ads that are timid and “me too.” Swap
the company name and logo, and they are pretty much interchangeable
with every one of their other competitors. There’s really only one
opinion you should be worrying about—that of your customers and
prospects. Frankly, no one else’s opinion, including yours, shouldfigure in what you put in your sales copy. Testing and measuring
response is the only true way of judging the effectiveness of your copy.
The masses are living lives of quiet desperation. They are absolutely
craving something that grabs or entertains them, even if it’s just for a
moment. Your job is to give it to them.
Elements of Great Copy
It’s incredible how a change in a word or phrase can dramatically
change the effectiveness of an ad. There are some words that are
extremely powerful and trigger emotional hot buttons. For example,
think about the following three words:
1.
Animal
2.
Fish
3.
Shar
k
Which of these three triggers the most emotional response in you? I
suspect it’s the last one, yet they could all be used to describe the same
creature. The same is true of words you use when writing sales copy.
Some words trigger a bigger emotional response than others. Here is
just a small sample of the most common compelling words:
•
Free
•
You
•
Save
•
Results
•
Health
•
Love
•
Proven
•
Money
•
New
•
Easy
•
Safety
•
Guaranteed
•
DiscoveryA one-word change in your headline can dramatically alter the
results you achieve. Always remember, 
people buy with emotions first
and then justify with logic afterwards
. Trying to sell to their logical
brain with facts and figures is a complete waste of time.
The five major motivators of human behavior, especially buying
behavior, are:
1.
Fear
2.
Love
3.
Greed
4.
Guilt
5.
Pride
If your sales copy isn’t pushing at least one of these emotional hot
buttons, then it’s likely too timid and ineffective.
Headlines are one of the most important elements in your sales
copy. Their job is to grab the attention of your target market and get
them to start reading your body copy. The headline is basically the ad
for the ad and should encompass the self-serving result your reader will
get. You’ll use headlines extensively in your marketing when writing
email subject lines, sales letter headlines or web page titles. Here’s a
small sample of headlines from some of the most successful advertising
campaigns throughout history:
•
They Laughed When I Sat Down at the Piano—But When I Started
to Play!
•
Who Else Wants a Screen Star Figure?
•
Amazing Secret Discovered by One-Legged Golfer Adds 50 Yards
to Your Drives, Eliminates Hooks and Slices and Can Slash up to 10
Strokes from Your Game Almost Overnight!
•
Confessions of a Disbarred Lawyer
•
Have You Ever Seen a Grown Man Cry?
•
An Open Letter to Every Overweight Person in Portland
•
Is the Life of a Child Worth 
$
1 to You?
•
How a Strange Accident Saved Me from Baldness
•
When the Government Freezes Your Bank Account—What Then?
•
How a “Fool Stunt” Made a Star Salesman
•
Wife of Famous Movie Star Swears Under Oath Her New Perfume
Does Not Contain an Illegal Sexual Stimulant!•
Profits That Lie Hidden in Your Farm
•
Proof: Doctors Are More Dangerous Than Guns!
Notice how all the successful, tested headlines above push one or
more of the five major motivators of human behavior?
For a list of hundreds of the most successful headlines in advertising history, visit
1pmp.co
m
Fear, especially the fear of loss, is one of the most effective
emotional hot buttons you can push in your sales copy. Understanding
how certain words link to certain emotions is powerful.
Many worry that this is too manipulative. Like any powerful tool, it
can be used for good or evil purposes and no doubt many people do
both.
A sharp knife in the hands of a surgeon can be used to save a life or
in the hands of a criminal to take a life. Either way, we need to
understand how this tool works and we can’t go through life avoiding
its use.
The same thing is applied to emotional direct response copywriting.
It’s a powerful selling tool, and you should never use it unethically.
If you sell something that is in the best interest of your prospect or
customer, then you are actually doing them a great service by using this
powerful selling tool. You are preventing them from buying someone
else’s inferior product or service.
Enter the Conversation
Already Going on in YourProspect’s Mind
We all have a conversation going on in our mind, all the time.
Sometimes this is referred to as “inner talk.”
That conversation is going to be very different for an expectant
mother than it is for a retiree. Or for a fanatical fitness junkie and a
couch potato. This is part of why it’s so important to understand your
target market well.
An emotional hot button for one type of target audience will fall on
deaf ears to another audience. Emotional direct response copywriting is
no substitute for understanding 
EXACTLY
 who your target audience is
and what their emotional triggers are.
Before you ever write a single word of copy, you must intimately
understand how your target market thinks and talks, the kind of
language they use and respond to, what kind 
of day they have and the
conversation that goes on in their minds. What are their fears and
frustrations? What gets them excited and motivated?
Research is often the most neglected component of copywriting and
is the major reason why even powerful copy can sometimes fail.
Emotional direct response copywriting is a powerful tool in your
marketing arsenal. But understand, it is part of a process. Research,
write, then test and measure, and you’ll be far ahead of 99.9% of all
your competitors.
Another way to enter the conversation going on in your prospect’s
mind is to address the elephant in the room. It’s natural to always try to
present your business in the most favorable light possible when
marketing yourself. However, this often leads to one of the most
common marketing blunders—discussing only the positive aspects of
doing business with you. Avoiding the elephant in the room, in other
words, the risks associated with buying from you, is a rookie mistake.
The amygdala is the fear part of our brain. It governs our reactions to
events that are important for our survival, and it stimulates fear to warn
us of imminent danger. If you’re being followed at night by a
suspicious-looking individual and your heart is pounding, that’s youramygdala doing its job. That’s good. However, the amygdala in your
prospect’s brain can also stop them from buying from you. That’s bad.
Whether you own a coffee shop or a hospital, when a prospective
customer considers buying from you, their amygdala is making a
judgment call about the potential risks involved. The risk being
evaluated by the amygdala may be as trivial as a bad-tasting latte or as
severe as an untimely death on an operating table. Either way, the risk
evaluation is always going on in the background. As a business owner
and marketer, you need to understand that. If you skirt around this
issue in your marketing, you allow the amygdala in your prospect’s
brain to run wild and potentially kill the sale. Given that this risk
evaluation will happen whether you like it or not, why not participate
in it and give yourself the best chance of addressing any potential deal
breakers before they get a chance to damage your bottom line?
Traditional selling tells us to overcome objections; however, in
reality, objections are rarely voiced. Instead, in our polite society, we
say nonsense things like “Let me think about it,” while inside the
amygdala is screaming, “Let’s get out of here!” Part of the job of good
sales copy is to tell potential prospects who your product or service is
NOT
 for. There are three very good reasons you should do this.
First, it filters out people who aren’t part of your target market or
those who wouldn’t be a good fit for what you have to offer. This
ensures you don’t waste your time on low-quality, low-probability
prospects. It also reduces the number of refunds and complaints from
customers who misunderstood what they bought.
Second, it immediately makes it more credible when you tell them
who this product is for. It feels much more evenhanded when you
cover both angles by telling them who it is for and who it isn’t for.
Last, the prospects who your product or service is for will more
strongly feel it is tailored to their needs than if you had said it’s for
anyone and everyone. It feels more targeted and exclusive.
Another excellent way to enter the mind of your prospect is to find
out what they blame, and to use a device in your copy known as “the
enemy in common.” If you ask most people why they haven’t achieved
success, some of the most common responses include:•
The economy
•
The government
•
Taxes are too high
•
Poor upbringing or parenting
•
Unsupportive family or friends
•
No time
•
No money
•
No opportunity
•
Lack of skills or education
•
Unfair boss
There’s just one thing wrong with this list—they aren’t on it!
Here are the results of a national survey that was conducted by one
of the major newspapers on “cost-of-living pressure,” also known as
spending too much and earning too little. You can see how few people
blame themselves for their current circumstances.According to the 
Journal of Safety Research
,
1
 74% of Americans
believe they are above-average drivers. Yet only 1% believe they are
below average.
It’s the same with accepting blame. How many times have you heard
a child say, “It’s not my fault”? As adults, people are much the same.
Most of us don’t believe we are in the wrong. So, what can you do with
this knowledge? First, in your sales copy, never blame your prospects
for the position they are in. If we’re going to enter the conversation
already going on in their minds, our marketing message needs to take
into account these existing thought processes—no matter how foreignthey 
are from our own.
“The enemy in common” is a great way of leveraging the “it’s not
my fault” mentality. Take something relevant from your prospect’s
blame list, side with them and tie it into a solution you have to offer. A
sample headline that a nutritionist might use could be:
“How Big Pharma and the Food Industry Are Conspiring to Keep
You Overweight and Sick.”
This is a great way of bonding with your prospect while offering
them a solution. By using a common enemy, you connect with the
prospect, and you’re seen as the savior against a foe—in this case, Big
Pharma and the food industry.
“The enemy in common” rattles their cage, enters the conversation
already going on in their mind and stirs up the emotions that are
already there, just below the surface.
It’s a great way to break through the clutter and get your prospect’s
attention.
How to Name Your Product,
Service or Business
I’ve had “the naming discussion” with entrepreneurs many times. It
usually goes like this: I’m asked for my opinion on a new name or
several variations thereof for a new product, service or business
venture. Then often follows an explanation of the name or names that
are being considered. Here’s my take on naming—if you need to
explain the name, to me that’s an automatic fail. The 
title should
reflect the content
. In other words, if the name doesn’t make it
automatically obvious what the product, service or business is, then
you’re starting from behind. When I give people this advice, some
shake their heads in disbelief. What about great brands with unusual
names like Nike, Apple and Amazon? Surely, I must be missingsomething by giving such simplistic advice? Here’s the thing. All of the
big brands spend hundreds of millions of dollars in advertising to
educate people about who they are and what they do. How much are
you willing to spend to do the same?
Here, we’re not even talking about advertising that sells or generates
leads. We’re talking about advertising 
that merely tells people what you
do. I can’t think of a bigger waste of money. By using a non-obvious
name, you’re starting from behind and then have to make up for it by
spending a lot of money on advertising to rectify the situation. All you
had to do to avoid this colossal waste of money was call your business
“Fast Plumbing Repairs,” which immediately explains what you do and
what you stand for, rather than “Aqua Solutions,” after which you have
to explain that “aqua” means “water” in Latin and that you provide
“complete plumbing solutions” (whatever that means), hence the name
“Aqua Solutions.”
So many times, I’ve seen a business or product name with an
unclear meaning. Sometimes, it’s a corny play on words; other times,
it’s an obscure literary reference; and still other times, it’s some made-
up word, the meaning of which is only apparent to the creator. The
reality is, no matter how clever your name is, very few people will go to
the trouble of trying to decipher its meaning or origin. These things
may be important to you because your business is your baby, but rarely
does a customer or prospect give them even a split second of thought.
What’s even worse is that being “clever” often creates confusion
and works against you. As we covered earlier in this chapter, confusion
leads to lost sales. If you confuse them, you lose them. It’s that simple.
Always choose clarity over cleverness
. It’s hard enough to get a
message read, understood then acted upon at the best of times. But
intentionally adding confusion into the mix when you’re a small
business with a modest marketing budget is madness.
Lastly, please don’t ask friends and family for their opinion on your
clever new name. They’ll, of course, praise your idea and compliment
you, which feels nice, but it’s unlikely to be truly helpful. By all means
test and get opinions but do so from objective people who are part of
your target market—not from those who already know what you’reabout. Naming can work for you or against you, and it’s expensive and
difficult to change down the track, so give it thought and effort, and
above all else focus on clarity.Chapter 2 Action Item:
What Is Your Message to Your Target Market?
Fill in square #2 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.
1
A.F. Williams, “Views of U.S. Drivers about Driving Safety,” 
Journal of Safety Research
 34,
no. 5 (2003).3
REACHING PROSPECTS WITH
ADVERTISING MEDIA
Chapter 3 Summary
Advertising media is the vehicle you’ll use to reach your target market and communicate
your message. It’s typically the most expensive component of your marketing, so it needs
to be selected and managed carefully to ensure you get a good return on investment
(
ROI
).
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why “getting your name out there” is a losing strategy
•
How to get a good 
ROI
 when advertising
•
The lifetime value of a customer and how this is split up between the “front end” and
“back end”
•
The role that social media plays in your business
•
How to effectively use email and postal mail as part of your media strategy
•
How to protect your business from “a single point of failure”J
Reaching Prospects with Advertising Media
The 
ROI
 Game
OHN WANAMAKER, ONE
 of the marketing greats, famously said:
“Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the trouble is I
don’t know which half.”
While this was understandable a century ago, when it was first said,
it should be a crime to say that today. Yet, the reality is that most small
businesses do little if any tracking of advertising. Not measuring where
your leads and sales come from and not tracking 
ROI
 on ad spend is the
mark of an amateur. We all have at our disposal the technology to
quickly, easily and cheaply track advertising effectiveness.
Tools such as toll-free numbers, website analytics and coupon codes
make this trivial. Remember,
 what gets measured, gets managed
. Be
ruthless with your ad spend by cutting the losers and riding the
winners. Obviously, to know what’s losing and what’s winning, you
need to be tracking and measuring.
This is vital because media is by far the most expensive component
of your marketing spend. It’s the bridge that connects your offer to
your target market.
It’s well beyond the scope of this book to go into the technical
details of each category and subcategory of media. However, I’d give
you this piece of general advice: hire experts that specialize in whatever
media you decide is right for your campaign—they’re worth 
their
weight in gold. Don’t try to do it yourself, especially when it comes to
the most expensive part of your marketing process. 
What you don’t
know
 
WILL
 hurt you
. Whether you’re using traditional media like
broadcast, outdoor and print or digital media like social, pay-per-click
and email, each has its own idiosyncrasies and technicalities that you’re
highly likely to mess up if you’re not experienced with it. It would be atragedy to get the target market and offer right and then have your
campaign flop because you messed up a technical detail in your media.
I’m often asked questions like, “What’s a good response rate for
direct mail?” or “What kind of open rate should I expect when doing
email marketing?” The expectation is that I’ll give a numerical answer.
Something like, “Expect a 2% response rate from direct mail” or
“Expect a 20% open rate for email.”
Usually, these kinds of questions come from well-meaning business
owners who have yet to build their marketing infrastructure. My
answer is always the same—it depends. Sometimes a 50% response rate
is a disaster, and sometimes a 0.01% response rate is a massive success.
Response rates will vary dramatically depending on factors such as
how relevant the message is to the target market, how compelling the
offer is and how you came about the list you’re marketing to. Instead of
asking what a good response rate is, which is a nonsense question,
they’re really asking, “How do I measure the success of my marketing
campaign?”
So, how do you measure the success of a marketing campaign?
For the impatient, here’s the short answer: did the marketing
campaign make you more money than it cost you? Another way of
putting it is, what was the return on investment on the marketing
campaign? If it cost you more than you made (or will ever make) on this
campaign, then it’s a failure. If it cost you less than the profits you
made as a result of the campaign, then it’s a success.
Of course, some people will argue with me and say that even a
campaign that lost money was valuable because it “got your name out
there” or was some sort of “branding” exercise. Unless you’re a mega
brand like Nike, Apple, Coca-Cola or similar, then it’s likely you can’t
afford to burn tens of 
millions of dollars on fuzzy marketing like
“branding” or “getting your name out there.”
Rather than “getting your name out there,” you’ll fare much better
by concentrating on getting the name of your prospects in here.
I like to think of marketing dollars as firepower. You need to use
your limited firepower wisely so that you can successfully hunt, come
home victorious and feed your family. However, if you start randomlyfiring in every direction, you’re going to startle and scare off your prey.
You need to be targeted and clever if you wish to be victorious.
If you’re a small- or medium-sized business, you need to get a return
on your marketing expenditures. Putting your comparatively tiny
marketing budget into mass marketing would have the same effect as
peeing in the ocean.
The game of mass marketing and large-scale branding can only be
won with atomic-bomb-scale firepower. If you’re a small to medium
business, that’s not a game you’re equipped to play. That being the
case, we need to look at the numbers carefully.
Let’s run through an example with some numbers to illustrate. I’ll
keep the numbers small and round for the sake of clarity.
You do a direct mail campaign and send out 100 letters.
The cost of printing and mailing the 100 letters is 
$
300.
Out of 100 letters, ten people respond (10% response rate).
Out of the ten people who responded, two people end up buying
from you (20% closure rate).
From this, we can work out one of the most important numbers in
marketing—customer acquisition cost. In this example, you acquired
two customers, and the campaign cost you a total of 
$
300. So your
customer acquisition cost is 
$
150.
Now, if the product or service you sell to these customers makes
you a profit of only 
$
100 per sale, then this was a losing campaign. You
lost 
$
50 for every customer acquired in this campaign (negative 
ROI
).
However, if the product or service you sell makes you a profit of
$
600 per sale, then this is a winning campaign. You made 
$
450 for
every customer acquired (positive 
ROI
).
Obviously, this is a simplistic example, but it illustrates how
irrelevant statistics like response rates and conversion rates are. Our
primary concern is the return on investment, which varies 
based on the
customer acquisition cost and how much actual profit a marketing
campaign yields.
One of the massive advantages of targeting a niche is that your
marketing becomes much cheaper. Targeted advertising ends up beingmuch cheaper than mass marketing because there is far less waste.
If you’re selling financial services and your ideal clients are doctors,
you’re far better off targeting medical industry groups and
communities than a general ad for anyone and everyone.
Your customer acquisition cost will drop dramatically because your
message to market match is much better and hence your conversion
rate will be much higher than if you had a general message in your ad.
Your advertising costs would also be lower because your target
market is smaller.
Remember the entire goal of your ad is for your prospect to say,
“Hey that’s for me.”
Trying to be all things to all people is unlikely to garner the same
reaction.
The “Front End,” “Back End”
and Lifetime Value of a
Customer
With the example given, we determined that if we made only 
$
100 of
profit per sale, then we had a losing campaign. However, in that
example, we didn’t take into account another very important number
used in measuring marketing success—
customer lifetime value
.
If, for example, we make 
$
100 directly as a result of the campaign,
but then the customer continues to buy from us down the track, that
completely changes the economics of the campaign. A campaign that
looked like a loser can, in fact, become a winner when we take into
account the lifetime value of a customer.
We now need to factor in how much we’ll likely make on a customer
over their entire tenure with us. For example, you might sell printers
that require refills or a car that requires servicing or something else thata customer buys repeatedly; for example, haircuts, 
massage, insurance,
Internet access and so on.
The money we make up front on a campaign is known as the “front
end.” The money we make on subsequent purchases is known as the
“back end.” Together, these figures make up the lifetime value of a
customer.
Lifetime value and customer acquisition cost are two of the key
numbers you need to know to measure marketing effectiveness. The
other statistics, like response rates and conversion rates, in themselves
are useless. We just use them to determine these two figures, which
give us a true picture of how our marketing is performing.
If you don’t know what these numbers are in your business, then
now’s the time to start measuring and making your marketing
accountable. Constantly testing, measuring and improving these
numbers is how you build a high-growth business.
Your “front end” offer is the offer that gets seen by prospects
(people who aren’t yet your customers). These are people who don’t
know you and have no reason to like or trust you. In general, the goal of
your front end offer is to create a customer and make enough profit
from the first transaction to at least cover the customer acquisition
cost. This makes it very sustainable to keep advertising. The real profit
is made on the “back end” through repeat purchases by existing
customers.
Sometimes it makes sense to “go negative,” that is, lose money on
the front end, because you know for certain you’ll make it up and more
on the back end. This is often the case with subscription businesses or
businesses that have a high lifetime value. If you don’t know your
numbers, this can be a risky strategy, so stick to the goal of having your
front end pay for your customer acquisition cost until you have a good
handle on your lifetime value numbers. In 
Chapter 8
, we’ll talk more
about the back end and increasing customer lifetime value. This can
revolutionize your business and turn losing campaigns into winners.Is Social Media a Cure-All?
Without a doubt, the Internet and social media are media
breakthroughs. They’ve democratized information and have made
possible 
an unprecedented level of connectedness. However, given the
hype that surrounds whatever the emerging social platform of the day
is, you’d imagine it was a marketing cure-all. It is not. Many self-
proclaimed social media “gurus” would have you believe that if you’re
not dedicating most or all of your marketing resources to social media,
you’re a Luddite who’ll soon be out of business.
Of course, as with most hype, there’s a need to keep a level head in
order to separate fact from fiction. Before I’m labeled as being against
social media, let me set the record straight. I’ve used social media in
multiple businesses and continue to use it on a regular basis.
However, let’s see where it fits into your overall marketing and
media strategy.
A successful marketing campaign has to get three vital elements
right:
1.
Market
 (covered in 
Chapter 1
): the target market you send your
message to
2.
Message
 (covered in 
Chapter 2
): the marketing message or offer you
send
3.
Media
 (covered in this chapter): the vehicle that you use to send
your message to your target market; for example, digital ads, direct
mail, email, podcasts, print ads and so on
You need to hit all three of these to have a successful campaign. You
need to send the right message to the right target market, through the
right media channel. Failing at any one of these three elements will
likely cause your marketing campaign to fail. Understanding this
framework helps put things in context. Social media, by definition, is a
form of 
media
—it’s not a strategy.
The time-tested fundamentals of marketing don’t suddenly change
just because a new platform comes along. The next thing to ask is, is it
the right media for your business? Remember, of the three things 
weneed to get right for a successful campaign, media is one of them. Every
type of media has its idiosyncrasies, and social media is no exception.
Here are some of the things you need to be aware of when it comes to
social media.
First, it’s not the ideal selling environment. I like to think of social
media as a social gathering or party. We’ve all been to gatherings where
someone, perhaps a family member or friend, has been bitten by the
multi-level marketing bug. You know, where they start pitching the
health benefits of the latest pills or potions and try to sell or recruit
others to sell.
It makes everyone uncomfortable because it feels pushy and is an
inappropriate time to be making or receiving a sales pitch. Social media
is exactly the same. Overt selling and constant pitching of offers are
generally considered poor behavior on social networks and can result in
repelling people from your business rather than attracting them to it.
However, just like a real-life social gathering, social media is a great
place to create and extend relationships that can later turn into
something commercial, if there’s a good fit. One of the most valuable
things I see in social media is being able to gauge customer emotions
toward your business and engage with vocal customers who offer either
praise or complaints in a public forum.
A side benefit of this is social proof. Being accessible, responding to
criticism or praise and engaging with your customers builds social
proof and makes prospects and customers feel like they are dealing
with humans rather than a faceless corporation. Remember, people buy
from people.
There are two potential traps with social media.
First, it can be a time suck. Feeling like you have to respond to every
inane comment can be draining, and it can suck time away from
marketing tasks that can give you a far better return on time and money
invested. It’s important to be disciplined with your use of social media.
Just like you wouldn’t let your employees stand around and chitchat all
day, you can’t let yourself or them get carried away with the online
equivalent. Some people have the perception that social media
marketing is “free.” It’s only truly free if your time is worth nothing
.Second, there’s the question of ownership. Your social media
account is actually the property of the social network. So, spending
huge amounts of time and money building up an audience on these
networks ends up building up their assets rather than your own.
My preference, as much as possible, is to build and own my own
marketing assets, such as websites, podcasts, email lists and so on. I
then use social media simply as a way to drive traffic to these marketing
assets. This way, my time and effort go into renovating my own
“house” rather than that of a landlord who can kick me out at any time.
A classic example of why you want to do this is Facebook’s change of
policy on business pages. Previously if people “liked” your business’
Facebook page, you could reach this entire audience for free. So,
businesses spent a lot of time, money and effort getting people to “like”
them on their Facebook page.
Now, Facebook requires you to pay them each time you want to
send a message to your entire audience. Otherwise, it only allows you
to reach a small percentage. For those who spent huge resources on
building up a Facebook audience only to have the rug pulled out from
under them, this came as a huge blow.
This is one of the reasons why I’d prefer to have 1,000 people on my
own email list than 10,000 people who “like” my Facebook page.
As always, with any marketing strategy, it’s vitally important to find
out where your prospects “hang out” and to use the appropriate media
to get your message through to them. The hot, new social media
platform may or may not be one of those places.
Email Marketing
Email is a direct, personal way to engage with prospects and customers.
Thanks to the proliferation of smartphones and mobile devices, pretty
much everyone has email in their pocket or within easy reach.
Building a database of email subscribers plays a central role in youronline marketing strategy. A prominent part of your website should be
an email opt-
in form. This enables you to capture the email address of
website visitors and gives you the opportunity to nurture those visitors
who may not be ready to buy immediately but who are interested and
want more information.
As we’ll discuss in the next two chapters, lead capture and lead
nurturing are two critical stages of the marketing process. They give us
the ability to intelligently deal with interested prospects who may not
yet be developed to the point of making a purchasing decision.
Generally, these kinds of prospects make up the majority of all
prospects and are crucial to filling your pipeline of future sales. If you
didn’t capture these interested non-buyers, you’d likely lose them
forever. Your only hope would be that when they finally became ready
to buy, they would remember your website among hundreds they may
have visited and completed the buying cycle they began days, weeks or
months ago.
An email also enables you to maintain a close relationship with your
customer base and makes it easy to test and launch new products and
services. Over time, as you build a relationship with your email
subscribers, your database becomes an increasingly valuable marketing
asset.
Creating a highly responsive list of email subscribers practically
enables you to produce cash on demand. You create a compelling offer
with a response mechanism and send an email broadcast to your list.
You get instant feedback about whether the offer is a hit or a miss. It’s a
great way of cheaply testing offers prior to investing in more expensive
media, such as print or pay-per-click advertising.
Despite the growth and popularity of social media, your database of
email subscribers remains one of the most important elements of your
online marketing strategy. As discussed in the previous few pages,
social media reach has become problematic because only a small
percentage of your followers will actually see your message. Even if
your message were allowed to reach everyone, you’d probably get
drowned out in all the noise. Funny cat videos, jokes and memes will
crowd out your marketing message. It’s called 
social
 media for areason.
Even more importantly, an email database is an asset that 
you
 own.
It’s independent of whatever social media platform may be hot. There
are many social 
media platforms that are now defunct or have declined
in use and popularity. If you build your business on someone else’s
platform and it starts to decline in popularity, your key online
marketing asset will be stranded.
While email is a powerful medium, it does have a few idiosyncrasies
that you must be aware of. Here are some of the key dos and don’ts
when it comes to email.
Don’t spam
. There are strict rules about email marketing in most
countries. Most notably, you must have the consent of the email
recipient to send them marketing emails. That’s why an opt-in form on
your website is critical. Never, ever buy or compile lists of email
addresses where the recipients haven’t explicitly requested to be
emailed. Not only is this very poor positioning, putting you in the same
category as spammers, but it’s also illegal. We’ll discuss positioning in
much more detail in 
Chapter 6
.
Be human
. Don’t write an email like a robot or like you’re writing a
formal letter. Email is a very personal medium and even if you’re
sending the same email to thousands of subscribers, write as though
you’re emailing a single person. Feel free to be a bit informal.
Use a commercial email marketing system
. Don’t ever use Outlook,
Gmail or any other standard email service for mass email marketing.
These services are designed for one-to-one emails, not one-to-many.
Your account will either get shut down or blacklisted if you start mass
emailing from these services. There are commercial email marketing
systems that are cheap and easy to use. The great thing about using
these services is that they automatically take care of a lot of the legal
compliance for you, things like having an unsubscribe option and your
contact details at the bottom of your marketing emails. They also work
hard to bypass spam filters and ensure good deliverability.
Email regularly
. If you rarely email your email database they’ll start
to go “cold.” They may have opted into your email database, but if they
haven’t heard from you for a long time, they may forget who you areand mark you as a spammer. Worse still, the value of your key online
marketing asset starts to decay. To keep the relationship warm, stay in
touch with your email subscribers at the very least monthly. Best
practice 
is closer to weekly, but it also depends on your target market. I
know some email marketers who email daily or even multiple times a
day. There are no hard-and-fast rules when it comes to frequency. Just
ensure when you email it’s relevant and value-building.
Give them value
. If you email your subscriber database only when
you want to sell them something, this will quickly get old and they’ll
either unsubscribe from your list, ignore your emails or mark you as a
spammer. All healthy relationships are based on an exchange of value.
Ensure the majority of your emails are not sales pitches but rather
something that creates value for your subscribers. A good ratio is three
value-building emails for every offer email.
Automate
. Another great reason to use a commercial email
marketing platform is automation. These platforms allow you to set up
sequences that automatically get emailed to new subscribers. For
example, when they subscribe, you could have your email marketing
platform automatically send them a welcome email. A day later it could
send them a value-packed email helping them to better understand the
product category they’re interested in. Three days later it could send an
email telling them more about you and your business. A week later it
could invite them to schedule a phone call with you. All this can be
done on autopilot. An email marketing platform can be one of the best
“salespeople” in your organization. It will never take a sick day, never
complain and never forget to follow up.
With email marketing you have three challenges:
1.
Getting your email delivered
. As discussed, the best way to ensure
good email deliverability is to use a commercial email marketing
platform. In addition to that, ensure that your email copy doesn’t
contain spammy phrases or use too many images or links.
2.
Getting your email opened
. The best way to get your email opened
is to have a compelling subject line. In the copywriting section of
Chapter 2
, we discussed copywriting strategy and headlines.
Imagine your email among hundreds of others in your prospect’sinbox. The job of your email subject line is to create curiosity and
motivate the recipient to open your email.
3.
Getting your email read
. Some marketers advocate that you should
keep emails to subscribers short. In reality, the length of 
your emails
is secondary to their relevance and quality. If you write compelling
content, it will get read. For example, several prominent email
marketers write very long emails. They also email their subscribers
frequently. By collecting numerous data points on their target
markets they know exactly what they want to read. So, while their
emails are long, they are highly relevant and compelling to their
target markets. An alternative approach is to keep emails short by
only having a teaser or summary in the email body. Readers are then
invited to click on a link so they can read more on your website or
blog.
Email is a very powerful and personal media channel. It allows you
to create compelling campaigns with a high degree of automation.
When done right it can be a valuable part of both an online and offline
media strategy.
Snail Mail
In an age where the Internet, email and social media play such huge
roles in our personal and business communications, many have taken
the view that postal mail, or “snail mail,” is all but dead. Nothing could
be further from the truth.
I’m extremely tech savvy, and I’ve grown up with the Internet from
its early dial-up days and prior. I’ve also been a co-founder of two very
successful tech startups that I helped build from zero right through to
rapid growth and exit. Yet, despite this background, or perhaps
because of it, I regard “snail mail” as one of the most important and
underutilized forms of marketing media. When it comes to your media
strategy, you should understand that 
email doesn’t replace postal mail,it complements it
.
We love the speed and efficiency of all things virtual; however, it
would be a mistake to underestimate the power of physical 
objects
when it comes to moving people emotionally. And, 
moving people
emotionally towards a desired action is what marketing is all about
.
Imagine a man sending his wife an “I love you” text or email on their
anniversary versus the same message communicated on a handwritten
card with a bunch of her favorite flowers. There’s a world of difference
between the virtual and physical equivalents of the same message.
Postal mail has a much longer lifespan and requires effort to dispose
of. It’s not uncommon for people to treasure and keep postal letters
from significant people in their lives for decades. The same would
rarely be the case for emails, which are ephemeral—in your inbox one
moment, deleted and forgotten the next.
Another important point about postal mail is that it has become
significantly less cluttered over the past few years, which from a
marketer’s perspective is a dream come true. Clutter is the enemy of
message cut-through and having a media that has actually become less
cluttered makes it all the more compelling. Conversely, email has
become orders of magnitude more cluttered. The noise within email
inboxes has gotten to ridiculous proportions, and even someone who is
good at sorting it approaches it with a completely different frame of
mind to postal mail. People handle their email with a finger hovering
over the delete key. Anything that isn’t immediately actionable gets
deleted, forwarded or forgotten in an inbox archive.
Until we figure out how to teleport physical objects from one
location to another like they do on 
Star Trek
, we’re reliant on couriers
and the postal service to transport postal mail and physical objects for
us.
Without a doubt, postal mail is a powerful media channel. However,
as with all media, it’s important not to get hung up or tied to a single
channel. Your goal is to figure out how to get a good return on your
media investment whether that be postal mail or anything else.How to Have an Unlimited
Marketing Budget
No discussion of marketing or spending on media can be complete
without discussing the budget. When spending money on marketing,
one of the following 
three things will occur:
1.
Your marketing fails (in other words, you make less in profit than
you spent on your marketing expenses).
2.
You have no idea if your marketing was a success or failure because
you don’t measure the results.
3.
Your marketing succeeds (in other words, you make more in profit
than you spent on your marketing).
For each of these scenarios, there’s a simple course of action:
1.
If your marketing consistently fails and loses you money then 
STOP
and change what you’re doing.
2.
If you don’t measure your marketing results that’s just plain stupid
because, with the technology we have readily and cheaply available,
it’s easier than ever to track your marketing results and return on
investment.
3.
If your marketing is working and consistently giving you a positive
ROI
, then you should crank it up and throw as much money as you
can at it.
One of the craziest things I see small business owners doing is
setting a “marketing budget.” By setting a marketing budget, you are
implying that either your marketing isn’t working and hence it’s a pure
expense (in other words, a waste of money). Or you have no idea if it’s
working because you don’t measure the results and so you throw
money at it in the hope that it’s giving you some sort of positive result.
If the former is the case, then, of course, you need to set a budget
because you can’t have expenses running wild in your business. But a
good question might be, why are you wasting money on marketing that
isn’t working? If the latter is the case, then you need to change things
pronto. You wouldn’t hire an employee and not measure theirproductivity, so why on earth would you consistently pay for marketing
and not know what result it’s generating?
If your marketing is working (giving you a positive return on
investment), why on earth would you limit it with a budget? Effective
marketing is like having a legal money printing press. This scenario is
called money at a discount. If I were selling 
$
100 bills for 
$
80, wouldn’t
you buy as many as you could possibly get your hands on? 
Or would
you say, “Sorry, my budget for discounted 
$
100 bills this month is only
$
800, I’ll just take ten please.”
That’s why I always say 
have an unlimited budget for marketing
that works
. One argument I hear against this is concern about being
able to handle the demand. Firstly, that’s a great problem to have.
Secondly, if you’re truly receiving more demand than you can fill, this
is the perfect opportunity to raise your prices. This will instantly boost
your margins and bring you a better quality of client.
The only time to set a marketing budget is when you’re in the
testing phase. In the testing phase, I advise that you fail often and fail
cheap until you have a winner. Test your headline, your offer, your ad
positioning and other variables. Then, cut the losers and optimize the
winners until you finally have a combination that gives you the best
possible return on investment.
Remember, the post office charges you the same amount to mail a
crappy direct mail piece that bombs as they do a high-converting direct
mail piece that pulls in millions. Once you have a winner that pulls in
more than it costs you, crank up the marketing spend and hence the
speed of your legal money printing press!
The Most Dangerous Number
One is the most dangerous number in your business. It makes
businesses brittle.
Does your business have only one source of leads? One majorsupplier? One major customer? Rely on one type of media? Offer one
type of product? To borrow a computer system term, does your
business have “a single point of failure”? If so, your business is brittle,
and a small change in circumstances outside of your control could have
a devastating effect.
That’s a very tough situation to end up in. Many businesses were hit
hard when Google changed its search engine 
algorithm. These
businesses put all their marketing budget and effort on search engine
optimization and literally overnight found their one source of leads
gone.
Similarly, when Google started to make changes to the types of paid
ads it wanted to show, even advertisers who were paying Google
enormous amounts of money each month were hit with the “Google
Slap.” That is, Google started to charge them four, five, sometimes
even ten times as much as they did previously. This change forced
advertisers to stop their campaigns and try to fix the issue or find
another source of leads. In the meantime, their business virtually
halted.
Some wise words of antiquity recommend that we build our house
on a rock mass instead of on sand. That way, when the storm inevitably
comes, our house doesn’t cave in. The first step is to identify any
scenarios in which the number one can potentially hurt you. Here are
some examples:
•
What if your largest customer leaves you for a competitor or what if
they go out of business?
•
What if there is a change of government legislation and the product
you currently offer gets outlawed or regulated into oblivion?
•
What if your main advertising strategy stops working?
•
What if your advertising costs rise dramatically?
•
What if your currently high search engine rankings disappear or
pay-per-click rates rise sharply?
•
What if your biggest supplier raises prices, has a supply shortage or
goes out of business?
•
What if you rely on email marketing and the government cracks
down further on this strategy?All of these scenarios can and do happen. If you rely on one of
anything, you are leaving yourself in an exposed position—you’re
effectively building your house on a sandy foundation. When the storm
comes, and the floods rise, the house is going to collapse. Identify and
eliminate single points of failure in your business.
That way, if the laws change, if the advertising rates go up, if all of a
sudden one specific strategy stops working as well as it used to, your
business will 
be safe. You’ll be the one with the power because you are
not reliant on one of anything. Jim Rohn had an excellent philosophy
on the matter:
You’ve got to think winter in the summer. It’s just too easy to get faked
out when the sky is blue, and the clouds are fleecy. You’ve got to
prepare for winter because it’s coming; it always does.
In the meantime, even if none of these scenarios comes to pass, at
least you’ll have built a more resilient and valuable business.
A common scenario I see when it comes to media strategy is that
many small businesses have only one source of new business. I
advocate having at least five different sources of new leads and
customers. Further, I recommend that most of these five sources be in
paid media. In other words, they cost you money to market yourself.
The reason paid media is so important is twofold.
First, it’s extremely reliable. If I pay a newspaper to run my ad,
there’s an extremely high probability the ad will actually be run. It’s
much harder to get such reliable and consistent lead flow from free (or
seemingly free) marketing methods, such as word of mouth.
Second, paid marketing forces you to focus on return on investment.
If a paid marketing method is not working, you cut it. You don’t waste
further time or money on it. Whereas, when the marketing method is
nominally free, such as with word of mouth, we tend to be less ruthless
and often end up wasting huge amounts of time because we didn’t have
to pay anything up front. However, there’s an opportunity cost that, if
careful analysis is done, often translates to a surprisingly large amount
of real money.The art and science of being able to consistently turn a dollar of paid
advertising into a dollar or more in profits through direct response
marketing will make your business resilient and can help you turn the
tap on to rapid business growth.Chapter 3 Action Item:
What Media Will You Use to Reach Your Target Market?
Fill in square #3 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.The “During” Phase Section Summary
In the “during” phase, you’re dealing with leads. Leads are people who know you and have
indicated interest in what you have to offer by responding to your marketing message. In
this phase, you’ll capture these interested leads in a database system, nurture them with
regular value-building information and convert them into paying customers.
The goal of this phase is to get your leads to 
like you
 and what you have to offer enough
to buy from you for the first time. Once they’ve bought from you, they become a
customer and enter the third and final phase of your marketing process.4
CAPTURING LEADS
Chapter 4 Summary
Capturing leads in a database system for future follow-up is critical to your marketing
success. This is because only a very small percentage of interested leads may be ready to
purchase from you immediately. Lead capture is all about properly handling interest and
building your future sales pipeline.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why you should never try to sell directly from an advertisement and what to do
instead
•
How to transition from “hunting” to “farming” and ensure you always have a full
pipeline of new business
•
Why you shouldn’t treat all prospects equally
•
How to use an “ethical bribe” to uncover high-probability prospects
•
How to instantly increase the effectiveness of your advertising by 1,233%
•
Why some businesses get a constant flow of leads and prospects while others struggle
•
How to be seen as an expert and authority by your target marketI
Capturing Leads
Hunting vs. Farming
MAGINE YOURSELF AS
 a hunter. You wake up in the morning, gather
your weapons and head out to the hunt. Some days, you come back
with a kill and your family eats a feast. Other days, you come back
empty-handed and your family goes hungry. The pressure is on every
single day to hunt successfully—it’s a constant battle.
Now imagine yourself as a farmer. You plant your seeds and wait for
them to be ready for the harvest. In the meantime, you nurture them
and treat them with care. You water and tend to your crops. When
they’re ready, you start harvesting. In my experience, most business
owners are hunters, not farmers:
•
They make cold calls to generate new business.
•
They spend huge amounts of time and energy trying to get a new
customer and do anything to close the sale as soon as possible.
•
Their advertising reeks of desperation as they try discounting and
competing on price just to make a quick sale.
•
They waste huge amounts of time pestering people who are not
interested in their product or service.
Most business owners are clueless about the purpose behind their
marketing. They slap the name of their business on their ad with a
pretty logo and some meaningless slogan claiming to be the leader in
their industry or area. Most are hoping to sell their products directly
from the ad or “get their name out there.” They may as well be flushing
money down the toilet.
In direct response marketing, the purpose of your advertising is to
find people who are interested in what you do rather than trying to
make an immediate sale from the ad. When your interested leads
respond, you put them in your follow-up database so that you can buildvalue for them, position yourself as an authority and create a
relationship built on trust.
After doing this, the sale comes (if it’s right for them) as a natural
consequence. This will take a mindset shift but is an absolutely vital
concept to understand.
Why not try to sell to them from your ad? It’s true that some people
reading your ad might be ready to buy immediately, but 
the vast
majority
 will not be ready to make a purchasing decision on the very
day they read your ad—even if they are interested in what you do.
If you don’t put them in a database then you’ve lost them. They
might have been ready to buy in a month, six months or a year. But
since your advertising was “one-shot” you’ve completely wasted that
opportunity. Your chances of them remembering your one-shot ad
from six months ago are extremely slim.
Mining for Gold with the Ethical
Bribe
Even in a narrow target market, all prospects should not be treated
equally.
All other things being equal, the more money you can spend
marketing to high-probability prospects, the better your chances are
of converting them to a customer.
Remember the proverbial archer we discussed in 
Chapter 1
? He has
a limited number of arrows and similarly you have a limited supply of
money for your marketing campaign, so it’s essential you invest it
wisely.
For example, if you have 
$
1,000 to spend on an ad campaign that
reaches 1,000 people, you’re essentially spending 
$
1 per prospect.
Now, assume that out of the 1,000 people the ad reaches, 100 are
potential prospects for your product. By treating 
them equally, whichyou would have to do with mass marketing, you’re wasting 
$
900 on
uninterested and unmotivated prospects to reach the 100 who are
interested.
What if, instead of treating them all equally, you could sift, sort and
screen so that you were only dealing with high-probability prospects
and not wasting valuable time and marketing dollars on uninterested
and unmotivated prospects?
You could then spend the whole 
$
1,000 on the 100 high-probability
prospects. That would allow you to spend 
$
10 on wooing each of them
instead of the measly 
$
1 per prospect you’d have if you treated them all
equally.
With ten times the firepower aimed at the right targets, do you
think we’d have a better conversion rate? Of course.
But how do we separate the wheat from the chaff? The short answer
is, we bribe them into telling us!
Don’t worry, there’s nothing underhanded here. We offer an
“ethical bribe” to get them to identify themselves to us. For example, a
kitchen renovation company might offer a free lookbook with the latest
kitchen design trends, materials and technologies.
Anyone requesting this “ethical bribe” would be identifying
themselves as a high-probability prospect. You now have at least their
name and address, which would go into your marketing database.
Remember, the goal is simply to generate leads. Avoid the
temptation of trying to sell from your ad. At this early stage you just
want to sift out the uninterested and unmotivated so that you can build
your database of high-probability prospects.
Here’s the other big reason you want to avoid selling directly from
your ad:
 at any given time (on average) about 3% of your target market
is highly motivated and ready to buy immediately. 
These are the
prospects most mass marketing hopes to convert. However, there’s a
further 7% who are very open to buying and another 30% who are
interested but not right now. The next 30% are not interested and
finally the last 30% wouldn’t take your product, even if it were free.If you tried selling directly from your ad, you’d be targeting only the
3% who are ready to buy immediately and losing the other 97%.
By creating a lead-generating ad, you increase your addressable
market to 40%. You do this by capturing the 3% who are immediate
buyers but also by capturing the 7% who are open to talking, as well as
the 30% who are interested but not right now.
By going from a 3% addressable market to 40%, you’re increasing
the effectiveness of your advertising by 1,233%.
This also has a secondary side effect with the people who are ready
to buy immediately. They see you’re not desperate to sell or discount
your product or service. They see that you are interested in building a
relationship first rather than just going for the jugular to make a sale.
This kind of marketing is similar to sowing seeds on a farm. It is an
investment in 
your future because, as your database of interestedprospects grows, so will your business and your results.
When you educate and teach, you are seen as an expert and an
authority. You’re no longer questioned; instead you are obeyed and
seen to have a personal, genuine, helpful interest in other people.
A sample campaign might offer a free resource or video series
promising to educate your prospect about the things they need to be
aware of, how to avoid being ripped off and what they should look for.
Once your prospect receives the value-packed information, you’ll have
delivered on all the promises made in your ad.
Your trustworthiness skyrockets. You’re positioned as the expert
and set apart from your competition. You haven’t put sales pressure
into your ad just to make a quick sale. Instead, you’ve started the
process of getting prospects to raise their hand. You’re asking them to
contact you, and when they do, they have identified themselves to you
as high-probability prospects.
Managing Your Goldmine
As a kid, I used to watch futuristic cartoons and shows. I was sure by
the time I grew up we’d all be riding around in flying cars. Well, at
least according to my wife, I have yet to grow up, but nevertheless,
many years later my primary form of transport remains terrestrial.
Sure, modern cars have some nice bells and whistles, but in their
basic form and function cars haven’t really changed in over 
1
00 years.
So that begs the question, why aren’t we all zipping around in personal
flying machines?
Personal flight technology has been around for some time, and the
cost of it is surprisingly low. In mass production, it would certainly
come pretty close to what cars cost. So what’s the problem? The short
answer is there’s simply no infrastructure to support personal flight.
The vast majority of our infrastructure is built around cars. Modern
houses, buildings, and cities are all built to accommodate cars.Why do some businesses get a constant flow of leads and prospects
while others struggle to get any? The answer is the same as the answer
to our personal flight dilemma—infrastructure
.
Some businesses have built a marketing infrastructure that
constantly brings in new leads, follows them up, and nurtures and
converts them into raving fan customers. Other businesses, in fact I
would say most businesses, do what I call “random acts of marketing.”
They throw up an ad here, an ad there, perhaps a website or a
brochure. They’re not building infrastructure—a system whereby a
cold lead enters one end, and a raving fan customer comes out the
other.
These sporadic, one-shot, random acts of marketing usually end up
costing more than they bring in, which is demoralizing and sometimes
leads business owners to say ridiculous things like, “Marketing doesn’t
work in my industry.”
To build a 
system
, we need to think it through from start to finish.
We need to understand how it works and what resources we’ll need to
run it.
At the absolute center of your marketing infrastructure is your
database of customers and prospects, but to manage your database
effectively, you really need a customer relationship management (
CRM
)
system. The 
CRM
 system is your marketing nerve center. It’s where
you manage your goldmine.
You want all your leads and customer interactions to end up in your
CRM
 system. This is where things get exciting.Chapter 4 Action Item:
What Is Your Lead Capture System?
Fill in square #4 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.5
NURTURING LEADS
Chapter 5 Summary
Nurturing leads is the process of taking people from being vaguely interested in what you
have to offer to desiring it and wanting to do business with you. The lead nurturing
process ensures that leads are interested, motivated, qualified and predisposed to buying
from you before you ever try to sell to them.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
The secret behind the Guinness World Records’ “world’s greatest salesman”
•
Why the money is in the follow-up and how to leverage this
•
How to annihilate your competitors and put yourself in a class of your own
•
A simple strategy for quickly moving prospects further into the buying cycle
•
Why a “marketing infrastructure” is critical to your business success and how to create
one
•
The three major types of people you need on your team to make your business work
•
How to leverage international talent to ensure your business successJ
Nurturing Leads
The Secret behind the World’s Greatest Salesman
OE GIRARD IS
 listed in the Guinness World Records as “the
world’s greatest salesman.” He’s sold more retail big-ticket items,
one at a time, than any other salesperson in recorded history. Was
he selling some amazing new technology that everyone had to have?
No. Was he selling to the mega-rich? Wrong again. He sold ordinary
cars to ordinary people. Between 1963 and 1978, he sold over 13,000
cars at a Chevrolet dealership. His stats are amazing:
•
In total, he sold 13,001 cars. That’s an average of six cars per day.
•
On his best day, he sold 18 vehicles.
•
On his best month, he sold 174.
•
In his best year, he sold 1,425.
•
Joe Girard sold more cars by himself than 95% of all the 
dealerships
in North America.
•
To make his feat even more incredible, he sold them at retail—one
vehicle at a time. No bulk fleet deals.
What was the secret to Joe’s success? He lists several, including
working hard and being likeable. Without discounting these factors,
I’m sure there were thousands of salesmen at that time who had those
admirable qualities, but they didn’t sell a fraction of the volume that Joe
did. One of the standout things that Joe did was to keep in touch with
his customers constantly. He sent a personalized greeting card 
every
month
 to his entire list of customers. In January, it would be a Happy
New Year card and inside it would say, “I like you.” He 
would then
sign his name and stamp it with the details of the dealership where he
worked. In February, his list might get a Valentine’s Day card. Again
inside the message was the same, “I like you.”
He would vary the size and color of the envelope, and each washand-addressed and stamped. This was critical to getting past the
postal mail equivalent of spam filters, where people stand over the trash
can and discard all the items that look like ads, scams, credit card offers
and other types of junk mail. He wanted his customers to open his
envelope, see his name and the positive message inside and feel good.
He did this month after month, year after year, in the knowledge that
they would eventually need a new car. And when they did, who do you
think would have been top of mind? By the end of his career, he was
sending out 13,000 cards per month and needed to hire an assistant to
help him.
By the time he was a decade into his career, almost two-thirds of his
sales were to repeat customers. It got to the point where customers had
to set appointments to come in and buy from him. Contrast that with
other car salespeople who just stood around waiting and hoping for
walk-in traffic.
Marketing Like a Farmer
What would you guess is the average number of times a salesperson
follows up a lead? If you guessed once or twice, you’d be about right.
Fifty percent of all salespeople give up after one contact, 65% give
up after two and 79.8% give up after three shots.
2
 Imagine if a farmer
planted seeds and then refused to water them more than once or twice.
Would he have a successful 
harvest? Hardly.
In marketing, 
the money is in the follow-up
. Based on this, we build
the irresistible 
lead nurturing model.Immediately after you’ve captured a lead, they should go into your
system, where repeated contacts are made over time. Contact does not
mean obnoxiously trying to pester leads into buying. You build a
relationship, giving them value in advance of them buying anything
from you, building trust and demonstrating authority in your field of
expertise in the process.
Accept the fact most people will not be ready to buy right away. Put
them in a database—and this database could be capturing email or
physical direct mail details (preferably both). Mail them something
regularly to stay in touch, positioning yourself as an expert in your
industry or field (more on that in the next chapter).
Like a farmer, you prepare your prospects to become ready for
harvesting. Just as Joe Girard did, over time you too can build a huge
pipeline of potential customers with whom you’ll be top of mind when
they’re
 ready to buy. Even more exciting is that they’ll already be
predisposed to doing business with you because of the value you’ve
created in advance. You won’t need to convince or put on a hard sell;
the sale just becomes the next logical step.
This growing list of prospects and the relationship you have with
them will become the most valuable asset in your business. It’s the
golden goose. When the prospect is finally ready to buy, you’re a
welcome, invited guest rather than a pest. The most important thing
you can take away from this message is to become a marketing farmer.
It’s a simple, three-step process:
1.
Advertise with the intention of finding people who are interested in
what you do. Do this by offering a free resource or valuable piece of
content that presents a solution to a problem they’re experiencing.
This positions you as an expert and as an educator rather than a
salesperson. Which would 
you
 prefer to buy from?
2.
Add them to your database.
3.
Continually nurture them and provide them with value; for
example, a newsletter on your industry or information on how to get
the most from whatever it is you do or offer. Important point: do not
make this a constant sales pitch. That will become old very 
quickly.
Be sure to offer them valuable information with an occasional pitchor special offer. Most important of all, be sure to keep in contact
regularly, otherwise, the prospect will forget you and your
relationship will then be relegated to that of a cold prospect and pest
salesperson.
If you become a “marketing farmer,” you’ll have a rich and continual
harvest as your database grows in number and quality.
Building Your Marketing
Infrastructure
In the previous chapter, we introduced the concept of advertising with
the intention of capturing leads. Capturing leads is one thing, but what
you do with these leads is what really separates the boys from the men,
so to speak. Have you ever had the experience of inquiring about a
product or service and never receiving any follow-up? Or perhaps you
received a quote and got one lazy follow-up call and nothing further?
This is a sign of a broken marketing infrastructure.
The sad thing is that a lot, even most, of the follow-up grunt work
can be automated using a 
CRM
 system. Most good 
CRM
 systems can be
set up to automatically fire off an email or text message to a client or
alert a salesperson to call and follow up. The automation can be
triggered based on some action taken by the prospect, by tracking
inquiries and purchases or based on preset timers. Automation systems
allow you to robotically sort, sift and screen prospects and customers
so that you can leverage your time more effectively.
Now that you have a database of high-probability prospects, 
your job
is to market to them until they buy or die
. It may seem like I’m
advocating being obnoxious and pestering people to buy until they cave
in. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Traditional selling training often focuses on pressure tactics like
“always be closing,” and other silly little close techniques that arebased on pressure. It makes the seller a pest who the prospect wants to
avoid
.
Instead of being a pest, I advocate becoming a welcome guest
.
Send your high-probability prospects a continuous stream of value until
they’re
 ready to buy. This could be in the form of tutorials, articles,
case studies or even something as simple as a monthly newsletter that’s
related to their area of interest. This builds trust and goodwill and
positions you as an expert and educator rather than just a salesperson.
Various technology tools make it easy to automate this continuous
follow-up mechanism, making this a cost-effective and scalable way of
building up a huge pipeline of interested and motivated prospects.
Some of these prospects will convert into customers immediately,
while others will do so weeks, months or even years later. The point is
that by the time they’re ready to buy, you’ve already built a solid
relationship with them based on value and trust. This makes you the
logical choice when it comes time for them to make a buying decision.
This is one of the most ethical and painless ways of selling, because
it’s based completely on trust and an exchange of value. While your
competitors are blindly shooting arrows every which way in the hope of
hitting one of the 3% of immediate buyers, with this technique you’re
focusing all of your firepower on a clear and visible target.
Your marketing infrastructure will be made up of “assets.” Here are
a few of the assets you might consider deploying in your marketing
infrastructure:
•
Lead capture websites and landing pages
•
Live, prerecorded and hybrid webinars
•
Email newsletters
•
Articles, resources and long-form content pieces
•
Industry reports, white papers and case studies
•
Direct mail sequences
•
Email 
sequences
•
Social media
•
Videos
•
Podcasts
•
Print ads•
Handwritten notes
•
Text message sequences
•
Shock and awe packages (discussed in the next section)
Many of these are part of my own marketing infrastructure. Over
time I continue to build bigger and more sophisticated marketing
assets. Each has a place and purpose. All the ads that I run are designed
to plug cold leads into this system and eventually convert them into
raving fan customers.
Of course, it does take time and money to build such a marketing
infrastructure, but just like building physical infrastructure like roads or
a railway network, the bulk of the time and cost goes into the initial
build. After that, it’s just maintenance and ongoing refinement.
And here’s the exciting thing: thanks to advances in technology,
much of my marketing system is automated, which gives me enormous
leverage. When I find a combination that works, I can redeploy it over
and over and reliably get the same results.
As I continue to build out my marketing infrastructure, my results
continue to improve. What about you? Are you building your
marketing infrastructure? Are you constantly building on and
improving your marketing systems?
Doing so is what will put you far ahead of your competitors, who’ll
be just fluffing about with their random acts of marketing.
Lumpy Mail and the Shock and
Awe Package
In 
Chapter 3
, we discussed the power of postal mail as a media channel.
“Lumpy mail” is a way of taking this powerful media channel and
putting it on steroids. Think about your postal mail sorting habits. You
have a pile of envelopes, then you notice one of the envelopes has
something in it that makes it lumpy. There’s a 
3D
 physical object in it,perhaps a book, product sample or trinket of some sort. Which of your
envelopes is going to get opened first and get the most attention? If
you’re like most people, it will be the 
lumpy one.
Lumpy mail is an attention-getter and allows you to be very creative
with your direct mail campaigns. In the direct mail industry, trinkets
purposely inserted for attracting attention are called “grabbers.”
Grabbers often set the theme of your sales letter. For example, you
might insert a small plastic trash can into the envelope with the theme
of the sales letter being “Stop Wasting Money.” Or perhaps you insert
a magnet with the theme being “Attract More Clients.” It sounds
corny and it probably is, but it gets attention, entertains and, more
importantly, if done right, gets great results.
Books and high-quality desk toys are other excellent items you can
insert in envelopes to make them lumpy. Other than just attracting
attention once off when being opened, these items generally don’t get
thrown away. Your customers and prospects will likely keep what you
sent them indefinitely and it will be a constant reminder of you.
Taking lumpy mail to the next level is the “shock and awe
package.”
3
 The shock and awe package is perhaps one of the most
powerful direct response marketing follow-up tools in existence. When
done right, it can skyrocket conversions and position you far above
your competitors. It’s so powerful, it essentially annihilates your
competitors and puts you in a class of your own. The awesome thing
about shock and awe packages is that even when your competitors find
out what you’re doing, they usually won’t dare copy you. Practically no
one does this.
In the previous chapter, we discussed the importance of capturing
the details of prospects who have indicated interest. The purpose of
this of course is to keep in touch with them and nurture them until
they’re ready to become a customer.
Now think back to the last time you inquired about a product or
service. Perhaps you phoned in, emailed or submitted your inquiry
through a web page. You did the typical prospect dance of “send me
more information.” What did you get in response to this request?
Likely, the organization you were inquiring with did one of 
thefollowing things:
•
Sent you a link to a web page
•
Sent you an email (perhaps accompanied by some attachments)
•
Spoke with you over the phone and answered your questions
They may have done all or some of the above. See what’s happening?
They’re responding to your inquiry in the cheapest and most efficient
manner. There’s nothing wrong with cheap and efficient but no one is
going to be entertained, delighted or inspired by it. No one’s going to
stop and say, “Wow they sent me a 
PDF
 with all the specifications.
How awesome!”
In your first few interactions with prospects, you have the
opportunity to make one of the following three impressions:
1.
same same
2.
crappy
3.
mind-blowingly amazing
Most business owners choose option 1; a surprisingly large number
choose option 2 and almost no one chooses option 3. Your job is to
devise a way to be option 3. Fortunately, you don’t need to reinvent the
wheel. A shock and awe package is one of the best ways to be mind-
blowingly amazing.
A shock and awe package is essentially a physical box that you mail
or deliver to prospects full of unique, benefit-laden assets related to
your business and industry. Here are some of the things you can and
should include in a shock and awe package:
•
Books. People are conditioned to almost never throw books out. Big
bonus points if it’s a book you wrote. Books are an amazing
positioning tool and catapult you from salesperson to educator and
expert authority instantly.
•
Easy-to-understand visual guides introducing yourself and the
specific problems your product, service or business solves for your
prospect.
•
Testimonials from past clients; a portfolio of client success stories;
before-and-after shots.
•
Media mentions, features or articles about you, your product or your
industry.•
Brochures, sales letters or other marketing material
.
•
Independent reports or white papers proving your point or
demonstrating the value of your type of product or service.
•
A sample of your products or services. Coupons or gift cards with a
face value on them can be powerful, as it feels like “wasting money”
just to throw these out. They also motivate the prospect to try you
out.
•
Unusual trinkets and gifts that entertain, inform and wow. I’ve
heard of everything from personalized coffee mugs to iPads being
included.
•
Handwritten notes thanking them for inquiring or recapping a
conversation you’ve had with them over the phone.
Whaaaat? I hear you say. Snail mail in this instant-access, on-
demand digital age? The answer is, 
YES
! Trust me, no one loves
technology more than I do. I’m a sucker for the latest “iAnything” and
I’m constantly glued to one of many screens. However, like most
people, I love receiving packages—even more so when they’re
unexpected.
While people’s snail mail used to be much more voluminous, it’s
now easier than ever to get cut-through with physical mail and
especially packages. If something in a FedEx box lands on your desk,
how long is it before you rip it open? If you’re like most people, I
suspect it’s not very long.
I’m certainly not saying you shouldn’t send immediate responses to
information inquiries using the phone, email or web, but understand
that the first few interactions with a prospect are sacred and should be
carefully orchestrated. Nothing should be left to chance. A shock and
awe package is an amazing tool for delivering that “wow” emotion to
your prospect.
A shock and awe package should do three things:
•
Give your prospect amazing, unexpected value
•
Position you as an expert and trusted authority in your field
•
Move your prospect further down the buying cycle than they would
otherwise have been
How much more powerful is this than the standard, “Sure, I’ll shootyou an email with 
more information.”
A common objection to shock and awe packages is that they’re too
expensive. In the previous chapter, we discussed that, all other things
being equal, the more money you can spend marketing to high-
probability prospects, the better your chances are of converting them
to a customer. That’s what the shock and awe pack is all about. If you
can outspend your competitor wooing and wowing prospects, you’ll
run rings around them. Of course 
you must know your numbers
,
particularly numbers like customer lifetime value, otherwise you will
go negative. 
You can’t substitute good marketing for bad math
.
The numbers obviously have to make sense. Unless you’re in an
extremely low margin, purely transactional business (something I really
don’t recommend you be in), then the numbers should work and
sending the shock and awe package should be very economical.
Don’t make the mistake of being cheap and efficient when it comes
to wooing prospects. Shock and awe packages are a huge competitive
advantage. Most competitors won’t understand them, and even those
who do usually won’t have the courage to use them because, if they’re
like most businesses, they won’t know their numbers. They will likely
perceive them as being too expensive; after all, there are cheaper and
more efficient ways to acquire customers. Let your competitors do
cheap and efficient marketing while yours entertains, delights, inspires
and wows. It will put you worlds apart.
Become a Prolific Marketer
One of the commonalities among high-growth businesses is that they
focus heavily on marketing and make a lot of offers. Some of these
offers end up being misses and some end up being hits. The exciting
part is that you don’t need many hits to offset your misses, especially if
you place “small bets” by first testing with a small segment of your list.
By making many offers, you start to get a very good sense of whatworks and what doesn’t. When you become a prolific marketer, it’s
much easier to spot trends and scientifically measure response by split
testing
.
Another important attribute of high-growth businesses is that
they’re not timid with their offers. They take risks, use compelling
copy and make outrageous guarantees.
Could it really be that simple? Making more compelling and more
frequent offers? The short answer is, yes. The fundamentals never
change. Sure, there are now more media channels through which to
make offers, new marketing technology to help you track return on
investment and split test, but the fundamentals never change.
More compelling and more frequent offers = rapid business growth.
Being more prolific with your marketing will create a buzz in your
business. Your clients and prospects will start to notice you more and
you’ll start to cut through the clutter and fill up your sales pipeline.
Any change that becomes part of your routine, whether positive or
negative, will have a profound impact over time. If you make the
crafting and sending of offers to your list of clients and prospects a part
of your regular routine, within a short time you’ll have a dramatically
different business.
Making regular offers will make you a better marketer. Getting good
at the science of marketing is the key to rapid business growth. And
when you get better, everything will get better for you.
Make It Up, Make It Real and
Make It Recur
In school, you were taught to be independent. You had to pass math,
science and English to get to the next level. Imagine you pooled your
talents with a couple of friends. One friend who was good at math did
all the math tests. Another friend who was good at science did all thescience tests. Finally, you did all the English tests, because that’s what
you were good at. In school, that type of collaborative work structure
would have been called cheating and all three of you might have been
disciplined or even expelled. Yet, in business, pooling different talents
in pursuit of a single goal is exactly the type of structure that results in
successful outcomes. Business is a team sport, one in which you’re
never going to win on your own
.
It takes different “types” to make a business work. Here are the
three major types:
1.
The entrepreneur
: this is the ideas person or visionary. They see a
problem or gap in the market and are willing to take risks so they
can solve that problem for a profit. 
They make it up
; for example,
seeing a gap in the market for a particular product and hiring all the
right people needed to get the business up and running.
2.
The specialist
: this is the implementer of the entrepreneur’s vision.
They could be an engineer, a venture capitalist, a graphic designer.
They take the vision, or a part of it, and help make it reality. 
They
make it real
; for example, building the factory to produce the
product, getting the tooling right, creating the product packaging.
3.
The manager:
 they come in every day and make sure things get
done, work gets delivered and the vision is on track. 
They make it
recur
; for example, running the factory, making sure shipments get
out on time, making sure quality is right.
It takes all three types for business success, yet it’s extremely rare
for a single person to be good at all three. Many small business owners
are either the entrepreneur or the specialist, or both, but are rarely the
manager.
Even if you’re currently the sole operator of your business, you need
to find a way to have all three bases covered. You can do this by
outsourcing or hiring. Small business owners often try to take on too
much and things inevitably slip through the gaps. The lack of a manager
role is often why a marketing infrastructure never gets up and running
properly. It’s why email newsletters don’t go out or why shock and awe
packages never get sent. The business owner might agree these are
great lead nurturing ideas (and they are), but they’re busy being theentrepreneur or specialist and, in the absence of a manager taking care
of the marketing infrastructure, the operational stuff often doesn’t get
done.
So what’s the point of having sophisticated marketing tools and
assets like a shock and awe package if they don’t consistently get
deployed
?
You’ve probably already got all three roles handled in many other
parts of your business. For example, when you were starting out, you
had the idea and vision for what you were going to build—you made it
up. You then might have hired a lawyer to set up the business’s legal
structure—your lawyer made it real. Then, every year, you might get
your accountant to take care of your tax returns and compliance—your
accountant makes it recur.
It’s critical you do the same for your marketing infrastructure. Get
systems into place (we talk more about systems in 
Chapter 7
). Come up
with marketing ideas, or better still, shamelessly steal the ones in this
book; hire graphic designers, web developers and copywriters to make
it real; then get admin help or use fulfillment services to make it recur.
As discussed earlier, much of this can be automated and what can’t be
automated should be delegated. It’s just too important to neglect. Lack
of a functional, running marketing infrastructure will harm, or possibly
kill, your business.
The reason you likely don’t neglect your annual tax obligations is
because they’re enforced upon you by the government. Their calendar
dictates when tax returns need to be filed and when various taxes need
to be paid.
You can replicate a similar forcing mechanism with a “marketing
calendar.” A marketing calendar sets out what marketing activities have
to happen on a daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly and annual basis, and
you put those into your schedule like you would all other important
business events.
For example, you might decide the following marketing calendar is
right for your business:
•
Daily:
 check social media for mentions and respond appropriately.
•
Weekly:
 write a piece of content and send the link in an emailbroadcast to email list subscribers.
•
Monthly:
 run an educational webinar and answer questions from
attendees.
•
Quarterly:
 send past customers who haven’t purchased recently a
reactivation email.
•
Annually:
 send all customers a gift basket thanking them for their
business.
After you’ve locked in 
what
 needs to be done and 
when
, the only
other question you need to answer is 
who
 will be responsible for
delivering on each of these scheduled marketing activities. Again, if
you’re a small or sole operator, don’t try and do it all yourself. Where
possible make these repetitive operational activities someone else’s
responsibility.
In addition to regular, scheduled marketing activities, you need to
consider event-triggered marketing activities. For example, consider
these event triggers and their corresponding actions:
•
You meet a potential prospect at a business event:
 enter their
details into your 
CRM
 system and put them on your email list.
•
You get an inbound sales inquiry:
 send them a handwritten note
and your shock and awe package.
•
You get a new email list subscriber from your website:
 add them to
your 
CRM
 system, which automatically emails them an educational
five-part video series over the next thirty days.
•
You received a customer complaint:
 after the issue is resolved, send
them a handwritten apology note and a 
$
100 coupon for their next
purchase.
Again, as much as possible, make these event-triggered activities
someone else’s responsibility. This will free you up to do higher-level
marketing tasks like designing and testing new marketing campaigns or
improving the value of your offering. There are few business activities
that pay as highly as working on your marketing.
Even if your business is currently small, hire admin help in the form
of a manager type who will “run the factory” for you and make sure
your scheduled and event-triggered marketing activities recur.As entrepreneurs we have a “can do” mindset. This often means that
when something needs to be done, we are tempted to roll up our
sleeves and just do it. However, spending a lot of time doing things
that aren’t your area of expertise or aren’t a good use of your time can
quickly become a very expensive exercise. Remember, money is a
renewable resource—you can always get more money, but you 
can
never get more time.
Another common concern with outsourcing or delegating tasks is
quality. Will they get the job done as well as you would? The answer is,
probably not. But a rule of thumb I like to use is 
if someone else can do
it
 
80% as good as you can, then you should delegate it
.
Letting go can be difficult, especially if you’re a control freak and
perfectionist like most entrepreneurial types are. But it’s necessary if
you’re going to get scalability and leverage in your business. Otherwise,
you end up effectively paying yourself minimum wage for routine tasks
while sacrificing high-value tasks such as building your marketing
infrastructure, which can take your business to a whole new level.
Here is some timeless wisdom from Jim Rohn:
Learn how to separate the majors and the minors. A lot of people don’t
do well simply because they major in minor things.
Don’t mistake movement for achievement. It’s easy to get faked out by
being busy. The question is: busy doing what?
Days are expensive. When you spend a day you have one less day to
spend. So, make sure you spend each one wisely.
We can no more afford to spend major time on minor things than we
can to spend minor time on major things.
Time is more valuable than money. You can get more money, but you
cannot get more time.
Time is the best-kept secret of the rich.Finally, the most common complaint is that it’s too expensive to
hire or outsource help. This may have been true a few years ago, but
not anymore thanks to the wonder of geoarbitrage. There is an
enormous pool of talent in Southeast Asia, India and Eastern Europe
that will work for you at a fraction of the price of local employees and
contractors.
There’s a good reason large companies move a lot of their routine
operations to these locations. They are full of workers who are talented,
eager, well-educated and speak English fluently
.
You can assign tasks and have them magically happen while you
sleep. Importantly, it’s not just about cost but also about scalability.
Locally, you would need to comply with all sorts of red tape when
hiring and firing employees or even contractors. However, thanks to
freelancer job boards and marketplaces, you can hire an army of
personal assistants, graphic designers, web developers and almost any
other skill you can imagine. All of these can be hired on demand to
work on a project basis or as part of your team on an ongoing basis.
The Internet has broken down geographical barriers and enabled
anyone to have a global workforce. Never before has so much talent
been so readily available and been so cost-effective.
Of course, occasionally the tired old argument about patriotism and
creating local jobs comes up, but how many local jobs are you going to
create if you fail to implement critical marketing strategies and go out
of business? Globalization of labor and talent is a reality and has been
for some time. Previously the domain of only large multinational
companies, international outsourcing and geoarbitrage are now within
easy reach of small to medium businesses and entrepreneurs like you
and me. This is a real game changer. As entrepreneurs, our job is to
embrace change and find ways to leverage and profit from it rather than
fight it.
As you become more successful, you’ll help create local jobs as a
byproduct of your success. When you upgrade your house, give
generously to a good cause or buy a new car, you’ll be creating local
jobs and benefiting your local community, most of which wouldn’t be
possible if your business fails.Chapter 5 Action Item:
What Is Your Lead Nurturing System?
Fill in square #5 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.
2
These statistics are widely quoted in sales and marketing circles. I attempted to track down
the original source of these figures, but after a few hours of research the best I could do was
find that they were “based on the findings of major national research firms.” As with most
statistics, you should take them with a grain of salt. However, regardless of source or how
these specific numbers were derived, in my experience they are about right. The point
being that very few salespeople bother to follow up more than a few times.
3
The name and concept is generally credited as being the invention of direct marketing
legend Dan Kennedy.6
SALES CONVERSION
Chapter 6 Summary
Sales conversion is all about creating enough trust and demonstrating enough value to
motivate interested leads to become paying customers. Positioning yourself correctly will
make the sales conversion process easy and natural for both you and your customer.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why positioning is the critical factor when it comes to charging high prices for your
products and services
•
How to position yourself as a welcome guest rather than a pest when selling
•
Why the odds are stacked against you if you’re a small to medium business and what
to do to level the playing field
•
How to massively reduce the perceived risk that customers see when it comes to
buying from you
•
How to instantly generate trust and credibility when selling
•
How to correctly price your products and services
•
How to remove the roadblocks that are preventing people from buyingY
Sales Conversion
Every Dog Bites
OU’VE LIKELY HEARD
 the corny old joke that appears in the classic
movie 
The Pink Panther Strikes Again
. Peter Sellers, who plays the
hapless Inspector Clouseau, sees a cute dog and in his ridiculous
French accent asks the man standing near it, “Does your dog bite?”
The man shakes his head and replies, “No.” Clouseau then reaches out
to pat the dog whereupon the dog lashes out and bites his hand. He
then turns back to the man and indignantly asks, “I thought you said
your dog did not bite?” The man casually replies, “That is not my dog.”
The people you’re selling to have been bitten too many times and
now think all dogs bite. The fact is unless you’re the well-known
incumbent in your industry, you’re not even starting the selling
process in neutral territory but rather you’re starting behind, in
negative territory. Even though you’re an ethical operator, your
prospects are cynical and don’t trust you. Unfortunately, it’s a case of
guilty until proven innocent, and you have to work your way from
negative to positive territory and win their trust before a sale can be
made.
With trust being the major barrier to a sale, you’ve got to have some
solid strategies for sales conversion. While a comprehensive program
of sales training is out of the scope of this book, in this chapter we’re
going to look at a few strategies and tactics that will make the sales
conversion process much easier.
4
 Specifically, we’re going to discuss
the central role played 
by positioning and how to make proper
positioning a part of your trust-based sales conversion process.
In the previous two chapters, we covered how to capture and
nurture high-probability leads in order to build trust, value and
authority. All this was done with the purpose of making the salesconversion process natural and easy. By the time you get prospects to
the point of sales conversion, they should already be pre-framed, pre-
motivated and pre-interested and essentially asking to buy from you. If
you have to convince them or put on the hard sell, then you likely need
to improve your lead nurturing process.
Most salespeople position themselves as either desperate beggars or
as obnoxious, pushy salespeople using silly outdated “closing”
techniques like 
ABC
 (always be closing), the trial close or the
assumptive close. These techniques have become a joke in the sales
trade and, unless you’re selling low-value products like vacuum
cleaners door-to-door, they’ll create more distrust with your prospect
rather than help you.
Another equally bad approach taken in many new businesses is
expecting sales to happen because of the mere fact that the business
exists. Some open a physical store, others build a website and expect
sales to just start rolling in. Their marketing strategy is hope. And sure,
they may make a small number of sales just by virtue of being there
when a random prospect wanders by. But that is a guaranteed path to
frustration. Many such businesses make just enough in sales to scrape
by. They then conclude the market or their industry is too competitive.
Truth be told, I don’t know of any market or industry that is not
competitive. But one thing I know for certain is that in any market or
industry you look at, no matter how competitive, there’ll be someone
doing really well and there’ll be someone struggling.
If we were honest with ourselves, we couldn’t really put it down to a
problem with the market or industry. So what’s the problem? The
problem is likely that they’re positioning themselves as a commodity, a
“me too” type of business.
When you position yourself in this way, your only marketing
weapons are to shout as loudly as possible (which is very expensive) 
or
to discount your prices as far as possible (which is dangerous). Unless
you are a Costco, Walmart or other such behemoth, you really don’t
want price to be your key differentiator, as that’s a battle you won’t
win.
At this stage, many of these businesses realize their folly and startmaking dubious and unquantifiable claims like being “the best,” “the
highest quality” and so on.
There’s No Money in Your
Product or Service
Whether you’re selling freshly baked bread, accounting services or 
IT
support, the way you market yourself will have a dramatic impact on
the clients you attract and the amount that you can charge for your
services. A commonly held belief is that “it’s all about the product,” so
if you have a better product or service people will automatically be
more likely to buy from you and pay more for it.
While this is true to some extent, the law of diminishing returns
comes into play when your product or service reaches a “good enough”
level. After all, how much better can your 
IT
 support or accounting
services or bread be than that of your competition? Once you’ve
reached a level of competence, 
the real profit comes from the way you
market yourself
.
How much does a world-class violinist make? Well, that depends on
how he markets himself. Have you ever heard of Joshua Bell? He’s one
of the finest classical musicians in the world. He plays to packed
audiences all around the world, making upwards of 
$
1,000 per minute.
He plays a Stradivarius violin built in 1713, currently valued at 
$
3.5
million. This particular Stradivarius violin, being over 300 years old, is
renown to be the most beautiful-sounding violin ever crafted.
So, here we have the finest violinist in the world playing the most
beautiful violin ever. It’s safe to say that Bell, as a musician, is the best
at what he does. At the height of his career he was approached by the
Washington Post
 to participate in a social experiment. They wanted him
to play at a local subway for an hour, during which thousands of 
people
would walk by and hear him play. So on the morning of January 12,2007, Bell played a set list of classical masterpieces with his violin case
open. Can you guess how much the finest violinist in the world,
playing a beautiful 
$
3.5 million violin, made in an hour? A grand total of
$
32.
To see the video of the Joshua Bell social experiment, visit 
1pmp.com
The finest violinist, playing the most beautiful instrument, made a
meager 
$
32 from his “customers.” The same violinist played in a
Boston concert hall a few nights earlier and the audience members paid
$
100 or more per ticket. During that event, he earned over 
$
60,000 per
hour.
The same talented musician, playing the same music on the same
violin, yet in one instance he earns 
$
32 an hour and in another, he
earns 
$
60,000 per hour. What made the dramatic difference? In a
word, positioning.
If you’re a professional musician and you position yourself as a
subway busker, your “customers” will treat you as such and pay you
accordingly. Conversely, if you position yourself as a professional
concert performer, you attract a totally different customer and, once
again, get paid accordingly. In other words, people will generally take
you at your own appraisal—unless proven otherwise.
Of course, you can’t cheat by positioning yourself as a professional
musician and then show up and be unable to perform at a high level.
The same is true regardless of what business you’re in. If you’ve got a
quality product or service, what’s stopping you from positioning it at a
much higher level—offering it at a premium price and attracting a
much higher quality of customer?
Resolve to stop positioning yourself as a commodity and competing
solely on price. The result to your bottom line will be phenomenal
.Transitioning from Pest to
Welcome Guest
How do you feel about a dear friend who shows up at your front door?
Contrast this with how you feel about a stranger selling door-to-door
who interrupts your dinner or family time. What’s the difference? The
former is a welcome guest, someone you have a relationship and
connection with. The latter is a pest. You don’t know who he is or
where he’s from, and most likely you don’t even want or need what
he’s selling.
The welcome guest brings value to your life, whereas the pest is just
there to interrupt you and to take. Wouldn’t it be great if you could
approach a prospect and be treated by them as a welcome guest rather
than a pest? Selling suddenly becomes much easier and more pleasant
when you are welcomed with open arms and when the prospect is
deeply interested in what you have to offer. This is the transformation
I’d like you to make in your business and in your marketing. Transition
from being a pest to a welcome guest.
Most businesses try to sell without first creating trust. They either
cold-call or advertise using outdated methods that no longer work.
The problem with this is you’re asking your customer to make a
decision when they have no idea about who you are or what you’re
about. They don’t know you, don’t like you and don’t trust you yet.
It’s like proposing marriage on a first date—sure it may work once in
a blue moon, but do you really want to stake your whole business on a
strategy like that? You’ll end up with a poor closing ratio of say one in
ten or one in 20 and you’ll waste a significant amount of time, energy
and money dealing with unqualified prospects. What’s more, you’ll
waste a lot of money on poor advertising.
If you have a generic ad and you get people calling up and you say to
them, “Sure, I can come out and see you” or “Sure, I can help you,”
the problem with this is that they barely know you and are probably
just price shopping, so your conversion rate is likely to be at a far lower
level than it could be.At this stage, many business owners get hooked on “hopeium.”
Hopeium is a “drug” that travels through your body and mind when
you think you have an interested prospect who is sending 
you positive
signals but who actually has no intention of buying from you. The drug
is usually activated when your prospect says, “Tell me more about your
product...” “Send me a quote...” or “Send me more information...” You
know what I mean, right? Someone calls your office and shows interest
in what you have to offer and instantaneously you feel the “rush” of
excitement that this is going to be your next sale.
Then, a few days or a few weeks later, after continually chasing
them, you get hit with the “silent treatment.” You’ve had some good
conversations and they’ve expressed interest in what you have to offer,
but all of a sudden everything goes cold. You try calling them back once
or twice. You even send a follow-up email, but nothing. They just
disappear. You figure you’ve somehow lost the sale, and you don’t
know what you did wrong or what was wrong with your product. It
makes selling feel like such a painful and arduous process.
Hopeium is dangerous because it’s not based on the truth of what
your prospect is really thinking. The faster you “detox” from hopeium,
the sooner you’ll stop wasting your selling time chasing prospects who
aren’t a true fit for your solution.
Over the years, prospects have become more and more skeptical.
They’ve been burnt too many times and they simply don’t believe you.
So, the problem is you’re not even starting at zero, you’re starting in
negative territory. And the old-school “close, close, close... sell, sell,
sell...” approach doesn’t work the way it used to. Potential clients get
their backs up and end up doing nothing because they don’t trust you.
Instead, you need to move towards the model of “educate, educate,
educate.” With education, you build trust. With education, you
position yourself as an expert. With education, you build relationships.
With education, you make the selling process easier for both buyer and
seller.
As discussed in the previous chapter, instead of trying to sell to
them straight off the bat, offer your readers something of value that
educates them about the problem they’re experiencing. This could bean email series, a case study, a video, a webinar and so on. These are all
great 
educational tools.
Delaying the sale accomplishes two things. First, it shows you’re
willing to give long before you take, which breaks down sales
resistance. Second, it presents you as an educator and expert in your
field. Think about it. Who would you prefer to buy from: a pushy sales-
person salivating for their next commission or an expert educator who
has your interests at heart and wants to help you solve your problem?
You must stop selling and start educating, consulting and advising
prospects about the benefits your products and services deliver
compared to each and every competitor in your category.
Best you read that again; it could be worth a fortune to you.
Let’s face it, no one wants to be seen as a stereotypical salesperson
who is pushy and untrustworthy. However, if you think about yourself
as a doctor who diagnoses and then prescribes solutions to people’s
problems, then I’m sure you’ll be much more comfortable selling under
those circumstances—as a trusted, educated, knowledgeable, qualified,
confident, capable advisor.
And that is exactly who you need to be perceived as in the eyes and
mind of your prospects—as someone who 
educates
 them and solves
their problems.
This would be a good time to share with you my definition of an
entrepreneur: “someone who solves people’s problems at a profit.”
Bottom line, don’t let them think you are in sales for one second.
The best way to do all this is consultative, advisory selling using a
nurturing system (more on that shortly). You must see yourself as an
agent of change, a creator of great value, benefit and advantage in the
lives of your customers and prospects.
Become the expert in your category or industry. Quite honestly,
everybody is trying to be an expert; it’s just that their marketing sucks.
The coffee shop is trying to make the best coffee; it just sucks at
marketing that fact.
Consultative, advisory selling is the most cost-effective, the most
enduring, the most impactful and the most powerful marketing
strategy a business owner could ever devise.The balance of power is now in your hands, as long as you choose to
consult, advise and educate prospects or clients about the benefit that
your product brings to them. It’s the only way to take the power 
back
from the buyer in the chaotic world we live in today. So, stop selling
and start educating and advising. Your clients will appreciate you more
and so will your bank manager.
Manufacturing Trust
Ask most people and they’ll tell you they despise dealing with large,
dumb companies. Poor service, indifferent staff and out-of-touch
management are hallmarks of large companies. Yet, for some reason,
we keep dealing with them despite knowing that there are probably
much better options out there.
One of the biggest reasons behind this is a comfort—that while the
experience may not be great, it likely won’t be horrible. As the saying
goes, “Better the devil you know than the devil you don’t.” Fly-by-
night operators and snake-oil salesmen have made many people distrust
small businesses by default. People know that while a large company
might not give the very best service, they are unlikely to be outright
scammed by them.
If you run a small business, that puts you at an immediate
disadvantage. A customer doing in-depth due diligence on you may
conclude that you are trustworthy and provide great service, but the
vast majority of customers won’t go to that effort. They will often take a
cursory glance and judge you by your cover.
That’s why it’s increasingly important to present your business in a
way that conveys trust and confidence. The strategic use of technology
is one way that you can level the playing field. In times not so long ago,
access to business technology tools was cost prohibitive for small
businesses and hence was the domain of large companies. The Internet,
software as a service (SaaS) and cloud computing have leveled theplaying field.
A famous cartoon published in 
The New Yorker
 depicts a dog sitting
at a computer and is captioned, “On the Internet, nobody knows you’re
a dog.” This illustrates how technology can help make the little guy
look like one of the big guys—leveling the playing field and helping
fight the trust bias against small businesses
.
The following are some inexpensive ways you can use technology to
help you present your business in a larger and more professional
manner. In addition to helping you fight the small business trust bias,
many of these tools will help you run and scale your business in a much
more efficient manner.
Website:
 your website is probably one of the first places prospects
go to check you out. Beware of the following signals, which scream to
potential prospects that you are small or potentially untrustworthy:
•
No phone number is listed. Phone numbers should be prominently
listed at the top of every page.
•
A 
PO
 box address or no address is listed instead of a proper physical
business address. Even if you work from home, you can use virtual
office services to meet with customers and to display a business
address on your website.
•
There is no privacy policy and/or terms of use. Templates for these
are widely available.
•
The design is bad or cheap-looking. Don’t skimp on design. Even if
you build the website yourself, attractive, easy-to-use website
templates are available at very minimal cost.
Email address:
 it amazes me how many small, even medium-sized,
businesses advertise a Gmail or 
ISP
-issued email address rather than
using an email address with their own domain. Who looks more
trustworthy: johnnynacho69@gmail.com or
john.smith@company.com?
Phone number:
 your phone number can say a lot about you. Using
an easy toll-free number or vanity number can give your business a
national feel. It also helps people recall your phone number on fast-
moving media such as audio or billboards where the prospect has only a
split second to take note of your phone number. Conversely, a localnumber signals that you’re a local (which may be preferable in some
instances).
CRM
:
 as discussed in previous chapters, this is your marketing nerve
center. A customer relationship management (
CRM
) system will help
you keep track of customer details and automate and manage follow-up.
It’s a much more efficient way of managing customer records than just
a spreadsheet or some ad hoc filing system
.
Ticketing system:
 if you’re dealing with customer support or
inquiries, a ticketing system can help you and your customers keep
track of requests. This can dramatically lower the burden on you and
your staff to respond to status updates, phone calls and emails. It also
gives the potential customer confidence that their request is trackable
and hasn’t gone into some black hole.
These are just a few of the tools that can help you fight the trust bias
that disadvantages small businesses. Using these tools, you can punch
above your weight and present yourself as a professional organization,
even if you’re just starting out.
While these tools are not a replacement for having great products
and service, they can help you manage perception. Keep focused on
your marketing and soon perception will become reality.
Outrageous Guarantees
The first time I saw tasting spoons at an ice creamery, I finally realized
just how truly risk averse we all are. Potential ice cream buyers hold up
a queue of people behind them while they taste test several flavors with
tiny plastic spoons. All this is to ensure that the flavor of ice cream they
finally commit to buying doesn’t disappoint.
Risk reversal in the form of an outrageous guarantee means that if
the product or service doesn’t work out for the prospect, you’re the
one who’ll have something to lose rather than them. This needs to be
more powerful than something ordinary and lame like “money backguarantee” or “satisfaction guaranteed.” By having something to lose if
it doesn’t work out, you have an easier path to the sale and you’ll much
more easily avoid alarm bells set off in your prospect’s brain.
Here’s a practical example. If I want to hire an 
IT
 company for my
business, what sort of things might I fear? Here are a few items that
immediately come to mind:
•
Are they going to send some junior technician who’ll fluff about for
hours as he learns on the job while I get billed a premium hourly rate
for the privilege
?
•
Are they going to be available when I urgently need support?
•
Will the problems they fix recur?
•
Are they going to bamboozle me with geek speak when I request an
explanation of work performed or needed?
A risk reversal guarantee for this type of business might look like:
“We guarantee that our certified and experienced 
IT
 consultants will
fix your 
IT
 problems so they don’t recur. They’ll also return your calls
within 
1
5 minutes and will always speak to you in plain English. If we
don’t live up to any of these promises, we insist that you tell us and
we’ll credit back to your account double the billable amount of the
consultation.” Compare that with a weak and vague promise like
“satisfaction guaranteed.”
To be truly effective when using this technique, you must avoid the
vague crap that everyone says; for example, satisfaction guaranteed,
service, quality, dependability. Your guarantee should be very specific
and address the fear or uncertainty that the prospect has about the
transaction.
For example, if you’re in the pest control business, your customers
want to know that:
•
The pests won’t come back
•
The technician won’t leave their house dirty
•
Their family and pets won’t be poisoned by the chemicals
So your outrageous guarantee could be something like this:
We guarantee to rid your home of ants forever, without the use of toxicchemicals, while leaving your home in the same clean and tidy
condition we found it. If you aren’t absolutely delighted with the
service provided, we insist that you tell us and we’ll refund double
your money back.
Is this kind of guarantee risky? Only if you consistently do a crappy
job. If you are committed to giving your customers excellent service
and training your staff accordingly, then there is almost zero risk for
you. More importantly there’s also almost zero risk for your prospects,
which makes closing sales much 
easier. Indeed the law may even
require that you provide warranties on the quality of your products and
services and make things right if they fall short. Given this is likely
already a legal requirement, why not up the ante and make it a feature
you promote in your marketing?
Here’s the other thing about guarantees. If you’re an ethical
operator, you are most likely already offering a guarantee but you just
aren’t using it to your advantage in your marketing. So why not make a
point of talking about something that you’re already doing? Most
people are honest and won’t abuse guarantees, especially if they’ve
received the service they were promised. Even after accounting for the
few people who do abuse them, you’ll be far ahead because a strong
guarantee will attract more customers than a weak and vague one.
A smart entrepreneur will look at their business from the eyes of a
fearful, skeptical prospect and reverse all the perceived risks so that the
path to the sale is much smoother. This also results in customers who
are much more sticky and who won’t fall for your competitors, which
by comparison seem much more risky to deal with.
A strong, results-oriented guarantee will also drive you to deliver a
great customer experience. This alone ensures that it’s worthwhile to
have a strong guarantee. Your customers have their own fears. When
you can name their fears and guarantee against them in your marketing,
you give yourself an overwhelming advantage over your competitors.Pricing Strategy
Setting price on your products or services is one of the weightiest
decisions you’ll make in your business. It will touch every part of your
business, from the financials to how you are perceived in the
marketplace. Yet, often scant attention is paid to the psychology and
marketing potential of price.
The price of your product is a critical positioning indicator. Do you
think when they go to set price on a Rolls-Royce or Ferrari, they just
add up the bill of materials and then just add on an acceptable markup?
Hardly. Price is central to the positioning of the product.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, if you position yourself as an
educator and a trusted advisor, price becomes much more flexible. 
I
hope you’re never in the unfortunate position of needing heart surgery,
but if you are, do you want the cheapest heart surgeon? I doubt it.
More often than not, business owners set prices based on what their
competitors charge. A common application of this is setting price
slightly lower than the market leader in their industry. Another
common way that price is set is to just take the cost price and add what
feels like an acceptable markup.
Both of these are acceptable starting points; however, if you aren’t
thinking about the marketing or the psychological implications of price,
then you are likely leaving huge sums of money on the table.
Number of Options
Regardless of industry, most products or services offer multiple flavors
or variants of the primary offering. Henry Ford famously offered his
customers the Model T “in any color that he wants so long as it is
black.”
While it may seem backward by today’s expectations of infinite
choice and expressions of individuality through ever-increasing
personalization, the great industrialist does bring up an issue that is
relevant to all entrepreneurs. How much choice should we offer?
Conventional wisdom would have you believe that the more choiceyou offer, the more sales you will make. However, this has been proven
totally false time and time again.
There is a famous study by a professor of business at Columbia
University that illustrates this point well. In a California gourmet
market, Sheena Iyengar and her research assistants set up a booth of
samples of jam. Every few hours, they switched between a selection of
twenty-four flavors of jam to only six flavors. On average, customers
tasted two jam flavors, regardless of the size of the assortment.
Here’s the interesting part. Sixty percent of customers were drawn
to the large assortment, while only 40% stopped by the small one. But
30% of the people who had sampled from the small assortment decided
to buy, while only 3% of those confronted with the large assortment of
flavors purchased a jar.
The conclusion? Offering too much choice can actually 
prevent
sales. The psychology behind this finding is that people get caught 
like
a deer in the headlights. Fear of making a suboptimal choice prevents
them from making any choice at all.
If you look at Apple and their wildly successful products, you’ll see
they are usually offered in only two or three variations each. This seems
to be the happy medium between too few options and the brain
overload that is caused by too many options.
Along these lines, a pricing strategy that I’ve seen work very well is
offering a “standard” and “premium” variation of a service or product.
The “premium” version is priced at about 50% above the “standard”
but offers twice or more value than the “standard” variation.
When using this strategy it’s important to make sure that you are
genuinely offering much more value with the “premium” than you are
with the “standard.” This strategy works extremely well in cases where
the incremental cost of delivering the “premium” is relatively low,
because the price differential ends up as pure profit on your bottom
line.
Reverse Risk with “Unlimited”
Most people are extremely risk averse. They fear being stung by
unexpected charges whether related to data usage, medical costs orconsulting fees.
As we previously discussed, if you can remove this risk for them,
you greatly increase the opportunity for a sale. An excellent strategy for
removing this risk is to offer an “unlimited” variation of your product
or service at a fixed price.
For example, an 
IT
 company could offer “unlimited” technical
support for a fixed monthly fee, a restaurant could offer “unlimited”
beverage refills and so on. While many business owners fear that abuse
of an unlimited option will send them broke, this can easily be
remedied in your terms and conditions, which would allow for fair use
but would stop or limit abuse.
Especially when you are selling something that needs to be
consumed in a particular time frame, the risk of offering an unlimited
option is very low. Looking at your average transaction value over time
and working with the law of averages can give you a very accurate idea
of what it will cost you to offer an unlimited option
.
People tend to overestimate how much they will use a product or
service when they are at the point of purchase. So offering an unlimited
option helps you capitalize on this as well as removing any perceived
risk of overage charges.
The Ultra-High-Ticket Item
In every market, there is a small percentage of the population who
wants to buy “the best” variant of a product in its class.
The indicator most often used by consumers as to what is “the best”
is price. Some consumers will pay ten, 20 or 100 times the price of
other functionally similar products; for example, Rolls-Royce, private
jet travel and so on.
While you might not sell these kinds of high-ticket products every
day of the week, if you don’t make them available among your normal
product mix, then you’re definitely leaving money on the table.
These ultra-high-ticket items can make up a very large percentage of
your net profit, even if you only sell a small number of units. They will
also help you attract a more affluent customer who shops based on
prestige, service and convenience rather than on price.Lastly, a big benefit of the ultra-high-ticket item is that it makes the
other variations in your product range look much more reasonably
priced by comparison. A rule of thumb often used is that 10% of your
customer base would pay ten times more and 1% of your customers
would pay 100 times more. Make sure you’re not leaving money on the
table by not having ultra-high-ticket items in your product mix.
Resist the Urge to Discount
When the market you operate in is highly competitive, there is a strong
urge to discount your prices. This strategy needs to be used with
extreme caution, because of the pressure it puts on your margins, profit
and, more importantly, your market positioning.
Unless you have a very specific loss leader strategy, try to avoid
discounting at all costs. With a loss leader strategy you try to entice a
customer based on price and then upsell or cross sell other higher
margin 
products or services.
A better option than discounting is to increase the value of your
offering. Bundling in bonuses, increasing quantities or adding
peripheral services can be of genuine value to your customer but cost
you very little to do.
Regardless which specific strategies you implement, it is important
to continually test and measure. Consumers are bags of emotion and
are not driven purely by rational motivations.
Make the setting of price a central part of your overall marketing
strategy.
Invite Them to Try before They Buy
Some time ago, I dropped into my local 
BMW
 dealership’s service
center to check out an error message I was getting on my car’s
computer system. A few minutes later, the service clerk emerged. The
guys in the garage had made a couple of small adjustments. “It’s all
sorted,” he said, and went on to explain what the problem was with
some technical car jargon. I nodded my head knowingly, pretending to
understand what he was saying to prevent the castration of my male
ego.Next, he asked me, “Would you like to book the car in for a service?
The car’s computer indicates you’re almost due.” Nice upsell move. I
said, “Sure let’s book it in for mid next month.” The service clerk then
advised me that when making a booking that far in advance, I’d be
eligible for a loan vehicle for the day. I thought, great! That way, I
wouldn’t need to have anyone drop me off and pick me up. I requested
to borrow a car that is the next model up from mine.
This request should have sent his sales alarm bells ringing: existing
customer with a three-year-old car that has just come out of warranty
requesting to borrow and test drive the expensive next model up for a
whole day. If ever a golden sales opportunity dropped in someone’s lap,
this was it. Instead of recognizing and grabbing this opportunity, he
apologized and said he could only loan me a car several models down
from mine. Then he goes on for the next few minutes telling me how
good the much cheaper model is.
I felt like knocking on his forehead and shouting, “
HELLO
! Anybody
home? 
HELLO
!” Or perhaps I should have channeled Julia 
Roberts’
character from 
Pretty Woman
 and said, “Big mistake. Big. Huge. I have
to go shopping now,” and then stormed out. Instead, I thanked him for
his time and said, “I’ll see you next month.” I couldn’t believe what
had just transpired.
Did the service clerk really not see the opportunity? Unlikely. It was
probably more a case of the “it’s not my job” mentality. He probably
thought something like, “Hey, I’m in service. If he wants to test drive a
new car, he should go see someone in sales.” This is a mistake many
businesses make. They segregate their staff into “departments.”
Therefore, people outside of the sales department think that anything
sales related has nothing to do with them. Big mistake. Huge! As a
business owner you should make it abundantly clear to all staff that
sales are the lifeblood of the business and that 
everyone is in sales
.
Every staff member at some stage will have the opportunity to
positively or negatively influence a sales opportunity. Make it known
that regardless of what their primary role in the business is, responding
to sales opportunities 
is their job
. One of the best ways to get this point
across is to have an incentive program where sales get rewardedregardless of the position of the person they came from. You might
even discover some hidden sales talent.
The easiest sale to make is to an existing satisfied customer. Let all
your staff know the cues to look out for—without being pushy or
obnoxious, of course.
Now granted, I may not have been ready to buy a new car right then
and there, but would spending a full day with a car I’d been eyeing have
brought me closer to buying? Of course! Would it have started my
buying juices flowing? Absolutely!
This brings us to another very powerful technique you can and
should add to your follow-up sequence—try before you buy, also
known as a free trial or “the puppy dog close.”
Picture the scenario—you’re not sure if getting a new puppy is such
a great idea, or perhaps you’re unsure if this particular breed is the
right fit. The pet store salesperson assures you that you can take the
puppy home with you and if you don’t like it, just bring it back—no
questions asked. Sound reasonable? So, you take the puppy home with
you, you and the kids play fetch and run around outside with it. 
He
licks your nose in the morning and waits for you faithfully at the door at
the end of the day. Naturally, you all fall in love with the new member
of the family. And the sale is made—not by the salesperson, but by the
puppy.
It’s that simple.Try returning this little guy. I dare you!
It’s one of the most powerful ways to win more business and it’s
based on the magic of “try before you buy.” Using this technique can
dramatically boost your sales. First, it breaks down sales resistance,
making the prospect feel less like they’re committing to something
irreversible.
Second, it puts the onus on the buyer to reverse the sale, which puts
inertia back on your side. Lastly, a genuine customer is highly unlikely
to return a good product that is meeting their needs. Implement the
“everyone’s in sales” mindset in your business and couple it with a “try
before you buy” offer and you’ll see dramatically better conversion
rates
.Close Down Your Sales
Prevention Department
It never ceases to amaze me how many businesses, large and small,
make it difficult to buy from them. It’s almost like they have a sales
prevention
 department, whose job is making the buying process a
painful experience. Leave the red tape, lengthy forms and inflexible
rules for government departments. Your job is to make it 
easy
 for
customers to buy from you.
Signs that say “Cash Only” or “
$
10 Minimum for Credit Cards” or
“We Don’t Accept Amex” are the sales prevention department at
work. These businesses may be saving money on merchant fees but are
almost certainly losing far more in terms of lost sales, lost customers
and lost goodwill. They’re stepping over dollars to pick up pennies.
You need to offer your customers 
their
 preferred payment method,
not yours. Also, don’t punish customers for using their preferred
payment method by adding a surcharge. Rather, factor merchant fees
into your general pricing or absorb them. If your margins are so thin
that you can’t afford to factor merchant fees into your general pricing,
then you have some far bigger problems to solve than just merchant
fees.
As mentioned in 
Chapter 2
, another strategy for increasing your
conversions is to offer a payment plan or finance for your high-ticket
items. This can mean the difference between a sale and no sale. First,
people often think of both their income and expenses on a monthly
basis. Second, people are far less attached to future money than present
money. Present money is usually already spent. If you can present your
offer in easy, bite-sized monthly chunks or a future obligation, rather
than a big lump sum, this will dramatically increase conversions.
Look for other things that could be roadblocks to sales conversion.
Are you requiring prospects and customers to jump through hoops, fill
in useless forms or conform to processes that aren’t really necessary?
How could you remove these roadblocks or at the very least make themmuch easier?Chapter 6 Action Item:
What Is Your Sales Conversion Strategy?
Fill in square #6 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.
4
For a comprehensive study of modern selling strategies, I highly recommend 
SPIN
 Selling
by Neil Rackham.The “After” Phase Section Summary
In the “after” phase you’re dealing with customers. Customers are people who like you
and what you have to offer enough to have paid you money at least once. In this phase,
you’ll turn your customers into raving fans by delivering a world-class experience. You’ll
then find ways of doing more business with them and increasing their lifetime value.
Finally, you’ll create an environment where referrals continually come your way.
The goal of this final phase is to get your customers to 
trust you
 and buy more from you.
This phase continues in an ongoing “virtuous cycle” where you deepen your relationship
with customers, do more business with them and get more referrals.7
DELIVERING A WORLD-CLASS
EXPERIENCE
Chapter 7 Summary
By delivering a world-class experience, you turn customers into a tribe of raving fans who
want to buy from you repeatedly. To deliver this world-class experience, you need to
implement systems in your business and make smart use of technology.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why building a tribe of raving fans is crucial to your business success and how to do it
•
The two critical functions of your business
•
How to innovate, even when the product or service you sell is boring and ordinary
•
The purpose of technology in your business and how to leverage this in your marketing
•
Why systems are the key to uncovering a fortune that lies hidden in your business
•
The four main systems in your business that virtually guarantee your business success
•
How to eliminate the biggest bottleneck in your businessA
Delivering a World-Class Experience
Building Your Tribe of Raving Fans
TRIBE IS A
 group of people connected to one another, connected
to a leader and connected to an idea.
5
 For thousands of years,
human beings have been part of one tribe or another.
One of the things that separates extraordinary businesses from
ordinary ones is that they lead tribes, tribes of raving fans—not just
customers. In your business, a tribe member is a special type of
customer. One that acts as a cheerleader and is actively conspiring for
your success. Your tribe members amplify your marketing message and
take it to heights you’d never be able to reach on your own with paid
advertising. Here are a few of the qualities of these extraordinary
businesses that become tribe leaders:
•
They continually focus on wowing their customers, which turns
them into raving fans
•
They create and foster lifetime relationships
•
They make it easy and fun to deal with them
•
They create a sense of theater around their products and services
•
They have systems so that they can reliably and consistently deliver
a great experience
In this chapter, we’re going to look at some strategies for turning
customers into raving fans who trust you, refer you and can’t wait to do
more business with you. These people 
are your tribe and it’s vital to
have strategies for building such a following and taking great care of
them.
Most ordinary businesses stop their marketing efforts once they’ve
converted a prospect into a customer (in other words, the prospect
buys from them). This sort of transactional thinking keeps them stuck
and puts a firm lid on their business growth. By contrast, trulyremarkable businesses get exponential results because each customer
they add is not just revenue once but it’s revenue over and over again
because this person becomes an evangelist for the business.
Even more exciting than that, new product launches become easy
and predictable. You don’t have to market, hustle and convince as
much when you have a tribe of raving fans. Look at Apple, one of the
leaders in this type of marketing. They can launch a brand new product
or even a new category of product and they already have a legion of
raving fans queuing up days in advance begging Apple to take their
money. This isn’t just the domain of large companies like Apple.
In fact it’s an area where small businesses have a massive advantage.
Unlike large businesses that are inflexible and steeped in bureaucracy,
have numerous lines of reporting and people with varying agendas,
small businesses can be agile and respond to customer needs and
feedback quickly. More importantly, small businesses can micromanage
the customer relationship. The customer doesn’t as easily get lost in a
sea of other customers and a relationship that is much more personal
and much more tribe-like can be developed. It’s your job to create and
foster a tribe of raving fans and understand that the marketing process
really only begins once you convert a prospect into a paying customer.
Sell Them What They Want but
Give Them What They Need
In 
Chapter 2
, we talked about the essential elements of crafting a good
offer. As discussed in that chapter, the first step is to find out 
exactly
what your market wants. Now, I want to go deeper. When it comes to
the delivery of your product or service, we need to give our customers
not just what they want but what they need.
There’s often a big difference between what people want and what
people need. Let me give you an example. Let’s say you’re a fitnessinstructor. You improve people’s lives through better health, fitness
and nutrition. The concept of better health is too vague, far off and
long-term for most people. So instead, you’ve got to appeal to vanity,
performance or some other specific want that the prospect has; for
example, ripped abs, toned body, great figure.
So you need to give them what they need in terms of health
improvement but do it via what they want (improvements in
appearance and performance)—and that’s what you sell them. You
need to understand both wants and needs. They are sometimes
overlapping and sometimes completely separate.
If I’ve owned a treadmill for a long time but I haven’t lost any
weight, does this prove that treadmills don’t work? This is obviously a
ridiculous conclusion. For my treadmill to “work” I’ve got to turn it on,
run on it for a while, sweat and repeat the process on a regular basis.
Buying it is just the first step. Putting it to its intended use is another.
While this may seem obvious, a big part of the battle you’ll fight is
getting people to do what they need to do to achieve results with your
product or service.
Some business owners feel like following through to implementation
is not their responsibility, that their customers should be responsible
for getting results with the product or service they’ve bought.
However, this is shortsighted. We live in a world that’s fast-paced,
with a lot of things competing for the time and attention of our
customers. Our goal is for our customers to achieve results.
A customer who buys a product or service and doesn’t use it or
implement it correctly is highly likely to write it off as something that
doesn’t work, and that’s the last thing we want. At best, it ends up
being a one-off sale, and at worst, it ends up being labeled a scam. As
ridiculous as is someone calling a treadmill a scam because they failed
to actually use it, a consumer can do the same with your product or
service
.
Except now the consumer has access to online forums and social
media and will either spread positive feedback if they got positive
results or negative feedback if they didn’t. Unfair? Maybe—but the
mark of winning businesses is going to be turn-key solutions that helpcustomers through implementation to the desired result.
In many cases, it’s going to mean you need to spoon-feed them
through the process of getting results. Otherwise, you’re in a low
margin, commodity, transaction-style business competing solely on
price. That’s a dangerous place to be with price comparisons being only
a click away.
So, your job is to find a way to sell what your prospects want but also
to give them what they need. To get them to take action and do what
they need to do to get results may mean that you have to package
things in a certain way. You may need to cut the process up into
manageable, bite-sized pieces so that it doesn’t seem so daunting.
You may have the best vitamin in the world, but you need to make it
taste sweet so the kids will eat it. That’s giving them what they want
but also what they need.
Leadership is an attractive quality and people want to be led. By
taking the initiative of packaging up the implementation of your
product or service, anticipating roadblocks that will be encountered
along the way and having solutions to overcoming these roadblocks
shows leadership. Helping your customers all the way through to
achieving results will have a big payoff for both you and them.
Not doing so will shortchange the both of you. Remember your goal
is to create a tribe of raving fans—not just transactions.
Create Theater around Your
Products and Services
Peter Drucker is famously quoted as saying that the two basic functions
of every business are marketing and innovation. The word “innovation”
often conjures up thoughts of high-tech startups in Silicon Valley,
biotech companies or engineering firms. The question often arises, can
an ordinary business that sells ordinary products be innovative? Theanswer is, of course, yes
.
A common misconception is that the innovation has to be in the
actual product or service itself. If you sell a boring or ordinary product,
it may seem like innovation is not relevant to your business or industry.
It may seem you have no option but to compete solely on price.
However, innovation can go far beyond the actual product that’s
sold. Innovation can be applied to how the product is priced, financed,
packaged, supported, delivered, managed, marketed or a myriad of
other elements related to any part of the customer experience. One
area where businesses fail spectacularly is in creating a sense of theater.
Your customers don’t just want to be serviced. They want to be
entertained. Give them what they want by creating a sense of theater
around your product.
If you’re in an “unsexy” business in which your customer’s first
question is generally centered on price, you may be a bit skeptical
about all this talk of innovation and theater. After all, how can a
manufacturer of blenders really be innovative? Or perhaps a restaurant?
How can these ordinary, boring businesses be innovative? I’m glad you
asked.
Blendtec is a manufacturer of blenders, ordinary blenders like the
type you would use in your kitchen at home. They’ve created an
enormous viral marketing buzz by making a YouTube video series
called 
Will It Blend?
 Here they have a wacky-looking scientist
demonstrate their product by blending a variety of weird 
objects from
iPhones and iPads to golf balls.
To watch the Blendtec video series, visit 
1pmp.com
I want to cry after seeing the wanton destruction of my favorite
Apple products; however, Blendtec must be pretty happy about the
hundreds of millions of views on their YouTube channel. That kind of
publicity compared with the small cost involved in producing thesevideos is just genius. Could you similarly create a sense of theater and
publicity by demonstrating your ordinary product being used in
unusual ways?
I was in the men’s room at a local restaurant in my area when I
noticed this poster on the wall:The restaurant offers a pick up and drop off service so customers
don’t have to worry about driving under the influence. It createsconvenience for the customer and the restaurant ends up selling more
of their highest-margin product—alcohol. Everyone wins.
These are just a couple of examples of ordinary, otherwise boring
businesses that are selling their products in innovative ways. Now it’s
time for you to innovate. You don’t have to invent anything original.
Model, borrow or shamelessly steal innovative ideas 
from other
industries or products.
Do anything other than stay a boring commodity, which forces you
to compete solely on price.
Use Technology to Reduce
Friction
My wife and I were recently dining at one of our favorite restaurants.
The food there is great, the staff are courteous and helpful and the
location is spectacular—right on the beach. On a cold night they have a
wood fireplace going, which really adds to the atmosphere. We’ve been
dining there for about a year, ever since we moved to the area. As I
went to pay for the meal, I looked over and, sure enough, it was still
there—a tattered, handwritten sign near their credit card terminal that
said, “Sorry our credit card machine doesn’t work with 
PIN
s, please
sign instead. Apologies for the inconvenience.”
I marveled at how such a high-end restaurant that has got so much
right has got this one fundamental thing wrong. As a business owner, if
there’s one part of interacting with my customers that I want to be as
smooth and frictionless as possible, it’s the part where I get paid. Not
only was this faulty credit card machine not attended to for at least a
year (that I know of), but they clearly had no intention of implementing
new, even more frictionless payment technology, such as contactless
payment systems.
The rate of technology innovation over the past few years has beennothing short of astonishing. While the pace has increased and
continues to increase exponentially, the purpose of new technology has
remained constant over thousands of years.
Plain and simple, 
the purpose of any new technology in your
business is to eliminate friction
. We want the fastest and easiest path
to the sale, while increasing customer satisfaction. We also want 
to
avoid situations where technology hinders rather than facilitates
business.
As customers (usually of large institutions), we’ve all had the
frustrating experience of trying to talk sense to someone who’s being
held back by technology and responds with their version of “Computersays ‘No’...” As small business owners, we must ensure technology is
being used in our businesses in ways that remove friction rather than
ways that 
create it.
Technology makes our lives easier by doing the “heavy lifting” on
our behalf, whether it’s doing a complex calculation, lifting a concrete
block into place or searching through thousands of publications to find
an obscure literary reference. Yet, sometimes it’s like we implement
technology for technology’s sake. For example, I often ask people what
the purpose of their website or social media presence is. I rarely get a
succinct and direct answer.
The goal of your technology is to reduce the friction experienced by
your customers in getting their desired results. Great examples of this
are contactless payment technologies, same-day deliveries, search
engines, streaming services and voice assistants.
By reducing friction, technology helps us do in a fraction of the time
what would have taken us hours, days or years to accomplish without
it. So how can you use technology to reduce the friction between you
and your customers? What tasks can you streamline and make
seamless? More importantly, how can you ensure technology isn’t
hindering your relationship with your customers? Here’s how I do it.
Think of each piece of technology as an employee. What am I hiring
this employee to do? What are its key performance indicators (
KPI
s)?
Take the example of a website. It’s pretty common that a business will
have a website with no specific goal, just some vague notion or hope
that customers will come their way because they have put up an online
version of their brochure.
By contrast, every smart entrepreneur I know uses technology with
very specific, measurable goals in mind. For example, a website can be
used for selling a product or getting prospects to opt in to a marketing
database. These things are measurable and can have 
KPI
s attached to
them. We know instantly if they’re working or not and we fire the ones
that aren’t working and we continue 
improving the ones that are.
Now may be a good time to rethink the various ways you use
technology in your business. Are they reducing friction? Are they
doing what they were hired to do?Become a Voice of Value to
Your Tribe
The late great Jim Rohn said it well: “Don’t spend most of your time on
the voices that don’t count. Tune out the shallow voices so that you
will have more time to tune in the valuable ones.”
It’s certainly wise advice; however, part of delivering a world-class
experience to your customers is 
becoming
 a voice of value to them.
You need to be a thought leader in your industry, someone who is
sought out for opinion and comment. You do this by becoming a
creator of content. One of the major distinctions between successful
entrepreneurs and “wantrepreneurs” is that successful entrepreneurs
are predominantly content creators whereas wantrepreneurs are
predominantly content consumers. Even more than just content
creators, successful entrepreneurs are often 
prolific
 content creators.
To become a voice of value, you need to have valuable ideas and
rarely do valuable ideas come from nowhere and interrupt you. By
seeking out other voices of value—thought leaders in and out of your
industry, mentors, coaches and successful peers—you lay the
foundation for building your own valuable ideas.
This type of self-education is the most valuable type of education I
know of. Yet, it’s important not to let too many voices in, however
tempting that may be. A few voices who speak from experience and
firsthand knowledge are infinitely more valuable than a multitude of
voices that speak from theory and opinion. While neither theory nor
opinion are bad in themselves, rarely do I find voices of value from
sources that haven’t been where I want to be.
The days of high-pressure selling tactics are fast coming to an end, if
they haven’t already. In an age in which everyone is connected and
everyone has access to almost all the available information, the most
valuable commodity is reputation. The reputation economy 
requires
that you transform your marketing from just information and high-
pressure sales tactics to education-based marketing. As we’ve discussed
throughout this book, the point of education marketing is twofold.Firstly, it’s about positioning yourself as an authority in your target
market. Everyone wants to hear from an authoritative source. By being
a content creator, you position yourself as an authority and expert in
your niche.
Secondly, it’s about building relationships—becoming the trusted
advisor to your target market rather than just a salesperson. By
regularly releasing valuable, educational content to your target market,
you lay the foundation for a relationship—and, after all, who would you
prefer to buy from, a trusted source who has been giving you a lot of
value or a stranger who wants to make a quick sale?
Becoming a voice of value is hard work and it takes time, but the
time invested will pay dividends. In the reputation economy you can’t
afford to be a commodity or another “me too” type of business. What
can you do to start being a voice of value in your market? Could you
start a podcast? An email newsletter? A YouTube channel?
Any one of these things could be the start of you becoming a voice of
value to your marketplace. Certainly doing so will set you far apart from
your competitors who are still stuck on the selling tactics that are no
longer working.
Tell Them All the Trouble You
Go To
My wife and I were driving home one night after being out to dinner
and I was looking forward to a nice relaxing end to my Saturday night
when I heard those dreaded words: “Let’s stop off at the supermarket. I
just need to pick up a couple of things.” I groaned and pulled into the
parking lot. Hating shopping more than almost anything else, I tried
my old classic line: “I’ll wait for you in the car.” After all, she was only
picking up a couple of things and I could use that time 
productively to
catch up on some missed calls and messages. But she’d have none of it.I finally found myself in the last aisle of the supermarket, holding a
shopping basket heavy with the broken promise of “just a couple of
things.” While my wife was busy deciding between grapefruit or
coconut shampoo (that’s a marketing lesson in itself), something caught
my eye—a brilliant marketing ninja move, perfectly executed. See the
picture I took of it below:
Can you see the huge difference between the two bottles of shower
gel on the right versus the one on the left? The two bottles on the right
are one of the best uses of product packaging I’ve seen in a long time.
The one on the left is boring, safe and almost indistinguishable from
the 100 other bottles on the shelf.
It takes a long time to pour a full glass of Guinness. This is because
of a process called nucleation, in which pockets of air from additional
bubbles diffuse through the beer. While this is now appreciated,
originally there was a lot of negative consumer opinion about the
length of time required to correctly pour a pint of Guinness from thetap. During the mid-1990s Guinness turned all this around with a
marketing campaign that sold this negative attribute as a positive
feature. Essentially, they started telling people how much effort went
into pouring the perfect beer. They emphasized this by saying, “It takes
119.5 seconds to pour the perfect pint,” and “Good things come to
those who wait.”
Here’s the lesson: 
tell your audience about all the effort that goes
into delivering your product or service
. In your sales copy and even in
your packaging, give them the details of how you painstakingly prepare
or manufacture your product. This applies equally if you deliver
services. Tell them about your skills, how you acquired them, all the
checks and balances you have in place and how you train your staff. The
backstory to your product or service is an absolutely essential part of
your marketing. Don’t let your efforts and skill go unnoticed. It gives
them an assurance that there is substance and quality behind your
product. This is especially important if you are pitching a premium
product or service.
Looking back at my photo of the shower gel, you can see that the
backstory here takes up the entire space on the bottle. There isn’t even
a logo or company name—very smart and very good use of prime real
estate! The fact is, 
no one cares about your logo, company name or
some dubious claim about being the leader in your industry
. They
want to know about what your product will do for them, and your
backstory is essential to this.
So, there you have it. I went from being an unwilling participant in a
shopping trip to seeing a new twist on a valuable marketing principle—
good things indeed come to those who wait.
Products Make You Money,
Systems Make You a FortuneOne of the major things I have always concentrated on in all my
businesses is creating systems. After first reading Michael Gerber’s
book 
The E-Myth Revisited
, I was hooked. The penny dropped inside
the business part of my brain. Good thing, too, because I’ve done very
well out of business systems. Creating systems is one thing that took
me from struggling and broke in business to doing well and
successfully 
exiting multiple startups.
The most valuable business systems are those which are replicable.
If your business relies on a genius or superstar talent at the center of it,
then it will be difficult or impossible to replicate. That’s one of the
reasons investor Warren Buffett only invests in “boring businesses,”
ones he can understand, that deliver a staple product, that have solid
management and that generate a lot of cash—how boring!
Among his portfolio you won’t see any high-risk technology
startups, highly speculative biotech companies or concepts you can’t
understand. These often rely on one or two superstars who would kill
the company should they leave. Instead, you’ll see solid businesses that
have systems that deliver excellent products consistently over a long
period of time. 
Systems allow mere mortals to run an extraordinary
business
.
Once you have a business system that is replicable, people will want
to pay you large sums of money for it. The money will come in many
forms but the most common are:
•
Customers wanting to do business with you because you deliver
consistent results
•
Licensees wanting to license your system
•
Franchisees who want to buy into your franchise system
•
An investor or competitor wanting to buy out your business
There are four main types of business systems you need to create,
regardless of what type of business you’re in. You’re almost guaranteed
to make a fortune, if you can create scalable and replicable systems in
these four areas of your business:
1.
Marketing system:
 generate a consistent flow of leads into the
business
2.
Sales system:
 lead nurturing, follow-up and conversion3.
Fulfillment system:
 the actual thing you do in exchange for the
customer’s money
4.
Administration system:
 accounts, reception, human resources and
so on; support of all the other business function
s
Regardless of what business you run, these four functions will be
relevant to you.
Many small businesses get bogged down with fulfillment and
administration while neglecting their marketing and sales systems.
After all, no one is pressuring you with deadlines to get you to do more
marketing. All the seemingly urgent issues generally fall into the
fulfillment and administration functions. This causes a common
situation in which the business is struggling, even though they might
be offering excellent products and services.
The problem is that 
customers don’t find out how good your
products and services are until they have bought from you
. And if
your marketing and sales systems aren’t in place, they will never buy in
the first place and find out how good you are. It’s a vicious cycle.
Some rely on reputation and word of mouth. While these are great,
it takes a very long time to build up enough business purely on
reputation. Smart businesses, on the other hand, go to great lengths to
perfect their marketing and sales systems.
So what exactly is a business system?
In short, business systems start with documented procedures and
processes that allow your business to run without you. Most often,
these are in the form of checklists, but video and audio training can also
be an important part of it. Collectively, these materials are referred to
as an 
operations manual
 and its purpose is to capture the collective
“know-how” of the business.
The poster child for business systems is McDonald’s. This is a
complex, worldwide, multi-billion-dollar business that is essentially
run by pimply teenagers who can’t even be trusted to make their beds.
How do they do this? McDonald’s has amazing business systems. Their
operations manual covers every minute detail of the business, from big
things like hiring and customer interaction to knowing exactly how
much sauce to squeeze onto a Big Mac bun and how many picklesshould be on it. I should know. I worked there as a teenager. Here’s a
little something I found when I 
was moving house a few years ago.
In my experience, there are two major reasons why business
systems are overlooked by many small business owners.
The first reason is because business systems are “back office”
functions. Unlike the latest product offering, sales techniques or other
highly visible aspects of your business, good business systems are
considered by some as boring. While building them may indeed be
boring, the incredible power they give you is anything but.
The second major reason that business systems are neglected is
because of a perceived lack of urgency. When a business is small or just
starting out, there are seemingly much more important things to do
like sales, administration and order fulfillment. With all of these
important things vying for the increasingly scarce time of the business
owner, business systems seem like something that can be put off until
later. However, just like any other accumulation of neglect over time, it
rarely ends well.
It’s a sad situation when a business owner goes to sell their business
and finds out, after putting in many years of hard work, that their
business is worthless. It’s not so much that the business itself is
worthless; it’s that they 
ARE
 the business and without them there is noreal business to sell. In cases like this, they can’t sell it for any kind of
reasonable sum beyond the value of their stock and maybe a small,
nominal amount for “goodwill.”
There are numerous benefits to implementing systems in your
business. Here are some of the most important.
It builds a valuable asset
. It’s nice if your business gives you a great
cash flow to fund your lifestyle. But wouldn’t it be fabulous if one day,
when you decided it was time, you could sell your business and have
the biggest payday of your life? You can do this only if you 
build the
value of the business, and that can happen only if you’ve built systems
that can continue running without you.
Leverage and scalability
. Systems give your business the ability to
expand. You can replicate your business in other geographic areas
yourself or by franchising or licensing the rights to your business
system. Many fortunes have been made this way.
Consistency
. Consistency is one of the keys to delivering an
excellent customer experience. You may not like the food at
McDonald’s but one thing you can say about them is that, wherever
you go, they deliver a very consistent experience.
Lower labor costs
. When you and your staff don’t have to waste
time and effort reinventing the wheel each time, this improves your
efficiency and reduces your labor costs.
The Power of Systems—The
Ability to Fire Yourself
Let me ask you a question. If you went overseas for six months leaving
your business behind, when you came back would it be in better or
worse shape than when you left it? Would you even have a business left
to come back to? If you answered in the negative to either of these
questions, then it’s likely you don’t have a business—rather you 
AREthe business. Many small businesses, especially when they are sole
operators or where all the partners work in the business, make the
mistake for the reasons outlined above, of not thinking about systems.
After all, the business is small and the founder or founders perform all
roles. Unfortunately, this thought process dooms them to staying small
and remaining a prisoner in their business.
They often find themselves in a catch-22. They have no time to work
on the business because they are too busy working in the business. And
they can’t get away from the business because they haven’t developed
documented systems and processes. So they’re stuck in a business that
has become a self-made prison. Don’t get me wrong, they may be
financially successful. Their business may be thriving with a loyal base
of customers, but the problem is they are stuck—
shackled to their
business.
If they were to leave or get sick for an extended period of time, their
business would cease to exist. The problem is that all the know-how of
the business is stuck in a silo between their ears. The only way out is to
make time to create and document these business systems. Thankfully,
this daunting process is not that difficult when we break it into chunks.
Our goal is to eliminate the biggest bottleneck from your business
—
YOU
. Even if you’re not looking to get out of your business
immediately, the day will come when you need to take time off, want to
go on to another venture, employ more staff or even sell your business.
When the time comes, you’ll be thankful you followed this advice.
Your job as an entrepreneur is to be an innovator and a builder of
systems. Even if you are a sole operator right now, it’s important to
think long term and think big. The first part of the process is to think of
your business as being ten times the size it currently is. If that were the
case, what roles would exist? For example, would you have someone
taking care of the bookkeeping, someone else in shipping, another
person in sales, a marketing person and so on? You get the idea.
If you’re a sole operator or a small business, it’s not a problem if you
currently perform all or most of the roles in your business. But it is a
problem if you currently 
have to
 perform all the roles in your business.
If you are indispensable, you are a bottleneck and the business will onlymove as fast as you can.
We need to start looking at each role in the business. Now when I
say role I don’t mean person. For example, in a small business the same
person might be both on reception and doing the bookkeeping. Even
though one person does both of these roles, they are still two separate
roles and if the business were larger these two roles would be
performed by different people. In an even larger business, a single role
might be broken up even further. For example, there might be a
separate bookkeeper for accounts payable and accounts receivable.
Once you’ve identified all the different roles in your business, you can
start defining what tasks each role performs. For example, what are all
the tasks we expect the person performing the bookkeeping role to do?
These tasks may include
:
•
Invoicing customers
•
Bank reconciliation
•
Following up unpaid invoices
•
Entering supplier invoices
•
And so on
Now once we’ve identified all the roles within the business and
defined what tasks each role does, we need to document exactly how
each task should be performed.
One of the best tools you can use in building business systems is
checklists. Checklists are easy to create, follow and track. Once you’ve
created a list of all the tasks performed in your business, you are ready
to start documenting exactly how these tasks are performed.
A simplified example for following up on unpaid invoices could look
like:
•
Run accounts receivable report
•
For any invoices that are 7 to thirteen days overdue, send a friendly
reminder
•
For any invoices that are 14 to 27 days overdue, call the customer to
remind them to pay
•
Forward any invoices that are more than 27 days overdue to our debt
collection agencySee how we’ve broken the task down into small, easy-to-follow
steps? Granted the above is a simplistic example for illustration
purposes. Some of these steps include subtasks that would also need to
be documented; for example, how do you run an accounts receivable
report?
To recap, it’s essentially a three-step process:
1.
Identify all the roles in your business
2.
Define what tasks each role performs
3.
Create checklists for properly completing these tasks
Now if you wanted to delegate or outsource a task, it’s going to be so
much easier to hand the person a step-by-step process rather than just
giving them ad hoc training and watching over them constantly 
to
make sure they do it right.
Now scaling your business becomes super easy—just add people.
Once you discover the awesome power of systems in your business,
you’ll never go back to the old way of doing things.
As you can see, this method is a way of getting the systems you
already have in place documented. Currently, all these processes may
be stored in your head and accessible only to you. Documenting these
business systems will be the only way to easily scale your business and
let it run without you.
Importantly, this also ensures that your customers get a consistent
experience. If, or rather when, staff join or leave your business, you
want to ensure that customers still get the same, world-class
experience. You can’t leave this to the discretion of individual staff. It
has to come from the business and having documented systems is by
far the best way I know of doing this.
Your Ultimate Customer
Neil Armstrong once said: “You only have to solve two problems when
going to the moon: first, how to get there; and second, how to get back.The key is don’t leave until you have solved both problems.”
In the excitement of starting a business, it’s common to spend a lot
of time thinking about “how to get there,” that is, become successful,
but often what’s given less thought is “how to get back”—in other
words, the exit strategy.
When starting a business, it’s important to think clearly and plan for
how you will exit. This sounds obvious but is something many business
owners don’t think about until it’s too late. How’s it going to end?
Who will your buyer be? Why will they buy your business? Will they
buy you out for your customer base, for the revenue, for the intellectual
property? How will they get a return on their investment? Answering
some of these questions will help you visualize exactly who your buyer
is and why they would buy you. It’s crucial to think about these things
at the beginning because they will help you shape exactly how you
engineer your business and what you focus on. If your goal is to exit a
business for 
$
50 million then everything 
you do in your business can be
framed with the question, will this help me get to 
$
50 million?
You’ll rarely make as much money running a business as you will
selling one. The person or company who puts you out of business is
your ultimate customer and satisfying them will result in the biggest
payday you’ll ever receive. Countless fortunes have been made this
way. Sadly, a very large number of businesses are worthless and
eventually just get wound down because the owner wants to or has to
move on and has not been able to secure a buyer. This is why it’s so
crucial to structure things in a way that ensures you’re on the receiving
end of a big payday rather than faced with the realization that your
years of hard work have come to naught as far as the value of the
business is concerned.
Over the years I’ve sold multiple businesses, and now as an angel
investor, I’m on the other side of the table, evaluating businesses I feel
would be worth buying into. I can tell you one of the most important
things a purchaser looks for and that you need to satisfy is whether you
HAVE
 a business or whether you 
ARE
 the business. There’s an
enormous difference. If your business can’t be operated without you,
then it’s not a saleable asset and you’re stuck, regardless of how good orprofitable it is. That’s why business systems are so crucial. Having
documented systems is what enables the business to run without you.
Next, you need to consider who will buy your business and why.
Will it be a competitor? Someone new to the industry? Someone in
your industry but in a different niche? Structuring the business with a
logical acquirer in mind is smart and it’s something that’s very
attractive to investors. It shows them a clear path to exit and return of
their invested capital. Even if you don’t plan to take on investors, as the
owner of the business, you should think of yourself as an investor. You
wear the entrepreneur hat by day but at night the investor hat should
be put on and you should be questioning when that return on invested
capital is going to occur and how.
One of the most common objections I hear from owner-operators is,
“I love what I’m doing and I don’t intend to sell.” That’s great, if what
you love doing is making you a good 
income—relatively few people
enjoy such a lifestyle. But whether you like it or not, one day your
circumstances will change. You may get bored, get sick, want to retire,
see a better opportunity and so on.
When, not if, that time comes and you do decide it’s time to sell,
you want to be able to walk away with a check that has a lot of zeros on
it rather than have to wind it all down and possibly end up in debt or
sell for a pittance. If you start thinking about structuring for exit at the
time you need to exit, you’re toast. It’s way too late and you’re very
unlikely to achieve a favorable result. You need to start with the end in
mind. Start thinking about your ultimate customer and what would
motivate them to write you the check that becomes your biggest
payday.Chapter 7 Action Item:
How Will You Deliver a World-Class Experience?
Fill in square #7 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.
5
This definition is from Seth Godin’s excellent book 
Tribes
.8
INCREASING CUSTOMER LIFETIME
VALUE
Chapter 8 Summary
Increasing the lifetime value of existing customers is where the real money is made. To do
this, you need to have strategies and tactics for getting existing customers to do more
business with you. You also need to know, manage and continually improve key numbers
in your business.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why your existing customer base is a rich diamond mine and how to realize its value
•
Five major ways to make more money from existing customers
•
How to win back lost customers or reactivate customers that haven’t bought from you
recently
•
The critical marketing metrics you must know and manage
•
An example in which slightly improving three key numbers generates a 331%
improvement to the bottom line
•
Why not all business growth and revenue is good and how to avoid “polluted revenue”
•
The four categories of customers in your business and why you shouldn’t treat them
equallyA
Increasing Customer Lifetime Value
Acres of Diamonds
S ENTREPRENEURS, WE’RE
 often focused on the kill. We’re
closers, hustlers, and we like the taste of fresh blood in our
mouths. That’s the sexy stuff that we discussed in detail in the
first six chapters of this book. It’s the “front end” offer that brings the
new customer through the door.
In this chapter, I want to focus on the “back end.” That’s the stuff
that makes your existing customers buy more. I know this isn’t as sexy
as discussing positioning, closing techniques or cool marketing
strategies to get new customers, but trust me, this chapter is where the
real money is made.
Russell Conwell’s classic speech “Acres of Diamonds” is about a
man, Ali Hafed, who wanted to find diamonds so badly that he sold his
farm, left his family and went off on a search that took him all over the
world. His search was futile and ultimately led to nothing but his own
demise. Meanwhile the new owner of his farm discovered “the most
magnificent diamond mine in all the history of mankind” right there on
the farm that he had purchased from Ali Hafed.
To hear an audio recording of the speech “Acres of Diamonds” or to read a
transcript, visit 
1pmp.co
m
The moral of the story being “dig first in your own backyard when
seeking treasure.” I think this applies perfectly to marketing. Most
businesses have a rich “diamond mine” in the form of existingcustomers that remains largely untapped, yet they leave this “family” of
existing customers after the first few transactions and spend all their
marketing energy, money and resources on seeking new sources of
revenue.
While much of this book rightly focuses on getting new customers,
which is vital, that’s only one of the two ways to grow your business.
The other way is to make more from existing and past customers. Most
businesses, especially if they’ve been around for a while, are sitting on a
veritable diamond mine. Increasing revenue and, more importantly,
profit from existing and past customers is far easier than getting new
ones. A widely quoted statistic is that a person is 21 times more likely
to buy from a business they’ve bought from in the past compared with
one they’ve never purchased from.
6
 That puts you at a huge selling
advantage when it comes to your current and past customers. The real
profit is in figuring out how to sell more to existing and past customers
and increasing their lifetime value. Let’s look at five major ways to do
this.
Raising Prices
One of the most overlooked ways of increasing the lifetime value of a
customer is simply by raising prices. Most businesses fear that raising
prices could lead to a customer exodus or backlash of some sort. While
it does need to be handled strategically, you’ll generally find your
customers are far less price sensitive than you imagine. If you’re
positioning yourself correctly, as discussed in 
Chapter 6
, and delivering
a great customer experience, 
as discussed in the previous chapter, then
most customers will happily accept price rises. Depending on how you
transact with your customers, some may not even notice.
Reverse roles for a moment and think back to your own purchasing
habits. How often have you caught yourself just swiping your credit
card without even looking at the total, let alone itemizing the wholebill? Personally, I find this is very often the case, especially when it
comes to lower value goods and services. Even though I visit my local
café often, I don’t know exactly what they charge for a coffee. Even
more importantly, if they raised their prices by 10% or 20% I’d likely be
none the wiser. I’d just swipe my credit card and wait for the coffee to
be served. For the owner of the café, though, I suspect a 10% or 20%
increase to the bottom line would be significant—possibly the
difference between struggling and thriving.
When was the last time you actually increased your prices? If it’s
been a while, then it may be time to reassess. Here’s the thing: if you
hold your prices constant for a long time, in real terms you’re
effectively lowering them because inflation makes the same nominal
amount of money less valuable over time. Inflation is the sustained
increase in the general price level of goods and services over a period of
time. Think about the price of milk or bread when you were a kid
compared to now. That’s inflation at work. By not increasing your
prices over a long period of time, you’re effectively giving yourself a
pay cut.
The key to raising your prices in a way that makes it palatable to
your clients is giving them a reason why. Explain to them the increases
in quality of your product or the increased input costs that you’ve
borne. Explain to them the benefits they’ve already received from your
offering and how they’ll benefit from your future innovations. Some
percentage of customers may leave you despite your explanation;
however, they tend to be the lowest-value customers. A customer won
on price will be lost on price. If it’s done right, the increase in profit
gained by raising your prices will outweigh any lost revenue from
price-sensitive churners.
If you’re particularly concerned that your existing customers won’t
tolerate a price increase, you can try “grandfathering.” This is where
the price increase is only applicable to new customers and 
existing
ones are “grandfathered” in at the current price level. If you do this,
ensure you tell your existing customers what you’re doing, as this can
reinforce to them what a great deal they’re getting and increase their
loyalty to you since you’re making them feel special.Upselling
“Would you like fries with that?” is responsible for hundreds of
millions of dollars to McDonald’s and a similar upsell strategy could be
worth a fortune to you. Upselling is the bundling of add-ons with the
primary product or service being sold.
In Robert Cialdini’s classic book 
Influence: The Psychology of
Persuasion
, he discusses the contrast principle. The contrast principle
comes into play when two different things presented sequentially feel
more different than they really are. For example, if you lift a heavy
object first followed by a light one, you’ll judge the second object to be
lighter than it really is. If your neighbor is having a really loud party all
evening, the peace and quiet you suddenly appreciate more when it’s
over is the contrast principle in effect.
The exact same thing applies to price. When prospects buy the
primary “expensive” item first, the suggested add-ons feel
comparatively cheap. Men who’ve shopped for a suit will know exactly
what I mean. You get to the counter with the suit you’ve picked out
expecting to pay the price on the tag. In reality, your shopping journey
is just beginning. The sales clerk now starts discussing your shirt
requirements. Normally, you might have balked at such expensive
shirts but in contrast to the price of the suit, the shirts seem reasonably
priced. Five shirts later, the sales assistant is complimenting your
excellent taste in shirts and helping color match ties to go with them.
When you finally think it’s over, out come the socks and belts. When
all’s said and done your transaction value has possibly doubled or
tripled.
Two things work in your favor with upsells. First, the contrast
principle as already discussed. Second, because the prospect was not
specifically shopping for your suggested add-ons, they’re much less
likely to be price sensitive to the item being attached. Both of these
factors mean much higher margins for you. While I don’t recommend
it as a strategy, it’s not uncommon for the primary product to have thin
margins with the real profit being in the upsells. Consumer electronics
are often sold that way, with a razor-thin margin on the core productsand most of the real profit coming from add-on accessories like cables,
batteries and the extended warranties.
A great way of framing an upsell is to say, “Most customers who
bought X also bought Y.” You see this done well in large e-commerce
stores like Amazon. People want to participate in social norms. By
telling them what “normal” buying habits are, you tap into the
powerful, deep-seated psychological human desire to fit in.
Some mistakenly think that when a customer has just bought, they
need to be given a break before attempting to sell to them again.
Nothing could be further from the truth. When the prospect is “hot
and heavy” and in the buying state of mind, they’ll be much more
receptive to other offers to buy. This is your opportunity to bundle in a
high margin add-on. It gives the customer a better result and instantly
increases your customer lifetime value.
Ascension
Ascension is the process of moving existing customers to your higher-
priced, and hopefully higher-margin, products and services. It’s the 
ISP
selling you the higher-speed Internet plan or the car dealer selling you
the next model up. Ascension campaigns should be a constant part of
your marketing process. Very often, customers stay on existing
products or services even though they can benefit from and afford to
move up. This is inertia working against you.
Other than just making you more profit, ascension campaigns help
you combat inertia and can prevent customers from switching to a
competitor. When customers independently consider moving up
because your current product or service is no longer meeting their
needs, they will often look at what your competitors have to offer and
blame you for the poor experience they’re having with your product or
service. All they see is that the Internet service you sold them is
frustratingly slow or the car you sold them has 
terrible fuel economy. Itmay well be their fault for choosing that cheap option three years ago,
but it’s your fault and your problem if you lose them because you
weren’t proactive enough to keep up with their needs.
Equally bad is having only one pricing option or only one option for
each product or service category. Having only one option means that
you’re leaving huge sums of money on the table. At minimum you need
to have a “standard” and a “premium” option in each category. In
Chapter 6
, we discussed the importance of also having an ultra-high-
ticket item among your product mix.
These types of offerings can make up a very large percentage of your
net profit, even if you only sell a small number of units. They also
attract more affluent customers who shop based on prestige, service
and convenience as opposed to low-value customers who tend to be
price shoppers. As mentioned in 
Chapter 6
, a general rule of thumb is
that about 10% of your customers would pay you ten times more and 1%
of your customers would pay you 100 times more. Having only a single
option leaves an enormous amount of money on the table.
Ultra-high-ticket items also help you benefit from Cialdini’s contrast
principle. Your less affluent clients will see your standard products and
services as being much more reasonably priced by comparison, while
perhaps retaining many of the core features and benefits of the ultra-
high-ticket item.
Lastly, high-ticket options give clients an upgrade path, something
to aspire to. People always want what they can’t have and having ultra-
high-ticket items in your suite of products and services can keep alive
their desire to buy from you in a future when they’re in a better
position to do so.
Frequency
Increasing the frequency with which your customers buy from you is
another solid strategy for increasing lifetime value. There are manystrategies for doing so but here are a few of my favorites.
Reminders.
 People live busy lives. They don’t always remember to
do things 
in
 a timely manner even when it’s of benefit to them. 
Send
reminders by post, email or text message to remind them to do
business with you again. The sending of regular reminders can be fully
automated, so take advantage of technology to do some of the heavy
lifting for you. Some worry about seeming too pushy. However, if you
sell something of value that benefits your customers, then you do them
a great disservice by not selling to them regularly enough. Great
candidates for reminder notices are products and services whose
benefit or usefulness expires over time. Examples include car servicing,
massages, dental checkups, pet vaccinations and much more. What if
you sell a product or service that has a longer lifespan
—for example,
real estate, cars or financial planning—and you don’t really know when
the customer might be likely to buy again? We covered this in
Chapter 5
. Keep in touch and continue building and developing a
relationship through your nurturing system. It could be as simple as a
weekly email newsletter. This keeps you top of mind, so when they’re
ready to buy again, you’ll be a logical choice.
Give them a reason to come back.
 My wife was recently shopping at
a specialty shoe store that is almost an hour drive from our house.
When she paid for her purchase she was given a voucher worth 
$
30 for
every 
$
100 she spent. She spent about 
$
300 and ended up with a 
$
90
voucher. The voucher was given to her at the checkout when she paid
and had an expiry date that was about six months into the future.
However, more importantly, it only became valid from the day after its
issue, so you couldn’t just walk back into the store and use it
immediately. You had to come back another day to use it. She came
home and told me about all the amazing bargains she’d found out
shopping as wives tend to do. Next she told me, “They had some shoes
I think you’d like, and I’ve got this voucher here for 
$
90. It would be a
shame to waste it.” Guess where I was dragged the next day? With half
my Saturday afternoon gone trying out shoes that I didn’t know I
needed, we found ourselves at the register handing over another 
$
200.
The cashier told us the good news. We’d spent 
$
200 so we wereentitled to a 
$
60 voucher. What happened next is a lesson in human
psychology worth the additional 
$
200. I watched my wife, who was
tired of driving back and forth to this far-flung shoe store, almost plead
with the cashier not to give her the 
$
60 voucher, as she didn’
t want to
drive all the way back and she also didn’t want to “waste” the 
$
60
voucher either. The cashier smiled and apologetically said it was store
policy and that she had to give out the vouchers. With one simple
tactic, the store had almost doubled the initial transaction value and
created psychological pain associated with not coming in for repeat
purchases. How could you use a similar tactic to encourage repeat
business? Note, this is completely different from discounting. This
encouraged, almost forced, future purchases.
Help them buy repeatedly with subscriptions.
 Some products or
services like Internet access, insurance or electricity supply lend
themselves naturally to a subscription business model. However, you
need to think outside the box and take advantage of a revolution that’s
going on in the way that traditionally non-subscription products are
being sold.
The Dollar Shave Club turned cheap, disposable razor blades into a
subscription service. How brilliant is that! Not only have they created
enormous value and convenience for their customers but they now get
to charge for their product every month until you say stop. Other
product categories have followed suit enabling you to buy monthly
subscriptions to cosmetics, underwear, fruit, socks, pet food and much
more.
A big heavy bag of dog food now arrives automatically on my
doorstep every six weeks. No more trekking to the pet store only to
find it’s out of stock. No more loading it in and out of the car and
hauling it back home. It’s automatic; I don’t ever need to think about it
again and my supplier is presumably thrilled with the predictable
income stream. If you sell consumables of any type, couldn’t you turn
your product into a subscription service?
The side effect of this is that the customer’s price-shopping radar
generally turns off when buying products by subscription. Whereas,
previously, I might have been tempted to look at discount offers on theparticular brand of dog food I buy from the various pet food retailers in
my area, now my dog food shopping radar is off. I know it’s
automatically taken care of every six weeks, so why would I bother
looking for it? Sure, your customer might do a market check every so
often, but on a subscription service they don’t need to make a
purchasing decision every time. If you’re delivering extra value in 
the
way of convenience, your customers likely won’t even care that you’re
charging them more. People understand that convenience has a price
and for the most part they’re okay with that.
Reactivation
If you’re like most businesses, you’re sitting on a goldmine in the form
of a list of past customers. Past customers have trusted you enough to
cross the chasm between prospect and customer. They may have
stopped buying from you for any number of reasons, including a poor
experience, better pricing elsewhere, moving out of the local area or
simply apathy because you didn’t give them a compelling reason to
come back.
This list of past customers is of tremendous value because much of
the hard work involved in getting prospects to know, like and trust you
has already been done. Now you just need to run a reactivation
campaign to win them back. This is great for getting some quick wins
and bringing in “fast cash.”
Here are the basics of running a reactivation campaign:
1.
Start by going through your customer database and pulling out
names of past customers whom you haven’t heard from or who
haven’t bought from you for a while. Obviously, you want to filter
out any bad customers who you don’t want back.
2.
Create a strong offer to induce them back to you. A gift card, coupon
or free offer with a strong call to action usually works well.
3.
Contact these past customers and ask them why they haven’t
returned. If it’s something you did wrong, and if it’s appropriate,offer an apology and describe what corrective action you’ve taken. If
they reactivate and start buying from you again, follow up with them
afterwards to make them feel special.
Some great reactivation campaign themes and headlines are “We
Miss You” or “Have We Done Something Wrong?” You can then
describe to them how you’ve noticed they haven’t bought from you in a
while and you’d love to have them back and show them how special
they 
are to you. You get the idea.
In an ideal world, reactivation campaigns should be unnecessary but
the reality is from time to time you’ll mess up, lose out to a competitor
or just get complacent with your marketing. A reactivation campaign
can reboot the relationship and contribute significantly to increasing
customer lifetime value.
Numbers Tell Us the Whole
Story
I love a good story and storytelling is a big part of what we do as
marketers. But when it comes to measuring and managing the success
of your business, stories often obfuscate the truth.
If you’ve ever watched the television show 
Shark Tank
 you’ll know
exactly what I mean. In case you’ve never watched it, 
Shark Tank
 is a
reality show on which entrepreneurs pitch their business to a group of
wealthy investors (referred to as sharks) in the hope of securing them as
an investor. It always starts in the same predictable manner. The
entrepreneur introduces their product or service, describes what
problem it solves and usually demonstrates it. They usually end the
presentation by telling the sharks what a great investment opportunity
their business is. The sharks will then respond with a few softball
questions and then, inevitably, comes the one that’s on the mind of
every prospective investor: “Tell us about your sales numbers.” That’susually when most of the amateur entrepreneurs squirm and start
telling a long, convoluted story about why there are very few or no
sales.
You also see great examples of these sort of weasel stories in many
company prospectuses and investor reports. They dedicate pages upon
pages to telling their story. They brag about how great their products
and services are, describe what great future prospects they have and
back it all up with beautiful graphs illustrating a healthy growth
trajectory. Then you get to their actual numbers and it’s a sea of red.
When I’m in the mood for some good fiction, I skip the Stephen King
novels and head for a few of these reports instead. They can be a very
entertaining read!
You’ve likely heard the often-quoted management maxim, that 
what
gets measured gets managed
. Marketing is a game for which 
you need
to constantly measure, manage and improve your numbers. You don’t
need a long, convoluted story. You just need the numbers because
numbers tell us the whole story
.
Your doctor just needs several key numbers and they pretty much
know the state of your health. Your accountant just needs a few key
numbers and they know the state of your business. The same is true of
your marketing. You need to know and continually improve your
numbers. In a moment, I’ll demonstrate to you why this is so powerful,
but for now, here are some of the key numbers you need to know:
•
Leads
: calculate the number of new leads that come into your
business (lead capture and lead nurturing were covered in 
Chapters
4
 and 
5
).
•
Conversion rate
: calculate the percentage of leads you converted
into paying customers. (We covered sales conversion in 
Chapter 6
.)
•
Average transaction value
: know the average dollar amount that
customers spend with you. (We looked at several ways of increasing
this number earlier in this chapter.)
•
Break-even point
: identify the dollar amount you need to make to
keep your doors open. It encompasses such things as rent, staff,
utilities and any other ongoing operating expenses.All of these numbers are typically measured on a monthly basis, but
depending on the size of your business, you could measure them
weekly or even daily. Now, let’s look at an example that demonstrates
how powerful measuring, managing and improving these numbers is.
Imagine you run an e-commerce store that sells consumer
electronics. You import the goods from China and have a profit margin
of 50% on each item you sell. You get an average of 8,000 visitors to
your website each month, and of these, an average of 5% end up
making a purchase. On average, each customer spends 
$
500 with you.
Your break-even point, which encompasses operating expenses such as
running the warehouse, employing staff and hosting the website, is
$
90,000 per month. So your monthly 
numbers look like this:
Leads
8,000
Conversion Rate
5%
Total Conversions:
400
Average Transaction Value
$
500
Total Revenue:
$
200,000
Gross Margin
50%
Total Gross Profit:
$
100,000
Break-Even Point
$
90,000
Total Net Profit:
$
10,00
0
Now, all we want to do is focus on improving three key numbers.
We want to improve Leads, Conversion Rate and Average Transaction
Value by just 10% each.
So, you make your ad copy more compelling and instead of 8,000
visitors to your website, you get 8,800. Then you have an outrageous
risk reversal guarantee that lifts your conversion rate from 5% to 5.5%.Lastly, on your checkout page, you have an upsell offer that lifts your
average transaction value from 
$
500 to 
$
550. Your margin stays the
same at 50% and fixed running expenses remain the same at 
$
90,000
per month.
The numbers before and after your marketing optimizations look as
follows:
BEFORE
AFTER
Leads
8,000
8,800
Conversion Rate
5%
5.5%
Total Conversions:
400
484
Average Transaction Value
$
500
$
550
Total Revenue:
$
200,000
$
266,200
Gross Margin
50%
50%
Total Gross Profit:
$
100,000
$
133,100
Break-Even Point
$
90,000
$
90,000
Total Net Profit:
$
10,000
$
43,100
See what’s happened? We’ve improved just three key numbers by
only 10%, yet the result to the bottom line is a staggering 331%
improvement. In the first scenario, the business owner was taking
home 
$
120,000 annually before taxes. In the second scenario, he takes
home 
$
517,200 per year. Do you think that would have a massive
impact on his life? Without a doubt it would.
Granted this is a very simplistic example and we’re using cowboy
math for the purposes of demonstration. However, it quickly becomes
clear what a huge leverage point marketing is within a business.
Further optimizations could be made by increasing the gross marginthrough price increases or better buying power with the wholesale
supplier. Perhaps some operating expenses could be cut with better
automation and business systems.
The main point is that measuring, managing and improving your key
marketing numbers, even by an incremental amount, can have a
massive impact on the end result. 
Small hinges swing big doors
.
There are several other key metrics you need to measure and
manage. As discussed in 
Chapter 3
, customer acquisition cost is an
important metric that helps you figure out, on average, how much you
spend on media to attract and convert a new customer. This, in turn,
helps you figure out what kind of return on investment that particular
media is giving you.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, your business should have a
subscription or recurring element to it. If it doesn’t yet, that’s
something you need to implement urgently. Here are some of the key
metrics you need to measure and manage in a subscription or recurring
business model:
•
Monthly Recurring Revenue
: this is your total recurring billings.
You want this number to be growing over time. If it’s flattening out
or declining, you may have either a churn problem or a customer
acquisition problem.
•
Churn Rate
: this is the percentage of recurring customers that
cancel subscriptions or stop buying from you. Filling the bucket is
great but not if it’s leaking at a rapid rate
.
•
Customer Lifetime Value
: this is the key metric that this chapter is
focused on. Increasing this number is where the money is.
Keeping a constant watch on your key numbers is one of the best
ways of managing your business and making sure that things are
heading in the right direction. It avoids nasty surprises on quarterly or
annual financial statements.
I highly recommend you keep track of these marketing metrics, and
any other significant numbers in your business, on a company
dashboard. A business dashboard can be as simple as a whiteboard with
the relevant numbers manually updated on a monthly or weekly basis,or it can be more sophisticated; for example, a real-time screen or
internal company web page. Dashboard software solutions can
automatically pull data in real time from a variety of sources. This
makes measuring and managing your key metrics easy. Other metrics
you may want to include on your dashboard could be customer
satisfaction rate or the number of complaints you receive.
A business dashboard is a great early warning system for problems
and can keep you and your team excited, motivated and accountable.
Smart business owners also tie incentives to hitting key metrics. You
might do something informal like taking the team out to dinner if the
churn rate stays below a certain threshold, or you might treat
incentives more formally by tying performance reviews and bonuses to
certain metrics.
Measuring, managing and improving your numbers daily, weekly or
monthly is key to building a high-growth business.
Polluted Revenue and the
Unequal Dollar
Most entrepreneurs are driven and, in the drive for growth and
revenue, sometimes not enough thought is given to the 
quality
 of that
revenue. In this section, I want to introduce you to the concept of the
unequal dollar. It’s absolutely key to helping you create a tribe of raving
fans rather than transactional customers. This is integral to your
success. The 
difference between a customer who is just a transaction
and one who is a raving fan is huge, even if the nominal dollar amount
of the transaction is the same. This is because not all revenue is good
and not all growth is good. For example, cancer grows but it’s not the
type of growth you want. Equally lethal to a business is growth of the
wrong type of revenue.
Businesses need revenue like our bodies need air and water. Smallbusinesses are often under-resourced, so it’s forgivable that they’re not
too discriminating about where they take their revenue from. They’re
often in “eat what you kill” mode. If you drink polluted water or
breathe polluted air, you’ll get sick. Similarly, if you take on toxic
customers you’ll generate 
polluted revenue
, which makes your
business sick.
In other words, a dollar from suboptimal or toxic customers isn’t
equal to a dollar from a raving fan customer. This principle of the
unequal dollar is vital to understand. Generally your customer base can
be divided up into four categories.
7
1.
The Tribe
: this set of customers are raving fans, supporters and
cheerleaders who promote your business and are actively conspiring
for your success. This is healthy revenue that builds your business.
Growing these types of customers is the key to being successful and
achieving hyper-growth.
2.
The Churners
: churners are customers who really can’t afford you
on the basis of either time or money. Because they can’t afford you,
you might have engaged in overly aggressive sales and marketing
tactics, overhyped promises or heavy discounts to get them to sign
up. Then, when they discover they’re not a good fit, they churn out.
They leave you, and if you have too many of these, you catch a
“churn flu,” which can be fatal to your business. These types of
customers can also create brand problems for your business, as they
often turn around and go back out into the marketplace and tell
everybody that you’re a liar 
or label you as dishonest.
3.
The Vampires
: unlike churners, vampires can afford you 
but you
can’t afford them
. They consume a massively disproportionate
amount of resources compared with your average customer while
paying the same amount as other customers do. They usually aren’t
content to work with the teams that you have in place. They always
need to talk to the 
CEO
 and they often terrorize and manipulate the
CEO
 into terrorizing the team in their interest. They just suck the
blood right out of your business.
4.
The Snow Leopard
: this might be your biggest customer, one who
makes up a very large chunk of your revenue and pays you a lot ofmoney. They’re exquisite and beautiful but extremely rare and
almost impossible to replicate. Most businesses have a client like
this. They also tend to be customers who are fun to work with.
They’re so wonderful that the team and the leaders in the business
love to spend a lot of time with them. Overall, they’re a bad
investment because they’re so rare and therefore don’t represent a
great growth strategy.
Another more formal way to categorize customers is using the Net
Promoter Score (
NPS
). 
NPS
 has been created to measure customer
loyalty and satisfaction. In 
NPS
 terminology customers are either
promoters, detractors or passives. 
NPS
 can be as low as −
1
00 (everybody
is a detractor) or as high as +
1
00 (everybody is a promoter). An 
NPS
 that
is positive (that is, higher than zero) is felt to be good, and an 
NPS
 of
+50 is considered excellent. The Net Promoter Score is calculated
based on responses to a single question, “On a scale of 0 to 
1
0, how
likely are you to recommend us to a friend or colleague?” Those who
respond with a score of 9 or 
1
0 are labeled “promoters.” Those who
respond with a score of 0 to 6 are labeled “detractors.” Those
responding with 7 and 8 are labeled “passives.” Often the scoring is
then followed with an open-ended question asking for reasons behind
the customer’s rating. These reasons can then be used by management
for follow-up action.
Whether you use more formal metrics like the 
NPS
 along with labels
like promoters and detractors or you use less formal techniques and
labels like tribe, churner and vampire to categorize 
your customers, it’s
important that you don’t treat all customers and revenue equally. Don’t
let yourself get fooled into thinking that all revenue is good.
Fire Problem Customers
Firing customers? That seems a very foreign concept to most business
owners who are desperately trying to find new customers and newbusiness. It may also seem bizarre that in a book all about marketing
and customer acquisition we have a section dedicated to firing
customers. However, as discussed in the previous section, not all
dollars are equal and not all revenue is good. You’ll sometimes get to a
stage at which you know that you’ve got toxic customers and polluted
revenue. You know it’s sucking the life out of your business and you
can’t let it go on anymore.
Not firing problem customers is likely costing you huge amounts of
time, money and aggravation. You’ve likely heard that old business
cliché “the customer is always right.” I’m here to tell you the customer
isn’t always right. Rather the 
right
 customer is always right. Taking this
cliché in its original form seriously will mean you live your business life
as a doormat spending your time trying to please or retain problem
customers like vampires and churners. Unlike red wine, problem
clients don’t get better with time.
First, a clarification. I’m not talking about customers who have a
legitimate cause for complaint. Customers who have a genuine
complaint are valuable intelligence assets. It’s often this sort of
customer that can help you uncover weaknesses in your business. They
may even reveal something that was causing you to lose business
without you knowing because other unhappy customers didn’t
complain—they simply stopped buying from you. Fixing legitimate
complaints from customers can strengthen your relationship with them
and makes your business more robust. A customer who sees you
responding to and resolving their genuine complaint is far more likely
to buy from you again and recommend you to others. 
They feel
validated, respected and taken seriously.
Let’s define problem customers. For whatever reason, there’s a
percentage of the population that’s never happy. These are your
detractors, vampires or churners. They’re always whining, dissatisfied
and feeling like everyone’s out to take advantage of them. You could
shower them with gold and provide your product or service for free and
they’ll find something to complain about. These people are like a
cancer sucking the life out of you and your business. I suggest you cut
them loose as quickly as possible.I have without exception, across multiple businesses and industries,
found that it’s the low-value, price-sensitive customers who complain
the most, waste huge amounts of your time and always need to be
chased for payment. The high-value customers who are the most
profitable tend to pay on time, treat you with respect and value your
services. It seems counterintuitive but it’s been proved true in every
business I’ve ever been involved with. I suggest that as part of your
regular housekeeping activities, you fire these low-value, problem
clients.
As business owners we often get faked out by thinking that as long
as we keep the gross sales numbers high, there’s bound to be enough
net leftover to make it all worthwhile. However, if you ran a true profit
and loss statement on these problem clients, one which took into
account all the time you spend chasing and appeasing them, you’d find
very often that you make very little, if any, real profit on them. In fact,
most of them would likely result in a net loss when taking into account
the low value they bring coupled with the time and energy needed to
deal with them.
Another important reason you should fire low-value customers is
because, apart from sucking up your financial resources, they are also
causing you to lose out on opportunities. Firing problem customers
frees up valuable time and resources that can be used for focusing on
and building value with existing tribe members as well as acquiring
new ones. With the toxic customers taking up all your time and
energy, it’s often the high-value, respectful customers who suffer a lack
of attention. Don’t give the squeaky wheels oil. Replace them.
Your tribe members are like the proverbial “good wife” taking care
of things at home and keeping 
things running while the husband’s out
at strip clubs looking for love in all the wrong places. Your tribe are the
customers that keep your lights on and stick with you and promote you
despite you focusing on trying to appease vampires, trying to retain
churners and throwing your time and resources at snow leopards.
Firing the detractors gives you the time needed to show more love
to your high-value tribe members. Doing so builds loyalty and can very
quickly result in an increase in lifetime value and healthy revenue thatfar outweighs the loss of the polluted revenue.
Another beneficial side effect of firing problem customers is that it
creates scarcity without being disingenuous. It sends a message that
you only have a limited supply and that you are very selective about
whom you’ll work with. With limited supply, people have to play by
your rules and pay accordingly.
Business should be fun. If you allow problem customers to suck the
fun out of it, then you’re losing out on one of the major benefits of
running your own business. If it’s no longer fun, no amount of money
can compensate for being miserable. If it’s no longer fun you’re likely
not doing it right. Take time out periodically to review which
customers are causing you the most pain in your business then give
them the news they deserve. You’ll feel like a huge weight has been
taken off your shoulders and you’ll have renewed energy to focus on
high value tribe members.
Better still, you can kill two birds with one stone by sending your
problem customers to your direct competitors. You’ll be freeing
yourself of the problem while lumping your competitors with it.Chapter 8 Action Item:
How Will You Increase Customer Lifetime Value?
Fill in square #8 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.
6
This statistic has been bandied about for years. I’m not even going to attempt to try to track
down its original source. In reality, whether the number is 21, 18, five or whatever is pretty
irrelevant. What is relevant is that it is much easier to sell to people who’ve previously
purchased from you than it is to try and sell to new prospects.
7
A lot of the concepts in this section were devised by Richard Tripp, a specialist in hyper-
growth and creator of the 
POV
 Method, which helps categorize healthy versus unhealthy
revenue.9
ORCHESTRATING AND STIMULATING
REFERRALS
Chapter 9 Summary
Orchestrating and stimulating referrals is an active process. Many businesses wish and
hope for referrals but don’t have a deliberate system for making them happen. By
implementing some simple tactics you can make the flow of referrals a more reliable part
of your marketing process.
Highlights covered in this chapter include:
•
Why relying on word of mouth is a losing strategy
•
How to ask for referrals without looking needy or desperate
•
The “Law of 250” and how it relates to getting an ongoing stream of referral business
•
The psychology behind referral marketing and how to compel existing customers to
want to give you referrals
•
How to create a win-win scenario with joint ventures
•
How to profit by referring your customers to others
•
What “branding” really is and how to build brand equity in your businessW
Orchestrating and Stimulating Referrals
Don’t Rely On a Free Lunch
HENEVER I SPEAK
 to business owners about how they market
themselves, “word of mouth” almost always comes up as the
primary or only form of marketing they rely on. This used to
shock me but now I’ve come to expect it. When I say “word-of-mouth
marketing” here, I’m talking about the passive type where you hope
that by doing a good job, word will spread and more customers will
come your way.
Notice that the name of this chapter isn’t “Sit and Wait for
Referrals”? It’s called “
Orchestrating
 and 
Stimulating
 Referrals.” This
implies that making referrals happen requires something very active on
your part. Yet, many business owners see referrals as out of their hands
and something that just (hopefully) happens. While passive word-of-
mouth marketing is great, it’s an extremely slow and unreliable way of
building a business. Assuming you do everything right, it can take
many years, even decades, to build a successful business on the back of
word of mouth alone. As discussed in 
Chapter 3
, having only a single
source of new business is extremely dangerous, but being unable to
control that source makes it doubly so.
Word of mouth is the business equivalent of a free lunch. Sure, it’s
nice when it comes your way and you appreciate it, but do you really
want to rely on it to feed yourself and your family? By being solely
reliant on word of mouth, you’re putting the fate of your business in
the hands of others—hoping they both like you and remember you
often enough to regularly send new business your way. This is an
extremely dangerous path to be on. If it’s similar to what you do in your
business, now’s the time to start building a much more robust referral
marketing system. You need to actively orchestrate and stimulatereferrals, rather than just hope and wait for them to happen.
A key part of the problem seems to be that business owners don’t
want to seem needy or desperate in actively asking for referrals. They
feel like asking for referrals is like begging or asking for a favor—and
that’s certainly not the kind of positioning I’d want you to adopt.
It’s important to understand the psychology behind referral
marketing before we get into specific tactics. Think back to the last
time you recommended a restaurant or a movie to a friend. Were you
doing so as a favor to the restaurant owner or movie theater chain?
Unlikely. In all likelihood, you wanted your friend to have a great
experience. You made the referral because it made 
you
 look and feel
good. That’s the exact same concept we want to use in our referral
marketing, but rather than waiting and hoping someone discovers and
shares us, we want to orchestrate and stimulate the process. We want
to make it more deliberate and reliable.
Ask and You Shall Receive
Remember the world’s greatest salesman, Joe Girard, whom we
introduced in 
Chapter 5
? Part of the reason he started sending greeting
cards to his list of clients monthly was because of the “Law of 250.”
After attending a Catholic funeral, Joe looked into the visitor book and
counted the number of people who signed it at each funeral. He
noticed that, on average, it was about 250 people. Later he sold a car to
man who ran a funeral home and after the sale asked him how many
people, on average, attended the funerals he conducts. The man
replied, “About 250.” Another time, Joe and his wife were attending a
wedding and he asked the owner of the catering business what the
average number of guests was at a wedding. “About 250 from the
bride’s side, and another 250 from the groom’s,” came the 
answer.
That’s when Joe came to the realization that most people have about
250 people in their lives who are important enough to invite to awedding or to a funeral.
From that he figured that every person he did business with
represented 250 potential referrals if he did a great job, or 250 enemies
if he did a crappy job. So, he set about building relationships rather
than thinking transactionally and just selling cars. One of the things he
did was follow up with new customers and ask how their new car was
going. If it was going well, he’d ask for a referral. If it wasn’t, he’d fix
the problem and then ask for a referral.
This brings us to 
one of the best strategies for getting what you
want in business and indeed in life—just ask
.
So many people just wait to be discovered, wait to be picked, wait to
be referred to. You, however, are an entrepreneur, which means 
you
make things happen
 for yourself. You don’t just wait for them to
happen to you. With this in mind, one of the best ways to get referrals
is by straight out asking for them from customers for whom you’ve
delivered a good result. It’s amazing how many business owners hope
for referrals yet rarely ask for them, something as simple as:
Mr. Customer, it’s been such a pleasure working with you. If you
know anyone who’s in a similar situation to yourself, we’d love you to
give them one of these gift cards which entitles them to
 
$
100 off their
first consultation with us. One of the reasons we’re able to keep the cost
of our service down is because we get a lot of our business through
referrals from people like you.
See what’s going on here:
•
We’re acknowledging them and appealing to their ego. People love
being acknowledged.
•
We’re not asking them for a favor but instead offering something
valuable they can give to someone in their network.
•
We’re giving them a reason to give us referrals—a reason that had
directly benefited them.
By making a system for generating referrals, we dramatically
increase the reliability of word-of-mouth marketing. And while noteveryone will give you referrals, many will, and it sure beats just
passively hoping.
One of the things you can be almost sure of is that your customers
know other people who are similar to themselves. It’s human nature to
be attracted to people with the same likes, interests and situations as
us.
Another excellent strategy is to make known during your sales or
customer onboarding process that you 
expect
 them to give you
referrals as a natural course of doing business with you.
Mr. Customer, we’re going to do an awesome job for you, but we need
your help also. Most of our new business comes through referrals. This
means that rather than paying for advertising to get new clients, we
pass the cost savings directly to you. We typically get about three
referrals from each new customer. When we’re finished working
together and you’re
 
100% satisfied with the work we’ve done, we’d
really appreciate it if you could keep in mind three or more other people
who we could also help.
Again, breaking it down, we are:
•
Letting them know that they’re going to get a great result.
•
Showing them a direct benefit that they’re going to be, or already
are, deriving by referring to us.
•
Creating an expectation of a certain number of referrals (without
being too pushy) so that they can start thinking ahead of time about
who would be suitable.
•
Leaving the power with them by telling them that their referral is
subject to us doing a great job for them.
Relying on the goodwill of others is not my idea of being an
entrepreneur. By increasing the reliability of word-of-mouth
marketing, you take back control of your lead flow and build a solid
foundation for rapid business growth
.Conquering the Bystander
Effect
Asking for referrals is one thing, but how you ask for them can have a
dramatic impact on the quality of the referrals you get and the
likelihood that you’ll get them consistently.
The bystander effect is a phenomenon that occurs when a large
crowd gathers around an ongoing emergency or crime and essentially
treats it as a spectator sport.
Everyone in the crowd assumes that someone else will intervene,
assist or contact emergency services. The end result is that the terrible
event is compounded by the fact that no one took the initiative to help.
How could any decent person watch others in distress and not do
anything to help? The fact is that it’s likely that you’ve done the same
thing to some extent. Have you ever slowed down as you pass a car
accident on the freeway to see what’s going on but then driven on
assuming someone else is assisting those involved? That’s the
bystander effect in action. It happens because of a lack of personal
responsibility. You aren’t specifically involved in the accident, and so
there’s a diffusion of responsibility.
I’ve attended business networking meetings and events during
which the participants stand up and say something like, “If you know
somebody who needs service X, then please refer them to me.” So, the
plumber stands up and says, “If you know somebody who needs a
quality plumber, please refer them to me.” Then, the 
IT
 guy stands up
and says, “If you know somebody who needs help upgrading their
computer system, please send them my way.” Who’s “somebody”? It’s
somebody 
else
; that’s who “somebody” is. This, of course, is the perfect
ingredient for the bystander effect as it relates to referrals. Everyone
assumes somebody else will assist with the referral request. The result
is that our friends the plumber and the 
IT
 technician end up with no
referrals.
In first aid training, they teach you to give specific instructions to
specific people in a crowd. They teach you not to call out “somebodycall an ambulance!” or “somebody get a blanket!” As we’ve already
established, “somebody” is somebody else. 
Instead, they teach you to
make eye contact, point to a specific person and give them specific
instructions. You point directly at the man with the green hat, and you
say, “You, call an ambulance.” You point at the woman in the yellow
jumper and say, “You, get a blanket.”
Now you have specific people who have specific tasks to carry out. A
sense of personal responsibility kicks in and the odds that those tasks
get done have gone up exponentially.
The same thing is true of referrals. You have to be very specific in
your requests for referrals; this significantly increases the odds that
they’ll happen.
To better understand the mechanics of how referrals happen, we
must first understand that all referrals happen through a conversation
between two or more people. When these conversations are
happening, three things must happen for someone to refer you:
1.
They have to notice that the conversation is about whatever it is that
you do.
2.
They have to think about you.
3.
They have to introduce you into the conversation and, ultimately,
introduce you to the person they’re talking to.
So, for example, if you’re a financial planner, don’t make a vague,
fluffy referral request like, “If you hear about somebody who needs to
talk to a financial planner, please refer them to me.”
First, no one ever needs a financial planner; they need a solution to a
specific problem that a financial planner can solve for them. For
example, they may be nearing retirement age and want to make sure
they’ll have enough money to live comfortably throughout their
retirement years. So, you start with a specific problem that the
potential prospect has that you can solve.
Next, you need to think about who could give you that referral. So,
you start going through your database of clients, and you notice you
have several real estate agents on your books. It’s logical to assume that
someone nearing retirement age might think about downsizing.
Perhaps their children have grown up, gone to school and left home. Sonow they’re in a house that’s too big for them, and there’s too 
much
maintenance. They may be thinking about selling and looking to buy
something a bit smaller with lower maintenance.
Last, perhaps some local or national event may have occurred, and
that’s triggering people at or near retirement age to retire or think
about retiring. Perhaps a multinational company has recently closed its
local operation, or there’s been a change in legislation that affects
retirement pensions.
So now you can get much more specific. You might send an email to
your six real estate agent clients, saying something like:
Hey Bob,
If you have anyone who wants to buy or sell a property or who’s about
retirement age and has recently been made redundant, I’ve got
something that I think would really help them out. I’ve put together a
special report titled, “The
 
7 Keys to Leveraging Your Redundancy
Package and Ensuring a Fully Funded Retirement.” If you have
anyone who would benefit from this, please call or text me, and I’ll
send you a copy of the report to pass on.
See what’s going on here? First, you’re very specific with both who
you ask the referral from and what kind of referral you want to receive.
Second, you’re hooking into a situation that is a trigger for someone
needing your service.
Third, you’re not asking for a cold referral, wherein the referrer has
to get their client to call you or give you their client’s contact details.
The reason you don’t want to do that is because you haven’t yet
established trust with the prospect. They may not even be ready to talk
to anyone yet.
Last, you’ve set up the situation so that the referrer, in this case, the
real estate agent, looks good. They’re providing value to their client and
helping them solve a problem that is likely very much on their mind.
See how the referral here is 
orchestrated
 rather than just passively
hoped for?If you’re serious about generating referrals, systematically go
through your database of existing customers 
and make a referral profile
for each major group or type. Who do they know? What trigger will
help them remember you? How will you make them look good? How
will you help them provide value to the person you want them to refer
you to?
Once you start answering these questions and building referral
profiles, you can make referral marketing a deliberate, systematic
source of new leads rather than something passive you hope
occasionally happens.
Who Has Your Clients before
You?
As business owners we sometimes don’t see ourselves within the
bigger picture of our customer’s buying behavior. We just see their
interaction with us and market ourselves to acquire more and more
customer interactions.
There’s nothing wrong with that of course. But when we start to
look at the bigger picture, we can start to uncover profits that were
previously hidden. It’s like finding a 
$
50 bill in a jacket you haven’t
worn in a while, but on a much bigger and more profitable scale!
Your customer’s transaction with you is one of many they will make
that day.
Before their transaction with you, they did business with someone
else and after you they’ll do business with someone else.
The transactions may or may not be related, but one thing is for
certain—someone had your customers before you did and in all
likelihood they spent a good deal of money on sales and marketing to
acquire that customer.
Finding other complementary businesses that your customer dealswith before they deal with you can help you uncover untapped profits
in your business. Setting up a joint venture (
JV
) arrangement with one
or more of these businesses that are not in direct competition with you
can be a cheap or free source of leads.
If you’re a lawyer, an accountant might make a great source of new
leads. If you’re a car detailer, a mechanic could be your source of leads.
If you’re a pet food retailer, a vet might be your ideal source of new
customers
.
While this may seem obvious, it’s rarely done and it is even more
rarely done well.
Setting up a 
JV
 arrangement can be tricky. The most obvious and
direct route is to pay either a finder’s fee or a commission for incoming
leads or sales.
However, some business owners may not feel comfortable about
taking cash for leads they send you and in some industries this may not
even be legal. While it’s smart to pay for leads of known buyers who are
“hot,” there are other less direct ways that work just as well or better.
One awesome strategy involves creating a gift card or voucher for
your products or services. Let’s say, for example, your business is
“Mike’s Pet World,” a pet food retailer. You could create an
arrangement with a local vet. Find out what kind of pet food this vet
recommends to his clients, then create a voucher or gift card that he
can give away to new clients.
The beauty of this is that it is goodwill all round, no sales pressure,
no conflicts of interest. The vet would say something like, “I
recommend 
XYZ
 dog food. You can buy it at most pet food retailers but
you’re a good customer so here’s a 
$
50 voucher that you can redeem at
Mike’s Pet World, which is just down the road. They always carry
plenty of stock of 
XYZ
 dog food.”
It’s a win-win for every party involved. The vet creates massive
goodwill with the customer because he is essentially handing them 
$
50
for free. The customer receives an unexpected discount. You, as the
owner of Mike’s Pet World, acquire a new customer whose lifetime
value is potentially huge in exchange for a voucher with a face value of
$
50 (and a wholesale cost which is much less). You also get transferredmuch of the goodwill the customer already has with their vet.
Now it’s true not all customers will redeem a gift card or voucher
but the vast majority will. It feels too much like throwing out money to
toss out something with a monetary value attached to it. Let’s say that
you conservatively calculate that the average lifetime value of a new
customer at your pet store is 
$
5,000.
You’ve given away a part of the profit from a sale you would 
have
never have had. Genius!
Flipping it back the other way, you should look to see who has or
wants your clients after you’re done servicing them. This can become a
great secondary source of revenue to you, while increasing the value of
your offering to the end customer. Here are a few methods to monetize
your existing customer base in this way:
•
Sell the leads
: there’s very likely someone else in a complementary
but noncompetitive line of business who would be willing to pay
handsomely for hot, qualified leads. One caveat here is to ensure
that you have your customers’ explicit permission to pass on their
details.
•
Exchange the leads
: if you don’t want to, or if it’s not appropriate to
accept payment for leads, you could set up a two-way lead exchange
program with someone else in a complementary business. They
send you their customers and you send them yours. Again the same
caveat as selling leads applies. Never give out your customers’
confidential details without their permission.
•
Resell complementary products and services
: you could buy
complementary products and services on a wholesale or white label
basis and resell these to your customer base. The benefit of this
model is that you maintain full control of the relationship and never
hand over your customer details to a third party.
•
Become an affiliate referral partner
: this is similar to the model of
selling leads, except that instead of being paid per lead, you get paid
a commission on sales made by the third party you’re referring to.
This can be extremely profitable, especially for scenarios in which
you get a trailing commission on all future sales. Refer once and get
paid forever (or at least a long time). Many people in industries suchas insurance, telecommunications and finance have built highly
profitable businesses based on this model.
Look at who has your customers before you and after you and find
ways of creating value in both directions. This can become an
important source of new customers and new revenue for your business
.
Building Your Brand
There’s an enormous amount of confusion, especially among small
businesses, about what a brand is. A search on the Internet gives the
following diverse range of answers:
•
It is the emotional and psychological relationship you have with
your customers.
•
It is a type of product manufactured by a particular company under a
particular name.
•
It is the name, term, design, symbol or any other feature that
identifies one seller’s product distinct from those of other sellers.
•
It is the idea or image of a specific product or service that consumers
connect with, by identifying the name, logo, slogan or design of the
company who owns the idea or image.
All of these are only partial answers. I like to eliminate fluff and keep
things simple. So, here is my definition: 
a brand is the personality of a
business
. In fact, you can use the well-understood word “personality”
as a direct substitute for “brand.” That instantly clarifies the meaning.
Think of your business as a person. What attributes make up its
personality?
•
What’s its name?
•
What does it wear? (i.e., design)
•
How does it communicate? (i.e., positioning)
•
What are its core values and what does it stand for? (i.e., brand
promise)•
Who does it associate with? (i.e., target market)
•
Is it well-known? (i.e., brand awareness)
This personality varies dramatically between businesses. Toyota and
Rolls-Royce both produce functionally the same product, but their
answers to the above are very different.
Some small businesses look at the flashy advertising campaigns of
well-known brands like Apple, Coca-Cola and so on and get caught up
thinking that they also need to spend 
time, money and effort building
“brand awareness.” That’s putting the cart before the horse. Let me ask
you a simple question: what came first, the sales or the brand
awareness? The sales of course. It’s true that as a company gets bigger,
brand awareness does feed sales. However, don’t look at what they do
now as big companies. Look at what these businesses did to get big in
the first place.
When they were small, they certainly didn’t spend huge amounts of
money on flashy ads and brand awareness. They hustled, they closed
deals and sold their products. If Apple and Coca-Cola didn’t
concentrate on sales to begin with, they wouldn’t exist today and
there’d certainly be no awareness of them.
That’s why I tell small business owners the best form of brand
building is selling. If a brand is the personality of a business, what
better way is there for someone to understand that personality than by
buying from you?
As we discussed at the beginning of this book, trying to emulate the
marketing practices of large businesses is a major mistake.
When all is said and done, branding is something you do 
after
someone has bought from you rather than something you do to induce
them to buy from you. In the same way that you get a sense of
someone’s personality after you’ve dealt with them, so too it is with
your business and its personality or brand.
Brand equity is the goodwill you build up that compels people to do
business with you rather than your competitor. I once heard brand
equity described as customers crossing the road to buy from you even
though there’s a supplier of an equivalent product on their side of the
street.The things in your business that cause customers to figuratively or
literally “cross the road” to buy from you are your brand equity. This
can manifest itself in the form of customer loyalty, repeat business or
even a price premium you can charge for your product or service.
Importantly, it’s also the key to stimulating the virtuous cycle of
referrals.
For me, nothing illustrates this better than seeing queues of people
lining up for the latest Apple gadget while their competitors with
plentiful stock and no queues get much lower demand. This 
kind of
brand equity is born out of customers having amazing past experiences,
which turns these customers into raving fans. This is something that
simply can’t be bought with hype-filled “brand awareness” campaigns.
No one at Apple has to ask you to tell your friends. You just do it
because of the incredible brand equity they’ve built up.
As a small business, your best hope for emulating this is focusing on
sales and then turning your customers into a tribe of raving fans. This is
the advice I give to any small to medium business wanting to work on
branding.Chapter 9 Action Item:
How Will You Orchestrate and Stimulate Referrals?
Fill in square #9 of your 1-Page Marketing Plan canvas.W
Conclusion
A Bird’s-Eye View of What
We’ve Covered
E’VE COVERED A
 lot of ground in our journey through the nine
squares that make up the 1-Page Marketing Plan. It’s useful at
this stage to take a step back and look at a high level, visual
overview of the Direct Response 
Marketing Lifecycle.To download your copy of the Direct Response Marketing Lifecycle, visit
1pmp.com
This, along with your personal implementation of the 1-Page Marketing
Plan, will give you a solid foundation for marketing success in your
business.
As mentioned in the Acknowledgments, very few if any of the ideas
in this book are my original inventions. They are mostly proven
strategies, tactics and concepts taken from decades of testing and
measuring by the direct response marketing masters. However, the 1-Page Marketing Plan is an 
implementation
 breakthrough. It’s designed
to dramatically simplify the understanding of direct response marketing
and speed up its implementation in your business. Remember, it’s all
about implementation. I’ll reiterate—
knowing and not doing is the
same as not knowing
. You need to make the mistakes, risk looking
foolish and invest in yourself and your business. In my experience, I’ve
found that entrepreneurs fail to implement for one of the following
three reasons:
1.
Paralysis by analysis:
 they keep trying to learn more or get stuck
chasing the latest bright shiny object in the hope that they’ll get
everything perfect the first time around. You’ll never get everything
perfect the first time. You only truly learn by doing. Don’t let
perfectionism become a source of procrastination to you.
Remember, 
80% out the door is better than
 
100% in the drawer
.
Successful entrepreneurs have a bias for action, implement quickly
and course correct along the way. As one of my early mentors would
say, “Money loves speed.” The best time to plant a tree is yesterday.
The second best time to plant a tree is today. If you’ve been putting
off building and implementing a marketing system for your business,
then it’s time to plant that tree and get started immediately so that
you can reap the fruits of your labor in the future.
2.
Inability to delegate:
 as mentioned in 
Chapter 5
, business is a team
sport. I don’t know of any successful entrepreneur who 
doesn’t have
a team behind them. You have only 24 hours a day, so the only way
you can get more achieved in a day is by using other people’s time.
Even more importantly than other people’s time is other people’s
specialist expertise. This can reduce your learning time by years
compared to trial and error. What you don’t know 
will
 hurt you.
Hiring specialist expertise will save you time, money and huge
amounts of frustration. The ability to get independent and
sometimes difficult people all to go in one direction working on
behalf of your cause is a skill you should commit to mastering. This
is what the late great Jim Rohn referred to as “herding cats” and
almost nothing pays more than mastering this skill.
3.
“My business is different”:
 pretty much any conceivable problem
you have or are going to encounter has been solved by someone atsome time. Many of the solutions to your marketing problems are in
this book. Some business owners mistakenly think, “My business is
different, this won’t work for me” or “My customers are different,
they’d never respond to something like that.” The strategies and
tactics in this book are time tested and proven over many decades.
They’ve worked in almost every category and type of business you
could care to imagine, from trades to consulting to medical services
and much, much more. The reason the same stuff works over time
and across different business types is that you’re dealing with
humans—big bags of emotion. This doesn’t change over time or
across industry. People behave in a remarkably predictable manner,
which is why I know that these direct response marketing principles
will
 work for your business. There’s no leverage in trying to figure
out why these things won’t work for you. Your effort is far better
spent trying to figure out how to make it work for you.
Time Is Not Money
As entrepreneurs, we only get paid for bringing value to the market—
not for time. Sure, it takes time to deliver value but we only get paid for
the value. If we deliver a huge amount of value to the marketplace, 
we
get a huge payday. If we flop, we take a loss. That’s a risk most people
aren’t willing to take. Most people want to get paid for time—work an
hour, get paid for an hour. They want to avoid loss at all costs. Making
gains to them is nice, but their real objective is pain avoidance. There’s
nothing wrong with that, but the mindsets are worlds apart. Put
simply, entrepreneurs work in the 
results economy
, whereas most
other people work in the 
time and effort economy
.
The money we make as entrepreneurs is an automatic side effect of
creating value. If our focus is on bringing value to the market, it will
stop us from making all kinds of foolish mistakes. We’ll treat customers
with the long term in mind rather than being transactional or trying tomake a quick buck. The products we create or the services we deliver
won’t be half-baked. Focusing on the cause (value) rather than the
effect (making money) will lead to much greater long-term success.
Most of this book has been focused on getting, retaining and
satisfying customers through effective marketing. These are the tasks
that create the most value in your business and facilitate rapid growth.
Almost everything else is overhead.
The more times we create value by getting, retaining and satisfying a
customer, the more we get paid. Unfortunately, many business owners
get distracted “playing business.” Playing business is when you do
peripheral activities that don’t really create much value. Some
examples of “playing business” include things like constantly checking
email and endless, nonsense meetings that have no real point or
agenda.
Instead of playing business, you must 
do
 business. Winning in
business requires you to have a relentless focus on the activities that
deliver value. You must fight a daily battle with distraction,
interruption and procrastination. If you allow yourself to be distracted
from the value-creating work of getting, retaining and satisfying
customers, your business will struggle or fail. There are always things
to do that are more fun or seemingly urgent.
We rationalize playing business, but in reality there are only a few
value-building activities that you need to do daily—marketing being
key among them. It’s important to understand that marketing 
isn’t an
event, it’s a process. It’s something you do daily to build massive value
in your business and deliver massive value to your customers.
Your view of time affects everything you do in your business. For
the entrepreneur, time is 
not
 money. Value is money. Time is just one
of the inputs it takes to deliver value to the market. Make marketing a
daily process. Create your own 1-Page Marketing Plan and most
importantly 
implement
 the plan. Spend time daily 
doing
 business and
building value.Lipstick on a Pig
An enormous amount of your success is dependent on the vehicle you
choose. Some businesses are a Ferrari and adding marketing just
accelerates their success, whereas other businesses are a beat-up old
jalopy and adding marketing is like putting lipstick on a pig.
In a time when new technology is disrupting industries that have
been around for decades or centuries, it’s valuable to continually
evaluate whether your business or industry is in the sunrise or sunset
phase. Good times don’t last forever. Just ask bricks-and-mortar
bookstores, record stores and traditional news media giants.
Around the year 1900 there were 100,000 horses in New York.
London in 1900 had 11,000 cabs, all horse-powered. There were also
several thousand buses, each of which required 12 horses per day, for a
total of more than 50,000 horses. In addition, there were countless
carts, drays and wains, all working constantly to deliver the goods
needed by the rapidly growing population of these cities. All transport,
whether of goods or people, was drawn by horses.
If you had a horse-related business, then business was booming.
Everything from clearing away the huge amounts of horse manure to
grooming, feeding and housing the ever-growing population of horses.
Fast forward a few short years to the advent of electrification and the
development of the internal combustion engine. This brought new
ways to move people and goods around. By 1912, cars in New 
York
outnumbered horses, and in 1917 the city’s last horse-drawn streetcar
made its final run.
So, in 
1
2 years your business went from being on top of the world to
losing more than half its revenue. Five years after that you were bust
and all your knowledge, industry connections and skills were totally
obsolete. Failing to anticipate how changes in technology will affect
your business or industry, and failing to take action accordingly, can be
fatal to your business.
Kodak invented digital photography, yet despite this they could not
or did not use this early lead to their advantage. They let othercompetitors eat their lunch. Borders finally got into ebooks, but it was
too little, too late and consequently it also paid the ultimate price.
When the guy running his booming horse business in the early
1900s started to see these new-fangled electric streetcars appearing, he
might have chuckled to himself and thought that this form of transport
was just a passing fad. After all, horses had been used as a means of
transport for thousands of years.
Then, a few years on, when more and more of his revenue was being
eroded by the new technology, he might have started pining for the
good old days, when things were going well. He might have even
become angry about what was happening and expected the government
to intervene. See anything similar happening today?
Various industries, including manufacturing, news media and
bricks-and-mortar retail, are either in crisis or on the verge of crisis.
Globalization, the Internet and new technology is hurting them—big
time. They are whining and crying about the state of things, lobbying
for government intervention and hoping the good old days will soon
return. But the good old days aren’t coming back—at least not for
them.
Why don’t they just embrace the new technology and get on board
with it? Some of them will but most won’t—because they have the
same mindset as a turkey does.
Nassim Nicholas Taleb, bestselling author of 
The Black Swan
, tells
the story of a turkey who is fed by a farmer every morning for 1,000
days. Eventually, the turkey comes to expect that every visit from the
farmer means more good food. That’s all that has 
ever happened, so the
turkey figures that’s all that can and will ever happen. In fact, on day
1,000 it’s at the peak of its confidence. After all, it now has 1,000 days’
worth of track record on which to base its confidence. With a track
record like that, what can possibly go wrong? But then day 1,001
arrives. It’s two days before Thanksgiving and when the farmer shows
up, this time he hasn’t got food in his hand. Instead, he has a recently
sharpened axe. The turkey learns very quickly that its expectations
were catastrophically off the mark—that the good old days weren’t
going to last forever. So now Mr. Turkey is dead.Don’t be a turkey and don’t run your business like one. In times
past, almost all the value of a business was in its physical assets. Things
like real estate, plant and equipment, inventory and distribution
infrastructure. Today almost all the value of a business is in the eyeballs
it has access to and the customer base it has acquired.
Look at what’s happening today and the central role that acquiring
customers through effective marketing plays:
•
Uber, the world’s largest taxi company, owns no vehicles.
•
Meta (formerly Facebook), owner of some of the world’s biggest
media properties, creates no content.
•
Amazon, one of the world’s most valuable retailers, owns almost no
inventory.
•
Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider, owns no real
estate.
Just these few businesses are worth trillions of dollars.
Your ultimate competitive advantage is in anticipating change and
taking action accordingly. It’s going to take guts; you’ll have to take
risks and you’ll have to invest in research and new technology. You
need to constantly be pondering questions such as:
•
What business do I need to be in?
•
What technologies are coming that are going to disrupt my
industry?
•
How can I take advantage of the coming changes in technology
rather than fight them?
You need constant strategic innovation—innovation that your
customers care about.
Skunkworks projects are one of the best ways to stay abreast of
emerging technology while still continuing to run your current
operation. A famous example of a skunkworks project is the first Apple
Macintosh computer. Google famously made skunkworks projects part
of their company’s culture by allocating 20% of employee time to side
projects that interest them. Hugely successful Google products such as
Gmail, Google Maps and Google News came from these skunkworks
projects.What resources are you investing in emerging technologies and
trends in your industry?
Day 1,001 is coming for your business and your industry and if you
aren’t ready with a new plan, your business could well suffer the same
fate as the turkey.
Having a culture of innovation, anticipating what’s coming in your
industry and running some skunkworks projects in your business will
give you a massive competitive advantage.
Your Transition from Business
Owner to Marketer
Einstein’s famous definition of insanity, “doing the same thing over
and over again and expecting different results,” is well-known but
rarely acted upon.
At the start of every new year people make resolutions. Typical ones
are to lose weight, quit smoking and get out of debt. They hope that
things will magically become better for them as the clock strikes
midnight on the 31st of December. When they hit week two or three of
the new year, their resolutions become a distant memory as they return
to routine, old habits and the daily grind.
Resolutions are a close cousin of wishes—basically nothing more
than goals that have no plan or action behind them. Chances are, if
nothing changes in your regular routine, nothing will change in your
business or personal life.
One of the commonalities among high-growth businesses is that
they have a strong focus on marketing. They make marketing a regular
routine in their business and execute their marketing plan
continuously
.
Conversely, failed and struggling businesses either neglect
marketing altogether or do random acts of marketing with no plan orstructure. They try random tactics once or twice and give up when they
don’t see immediate success. That’s not a marketing plan—that’s a
recipe for disaster.
Others mistakenly believe that having a great product or service is
enough to “get the word out there.” The graveyards of failed businesses
are full of excellent products and services. For the most part they failed
because those running them didn’t pay enough attention to marketing.
Remember,
 no one knows how good your products or services are
until after the sale. Before they buy, they only know how good your
marketing is
. Put simply, 
the best marketer wins every time
.
If you’re serious about business success, then now’s the time to take
decisive action. It’s time to decide to become a great marketer and
transform yourself from a business owner to a marketer who owns a
business. Once you make this exciting transformation, you and your
business will never be the same again.
It’s my belief that this book is a marketing implementation
breakthrough because it makes creating and implementing your own
marketing plan easy. It can help you start or accelerate your journey
from business owner to marketer.
Marketing is the master skill of business. It will help you make your
current business a success and, importantly, it will help make other
businesses and enterprises you may be involved with in the future
successful.
Throughout this book, you’ve been the recipient of some extremely
valuable information. It’s information that most of your competitors
will never know or seek out. That puts you at a huge advantage—if you
take action. I urge you to take action. As mentioned at the beginning of
this book, 
knowing and not doing is the same as not knowing
. If you
continue to do what you’ve always done, you’ll continue to get the
same results you’ve always gotten.
Building a successful business enables you to live life on your own
terms. You deserve business success and it is attainable for 
YOU
. I
invite you on that journey of building an extraordinary business and
living life on your own terms.About the Author
Hey, thanks for reading.
This is the bit where I’m supposed to tell you how awesome I am.
It’s also usually written in the third person, which is kind of weird, so I
won’t do that.
I think people read “about” pages and author bios for two main
reasons. They want to know, “Is this person credible?” and “What can
they do for me?” With that in mind, here’s a bunch of business stuff
I’ve done that I’m proud of:
•
I’ve sold a lot of books. I’m in the top 0.0
1
% of nonfiction authors.
•
My books have a lot of reach. They’ve been translated into 32
languages and have impacted millions of entrepreneurs all over the
world.
•
I’ve founded, scaled and successfully exited multiple high-growth
businesses across various industries including 
IT
,
telecommunications and marketing.•
I’ve spoken to thousands of people at some amazing events and
conferences.
•
I’ve made a lot of money along the way. I know money doesn’t buy
happiness, but having grown up poor, I can tell you being rich is
much better.
•
I work very reasonable hours. My business and work support my
lifestyle, health and relationships rather than being detrimental to
them.
Here’s what I can do for you:
•
I’ll give you a clear, simple and structured framework for marketing
success.
•
I’ll help you and your team build your marketing skills,
infrastructure and capabilities.
•
I’ll help you grow your business revenue and profit.
•
I’ll help you increase the value of your business and create an asset
that’s salable, should you ever decide you want to exit.
•
I’ll help you build the kind of business that allows you to live life on
your own terms.
•
We’ll do all of the above in a way that’s fun.
You can learn more about my programs at 
LeanMarketing.com
You can contact me at 
allan@LeanMarketing.comGet the Brilliant Follow-Up
This book helped you craft your marketing plan. Now it’s time to put
your plan into action!
This is where many get overwhelmed. There’s an endless number of
tools, tactics and options. You keep being told to do more. More
complex, more specialized and more expensive marketing.
But what are the marketing tools and tactics that will actually get
you results? How do you avoid wasting time, money and effort on stuff
that doesn’t work?
The answer is a lean approach to marketing. The lean movement has
transformed dozens of industries and is now transforming marketing.
In my follow-up book, 
Lean Marketing
, you’ll discover:
•
The exact tools and tactics you need to build a devastatingly
effective 
marketing system
•
How to avoid doing marketing that annoys, interrupts and repels
and how to really 
move people to action
•
How to get bigger and better results by actually doing 
less
marketing
If you want to avoid expensive marketing mistakes and get immediate
traction, then you’ll love 
Lean Marketing
.
