© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
The Brand -Agency Relationship: 
Streamlining with In -House Teams 
and Flexible Engagement Models
Jillian Ryan
Principal Analyst
June 2019© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
The majority of US companies outsource part of 
their marketing budget to agencies
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Fewer brands rely on a single agency or agency 
of record (AOR)
“Rather than one agency being the 
center of the universe,  brands now 
rely on a fragmented roster of 
‘best -in-breed’ agencies .”
—Bill Duggan, Group Executive Vice 
President, Association of National 
Advertisers (ANA)
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
The majority of 
client -side 
marketers have 
one to three 
agency partners 
Full-service digital agencies, 
management/IT 
consultancies and integrated 
agencies were most 
commonly used.
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Brands want to take more control and ownership 
of their agency relationships 
“Some clients feel like they have lost control of their 
customer, or they don’t understand how their data is 
being used. In some cases, they feel dismayed 
by the black -box matrix of agency 
relationships and want to play a more 
active role in controlling their marketing 
activities .”
—Scott Tieman, Managing Director and Personalization Lead, 
Accenture Interactive
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Brands are reviewing their agency rosters closely
74% of multinational brands are auditing their current agency 
roster to find the right model and mix of external agency 
partners and capabilities.      Source: World Federation of Advertisers, 2019
52% of marketing executives planned to bring more marketing 
capabilities in -house in the next two to three years . A third 
planned to reduce the number of external agencies, and 29% 
planned to work with more consultancies  Source: Dentsu Aegis Network, May 2018
26% of US marketers planned to consolidate their roster into 
fewer agencies in 2018.          Source: RSW/US, January 2019© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Brands looking to streamline should start with a 
gaps and overlaps assessment
This exercise requires brands to answer four questions:
    What marketing and advertising expertise do we need to 
   execute our strategy and reach our goals?  
    What capabilities do we have internally?
    What areas do we lean on agency partners for? 
    Where are the gaps and overlaps?© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
After this assessment, brands often consider in -
housing select marketing capabilities
In-housing is taking a once outsourced capability and having it managed by 
an internal agency, team, group or single employee. The goal is for this 
expertise to become a core internal competency critical to the business. The 
requirement is to have the capability and the capacity to deliver brand -side. 
Brands do not  need to have an in -house agency to accomplish their in -house 
goals.  In-housing is binary —it’s a term with much gray area that often exists 
across a spectrum of engagement models.
Taking a capability in -house doesn’t mean entirely displacing current external 
agency partners. Rather, in-housing requires cooperation and buy -in from all 
stakeholders —internal and external —in the process. © 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Marketers working 
with in -house 
agencies appreciate 
the brand and 
historical knowledge 
these colleagues 
bring to the table, as 
well as the shared 
values and goals for 
the company
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Hybrid models are 
very common, and 
most brands fall in 
this gray area
A January 2019 survey from 
Forrester Consulting shows just how 
varied these brand -agency 
engagements are.
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Most marketing 
channels in 2018 
were managed by a 
mix of in -house and 
agency —or, in some 
cases, both
There was no clear standout for a
channel that is always managed by 
in-house vs. one that
is always managed by the agency.
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
In-house 
agencies still 
lean on their 
external 
agency 
counterparts
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Brands on an in -
house journey face 
several challenges, 
including the need 
to deliver a high 
volume of work 
quickly and 
contributing 
strategically to 
organizational 
plans 
© 2019 eMarketer Inc.
Key Takeaways
▪The brand -agency relationship is a flexible engagement, unique to 
each brand and evolving over time. 
▪Brands lean on their agency ecosystem for support with marketing 
capability and capacity. 
▪Brands should regularly perform a gaps and overlaps assessment to 
uncover the areas in which they need support for an external agency 
partner. 
▪In-housing is becoming more common, but it’s not a binary action. Not 
all brands that in -house have an in -house agency, and most brands 
that in -house still engage with agencies. 
▪Taking capabilities in -house is not without challenges. 