THE  
BRAND-AGENCY 
RELATIONSHIP
Streamlining with In-House 
Teams and Flexible  
Engagement Models
JUNE 2019
Jillian Ryan
Contributors: Ross Benes, Blake Droesch, Lauren Fisher, Nicole Perrin, Tracy TangTHE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  2
THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP: STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE 
TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS 
Brands can’t accomplish everything alone; external agency partners are essential to a brands’ capabilities and 
capacity. But with aggressive growth goals and complex tech and data requirements, many brands are streamlining 
agency relationships. 
What do brands want from their agencies? 
Client-side marketers want their agencies to provide 
better design and creative work, different pricing models 
and nimbler ways of working, according to SoDA. 
Stronger leadership, technology capabilities and data skills 
also fall on that list. 
What are the biggest challenges for agencies?  
Half of digital agencies say clients moving agency 
services in-house is a top challenge, according to 
Marketing Land. Competition for talent, budget cuts by 
clients and keeping up with new technology trends are 
also key obstacles. 
How are consultancies and agencies competing? 
With an expertise in operations and technology, many 
management consulting firms work with brands to help 
streamline—or butt in on—their agency relationships. 
This engagement often starts with an assessment of the 
marketing value chain and then includes an audit of gaps 
and overlaps. Consultancies make recommendations 
for what brands can handle internally and what can be 
outsourced to an agency. 
What is in-housing? 
We define in-housing as taking a once outsourced 
capability and having it managed by an internal agency, 
team, group or even a single employee. The aim is for this 
expertise to become a core internal competency, critical 
to the business. The requirement is to have the capability 
and capacity to deliver brand-side, but this doesn’t 
necessarily mean displacing the agency. In-housing 
requires cooperation and buy-in from all stakeholders—
internal and external. 
WHAT’S IN THIS REPORT?  This report will cover how brands 
rely on external agencies and how that relationship has 
evolved in recent years. It will also explore which services 
brands manage internally, with 12 brand case studies. % of respondents,  Jan 2019How Do US Companies Describe the Relationship
with Their Agencies as It Applies to Digital and
Creative Media?
Currently exploring the feasibility of bringing our digital media
and creative in-house
42%
Planning to onboard new digital media solutions/technology and
have our agency run them
37%
Currently running some parts of our digital ad campaigns
internally , but are facing challenges scaling our efforts due to
limited resources
35%
Planning to leave our agency and manage our digital media an d
creative in-house
24%
Have an internal agency and are having a hard tim e
ﬁnding/retaining/competing for talent
21%
Note: n=150 customer intelligence,  ecommer ce and mark eting
decision-mak ers
Source: F orrester Consulting,  "Harnessing AI's P otential: Marke ters Have
Adopted AI But Have Yet To Realize The Full Beneﬁt" commissioned by
Albert,  April 30,  2019
247542 www .eMarketer.com
KEY STAT: A January 2019 survey from Forrester 
Consulting asked marketing decision-makers to describe 
their agency relationship as it applies to digital and 
creative media. There was no majority response, showing 
just how varied brand-agency engagements are. 
CONTENTS
2 The Brand-Agency Relationship
3 The Shifting Dynamics of Brands and Agencies 
4 Brands Taking More Ownership 
6 Flexible Engagement Models: In-Housing, Outsourcing 
and Everything in Between 
9 An Inside Look at 12 Brands on an In-House Journey  
13 Challenges Ahead 
14 Key Takeaways 
14 eMarketer Interviews 
16 Read Next 
16 Sources THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  3
THE SHIFTING DYNAMICS OF 
BRANDS AND AGENCIES 
Brands have always relied on outside agencies for 
external expertise. Agencies work with multiple 
companies and stay ahead of the curve with best 
practices and new innovations. Brands can, therefore, 
benefit from having these agencies as strategic 
partners on marketing and advertising goals. 
“Brands do what they do best: knowing their brand, 
products, services and their customers; the agency’s role 
is to help them fill in the blanks, ” said Jessica Lustgarten 
Courtemanche, vice president and director of data and 
analysis at ad agency Digitas. 
Today, the majority of brands outsource part of their 
marketing budget to external players, according to 
September 2018 research from Cowen and Company. 
Eighty-five percent of US companies said they use an 
established legacy advertising agency, while 79% rely on 
nontraditional ones, like global consultancies and systems 
integrators for outsourced work. 
% of respondentsUS Companies that Outsource Part of Their Marketing
Budget to Traditional Marketing Companies vs .
Nontraditional Agencies , Sep 2018
Traditional agencies 85%
Nontraditional agencies 79%
Note: n=186 senior mark eting pr ofessionals; tr aditional mark eting
companies are deﬁned as established/legac y advertising agencies (WPP ,
Omnicom,  Publicis,  Dentsu,  etc.); nontr aditional agencies deﬁned as global
consultancies and system integr ators (Accenture,  Deloitte,  IBM,  PwC,  etc.)
Source: Cowen and Company, "Cowen CMO Technology Surve y, Vol. II -
Ahead of the Curve F ollow-Up ," Oct 12,  2018
242490 www .eMarketer.com
But fewer brands appear to be relying on a single agency 
or agency of record (AOR). “Rather than one agency 
being the center of the universe, brands now rely on a 
fragmented roster of ‘best-in-breed’ agencies, ” said Bill 
Duggan, group executive vice president at the Association 
of National Advertisers (ANA). 
Research from The CMO Club found that only 22% of 
CMOs worldwide used a single AOR as of March 2018. 
Models with several fragmented agency partners were 
collectively more common, such as a single holding 
company with multiple agencies from that company 
(27%), a single AOR plus some independent agencies 
(25%), or multiple independent agencies (24%). According to a report from agency business development 
firm RSW/US published in January 2019, half of US 
marketers used one or two agencies to support their 
business needs in 2018. Further, 64% said they were 
looking for specialty agencies with expertise in things like 
digital, social, content, etc. 
Research from SoDA, a global network of digital agency 
founders, also emphasized that less is more when it 
comes to agency partners. The majority of respondents 
had one to three agency partners, and only 15% used 
four or more. A mere 7% said they do not rely on an 
external agency. 
% of respondentsTypes of Agencies and Number of Agency Partners
Used by Client-Side Marketers Worldwide , Q3 2018
Types of agencies
Full-service digital agency 37%
Consultancy (management/IT) 36%
Integrated agency 34%
Specialized digital agency 25%
Product design agency 24%
Production company/design studio 18%
Number of agency partners
1 24%
2 35%
3 18%
4 6%
5+ 9%
none/no agencies 7%
Source: SoD A, "2019 Global Digital Outlook Study & Report" in partnership
with F orrester Resear ch, Nov 19,  2018
243963 www .eMarketer.com
The survey also found that the most common types 
of agencies used by client-side marketers in Q3 2018 
were full-service digital agencies (37% of respondents), 
management or IT consultancies (36%), and integrated 
agencies (34%). 
As brands select their partners, they must look to the 
vast and complex array of firms that make up the agency 
ecosystem. The 2019 Agency LUMAscape  features 
over 200 different agencies with specialties in creative, 
digital, media, public relations, and marketing and data 
services. The majority of these are offshoots from the big 
agency holding firms—WPP , Omnicom, Publicis, IPG and 
Dentsu—and the major consulting companies—Deloitte, 
Accenture and PwC—that have come to compete in the 
space in recent years. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  4
As marketers’ needs evolve with more aggressive 
growth goals placed on CMOs, as well as new data and 
technology requirements, external support needs are also 
changing. “Brands are focused on direct-to-consumer 
[D2C] models, customer experience and personalization 
at scale. This requires agencies to offer a more diversified 
set of capabilities to deliver on that, ” said Dirk Herbert, 
chief strategy officer for the US arm of the Dentsu 
Aegis Network. 
Historically, agencies have used mergers and acquisitions 
to expand offerings and obtain new skill sets. As new 
marketing channels and techniques emerge, so do 
agencies with specialized expertise and innovative 
practices. And this is often followed by a wave of agency 
acquisitions, as bigger, established firms (especially 
agency holding companies) buy up the emerging ones 
to consolidate expertise, add to their own capacity, and 
continue offering holistic solutions for clients. 
For example, over the past decade, the agency world 
has witnessed a proliferation of independent social 
agencies—many of which were quickly snapped up by 
larger agencies that needed to build out social expertise 
and offerings. 
Even with this convergence in the marketplace, 
competition is also coming from technology vendors who 
are establishing more direct relationships with brands. 
Marketing and ad tech vendors inserting themselves into 
the once agency-owned side of the relationship has been 
happening for years. 
This proliferates further bifurcation in partner 
relationships, which can make the partner landscape even 
more confusing for brands, according to Mark Sneider, 
owner and president of RSW/US. 
Division of partner relationships can be cause for concern 
for brands that are managing a myriad of agencies. 
Source: Nate Neal, published by AdExchanger, Jan 19, 2018 
This is a source of concern, as half of multinational 
brands think their own internal structures impede the 
management of their current agencies, according to 2018 
research from the World Federation of Advertisers (WFA). 
Fragmentation of the partner ecosystem with so many 
players—agencies, consultancies and tech vendors—each 
with their own expertise and goals, can cause increased 
divergence of strategy for brands if not properly managed. 
BRANDS TAKING 
MORE OWNERSHIP 
While agencies must offer expertise, best practices 
and guidance, brands in today’s landscape are taking 
stock of their external partnerships to assess what is 
working and what isn’t. 
“Brands have to take more ownership over staying 
ahead and being self-sufficient, ” said Joshua Palau, 
vice president of media strategy and platforms at Bayer 
Consumer Health. As Palau indicates, self-sufficiency is 
an important part of this assessment, but so is control. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  5
“Some clients feel like they have lost control of their 
customer, or they don’t understand how their data is 
being used, ” said Scott Tieman, managing director and 
personalization lead at Accenture Interactive. “In some 
cases, they feel dismayed by the black-box matrix of 
agency relationships and want to play a more active role 
in controlling their marketing activities. ” 
In the Q3 2018 SoDA survey, client-side marketers were 
asked what they wanted from their agency partners. 
Respondents cited better design and creative work 
(33%), different pricing models (30%) and nimbler ways 
of working (25%). Stronger leadership, technology and 
data skills were also on the list of requirements, albeit 
from smaller percentages. 
% of respondents,  Q3 2018What Do Client-Side Marketers Worldwide Want From
Their Agency Partners and Why Do They Terminate
Them?
What they want from their
agency partners
Better design/creative
Different pricing models
More ﬂexible/nimble working
models
Stronger leadership
Stronger technology capabilities
Stronger data capabilities
More training/staff augmentation33%
30%
25%
21%
17%
14%
6%Why they terminate their
agency partners
Pricing/value
New management at our
organization
Cost overrun
We needed different capabilities
Unhappy with strategyUnderstaffed/inexperienced
team
Unhappy with account/project
management33%
19%
16%
14%
13%13%
11%
Source: SoD A, "2019 Global Digital Outlook Study & Report" in partnership
with F orrester Resear ch, Nov 19,  2018
243967 www .eMarketer.com
Conversely, the survey also asked why brands terminate 
their agency relationships. Pricing/value was highest on 
the list, cited by a third of respondents. Internal changes 
at the brand were also in the top responses, including 
new management at the organization (19%) and the need 
for different capabilities (14%). 
Of the multinational brands surveyed by the WFA, 74% 
said they were auditing their current agency roster to find 
the right model and mix of external agency partners and 
capabilities. Most respondents in this survey believed 
their current model was not working effectively and rated 
their agency roster at 5.7 on a 10-point scale. 
An agency audit has many possible outcomes, most of 
them not great for the agencies themselves. RSW/US 
found that 26% of US marketers planned to consolidate 
their roster into fewer agencies in 2018. Dentsu Aegis Network had similar findings: Some 52% 
of marketing executives worldwide polled in May 2018 
planned to bring more marketing capabilities in-house in 
the next two to three years. A third planned to reduce the 
number of external agencies they work with, and 29% 
planned to work with more consultancies. 
FINDING THE GAPS AND OVERLAPS  
Many brands are working to streamline their partner 
relationships to have more control over core capabilities, 
said Jess Clifton, US head of digital at marketing and PR 
agency Edelman. 
Ironically, in some cases this discovery process starts by 
bringing in yet another partner. Management consulting 
firms have carved out a space in this assessment process 
by helping brands to answer four key questions: 
 ■What marketing and advertising expertise do we need 
to execute our strategy and reach our goals?   
 ■What capabilities do we have internally? 
 ■What areas do we lean on agency partners for?  
 ■Where are the gaps and overlaps? 
Deloitte is one such consulting firm working with brands 
through this process, according to Christine Cutten, 
principal and marketing transformation practice leader. 
Deloitte first evaluates the overall strategic direction of 
what marketing is trying to deliver, what the internal team 
already does well and pinpoints the areas that need more 
support. “We try to spot appropriate roles and gaps, 
then make recommendations on how to fill those holes 
internally or externally, ” she said. 
For consultancy McKinsey, this type of engagement 
begins with the firm’s proprietary “Marketing Capability 
Model, ” which is a fleshed-out map of all the possible 
competences that a marketing team should have for 
its continued growth. “We ask a lot of questions to 
understand the brand’s actual marketing structure and 
what they are able to manage to define what the right 
agency model is going forward, ” said Sarah Armstrong, a 
partner at the practice. 
The goal of this process is to identify the overlaps and 
gaps. This includes knowing how to distribute duplicate 
skill sets, how to reallocate expertise internally, hire 
new talent, or find the right agency partner to manage 
that work. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  6
Some of the larger agency holding firms also do this. 
For example, when Publicis Media Exchange is working 
with a client interested in taking its programmatic media 
buying capability in-house, the process starts with an 
in-depth audit. “We make health cards to assess how 
the client is set up in terms of talent, data, technology, 
strategy and analytics, ” said Karyn Johnson, president 
of programmatic investment. “This provides us and the 
client with a blueprint of their needs moving forward. ” 
MightyHive, a consultancy that helps brands in-house 
their programmatic media buying, does a four- to eight-
week-long assessment and scheduling at the start of 
an engagement, said Emily Del Greco, president of the 
Americas for the company. “We do a deep discovery 
process to understand their setup internally and build a 
road map of functional areas based on maturity level: Are 
they ahead, behind, or are they doing best practices? That 
informs our recommendations. ”  
For brands going through this exercise, it’s essential 
to recognize the outcome will be bespoke to their 
company’s individual goals, needs, current skill sets and 
agency relationships. 
FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS: 
IN-HOUSING, OUTSOURCING AND 
EVERYTHING IN BETWEEN 
Once brands complete a gaps and overlaps 
assessment, they often start to consider in-housing 
select marketing capabilities. But it’s important to 
note that in-housing is not a binary, all-or-nothing 
act—it’s a term with much gray area that often exists 
across a spectrum of engagement models. 
BRANDS TAKE WORK IN-HOUSE  
We define in-housing as taking a once outsourced 
capability and having it managed by an internal agency, 
team, group or single employee. The goal is for this 
expertise to become a core internal competency critical 
to the business. The requirement is to have the capability 
and the capacity to deliver brand-side. Most of the data featured in the remainder of this report 
will refer to in-house agencies, but to be clear, brands 
that in-house do not  need to have an in-house agency to 
accomplish their goals. 
Also, taking a capability in-house doesn’t mean entirely 
displacing current external agency partners. Rather, it 
requires cooperation and buy-in from all stakeholders—
internal and external—in the process. 
In 2018, 78% of US companies polled by the ANA said 
they had an in-house agency function. That percentage 
was up from 58% in 2013 and 42% in 2008, nearly 
doubling since the beginning of the survey period. 
% of respondentsUS Companies that Currently Have an In-House
Agency , 2008,  2013 & 2018
200842%
201358%
201878%
Note: 2018 n=412 c lient-side mark eters
Source: Association of National Advertisers (AN A), "The Continued Rise of
the In-House Agenc y," Oct 15,  2018
242409 www .eMarketer.com
That study also compared which services were most 
commonly handled by in-house agencies in 2013 and 
2018. The biggest growth areas were creative (up 
from 60% to 76%) and media (up from 22% to 36%). 
Programmatic, which roughly a quarter of in-house 
agencies now handle, wasn’t included in the survey 
in 2013. 
Research from In-House Agency Forum (IHAF) found  
that creative was the top function used by in-house 
agencies, according to US companies polled in July 2018. 
Digital/interactive, video and account/project management 
were also common functions. Around half of companies 
said their in-house team worked on social media, web 
development and strategy. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  7
Marketers working with in-house agencies appreciate the 
brand and historical knowledge these colleagues bring to 
the table, as well as the shared value and goals for the 
company, according to January 2019 research from The 
Boss Group and Cella Consulting. Cost savings and speed 
were less important, but still cited by more than six in 
10 respondents. 
% of respondents,  Jan 2019Which Qualities Do US Creative Teams and In-House
Agencies' Internal Clients Recognize as Part of Their
Value Proposition?
Brand knowledge
91%
Historical knowledge of products/deliverables
80%
Shared values/goals for company
76%
Cost savings
69%
Speed/cycle time
63%
High-end creative quality
59%
Compliance/legal requirements knowledg e
47%
Note: n=324
Source: The Boss Gr oup and Cella Consulting,  LLC,  "2019 In-House Creative
Industry Report," April 5,  2019
247226 www .eMarketer.com
THE GRAY AREA 
Even with the benefits of in-house teams, hybrid 
models are very common, and most brands fall in 
this gray area. A January 2019 survey from Forrester 
Consulting asked consumer intelligence, ecommerce 
and marketing decision-makers how they would describe 
their company’s agency relationship as it applies to 
digital and creative media. There was no majority 
response, and respondents could choose more than one 
answer, showing just how varied these brand-agency 
engagements are. % of respondents,  Jan 2019How Do US Companies Describe the Relationship
with Their Agencies as It Applies to Digital and
Creative Media?
Currently exploring the feasibility of bringing our digital media
and creative in-house
42%
Planning to onboard new digital media solutions/technology and
have our agency run them
37%
Currently running some parts of our digital ad campaigns
internally , but are facing challenges scaling our efforts due to
limited resources
35%
Planning to leave our agency and manage our digital media an d
creative in-house
24%
Have an internal agency and are having a hard tim e
ﬁnding/retaining/competing for talent
21%
Note: n=150 customer intelligence,  ecommer ce and mark eting
decision-mak ers
Source: F orrester Consulting,  "Harnessing AI's P otential: Marke ters Have
Adopted AI But Have Yet To Realize The Full Beneﬁt" commissioned by
Albert,  April 30,  2019
247542 www .eMarketer.com
This type of blended engagement also goes beyond just 
digital media and creative. In August 2018, corporate 
training provider Digital Marketing Institute (DMI) found 
that most marketing channels were managed by a mix of 
in-house and agency, or in some cases, both. 
% of respondentsManaging Marketing Channels In-House vs . Agency
Partners for Companies Worldwide , Aug 2018
In-house Both Agency
Email 46% 34% 20%
Apps 43% 28% 30%
Content marketing 38% 32% 30%
Mobile 36% 38% 26%
Voucher systems 36% 28% 36%
Display 35% 36% 29%
SEO 34% 34% 31%
Video 34% 35% 31%
Publishing platforms 32% 37% 32%
Pay-per -click search 31% 36% 33%
Organic social media 30% 42% 28%
Paid social media 29% 39% 31%
Online marketplace 29% 40% 31%
Note: numbers ma y not add up to 100% due to r ounding
Source: Digital Mark eting Institute (DMI),  "20/20 Vision: A Mark eting
Leader's View of Digital's Future," No v 28,  2018
243860 www .eMarketer.com
In fact, the survey also found that, across all channels, 
the work was fairly mixed, with no clear standout for a 
channel that is always managed by in-house vs. one that 
is always managed by the agency. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  8
AGENCIES OFFER SUPPORT, 
COLLABORATION 
In-house agencies still lean on their external agency 
counterparts. More than half look to them for new ideas, 
special projects and skill sets, according to The Boss 
Group and Cella Consulting. Additionally, overflow work 
(48%), high-level strategy (34%) and clearly defined 
scope work (28%) were also common engagement 
models. Only 13% said they compete head-to-head with 
external agencies. 
% of respondents,  Jan 2019What Is the Nature of US Creative Teams and In-House
Agencies' Working Relationship with External
Agencies?
New idea s, special projects and skill sets
55%
Overﬂow , extra capacity
48%
Tier 1 strategy , we can handle execution
34%
Clearly deﬁned/complimentary scop e
28%
Compete head-to-head
13%
Note: n=262
Source: The Boss Gr oup and Cella Consulting,  LLC,  "2019 In-House Creative
Industry Report," April 5,  2019
247223 www .eMarketer.com
Some 85% of in-house agencies outsource functions 
to external providers, according to IHAF research. 
Just more than half of respondents outsource video 
and creative functions, but there were several other 
specialties, including digital, print, media and PR that 
were sometimes handled externally. % of respondents,  July 2018Which Functions Do In-House Agencies at US
Companies Outsource to External Providers?
Note: among the 64% of companies surve yed that have in-house agencies
Source: In-House Agenc y Forum (IHAF),  "In-House Agencies Today: 2018
IHAF State-of-the-Industry Report" in partnership with F orrester Resear ch,
Aug 27,  2018
247505 www .eMarketer.comFunctions outsourced
Video
Creative
Digital/interactive
Print production
Media
Public relations
Research
Account/project 
management55%
52%
34%
29%
20%
15%
13%
9%Social media
Data analytics
Strategy
Procurement
Operations
Trafﬁc
Don't know
Other9%
6%
6%
2%
1%
1%
<1%
7%
Yes
85%Don't know
6%
No
9%
Ever outsource to
external providers?
Agencies that want to stay relevant understand that they 
can’t view the rise of in-housing as a threat, as doing so 
would be detrimental to their business model. In fact, 
many experts from the agency and consultancy side who 
spoke with us discussed how brands in-housing is a new 
and unique opportunity. 
“We view it as a way we can step in and teach clients 
to run an agency, ” Edelman’s Clifton said. “This is all 
completely foreign for brands, and this is where agencies 
have the opportunity to step up and help, while also 
enabling themselves to be a bigger partner in the long 
run. In-house agencies, especially the ones that are 
just getting started, aren’t necessarily going to have the 
capability to deliver on big major campaigns that the 
brand needs. ” 
MightyHive is set up to do just that: help brands  
in-house programmatic. Even the big holding companies 
are building custom models where they onboard 
skills and coach capabilities to clients looking to do it 
themselves. For example, Dentsu-owned Merkle recently 
acquired Filter, an agency known for this type of work. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  9
Additionally, agencies are seeking to embed themselves 
with their clients, and this can be to help them 
onboard new skills or improve the current working 
relationship with in-person collaboration. For instance, 
Omnicom Media Group offers clients on-premise “staff 
augmentation, ” according to Scott Hagedorn, CEO. 
Essentially, agency employees don’t physically work at 
Omnicom headquarters. Instead, the work is done on-site 
at the brand three to four days a week, with the agency 
expert and the client sitting side by side. 
This sort of embedded relationship also appears to 
be working well for Wunderman Inside, Wunderman 
Thompson’s on-premise offering, according to Jason 
Burby, chief client officer for the company’s North 
America division. Speed is a major benefit, as interactions 
between the agency and client can happen in real time. 
But even with the help of agencies, the ramifications 
for taking work in-house mean brands need to operate 
in an entirely new way, which is when they look to 
consulting firms. 
“Brands are no longer project-managing the agency, ” 
Accenture’s Tieman said. “Now they are working with 
the rest of their organization differently. This can be 
uncomfortable, challenging and usually requires a new 
organizational structure, which we help them build. ” 
AN INSIDE LOOK AT 12 BRANDS 
ON AN IN-HOUSE JOURNEY  
This section breaks out 12 vignettes from brands of 
all sizes in a wide variety of industries. No journey 
was the same, further showing how flexible models 
and unique engagements are the future of the 
agency relationship. 
BANK OF AMERICA 
Marketing strategy and planning is an internal focus for 
Bank America across all lines of business and within 
various centers of excellence, according to senior 
vice president and enterprise marketing executive 
Michele Barlow. 
The financial services company also has a 33-year-old 
internal agency that is considered an extension of the 
internal team because of the shared brand knowledge. While external agencies are familiar with the Bank of 
America brand, they don’t have the same authority as 
team members do. 
Another major benefit is speed. “Our in-house agency 
can react much more quickly, and it is easier to reprioritize 
with them than with our external agencies that are 
juggling other clients’ needs, ” Barlow said. 
A goal of the agency is to simplify the way Bank of 
America goes to market while keeping ownership of 
channels. For example, the in-house agency manages  
the company website, and it recently created new 
templates and tools to allow local branches to have access 
to brand-approved collateral customizable to their market. 
Agencies come into the fold when teams “start to 
translate marketing strategy plans into actual campaigns 
and programs, ” Barlow said. “Then we lean on our 
network of external agencies that we manage by 
specialization to get their deep subject matter expertise 
on execution. ” 
While most paid advertising is outsourced, the in-house 
agency is starting to take over paid social. Once the team 
did organic social internally, the paid portion was the next 
logical step. 
Even as capabilities shift, the best way for collaboration to 
thrive is to have clear delineation. “We need to make sure 
that all internal marketers are very clear on which agency 
they go to for which body of work. ” 
BAYER CONSUMER HEAL TH  
With the help of MightyHive, Bayer Consumer Health is 
currently setting up an in-house agency team focused 
on the platforms the company owns and operates in 
addition to strategy, programmatic, social, search and 
analytics capabilities. 
“We want our marketers to have a deeper understanding 
of digital media, ” Bayer’s Palau said. “You wouldn’t be able 
to do that if you were always working through an agency 
to get that knowledge. ” 
But that didn’t mean building the infrastructure alone. 
“When we started this process, we needed a partner that 
shared our vision of being self-sufficient and could get 
us there based on our timeline. Agencies aren’t typically 
structured to deliver against this vision, and so we knew it 
just wasn’t possible to work with them, ” he said. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  10
But MightyHive set a clear deadline on the engagement 
to have in-housing set up by 2020 and is helping with 
hiring, onboarding and doing the taxonomy work to set up 
all audience segments. 
CARS.COM 
At online marketplace Cars.com , all digital media buying 
has been managed in-house  since Q4 2018. Search,  
email and life cycle marketing had already been handled 
in-house. The next step was to start with social, 
then display and finally programmatic, according to 
Jenny Chan, senior director of consumer marketing 
and acquisition. 
“We wanted to have better control of our data. We feel 
closer to all the innovation and development in the media 
industry because we’re having direct conversations with 
media partners. This allows us to do a lot of data testing, 
stay in touch with latest developments, and better 
understand what works best in a particular channel, ” 
she said. 
With this hybrid model in place, even in its infancy, the 
in-house team is already mindful of maintaining external 
perspective and innovative thinking. The current solution 
is relying more closely on the media partners directly. 
CHOBANI 
At Greek yogurt brand Chobani, the delineation between 
in-house and agency work is simple. “We outsource the 
work we occasionally need to have done when there 
isn’t a consistent-enough cadence to justify building 
the capability in-house, ” said Leland Maschmeyer, 
chief creative officer. These typically tend to be more 
production-heavy tasks. “But our creative strategy and 
brand work is our competitive advantage, and we don’t 
and won’t outsource what sets us apart, ” he said. 
Still, part of the challenge of creating an in-house agency 
was determining how this new group would work with 
other parts of the organization. A cross-functional team 
created a framework for how projects would originate 
internally, move to the agency, get completed, delivered 
and then enter an approval process. Maschmeyer said 
this process was tweaked several times before getting 
the order workflow right. DELOITTE 
Four years ago, Deloitte Consulting set up its own  
in-house agency, which consists of a 300-person team 
that handles the creative and campaign planning, 
operations and activations (such as search, social and 
events), while the marketing team handles the strategy. 
“Historically, we were set up as creative services, but 
recently we’ve started to add on ad and marketing tech 
to extend our internal capabilities across the whole value 
chain, ” said Cutten, who originally helped set up the 
internal agency. “Our goal is to get ahead of new channels 
that are coming out and bolt on new experiences around 
what marketing is trying to deliver. ”  
Even with these skills in-house, brands still need to lean 
on supplemental external resources, she added. “The 
misnomer of an in-house agency is that it’s one or the 
other. There are always supplemental agency resources, 
even with the biggest in-house agency. ”  
A three-tiered approach is used to manage work. The first 
layer is the in-house agency, next is the typical agency 
resources, and then even beyond that, freelancers come 
in and fill in the holes when all other parties are at capacity. 
MIZZEN+MAIN  
D2C menswear company Mizzen+Main has an in-house  
team for all creative work, including branding and 
storytelling across channels. Cost savings and the ability 
to take risks are the two primary advantages to this  
in-house structure, according to CMO Stephanie Swingle. 
“We’re able to be more efficient with our time and 
executional dollars by having the creative team truly 
integrated into our marketing team structure. ” While 
Mizzen+Main relies solely on its external agency partners 
for media buying, having creative in-house allows for more 
rapid brainstorming and ideation for promotions and deals. 
As a D2C, the company has access to lots of first-party 
data on customer behavior and a more real-time look on 
inventory that can be used to shift strategy quickly. 
Although the creative function does live in-house, “we 
don’t look at our creative team as an in-house agency, 
but as the creative minds on our marketing team, ” 
Swingle said. “They’re very much part of our department. 
They are storytelling the brand through the lens of our 
overall strategy, and they are doing so with both a strong 
understanding and input into the context in which we use 
creative assets. ” THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  11
Additionally, there are times when this internal creative 
group does lean on a roster of freelancers, such as 
stylists, and special effects producers to augment content 
creation or deliver functional expertise to fill in the 
additional gaps during peak times. The strategy is to keep 
most of the work internal—because, as Swingle noted, 
“our employees understand who we are and what we are 
trying to communicate”—while still allowing for flexibility 
as needs and capacity change. 
NATIONWIDE  
Nationwide has its own internal agency shop of 150  
full-time employees, the iN-House Marketing Group. 
Founded in 2015, the shop unifies decentralized business 
units working in silos. Still, the financial services company 
works with a hybrid model on in-house resources and 
external agencies, according to Mike Boyd, senior vice 
president of enterprise brand marketing. 
The group is built like a traditional agency: It has 
account and project managements teams, a creative 
services group with writers and designers, a marketing 
operations unit to manage workflow, and an on-site 
studio for photography and video production. Uniquely, 
Nationwide manages programmatic media—including 
social—internally, but that unit sits within the media 
center of excellence, a separate entity from the iN-House 
Marketing Group.  
Although the Nationwide staff handles that work, the 
company still leans on its retainer agency roster heavily: 
Ogilvy handles national advertising and brand work; 
Universal McCann executes all media strategy outside of 
programmatic; Wasserman manages sport sponsorships; 
and Edelman does public relations. 
All of the external partners and internal experts clearly 
understand how the work is delineated. Boyd uses the 
metaphor of “swim lanes” to describe the clarity of who 
executes what. Agile processes and new collaboration 
and project management tools have enabled much of 
this clear demarcation. And in the cases where the 
internal agency is at capacity, a roster of smaller shops 
handles one-off project-based deliverables to keep the 
wheels moving. NEW BALANCE 
Sports apparel and footwear company New Balance 
operates its marketing and advertising with a flexible 
model. “We have a mix of in-house talent across 
digital and retail capabilities that service both regional 
and global needs, ” said Tim Malone, director of global 
marketing. Internally, designers, creators, production and 
operations own the day-to-day needs for ecommerce and 
programmatic campaigns. A mix of external agencies 
supplement this group for concepting, production 
and execution. 
“Often, the best ideas start with the people closest to 
the work who really know the brand; other times it takes 
a fresh outside perspective, ” Malone said. “It’s about 
expanding resources and leveraging the right talent in the 
right place. ” 
PRUDENTIAL 
At Prudential, the portfolio of work is managed through 
a dynamic hybrid approach, according to Niharika Shah, 
chief brand officer at the financial services company. 
Shah thinks of this hybrid model as a bell curve. The 
leading 10% to 15% at the start of the curve is everything 
that is fully outsourced “because external perspective is 
vital, or the skill is highly specialized to build or find  
in-house efficiently. ” This includes partnerships with 
creative agencies like Droga5 on master brand image 
work or the development of animation or virtual reality 
(VR) experiences. 
The middle 70% to 80% of the bell curve is the work 
led by internal staff where there is “heavy lifting in terms 
of integration, campaigns that require proximity to the 
business, and integration with owned digital experiences, ” 
Shah said. “Integration from the outside is an elusive 
concept, as campaigns are less about 30-second TV 
spots and increasingly more about platforms and digital 
ecosystems across media channels. ” 
The final 10% to 15% is work that is outsourced for 
efficiency and may include digital production or staffing of 
external sponsorships or events. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  12
“The value of this model is that it is always changing 
based on the demands of the business and the external 
media and tech landscape, ” Shah said. “It keeps talent 
engaged and aims to optimize marketing investments and 
agency relationships. ” 
THE CLOROX COMPANY  
Electro Creative Workshop, The Clorox Company’s  
in-house agency, has been around for 35 years (rebranded 
as its current expanded form in 2018), and has spent the 
past decade focused on digital experience, websites, 
experiential events and content. “We have all sorts of 
capabilities that we’ve developed as business needs, 
consumers, and the retail marketplace has grown 
and evolved, ” said Kerri Martin, chief electrofier at the 
company. “But what’s really important for any in-house 
agency is having the tools, processes and systems to 
enable you to grow and expand. ” 
Also essential is executive support and trust. And trust 
comes from the value proposition. “We can get the 
work done 25% faster for 25% less investment, but 
with 100% of the same world-class quality as our other 
agency partners. ” 
A major turning point in recent years for the company 
has been “evolving from order-takers to order-makers, ” 
Martin said. The workshop is much more involved in the 
big-picture strategy than it has been in the past. This has 
occurred as more competencies have been added to the 
agency’s skill set. 
TRUNK CLUB 
D2C subscription clothing box company Trunk Club has 
had an in-house creative since its founding in 2009. The 
group has historically been an independent creative team 
responsible for photography and the development of print 
and digital creative, but it was never truly integrated with 
the business, according to Maureen Boyle, senior director 
of creatives services and events. 
The company recognized a need for more integration and 
collaboration so that the creative team’s work was in line 
with the requirements of the core business. The first step was to establish the framework. How 
would this agency operate? What would the team 
structure look like? What roles needed to be filled? And 
how would those roles operate within the agency and 
within the larger company?  
These days, the creative in-house agency is responsible 
for two functions: the design team (including copywriting 
and content) and the production side, in charge of all 
photo and video. 
Together, both sides comprise the brand authority. “They 
are the brand experts, ” Boyle said. “The in-house agency 
understands the personality of Trunk Club, the tone 
of voice, the visual guidelines and can enforce those 
standards across the business. ” 
Stakeholders from both sides of the agency collaborate 
in a working-group team structure to intake new projects, 
developing the concept, assets, creative reviews, edits 
and revisions, Boyle said. 
But when the in-house team is at capacity, the company 
uses freelancers or even creative agencies on a contract 
basis with freelancers. “External agencies will always 
be necessary, ” Boyle said. “The in-house group will 
sometimes lean on these partners for fresh ideas, and we 
consider them an extension of the internal unit. ” 
VERIZON COMMUNICATIONS  
When 140, Verizon Communications’ in-house agency, 
was created in 2017 , the telecommunications firm relied 
on nearly 50 different agency partners, according to 
Warren Chase, vice president and chief operating officer 
at 140. The internal agency was formed with the goals 
of taking back brand ownership, having more proximity 
to decision-making, attracting the best talent and 
streamlining the number of partners. 
The initial concept started with a blueprint on what 
capabilities 140 would set up in-house in the first three 
years. “Now Verizon has subject matter expertise in skills 
that the company didn’t have before because everything 
was outsourced. We didn’t know how to run an agency. 
Having that skill set in-house, we have been able to 
dramatically impact the way we work, and the creative 
outcomes themselves, ” Chase said. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  13
Today, the agency handles all of Verizon’s owned online 
channels, social media and the retail environment, 
including the setup of stores, decor, displays and 
messaging. “We didn’t want confusion between us 
and external agencies on who would be doing what. ” 
McCann, for example, works with Verizon on TV 
campaigns in cooperation with the in-house group. 
CHALLENGES AHEAD 
The above examples might paint an optimistic 
picture of finding the appropriate flexible model 
that balances in-housing with agency relationships. 
While those brands have had success, experts who 
spoke with us for this report gave caution about how 
difficult this work can be, and the unique challenges 
they faced when streamlining their relationships. 
According to the survey from The Boss Group and Cella 
Consulting, half of in-house agencies said resourcing was 
the biggest challenge for their in-house teams. Innovation, 
skill sets, keeping up with market trends and technology 
were also cited as hurdles. 
% of respondentsChallenges Faced Within Their Group According to US
Creative Teams and In-House Agencies , Jan 2019
Resourcing 50%
Innovation 46%
Skill sets 34%
Keeping up with market trends 31%
Technology 25%
Other 12%
Note: n=321
Source: The Boss Gr oup and Cella Consulting,  LLC,  "2019 In-House Creative
Industry Report," April 5,  2019
247225 www .eMarketer.com
Other in-house creatives said that the speed at which 
they are expected to work and the volume of demand 
were leading challenges, according to a February 2019 
report from InSource and inMotionNow. Being a strategic 
contributor, communication with clients and meeting 
expectations, the increasing mix of channels that require 
creative and new technologies were also barriers. scale 1-7What Are the Leading Challenges US In-House
Creative Teams Face in 2019?
Speed at which creative teams are expected to work
5.44
Volume of demand for creative work
5.35
Being a strategic contributor to meeting organizational goals
4.36
Communicating with clients and meeting expectation s
3.86
Increasing variety of marketing channels that need creativ e
3.79
New technologies that change the way teams work
2.79
Retaining and supporting creative staff
2.42
Note: 1=least c hallenging and 7=most c hallenging
Source: InSour ce and inMotionNow , "2019 In-House Creative Management
Report," F eb 12,  2019
245315 www .eMarketer.com
Part of what makes the new brand-agency relationship 
flexible is that it is ever-evolving. What works today might 
not work tomorrow. Brands and partners must continue 
to implement assessments of gaps and overlaps regularly 
to ensure that capacity and capabilities are balanced both 
internally and externally. 
In 2019, brands are taking ownership and piloting more  
in-house competencies, some with a true in-house 
agency and others with smaller teams. As an outside 
partner, the agency will always serve as the safety 
net to support the brand as they work through the 
challenges together. 
Herbert gives the example of Dentsu Aegis client Intel. 
The tech company set up a full in-house agency and 
then disbanded it in late 2018 to shift its focus away 
from consumer audiences to more of a B2B strategy. 
“They felt they would be better served with an agency 
relationship, ” he said. 
“There is going to be a lot of trial and errors for clients, ” 
Burby of Wunderman Thompson said. “If brands go too 
far in one direction, they will feel it out and course-correct. 
As business needs morph and shift over time, and 
industry dynamics and technology change, the pendulum 
will swing back and forth. ”  
But agency partners will be there to help the brand if and 
when that time comes. THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  14
KEY TAKEAWAYS 
 ■The brand-agency relationship is a flexible 
engagement, unique to each brand, and evolves 
over time.  The only constant is that it requires 
cooperation and buy-in from all stakeholders—internal 
and external. Having a clear delineation process is also 
necessary to know which party owns what.  
 ■Brands lean on their agency ecosystem for support 
with marketing capability and capacity.  The AOR is 
not as common as it used to be. And in 2019, brands 
are outsourcing to a very fragmented roster of partners, 
including agencies, tech vendors and consultancies. 
 ■Brands should regularly perform a gaps and overlaps 
assessment to uncover the areas in which they need 
support for an external agency partner.  Consulting 
firms often assist brands with this exercise. This 
assessment should be revisited regularly. 
 ■In-housing is becoming more common, but it’s not 
a binary action.  Not all brands who in-house have 
an in-house agency, and most brands who do so still 
engage with agencies. 
 ■T aking capabilities in-house is not without 
challenges.  Many brands rely heavily on external 
expertise, from agencies, consultancies and vendors to 
guide them on this journey. 
EMARKETER INTERVIEWS 
Sarah Armstrong 
Partner 
McKinsey & Company  
Interviewed April 30, 2019 
Michele Barlow 
Senior Vice President,  
Enterprise Marketing Executive
Bank of America 
Interviewed May 9, 2019 
Mike Boyd 
Senior Vice President, Enterprise Brand Marketing 
Nationwide 
Interviewed May 2, 2019 
Maureen Boyle 
CEO and Director of Creative Services and Events 
Trunk Club 
Interviewed April 29, 2019 
Scott Brazina 
CMO 
Impact 
Interviewed April 29, 2019 
Jason Burby 
Chief Client Officer 
Wunderman Thompson, North America 
Interviewed May 2, 2019 
Jenny Chan 
Senior Director, Consumer Marketing 
and Acquisition 
Cars.com 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Warren Chase 
Vice President, Chief Operating Officer, 140 
Verizon  
Interviewed May 13, 2019 
Jess Clifton 
US Head of Digital  
Edelman 
Interviewed April 23, 2019 
Christine Cutten 
Principal, Marketing Transformation 
Practice Leader 
Deloitte Consulting 
Interviewed April 29, 2019 
Emily Del Greco 
President, Americas 
MightyHive 
Interviewed April 29, 2019 
Bill Duggan 
Group Executive Vice President 
Association of National Advertisers (ANA) 
Interviewed April 22, 2019 
Emily Foster 
Director 
In-House Agency Forum (IHAF) 
Interviewed May 2, 2019 THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  15
Scott Hagedorn 
CEO 
Omnicom Media Group 
Interviewed May 2, 2019 
Dirk Herbert 
Chief Strategy Officer 
Dentsu Aegis Network US 
Interviewed May 2, 2019 
Stefanie Jay 
Vice President and General Manager 
Walmart Media Group 
Interviewed May 10, 2019 
Karyn Johnson 
President, Programmatic Investment 
Publicis Media Exchange 
Interviewed April 29, 2019 
Mike Lamb 
Partner 
McKinsey & Company  
Interviewed April 30, 2019 
Jessica Lustgarten Courtemanche 
Vice President, Director, Data and Analysis 
Digitas 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Scott Mager 
Principal, Digital Advertising and 
Marketing Leader
Deloitte Consulting 
Interviewed May 13, 2019 
Tim Malone 
Director, Global Marketing 
New Balance 
Interviewed April 30, 2019 
Kerri Martin 
Chief Electrofier, Electro Creative Workshop 
The Clorox Company 
Interviewed May 3, 2019 
Leland Maschmeyer 
Chief Creative Officer 
Chobani 
Interviewed May 2, 2019 
Michael McLaren 
Executive Vice President  
Merkle  
Interviewed April 17, 2019 
Michelle Mirshak 
Senior Vice President,  
Data Architecture and Governance 
Spark Foundry 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Gaja Nagarajan 
Managing Director, IT 
Maxim Integrated 
Interviewed May 8, 2019 
Joshua Palau 
Vice President, Media Strategy and Platforms 
Bayer Consumer Health 
Interviewed May 6, 2019 
Bob Ray 
Global CEO 
DWA 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Jason Rose 
CMO 
SAP Customer Experience  
Interviewed May 9, 2019 
Krish Sailam 
Senior Vice President,  
Global Programmatic Solutions 
DWA 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Steve Simpson 
Senior Global Executive 
Publicis Groupe 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Niharika Shah 
Chief Brand Officer 
Prudential Financial 
Interviewed May 9, 2019 
Brooke Skinner Ricketts 
CMO 
Cars.com 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 THE BRAND-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP:  STREAMLINING WITH IN-HOUSE TEAMS AND FLEXIBLE ENGAGEMENT MODELS ©2019 EMARKETER INC.   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  16
Mark Sneider 
President  
RSW/US  
Interviewed April 24, 2019 
Elizabeth Spaulding 
Partner and Co-Leader, Global Digital Practice 
Bain & Company  
Interviewed April 26, 2019 
Scott Symonds 
Managing Partner 
AKQA 
Interviewed February 26, 2019 
Scott Tieman 
Managing Director and Personalization Lead 
Accenture Interactive 
Interviewed May 1, 2019 
Beth Wade 
Global CMO 
VMLY&R 
Interviewed May 8, 2019 
Amy Winger 
Chief Strategy Officer 
VMLY&R 
Interviewed May 8, 2019 
Stephanie Swingle 
CMO 
Mizzen+Main  
Interviewed May 3, 2019 
READ NEXT 
The Modern Marketing Department 2018: Evolution 
Through Digital T ransformation 
How’s that Digital T ransformation Going? A Slideshow 
of How Marketers, Agencies and Ad T ech Executives 
View Their Efforts 
Digital T ransformation: How Collaboration T ools 
and Strategies Can Align Organizations with 
Business Objectives SOURCES 
Association of National Advertisers (ANA) 
Cella Consulting 
Cowen and Company 
Dentsu Aegis Network 
Digital Marketing Institute (DMI) 
Forrester Consulting 
In-House Agency Forum (IHAF) 
inMotionNow 
InSource  
Marketing Land 
RSW/US 
SoDA 
The Boss Group 
The CMO Club 
World Federation of Advertisers (WFA)  
EDITORIAL AND  
PRODUCTION CONTRIBUTORS
Anam Baig Senior Editor 
Joanne DiCamillo Senior Production Artist 
Donte Gibson Chart Editor 
Katie Hamblin Chart Editorial Manager
Dana Hill Director of Production
Erika Huber Copy Editor
Ann Marie Kerwin Executive Editor, Content Strategy
Stephanie Meyer Senior Production Artist
Heather Price Deputy Editor
Magenta Ranero Senior Chart Editor
Amanda Silvestri Senior Copy EditorCoverage of a Digital World
eMarketer data and insights address how consumers 
spend time and money, and what marketers are doing to 
reach them in today’s digital world. Get a deeper look at 
eMarketer coverage , including our reports, benchmarks and 
forecasts, and charts. 
Confidence in the Numbers
Our unique approach of analyzing data from multiple 
research sources provides our customers with the most 
definitive answers available about the marketplace.  
Learn why .
Customer Stories
The world’s top companies across every industry look to 
eMarketer first for information on digital marketing, media 
and commerce. Read more  about how our clients use 
eMarketer to make smarter decisions. 
Y our account team is here to help:
Email research_requests@emarketer.com  to submit a request for research support, or contact  
accounts@ emarketer .com  or 866-345-3864 to discuss any details related to your account. 
To learn more about eMarketer advertising and sponsorship opportunities, contact  
advertising@emarketer.com .
The leading research firm for marketing in a digital world.
