Tomorrow's Artificial
Intelligence
A Futurist's Guide to Understanding and Harnessing AI
Technology That Is Shaping Our World
Kris BallCopyright © 2023 by Kris Ball
All rights reserved.
No portion of this book may be reproduced in any form without written permission from the publisher
or author, except as permitted by U.S. copyright law.
Under no circumstances will any blame or legal responsibility be held against the publisher, or author,
for any damages, reparation, or monetary loss due to the information contained within this book, either
directly or indirectly.
Legal Notice:
This book is copyright protected.  It is only for personal use.  You cannot amend, distribute, sell, use,
quote, or paraphrase any part of this book's content without the author's or publisher's consent.
Disclaimer Notice:
Please note that the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment
purposes only.  All effort has been executed to present accurate, up-to-date, reliable, and complete
information.  No warranties of any kind are declared or implied.  Readers acknowledge that the author
is not engaged in rendering legal, financial, medical, or professional advice.  The content within this
book has been derived from various sources.  Please consult a licensed professional before attempting
any techniques outlined in this book.
By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances is the author responsible for
any direct or indirect losses incurred as a result of the use of the information contained within this
document, including, but not limited to, errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.This book is dedicated to my uncle, Steven Ball, whose love of sci-fi was
instilled in me early on. 
I can remember dozens of conversations about the future and how the
science fiction authors from long ago were so right or so wrong.  May I one
day be counted among them, making my own predictions of what tomorrow's
technology may bring to humanity. 
For better or worse. Introduction
In a world where machines reign supreme and human labor becomes
obsolete, the dawn of artificial intelligence has sparked a wave of
apprehension.  The looming threat of lost livelihoods and a global takeover
sends shivers down our spines, echoing our deepest fears.  Nevertheless, as
the relentless march of AI continues, is doomsday truly upon us?
Imagine a future where industries seamlessly embrace the power of AI,
where efficiency reaches unprecedented heights, and tasks once performed by
human hands are now accomplished in a blink of an eye.  The landscape of
labor undergoes a profound transformation.  Social issues and natural
disasters are mitigated to the point of being nonexistent.  Rather than a
doomsday as Hollywood might suggest, the future in this brave new world is
bright.
Undoubtedly, AI's recent and unprecedented growth has left many
worried.  Seeing this unrestrained progress is precisely what instills in us the
fear that AI will take over our jobs 
and means of livelihood.  It is reasonable
to have these fears, primarily since many of us have fought so hard to make a
living after the pandemic.  Unemployment is still a significant issue, and
inflation has left many struggling to balance their finances.  Then there is the
issue of understaffing in companies where the existing employees are
overworked in return for little extra compensation.
This struggle drives people away from embracing futuristic technology,
even if that technology could make lives easier.Although AI has existed for decades, it was only in recent years that
machine learning, and more recently, deep learning, became feasible.  Now,
artificial intelligence is spreading like wildfire, and it is hard to keep up with
the progress.
But is it inherently as evil as some deem it to be?  Is AI something we
should avoid?  Is it a threat to us all?
It is the very idea of doomsday,
 
as we often see depicted in films and
books, that makes us think the worst of AI.  Whether AI brings about helpful
change or unknown chaos depends on how we utilize it.  If applied
appropriately, it could open the door to many possibilities.  It could make
jobs safer and provide opportunities for entirely new occupations.
A lot of the anxiety comes from inadequate information and a lack of
education among the population.  In simple words, we fear what we don't
know.  The fear of the unknown is often the most prominent kind of fear,
closing us off to the brighter side of things.
True, AI does have its risks.  However, much of the technology already
using this remarkable power has benefited people and made jobs easier and
safer.  It could potentially make things 
a lot 
better, making it a risk worth
taking. 
Despite what any single one of us thinks, artificial intelligence is an
inevitable change.  The ability of small startup companies to make their own
AI software is all around us.  It is not just the 
big companies like Google,
Amazon, Microsoft, Meta, and Apple that are investing in AI.  And it's not
just in the USA.  Countries like India and China have been working on AI for
years.  So, there is no stopping it.  It's here to stay.  
The knowledge gleaned from this book can provide you with newfound
confidence and put your doubts to rest.  The information will help you make
knowledgeable decisions.  This book will also guide you in determining what
jobs are "safe" and which ones might not be. 
What this book is NOT, is a comprehensive dive into how AI works. 
While it is discussed briefly, there are hundreds of other books out there that
cover that topic in depth.  It is also NOT a comprehensive list of all the
hundreds (and soon thousands) of AI software, apps, and plugins.  There is
just too much out there to list and cover.  Instead, this book is about how AI
is being used now and what that means for the future.
In the past, I worked in Clinical Informatics, teaching healthcare
professionals like nurses and doctors how to incorporate technology likeelectronic health records (EHR) and dictation applications into their everyday
practice.  In that job, I noticed a hesitancy to embrace technology.  This
seemed counter-intuitive.  After all, I was among intelligent people in a field
where innovation and technology are paramount.  In order to do my job, I had
to dig deep into the cause of their fears.  Then I had to address those fears. 
Only by anticipating and overcoming the typical barriers to change could I
get those healthcare professionals to adopt and even embrace the new
technology.  
I see the same hesitancy now with artificial intelligence.  And like before, I
want people to adopt and incorporate this technology into everyday use.  In
order to do that, I need to do what I did before: address the fears head-on. 
All the knowledge I have gained through in-depth research is presented in
this book for everyone to read in order to understand the world of AI.  Based
on current trends, news articles, social media posts, and statements from
experts in the field, I have gathered a unique collection of information that
helps paint a picture of what AI is doing now and what it could potentially be
in the future.
So that's what I hope this book does.  It empowers the reader with
knowledge about this tool that we call artificial intelligence.  Like any tool, it
can be used for good, or it can be used as a weapon.  Which direction it goes
depends on what we choose as a society. Contents
Section 1
1. AI: Already Everywhere
2. New Generation AI—Breaking the Boundaries
3. Breakthroughs in Modern Day Healthcare
4. AI in the Military
5. AI's Impact in Coding
6. Writing with AI
7. AI Assistants
8. AI in Politics and the Economy
9. Neural Fields for LiDAR
Section 2
10. Avatars
11. AI Music
12. Art vs. AI
13. Script and Video Generation
14. The Future of AI in the Job Market15. The COVID Effect
16. AI's Impact in Different Sectors
Section 3
17. Robotics
18. Preparing for the Future
19. Improved Search Engines
20. Education Overhaul
21. Cybernetics
22. De-Aging with AI
23. Optimized Logistics
24. Love and AI
25. Solving Health Concerns & Disparities
26. Wildfires
27. Flooding
28. Addressing Other Societal Concerns
Section 4
29. The Darkside of ChatGPT
30. "Culturally Inclusive" AI Avatars & Bias
31. Cheating
32. Deepfakes
33. Voice Cloning
34. The Cost of Training AI
35. Sports Betting
36. Data Leaks & Privacy
37. The Danger of Self-Driving Cars
38. The Prospect of Sentient AI
39. Singularity
40. ConclusionAfterword
Comment on the Cover Art
Glossary
ReferencesSection 1
AI is Here, NowA
T
1
AI: Already Everywhere
he Inception of AI 
lan Turing is known as the “father of modern computer science,” and for
good reason.
During the Second World War, the Allies needed to crack Germany's
communication codes, also known as "Enigma."  Enter Alan Turing, a
brilliant pioneer, mathematician, and cryptanalyst who did the impossible and
cracked the code, which paved the way for modern computing.
In 1935, Alan theorized a computing machine with a limitless memory,
consisting of a scanner moving back and forth, reading, and studying
symbols.  This is Turing's stored-program concept, where the machine can
learn, modify, and improve upon its own program.  This is also known as the
Turing Machine.  Today's computers are based on this concept.  Turing often
spoke of computers learning from experience and solving new problems
using guiding principles, also known as heuristic problem-solving (Copeland,
2019).
Years later, Alan Turning came up with something called the "imitation
game," which was a test of a machine's ability to be so human-like that it is
perceived as human.  Today we refer to this game as the Turing Test. 
Imagine in 1950 believing so much in the future of machine learning that
you suspect one day a robot could pass for a human.  What may have been
science fiction in Alan Turing's day is becoming more like reality today.Everyday AI in Our Homes
Today AI can be found all around us.  Perhaps the most commonly used
modern examples of AI are "Digital Assistants," including Cortana, Siri,
Alexa, and Google Assistant.  These tech aides are computer programs
designed to 'listen' and respond to user commands.  This includes answers to
questions, sending emails, making calls, controlling home appliances, etc. 
They are activated by a specific phrase spoken by the user, which is then
analyzed, and results are provided.  Voice recognition has seen significant
development over the years, and there has been tough competition between
the digital assistants we know and use.
Digital assistants are not restricted to smartphones, stand-alone devices,
and computers.  Smart home technologies such as smart TVs, speakers, and
headphones often feature voice recognition.  Amazon Echo and Google
Home are some of the most notable of these devices.  Amazon also created
the Fire Stick, a TV remote with Alexa's voice capabilities.
All of these are designed to do the same thing—follow commands and
perform tasks—but the constant change in quality and the advancement of
voice recognition continually progresses.  Aside from the aforementioned
popular AI assistants, other similar assistants exist, such as ELSA Speak,
Fyle, Hound, and Fireflies, to name a few.  It is a tight race, but 
the
competition works in the consumer's favor.  Each company is constantly
pushing the limits of what their tech can do to surpass the others and take
over a larger market share.  This theme appears again and again with AI. 
When digital assistant technology popped up on the scene a few years ago,
many people were hesitant to use it.  They did not see its need or usefulness. 
Or they found it too confusing.  Now almost every home in America has Siri,
Google, or Alexa, even if it is only on our smartphones.  Without realizing it,
we have already stepped into the AI universe – all of us.
It is fascinating to think that just a few decades ago, many people expected
phones to do little else other than make calls and send texts.  Now, they are
portable, efficient AI devices in the palm of our hands, moving along with us
in a fast-paced world.
Of course, this does not come without implications and criticism.  One of
the major concerns surrounding the use of digital assistants is privacy.  They
record and analyze your voice, so it's not uncommon to question where that
data is stored and how it is used.Another criticism is the impact these assistants have on society and
children.  More than ever before, kids today are super tech-savvy.  They can
use digital assistants in all sorts of creative ways parents have yet to
consider.  As a result, children do things differently.  They do not look up
information like their mom and dad or grandparents did.  They rely on
technology like a crutch.  Many are also less social than generations before. 
While this is not exclusively the fault of advancing technology, it is still a
criticism of the trend toward using more and more tech in our daily lives.  D
2
New Generation AI—Breaking the
Boundaries
igital assistants are only the tip of the iceberg.  Many companies have
been embedding AI technology in products for years.  Smart thermostats
will adapt to your settings and anticipate your needs.  Bank computers learn
from your spending habits and locations in order to flag strange purchases. 
Safety systems in cars adapt to changes in driving and road conditions. 
Email companies use AI to learn which mail you consider spam and filter it
for you.  The technology behind AI has been slowly creeping up on us, and
until recently, we barely noticed or cared. 
Then the long AI winter ended, and chatbots emerged, forever changing
technology. 
Rise of ChatGPT and Chatbots
A wave of generator AI, also known as chatbots, has recently taken the world
by storm.  According to Oracle, a chatbot is “a computer program that
simulates human conversation—written 
or spoken—and allows humans to
interact with digital devices as if they were communicating with a real
person.”  Chatbots use a combination of artificial intelligence and natural
language processing (NLP) to understand conversations and provide relevant
responses.
Enter ChatGPT, an ambitious piece of artificial intelligence designed by
OpenAI.  Released in late 2022, it has already surpassed the record number ofusers that TikTok achieved in a short time.  UBS Analytics conducted a study
and found that ChatGPT had gained over 100 million users within two
months of its launch.  That is a remarkable number.
It is spooky how good this tech is.  ChatGPT poses like a human when it
answers questions.  Once, when asked if it was an app, it denied that and
claimed itself as a "GPT-3 language model."  It is a surprisingly competent
tool capable of generating tweets, writing poetry, jokes, songs, and even
translating languages.  ChatGPT has been fine-tuned and backed up by
supervised and reinforced learning techniques that, in turn, generate
impressive content.
With these vast capabilities, using it for cheating and plagiarism has
emerged, especially in schools and workplaces.  ChatGPT and other chatbots
like it have sometimes been known to put out offensive words and biased
opinions and generate misleading information.  In an article by the NZ
Herald, early on in ChatGPT's rise, two students from Cambridge and
Pukekohe High Schools were accused of cheating using ChatGPT, although
the students deny the allegations.  In another instance, a college professor
threatened to fail his entire class for cheating using ChatGPT.
The trend is just getting worse.  In an article by the Daily Mail, a poll
found that half of college and high school students already use AI for
cheating.  Moreover, in a survey done by study.com of 
203 K-12 teachers, it
was found that 1 in 4 teachers had caught a student cheating using ChatGPT.
It is because of this, that the app is banned in many schools.  Italy became
the first country to ban ChatGPT outright due to concerns about privacy and
misleading information.  Eventually, they overturned their ban, but the point
was made.  Despite all this, certain schools welcome it.  These schools feel
that embracing new technology and moving forward with the world is better.
Programmers have used ChatGPT to solve complex coding problems and
found that the AI has advanced capabilities to write code or fix bugs.  The
chatbot has also passed academic exams with flying colors.  It is safe to say
that generative AI could be an essential resource in various fields, and at the
moment, it is only scratching the surface.
Natural Language Processing
Chatbots like ChatGPT use something called Natural Language Processing
(NLP).  But what is it?  As promised, I won’t dive too deep into the
technical.  In a nutshell, NLP is an area of computer science, specifically AI,
that explores how computers can understand written and spoken text andmanipulate it the way a human can.
NLP uses a combination of rule-based human language modeling and
statistical, machine, and deep learning models.  These help computers process
and understand written and spoken human language (IBM, 2023).
NLP drives text translation programs, responds to spoken commands, and
quickly summarizes large volumes of text in real-time.  NLP begins by
breaking down the text into smaller units to process, known as tokenization. 
That is followed by sentence-level structure—understanding the order of
words, grammar, and sentence meaning.  After that, the NLP moves on to
analyze context.  A single word can have different meanings in 
different
contexts.  After this, an algorithm is created to process the data.
You may have seen the term GPT in earlier sections of this book.  GPT, or
“Generative Pre-Trained Transformer,” is the latest iteration in NLP systems.
GPT is a learning model designed by Open AI that can perform what is
called "few-shot," "one-shot," or "zero-shot" learning, which means it needs
only a few examples, or zero examples, in order to learn complex tasks.  It
can learn new things from a small amount of data.  It can be fine-tuned using
instructions. 
I like to think of it as the most impressive version of the social media
game: Let predictive text finish this sentence…  It can be something simple
like, "I love to eat…" and the player is supposed to tap the middle word that
their smartphone predicts the next word should be.  Everyone gets different
answers because the words they use most are different.  My phone generated
this when prompted, "I love to eat lunch and drink coffee.  Lol, you know I
can do that with my cat."  It almost makes sense.  ChatGPT goes a step
further by sometimes selecting a word that is NOT the most common.  Like
picking the word option to the right or the left instead of the middle.  Its
ability to sometimes select a better word to make more sense is what makes it
so amazing.  Often referred to as the 
temperature,
 the randomization of
selecting a less frequent word helps to make the chatbot seem more human. 
While OpenAI's ChatGPT is the most used and most famous artificial
intelligence right now, there are several other big players in the NLP field. 
However, they all work in a similar fashion.
This is where people need to remember what AI actually is.  It is not
human, no matter how life-like its responses are.  It does 
not feel or care.  It
does not want.  It is simply a tool—code and math, statistics and
probabilities, ones and zeros.S
3
Breakthroughs in Modern Day
Healthcare
o now that we know what AI is… Let us explore how it is changing the
world.
AI has been the catalyst for significant breakthroughs in various fields,
including healthcare, software engineering, the economy, and the military. 
The technology has helped solve problems that have been asked for years.  It
has also helped gain a strategic advantage in different fields.
Healthcare
Bacteria mutate and evolve in order to be resistant to antibiotics.  The most
deadly of these are known as "superbugs" or "supergerms."  Two of these
high-risk pathogens are Enterobacteriaceae and Acinetobacter baumannii,
against which various antibiotics have been tested to see if they can destroy
the bacteria.  So far, many antibiotics have not been strong enough to fight
these superbugs —until now.
According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC, 2019), superbugs
infect nearly 2.8 million people nationwide and kill 35,000 annually.
Present-day techniques to screen antibiotics require significant investment
and take up valuable time.  One of the major issues surrounding superbugs is
that more variants keep coming, and there are not enough antibiotics to battle
them in the current biotech and pharmaceutical industries.
This is where artificial intelligence comes in.  It cuts down on the time ittakes to screen for antibiotics.
Halicin
James Collins, a professor of Medical Engineering and Science at MIT’s
Institute for Medical Engineering and Science and Department of Biological
Engineering, along with other researchers, formed an AI computer model that
analyzes molecular structures to find out what makes them effective in killing
E. coli.  To train the AI, they used data on 2,500 molecules and compounds
(Trafton, 2020).
When they tested the model, it picked out a molecule after analyzing over
6,000 compounds.  This molecule had a strong antibacterial quality, and its
chemical structure differed from the existing antibiotics.
This molecule was named Halicin, inspired by the famous fictional AI
from 
2001: A Space Odyssey
.  Halicin was tested against various bacterial
strains that were cultivated in a lab.  It destroyed many of the superbug
strains, including Acinetobacter baumannii.  It was able to eradicate the
bacteria in infected mice within 24 hours.
MIT's computer model can screen over a hundred million chemical
compounds and select antibiotics capable of killing bacteria more effectively
than existing drugs.  The researchers at MIT aim to utilize the power of AI in
order to discover more revolutionary drugs that could save lives.
The incredible discovery does not end there.  The research team went for a
1.5 billion-compound library and trained the model on 107 million
compounds.  It took just three days for the algorithm to discover 23 different
potential antibiotics, of which two are particularly effective.
Abaucin
Like Halicin, Abaucin was created by another company using AI to kill the
superbug 
Acinetobacter baumannii.
According to BBC News, "AI helped narrow thousands of potential
chemicals to a handful that could be tested in the laboratory.  The result was a
potent, experimental antibiotic called abaucin."  After training the AI to look
at the chemical structure of thousands of drugs, they were tested on the
superbug.  Specifically, "The AI was then unleashed on a list of 6,680
compounds whose effectiveness was unknown.  The results showed the AI
took an hour and a half to produce a shortlist."  The researchers tested
compounds from the shortlist and devised an even smaller list of potential
antibiotics.  "One of them was the incredibly potent antibiotic abaucin. 
Laboratory experiments showed it could treat infected wounds in mice andkill 
A. baumannii
 samples from patients” (Gallagher, 2023).
Halicin and Abaucin are only the beginning of a new AI-led medical era. 
Imagine a world where all kinds of deadly bacteria are eradicated with few
side effects.  With AI-driven technology and drug design, sepsis could
potentially be eliminated and no longer prove fatal.
Modern-day antibiotics tend to kill the good bacteria in human bodies
along with the harmful bacteria.  Researchers want to discover more
antibiotics through AI that specifically kill harmful bacteria and leave the
good ones intact.
And it's not just bacteria.  Viral diseases, which lack an actual cure, could
also be eradicated with the help of compounds developed with the help of
AI.  This could mean wiping out 
AIDS, influenza, COVID, and other deadly
diseases entirely from existence, providing a future where children may not
need vaccines against these diseases.
One thing COVID taught us was that vaccines are a hot-button issue.
Removing vaccinations as a form of preventative health could be a game
changer. Imagine a world where companies don't have to fire long-standing
employees who refuse to get inoculated during the next pandemic. In this
world, kids don't have to be homeschooled or banned from public sports
because their parents refuse to vaccinate them. AI-developed cures for
viruses will make this future possible.
Revela
AI has also proven itself in the cosmetic side of the medical field.  Revela,
a beauty and wellness brand, brought the power of AI into hair and skin care. 
By using AI to help tackle the age-old hair loss issue, they came up with a
new compound.  The company then launched ProCelinyl, a revolutionary
product to battle hair loss and aid hair growth.  According to the company,
Revela's product proved astonishingly effective among 97% of participants. 
If something as difficult to treat as balding can be solved with the help of
artificial intelligence, how many other challenging problems can we find a
solution to using AI?  
Brain/Body Interface
Another tough nut to crack has been the disability caused by a severed
spinal cord.  Trauma can leave people without the ability to walk, amongother issues.  Moreover, while bionics and robotics have come a long way in
helping restore movement, there is still a barrier when there is no movement
due to a lack of nerve conduction.  Most robotic assistance needs some
movement to trigger the device to move.  For example, if an arm 
is severed, a
robotic prosthesis can be attached and connected to muscles and nerves
further up from where the limb was cut.  When the patient uses their brain to
command what is left of the arm, the bionic appendage senses the electrical
conduction or twitch in muscles and makes the desired movement or action. 
But in patients with no conduction at all – as in those cases when the spinal
cord is severed and sends no conduction to the legs at all — that technology
does not work. 
Enter the AI-assisted brain/body interface. 
In an article by Nature written by Henri Lorach, Andrea Galvez, and
others, AI was able to help a man walk again after a complete spinal cord
injury.  According to the article, Swiss neuroscientists use brain and spinal
implants on Gert-Jan Oskam, a forty-year-old Dutchman paralyzed for twelve
years.  The two brain implants and one spinal implant communicate, bridging
the gap between his injured nerves.  A portable computer then interprets the
neural signals and relays them to a pulse generator that the body uses to
create muscle movement.  With this technology and therapy, Gert-Jan has
been able to walk and even climb stairs (Lorach, 2023).
The idea of being able to scan brains and interpret what electrical signals
mean regarding ideas, thoughts, etc., is not new.  However, it usually
involves large, expensive machines like MRIs and PET scanners.  Having
something implanted directly into the brain and then having AI technology
interpret those electrical and chemical signals in real time speaks volumes
about where the technology is going. 
Its potential use in healthcare is just the first step.  In the future, this
technology can be used in various ways, from tailored marketing and
advertising research to the criminal justice system.  Just imagine a new lie
detector test that cannot be beaten or fooled by the criminal.  The potential
applications with brain interfaces are endless.
Custom Chemo
Exscientia, a UK-based, AI-driven company, developed an AI-guided
technology that aimed to treat individual patients with aggressive bloodcancers by pairing them with specific and effective drugs.  This was initially
tested on an 82-year-old man with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma that was
not responding to traditional chemotherapy.  He had undergone chemo six
times.  There seemed to be no improvement.  Eventually, the patient was
enrolled in a trial set up by the Medical University of Vienna.
A small tumor tissue sample was collected from the patient, and using their
AI, a match to a drug that was not traditionally used for large B-cell
lymphoma was made. 
Ex vivo
-based drug screening was used to monitor the
progress, and two years later, the man was in complete remission.  The study
was called Exalt-1.  "This study seeks to test drugs directly against the tumor
tissues of each patient to discover specific drugs for their treatment.  This
allows the treatment of advanced-stage hematologic cancers.  The impact of
image-based drug screening with a deep learning algorithm exceeded
expectations" (Exscientia, 2022).
With AI testing individual cancer cells to find the best treatment for the
patients (thus increasing survival rates), it is not impossible to see a future
where the number of chemo rounds for cancer patients is significantly
reduced.  This is a future where patients would get more time with their loved
ones; where they could attend graduations and weddings that they would
otherwise not have. 
It’s undeniable that AI can provide a brighter future for patients and
someday pave the way for a world completely devoid of cancer.   
AI in Radiology
It is not just the more significant, fatal diseases that AI could help with.  AI
can help with minor injuries and fractures.  A delayed or missed diagnosis is
one of the many problems in radiology.  An AI trained to detect fractures
could save a radiologist much time and patients a lot of money.  A team of
researchers in England reviewed 42 studies and compared the performance of
AI and clinicians in fracture detection and diagnosis.  Of the 42 studies, 37
identified fractures using X-rays, and five used CT (Kuo, 2022).
AI proved just as efficient in detecting fractures as clinicians, if not better. 
Its sensitivity for detecting fractures was 91–92%.  Once the technology is
better developed, it could process CAT scans, MRIs, and X-rays quicker,
significantly reducing time.
In 2020, breast cancer affected millions of women, and over 685,000 died. Mammography screening is currently the most effective tool for detecting
breast cancer, but precise diagnosis still remains a problem.  AI-assisted
mammography could yield more precise diagnoses, significantly reducing the
number of deaths, and increasing positive patient outcomes.
Soon, we could have kiosks at drug stores where a person with an injured
limb could have their extremity scanned and have an accurate diagnosis
within minutes. The kiosk could then provide recommendations on which
aisle to buy an arm sling, a wrist splint, or a leg boot.  Additionally, women
could get their annual mammography screening by walking into a photo
booth and walking out with a diagnosis.  This could save on expensive
doctor's visits for minor injuries or annual screenings.  And by making
radiology exams fast and easy, more people are likely to get them done
timely, possibly catching issues that might 
have been missed or ignored.  The
possibilities with AI-assisted radiology in the future are exciting. 
Detecting Genetic Variations That Cause Disease
AI in genetic research has been a focal point of Google's efforts.  As a
result of their collaboration with PacBio, the research team is utilizing
Google's advanced deep-learning model, DeepConsensus, to accurately
identify genetic variants associated with various diseases.  This breakthrough
aids in the identification of severe genetic conditions.
Traditionally, genetic conditions have proven difficult for healthcare.  Rare
genetic conditions cost millions of dollars to research and treat. Developing
drugs for these conditions are often not cost-effective. The benefit to just a
few rare individuals does not justify the expense. However, with AI, the
financial burden of researching and curing these diseases may be
significantly reduced.  Moreover, the ability of AI to streamline and treat or
alter these abnormalities may make genetic diseases a thing of the past. 
AI and the EHR
AI is now entering the electronic health records (EHR) realm.  Carbon
Health Technologies uses AI to generate patient healthcare records in real-
time.  It records and transcribes the provider's interaction with the patient. 
The AI technology then incorporates lab results, radiology notes, and other
clinical data like vital signs.  Then it adds the doctor's summary to generate a
complete chart for the visit.  Finally, it uses AI for diagnosis codes andbilling (Ravindranath, 2023).
The streamlined process saves time and cuts costs.  Labor in the form of
scribes, coders, billers, etc., can be eliminated.  This technology allows
patient charts to be completed immediately, speeding up the billing and
payment process. 
Thinking ahead, AI incorporated into the doctor-patient relationship can be
beneficial.  AI can be programmed to look for connections in lab results and
symptoms, aiding in order recommendations and diagnoses.  AI could even
be programmed to recommend tailored treatments for the patient, considering
a wide variety of details.  Suppose a patient's responses during the healthcare
visit indicate that the patient is not likely to take pills or follow a strict
healthcare plan.  In that case, the AI might recommend admission to the
hospital for inpatient treatment.  If the patient's dietary and lifestyle choices
suggest they can do better with a low dose of medication, then the AI could
recommend that.  Cookie-cutter medicine might become a thing of the past. 
All of these medical advances using artificial intelligence show just how
important AI is to the future. Healthcare, more than any other sector,
highlights the positive impact AI can have on the human race.A
4
AI in the Military
I has made its way into the military as well.  Weapons, navigation,
surveillance, and aviation have all started to use AI to smooth operations
and make them more efficient while reducing human reliability.  As a
consequence, the systems might need less maintenance.  This also reduces
human error and the impact that such errors can have.
Drone operations are one of the more prominent areas for using AI. 
Instead of a single drone, swarms of drones can be deployed with the help of
AI, which allows them to gather more information.  The drones can also be
used in simulations and training operations, having decision-making abilities
in a myriad of situations.  The drone swarm can have a main objective, but
each drone acts independently to achieve it.  They communicate and relay
information to each other in the swarm.
AI algorithms can process data from a plethora of sources to aid decision-
making, especially in situations of high stress.  In many of these
circumstances, AI systems can promptly analyze 
a situation and give the best
suggestions on how to tackle it.  Unlike humans, it does not usually have
prejudice or bias, significantly reducing human error.  However, AI systems
still need better development to understand human ethics fully, and there is a
risk that they may learn bias from the data existing in their databases.  Since
decision-making is necessary, AI and humans can make it easier by working
together.  For these reasons, there will probably always be a need for a
human to oversee military decisions.Data Research
It is time-consuming to process large amounts of data, but AI can help by
quickly filtering through the data and choosing the most relevant
information.  It can also group together information from diverse datasets to
let military personnel identify patterns more effectively, come up with more
accurate conclusions, and create plans of action based on a complete and
clear picture of the situation.  AI can filter massive amounts of news and
social media content, eliminating repetitive and inaccurate information to
optimize the research process and reduce human error.
Using data research techniques, AI can make target recognition more
accurate in combat environments.  It can predict enemy behavior, weather,
and environmental conditions, assess strategies, and recommend plans to save
time and human resources.
War Simulation
Military training simulation software, also known as a virtual "wargame,"
combines software engineering, computer science, and systems engineering
that helps prepare soldiers for combat systems deployed during operations. 
These simulations provide 
realistic mission scenarios and tasks for soldiers to
perform so that they gain enough experience before applying their skills to
real-life situations.  Combat simulation is safe, allowing soldiers to
experience the realities of warfare without endangering themselves.  AI-based
simulation can personalize training programs and make fair assessments for
future adjustments, saving time and money.
Cybersecurity & Threat Monitoring
Cyberattacks can render military systems vulnerable, but AI can protect
programs, data, networks, and computers from unauthorized access.  It can
study and examine cyberattack patterns and develop protective strategies to
combat them, recognizing the tiniest signs of malware attacks long before
they invade a network.
AI can be used in threat monitoring and situational awareness to help in
various military activities.  AI-powered unmanned systems can monitor
border areas, spot any threat, and alert the response teams in real-time, thusstrengthening the security of military bases and increasing the safety of
soldiers in combat (Sentient Digital Inc., 2022).
Transportation
AI can play a role in transporting ammunition, goods, and troops and
reduce transport costs by suggesting the best route to travel.  It can also
identify issues for military fleets beforehand and increase the efficiency of
their performance. So much of military strategy and capability lies in
logistics. With AI at the helm, the military can improve performance and
dominate the enemy.
The outcome is impressive when all the methods of incorporating AI into
the military come together. For example, 
Palantir is an artificial intelligence
platform that has a simulation video where their AI can pull everything into a
real-life war scenario.  From spotting an enemy threat to reviewing possible
teams in the area with the logistical capabilities to take out the enemy target.
Their system can access the health and security levels of each member of the
team, the terrain for the safest and fastest routes, etc.
Palantir demonstrates how the military might use its AI in a war.  The
video shows the operator using a ChatGPT-style bot to order drones for
reconnaissance, devise several plans of attack, and jam enemy
communications.
With so many applications, AI's future in the military is absolute.  The real
futurist's question is: How much autonomy will humans have in the military? 
With advancements in drones and missiles, what need will there be for boots
on the ground?  How many soldiers are needed when AI can do so much? 
My guess is that AI will eventually make the military smaller. P
5
AI's Impact in Coding
rogramming
Artificial intelligence can essentially write its own programs, modify its
own programming, and generate new code.  Naturally, this has many
advantages for program developers. 
One of the most popular coding tools is Codex, developed by OpenAI.
Codex is a system that translates natural language into code.  It can interpret
commands written in natural language and run them for the programmer. 
This allows the programmer to build upon an existing application with a
natural language interface.  Codex can be used for almost any programming
task.  However, the tool is still new and can have limitations.
AlphaCode, developed by DeepMind, is another programming tool making
waves.  This model achieved a rank of 54% in coding competitions that
consisted of 5,000 participants (Google DeepMind, 2022).
Google has developed an AI tool called Bard that can help software
developers with programming, coding, debugging, and 
code explanation. 
Google plans on launching the features in over 20 programming languages. 
Bard can debug code line by line, thus helping users fix errors (Korosec,
2023).  The code can also be translated from one coding language to another. 
However, like many other new AI applications, Bard is still in its infancy and
needs improvement.  It is still prone to generating incorrect or incomplete
code for programmers.  Or even code that does not provide the expected
output even if it works.These are just three of the AI-assisted applications that can be used for
coding. More and more pop up each week with new features.
The consequences of rapidly evolving AI in software development should
be considered when everything moves quickly.  AI tools can recreate
vulnerabilities in the code they put forth as suggestions to programmers,
which programmers may or may not notice.  Relying too much on AI could
make programmers complacent.  There also comes the question of a
"technical debt," where sometime in the future, programmers may have to fix
software that no human has ever examined closely.
Many programmers feel that they will become obsolete when AI takes over
programming.  They would lose their jobs, which they had put years of effort
into learning and practicing.
But what about the flip side?
The ever-growing consumer demand for advancements in software has
placed a strain on coders. This stress on production may be alleviated by
employing both humans and AI to write code faster and with fewer bugs. The
partnership of AI and humans in coding can fix the supply/demand issue.
Even if AI takes over the majority of the coding, human coders can switch
to focusing on what AI cannot do.  This very instinct for adapting and
evolving will shape the future.  Humans are built to evolve.  We will always
find a way.
Looking back, ATMs are one of the most prominent examples of
technology 'taking' human jobs.  When ATMs first came onto the market, it
was feared that bank tellers would lose their jobs.  In reality, the number of
bank tellers grew between 1980 and 2010.  They became adept at sales,
developing a rapport with customers, and selling new products and services. 
Their job did not end; it became different.  I foresee this same future with
coders. 
Eventually, optimists believe that future programmers' jobs will focus less
on writing code and more on identifying and verifying false or dangerous
code.  This would make programmers valuable, even with AI in existence.F
6
Writing with AI
ormal Writing
Gone are the days when we used to scour libraries and the internet to
find information on essay topics, take notes, and write lengthy paragraphs
while struggling to reach the word limit.  All you have to do now is visit
ChatGPT or similar AI sites, type in a prompt, and et voilà, you have pages
and pages of a school essay written in seconds.  AI has already changed how
people write essays, papers, articles, and books. Writer's block?  What's that?
AI prompts can help get creative juices flowing.
However, it is not just essays.  When we reach the next level: scientific
writing and research papers, things become more challenging.  Even then,
generative AI has helped researchers write their academic papers and publish
new and profound ideas.
Writesonic is an AI tool that helps write articles, blogs, and papers.  It
comes at an affordable subscription price, making it suitable for small
businesses and freelancers.
Additionally, Copy.ai, is another effective AI writer out there that is
helpful for sales and marketing agencies, social media managers, businesses,
and startups.  It provides a range of options to write anything from blog posts
and ad copies to social media content and website copies.  The advantage of
this AI is that it provides multiple results based on the prompt and
information you provide, so you can go through the results and pick whatever
you like the most.Merlin is another AI tool that's a ChatGPT extension.  It is downloadable
from Chrome, enabling you to use ChatGPT on any website to write emails,
social media posts, blog posts, and code.
Other AI writers include Rytr, Simplified, Consensus, AISEO, Paperpal,
Quillbot, Trinka, Bertha AI, Scholarcy and many, many others.  Smodin has a
feature that allows it to write content that bypasses some AI detectors.  Conch
AI is another all-in-one writing tool.  It, too, can go unreported by many AI
detectors.
Many researchers feel the rift between their writing ability and the
requirements for manuscripts, which are essential for submitting to journals. 
This decreases their confidence and increases their anxiety.  Even when they
do write, they may not be able to meet the strict deadlines, which are essential
for a research career.  To tackle this, AI tools make writing—especially
scientific writing—a lot easier.
AI is capable of supporting humans in daily activities and providing
research support.  It is growing quickly in publishing in order to reduce time
and effort.  And costs.  In research and publications, AI is used for translating
languages, summarizing text, checking language, plagiarism, image quality,
and formatting content.  AI assistance makes research, writing, and editing
processes easier, faster, and more efficient.
The aforementioned tools are useful for supporting research and writing,
but they should not entirely replace human effort and experience.  The use of
AI in writing raises various ethical considerations:
●       
Risk of errors and biased results
: An AI tool is trained using data
models, and its limits lie within that training.  They are susceptible to bias
and cannot be used to finish writing tasks without being vetted by a human. 
AI can generate skewed results and misrepresent information if specific
keywords are excluded.  AI tools may be inaccurate since they need help
understanding the context.  Writers still require proofreading to avoid errors
in their work.
●   
Carbon footprints
: Language-learning models require intensive
training that requires a lot of power.  A lot of energy goes into crunching
large amounts of data.  The more advanced an AI, the greater its carbon
footprint, thus increasing carbon emissions.  Therefore, the developers of AI
may need to look for more energy-efficient options to reduce their carbon
footprint and protect the environment.  According to Marr (2023), in a review
by MIT Technology, over 626,000 pounds of carbon dioxide are emittedwhile training a single AI model, which is almost five times the emissions of
an average car in the US over a lifetime.
●   
Over-reliance on AI leads to learning losses
: The over-dependence
on AI causes researchers and students to lose their own sense of learning and
knowledge in writing.  It is a heads-up for everyone using AI: maintain your
writing voice.  The effort to learn and brush up on vocabulary skills should be
continued.
Implemented correctly, the promise of AI in formal writing and research
can have profound benefits.  Imagine data from research studies being
available to academics immediately, helping them implement best practices
faster by using evidence-
based techniques.  Imagine researchers who are not
strong writers shrugging off their fear and getting papers out there that would
never have made it into a journal without the help and confidence AI brings
to the table. 
Creative Writing
In an article by 
Tufts Daily
, an independent newspaper of Tufts University
in Medford, Massachusetts, ChatGPT was given a series of prompts.  The
first prompt was to write a story containing "deeper meaning." After this, the
AI was asked to review 
To Kill a Mockingbird
.  The initial task produced a
short story that was decent, while the second task produced a book review
that was shockingly well-written. This shows the difference in ChatGPT's
strengths in writing. New content is difficult for the AI, but reviewing content
that already exists is easy.
The gap occurs when the AI chatbot tries to emulate human emotions and
essence while writing short stories. Even though the prose is eloquent, it
lacks substance or depth.  ChatGPT also tried to employ foreshadowing and
symbolism but failed.  Even now, scientists have yet to reach the point of
creating an AI that understands the complexities of human emotions. So far,
AI has its limits, and it cannot reach the level of human creativity. 
One day AI may be just as good at creative writing as formal writing. 
Students are often asked to write essays and research papers needing more
individual uniqueness at schools and universities.  For this reason, many of
them have started using AI to help with the tedious work.  But in the realm of
creative writing, the use of AI drops.  One day, it may be equal.  Even then, I
suspect there will still be plenty of people writing their own stories without
the help of any AI.  There will forever be authentic, genuine stories written
by creative people bursting with the need to get their stories out there.  AIwill never take that away. 
Alternatively, AI could help speed up getting creative work out there.  AI
may not write the content but instead help with the advertising, copywriting,
editing, and other tedious parts of writing fiction.  Imagine a world where
readers no longer have to wait months and months for a sequel to their
favorite series.
WGA & SAG Strike Against AI
As of 2023, the Writers Guild of America (WGA) and the Screen Actors
Guild (SAG) have gone on strike against the Alliance of Motion Picture and
Television Producers, claiming that the companies have profited off the
writers' work or actors' likeness and are not compensating them enough.  The
WGA & SAG demand better pay and want guardrails that ban film studios
from using AI. The strike speaks to the broader idea of preventing AI from
taking jobs. 
Does AI write a script better than one written by a human?  Probably not. 
At least not yet. 
Do AI models look better on camera than the actors they are created after?
Not up close. Not yet.
Historically when jobs are threatened by technology, consumers decide the
outcome.  If the technology drives down costs while providing the same
service, the technology wins.  If not, the technology either improves or dies.
Lawsuits and strikes are one way of stemming the tide and forcing the
technology backward.  Only time will tell how this plays out.M
7
AI Assistants
Work Assistants
eetings are part of many people's daily work.  Often, for various reasons,
it may take effort to catch up on presentations and take notes, especially
when many things are going on, many points are made, and many tasks are
assigned.  Manually keeping notes can prove to be confusing and tedious. 
For this reason, many AI apps have been developed to help streamline this
process and make it easier for users to take notes of meetings.
Otter AI is a meeting assistant that helps write notes automatically, record
audio, and capture presentations.  It also lets you highlight key points and
automatically join and record meetings.  It makes the entire process easier to
manage, and you do not have to worry about missing anything important.
On the other hand, Mindgrasp is an AI tool that lets you make sense of
notes you have already taken during meetings.  You can 
summarize notes or
ask Mindgrasp to compare points.  You can ask for suggestions on
improvement and even ask it to write a paragraph on any specific point.
AI tools like these can help us manage our daily tasks and simplify our
work.  It all depends on how ethically and mindfully we use them.  Imagine a
future where we can attend meetings or classes but never have to jot down a
thing.  AI will be the personal secretary, taking notes and summarizing the
details in whatever method is best for our learning style.Personal Assistants
We know how efficient AI can be as personal assistants, from making lists
and presentations.  AI, such as Tome, is handy for creating presentations with
built-in features such as stock videos and 3D images and renderings.  All it
takes is for you to type in an instruction, say, "Write six slides on renewable
energy," and the AI presents you with a well-written delivery that you can
easily edit, rearrange, and make better. There is also a feature to add video
commentaries and use the Tome app to handle the presentations seamlessly
and last-minute changes.
That is only part of what AI can currently do as a personal assistant.  What
about trips?  Vacations?
We sit before computers and laptops for hours, working out every last
detail of our vacations—hotels, budgets, flights, the whole deal.  We also
know how frustrating it is to scour for the cheapest hotels and the best foods,
not to mention how confusing it is when you go to an entirely new place and
are presented with too many options.
This is why AI tools like Kayak were created.  Kayak helps with booking
flights, hotels, and car rentals.  It also has the feature of creating an itinerary,
which you can share with multiple people using a single link.
Of course, there is always ChatGPT up for answering questions related to
planning trips.  You can ask ChatGPT to plan a detailed itinerary, saving you
the cost and time of looking for places.  Even if you do not follow ChatGPT's
suggestions to the letter, it would give you a starting point.
With the use of this AI, you can create points of interest in a city you have
never been to before.  You can ask the AI to create columns with the distance
from the hotel to these points of interest, the costs of each place, and the
hours they are open.
When used right, AI can certainly save us the anxiety, time, effort, and
costs of navigating through an entirely new place.
AI can also be used as a personal assistant for content creators and
influencers. They can use apps like Tweetmonk, Tweethunter, Tweetify,
Postwise, and Tribescaler to improve their Twitter posts. YouTube tools
include Eightify, Steve AI, Clipmaker, Tubebuddy and Tumbly. Posts can be
improved, and content exported fasted with AI assistance.
With so many AI applications and websites out there to provide help with
everyday life, I foresee a future where AI is incorporated into almosteverything we do. Perhaps one day, we will have an all-in-one bot that knows
each of us completely: all our interests, our strengths, and our flaws and helps
us to navigate the world in a personal one-on-one relationship. If so, I'm
naming mine Jarvis.R
8
AI in Politics and the Economy
evolutionizing Politics
AI technology has grown so exponentially that it has even reached the
House of Representatives.
OpenAI's revolutionary and controversial AI, ChatGPT, has entered
congressional offices.  The House recently created a new working group for
the staff to experiment with and share AI tools in the office, which led the
House of Representatives digital service to obtain 40 licenses for ChatGPT
Plus (Jones, 2023).  The licenses came amid debates over artificial
intelligence, how the technology should be used in the government sector,
and how it should be regulated. 
This is one of the earliest examples of the use of ChatGPT in policymaking
processes.  According to Jones (2023), the Digital Services of the House of
Representatives will pay a monthly subscription plan for an indefinite
period.  Congressional offices intend to use ChatGPT to create and
summarize the content, create constituent drafts and press releases,
summarize large 
amounts of text in speeches, draft bills and policy papers,
graphic design for logos, etc.  The House is trying to catch up with trends and
advancements in technology in order to serve people better.
In the Executive branch, the White House, under the Biden administration,
has announced 140 million dollars to establish seven AI research centers. 
Another example of AI in politics is when US Congressman Jake
Auchincloss read a speech that ChatGPT wrote because he wanted toencourage a debate on the use of artificial intelligence.  He did so by reading
out a speech 
created
 by AI.
AI will help write laws and rebuttals.  It will also read through and
interpret proposals, which may hide embedded provisions for lobbyists, or it
can be used to incorporate more sneaky sections placed into bills guaranteed
to pass.  As mentioned before, AI is a tool that can be used for positive
effects on politics, or it can make the darker side of politics even darker. 
Economy
As of now, economic predictions are not reliable.  Economists need to do a
better job of predicting the economy.  Even in the past, they had failed to
predict depressions accurately.  This is in large part due to the mood swings
of consumers.  For example, if economists predict 4% inflation, people would
instinctively demand 4% in wages, increasing the inflation rate 
above
 4%.
Humans are irrational, unpredictable, and constantly change. Because of
this, economists mainly use theoretical models that do not consider natural
human nature, leading to unpredictability in their decisions and skewed
predictions.  The theoretical models have little value because they need to
consider the changes in human behavior and economic perception.
For example, take the story of GameStop, a much-beloved brick-and-
mortar game store.  Wall Street tried short-selling the 
company in the hopes it
would fail.  They were betting that the company’s share price would fall as a
means for hedge funds to make money.
In the case of GameStop, however, a group of users on Reddit who had a
sentimental attachment to the store went on a coordinated buying spree that
forced the price up by 1800%.  This caused short-sellers to suffer losses of
billions of dollars.  This sudden, unpredictable change in the stock market
showed that humans could do strange things out of emotion, leading to a
significant economic impact (Davies, 2021).
We have a flawed perception of the world through the lens of economics. 
Scientists hold on to the primary goal of seeking the truth and vow to have an
unbiased judgment to analyze the world best, but this rarely holds up in
practice.  The problem of economics goes beyond skewed analysis and
predictions.  It is often subject to politics as well.  Politics tends to
manipulate reality in order to attain power.  When this gets into economics,
what you get is an altered perception.
To avoid this, AI gives unbiased economic predictions and evidence-based
suggestions driven by data.  AI could end economic debates driven bypolitics and provide suggestions on overcoming the obstacles regardless of
what they mean for one political party or another.
AI-driven predictive analysis can tackle the challenges present in economic
forecasting.  AI like Danelfin, use artificial intelligence to review stock picks
and score them on a 1-10 rating. According to their website, "Since 2017,
US-Listed stocks with the highest AI score (10/10) outperformed the market
by +20.08% on average after 3 months, while stocks with the lowest AI score
(1/10) underperformed the market by -30.92% on average" (Danelfin, 2023).
Economists can use AI techniques to monitor more than just the stock
market's changing trends.  
Soon predictive analytics will be able to combine
classic statistical analysis with advanced AI technology.
AI can also analyze news headlines and how they influence human
sentiments about the economy.  JPMorgan is already using this.  They used
an algorithm that analyzed the effects of President Trump's tweets on the
financial markets.  When used on a large scale, AI could also help predict
when recessions hit so that banks and authorities could promptly tackle the
problem.
AI takes into consideration what economists do not: changes in human
behavior.  It can also predict changes in the economy, including supply and
demand, so necessary changes can be implemented accordingly. The
economy becomes more stable in a world where data is bias-free and
accurate, and human reactions can be predicted.  People can plan better for
the future when recessions and depressions happen less and less frequently. A
9
Neural Fields for LiDAR
utonomous Driving
A groundbreaking technique called “neural fields” for LiDAR (NFL)
has emerged as a significant advancement in the realm of autonomous
driving.  NFL combines neural fields and a detailed model of LiDAR sensors
to create realistic scans from different perspectives.
NFL combines the rendering capabilities of neural fields with a
comprehensive model of the LiDAR sensing process.  The results offer the
potential to observe real scenes from previously unseen perspectives,
enhancing the accuracy and reliability of autonomous driving systems.  Their
use will extend across various industries, such as robotics, virtual reality, and
gaming.  These applications benefit significantly from the availability of
realistic, high-quality synthesized views, which facilitate improved training
and evaluation of perception algorithms.
It has been tested and proven to outperform traditional methods in
synthesizing new views.  The NFL could 
revolutionize the autonomous
vehicle industry with the prospect of safer, more reliable, and more efficient
transportation.  Furthermore, incorporating physically motivated models of
sensing processes within NeRF and its variants will result in even more
realistic outputs, further bridging the domain gap between synthetic and real
data.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have already showcased impressive results
in synthesizing novel views with exceptional visual quality for variousapplications.  As NeRFs advance and adapt to diverse sensor types and
environmental conditions, there will be broader applications, more realism,
improved handling of dynamic scenes, and increased robustness.
Crime Scene Mapping
While the NFL technique primarily focuses on optimizing LiDAR scans
for autonomous driving applications, it could also be utilized in mapping
crime scenes.  LiDAR technology is commonly used in forensic
investigations to capture detailed 3D data from crime scenes.  The NFL's
ability to synthesize realistic LiDAR scans from different viewpoints could
assist in creating comprehensive and accurate representations of crime
scenes, aiding investigators in their analysis and reconstruction of events.
However, it is essential to note that specific adaptations and considerations
are needed to apply the technology effectively in the forensic area:
●       
Data Integrity and Maintaining Chain of Custody
●       
Forensic Standards and Practices
●       
Compatibility and Integration into Existing Forensic Software
●       
Expertise and Training on the Software
By addressing these considerations and adjusting the NFL technique, it is
possible to make good use of its capabilities in mapping crime scenes,
providing investigators with a robust 
forensic analysis and reconstruction
tool.  When used correctly, this technique could help catch criminals or help
juries to convict them. Section 2
AI in Pop CultureA
10
Avatars
rt was once believed to be the final frontier, impossible for AI to cross.
Now, art is being inundated with AI apps.  AI's vividness, beauty, and
creativity in our pop culture is impressive.  Despite this, AI's presence in art,
music, video, and creative writing has been riddled with controversy.  And
with good reason.  AI's presence in pop culture has us questioning, more than
ever, what it means to be human.
Nowadays, custom avatars of yourself can be made.  These almost life-
like, moving replicas of yourself can be created and used in various ways. 
There is even speech software that can replicate real-life voices. 
Synthesia is a platform that creates life-like AI representations of humans. 
Custom avatars can be used to create business videos with Synthesia.  After
creating your avatar, you can use it in a video by simply writing the script for
the avatar to speak and then generating the video.
ElevenLabs has speech software that creates life-like human voices for
creators and publishers to use for storytelling.  It does not just generate plain
voices; it takes care of intonations and inflections in human speech, making it
almost indistinguishable from reality.
Joanna Stern, a columnist for The Wall Street Journal, experimented with
testing the naturalness of digital avatars created using advanced generative AI
algorithms.  The result was alarming, as Joanna could create her own digital
clone capable of deceiving her relatives and tricking a bank's voice
recognition system.Using the Synthesia tool, Joanna created a video avatar based on her audio
and video recordings.  Although the avatar looked convincing, longer
exposures revealed that it was not a natural person.  Similarly, a digital avatar
used during a Google Meet video call appeared unnatural.
Joanna then tried creating a voice clone using ElevenLabs' generative AI
algorithm.  The audio avatar sounded more like a real person, adding
intonation and a smoother text rendering.  Joanna's sister and father did not
immediately notice they were communicating with a voice clone but
eventually realized it was not an actual person.
Despite the accuracy of the avatars, they are not yet capable of creating
perfect clones.  The uncanny valley still exists.  In the future, AI technologies
will likely advance, making it more challenging to distinguish between a
virtual avatar and a natural person during communication.  This brings up the
worrying subject of "deepfakes" spreading misinformation.
Deepfakes are a kind of synthetic media that is designed to replicate and
replace a person's likeness with another artificially.  It has steadily risen over
the past few years, although it is still young.
In an article by The New York Times, deepfakes have been used to spread
political misinformation in news outlets and various other places.  Graphika,
a research firm studying disinformation, discovered deepfake technology
being used to push false campaigns.  Many people in these videos were AI-
generated, taken from one of Synthesia's digital actors.  As such, the co-
founder and chief executive officer of Synthesia, Victor Riparbelli, said that
his team is dedicated to preventing their AI from being used illegally. 
However, oftentimes it is hard for them to detect a deepfake when there is no
hate speech, explicit words, or images in the videos.
Deepfakes have also been used to create pornographic videos using the
faces of celebrities, much to their embarrassment and shame.
It is hard to tell fake from real. Eventually, deepfakes can develop to the
point that it will be impossible to tell reality from fiction.  The use of such
technology should be scrutinized.
Avatars have also made headlines recently with their bias. In-app AI filters
like the one on TikTok can take a selfie of you and turn you into a cartoon.
However, the cartoon rendered takes into account clothing, background, and
facial expression. When tested, a white male's cartoon avatar was turned into
a black male simply by turning his baseball cap backward. The example
illustrates the deep-seated bias that lives within the software.A
11
AI Music
I in music made waves recently with the announcement of a new Beatles
record by Paul McCartney using AI (Savage, 2023).  The idea of artificial
intelligence using old recordings of John Lennon's voice to clean up audio
from over 50 years ago to create a new song is impressive.  It blurs the lines
between natural and artificial.
In fact, AI has made it so easy to compose music that you do not need any
musical talent to create it.  Descript is a platform that allows you to clone
your voice, which you can then use to edit audio or create music, podcasts, or
videos.  Descript uses an AI called Lyrebird to achieve ultra-realistic voices. 
It takes care of the tone of the voice.  The platform only allows you to clone
your own voice under its privacy policy.  Other programs allow you to clone
the voices of others to create music.
A podcast by the Guardian mentioned how David Guetta, a famous DJ,
cloned the voice of the famous rapper, Eminem, to create a track that he then
played at an event.   The crowd went 
wild.  There have been many instances
of musicians having their voices taken without their permission and those
voices being cloned and used to create new music.  This has led to massive
controversy surrounding the involvement of AI in the music industry, from
the music-making process right down to the vocals. Because as AI grows and
becomes more advanced, the rough edges around cloned voices will be
smoothed over until they become virtually indistinguishable from the real
thing.One of the many AI music software programs available out there is
Boomy.  It allows users to create songs by providing plenty of options.  You
can choose several genres and then click on a button that says, "Create a
song," and the AI will compose a new song for you in less than thirty
seconds.  It selects the track's key, chords, and melody, and then you can
fine-tune and edit your song.  You have plenty of choices for editing, such as
adding or removing instruments, adjusting the tempo and volume, adding
vocals, etc.
Boomy was launched at the end of 2018 and claimed its users around the
globe had created over five million songs.  The website also allows users to
upload their tracks onto Spotify and other music streaming sites, and every
time those songs get played, the users earn money (Belton, 2022).  The songs
sound computer-generated, but that does not stop the development of AI
songwriting software.  The more of them that come up, the cheaper
songwriting software becomes.
Using AI to compose music is not a new thing.  In the 1980s, David Cope,
a classical composer, developed a similar software system after hitting
writer's block.  He once set it up to compose music similar to that of Johann
Sebastian Bach, and the computer had composed 5,000 pieces of music
inspired by Bach, which were later released in an album called "Bach by
Design."
The Guardian expressed concerns about how human music-makers would
be "disenfranchised by AI" in the podcast.  They spoke in great lengths about
artists with their voices and music cloned and how they expressed their fears
about AI taking over the music industry.  The controversy surrounding AI
applications in music is still intense (Joseph, 2023).
A future where the majority of music is AI-created isn't too far away. 
Playlists could be generated based on what style of music we like and what
tasks we are doing.  Going to the gym?  AI has a brand-new playlist with
songs it just created for you.  Need soft classical music while cooking
dinner?  Thirty seconds later, you have a brand-new album to last you for the
next three hours.  Music will become something custom and unique to each
of us.
Copyright is a tricky area when it comes to AI-composed music.   The
famous record label, Universal, urged Spotify and Apple Music to stop
selling AI-generated music and stop anyone from stealing original content to
train AI.  It is not just Universal.  The entire music industry is urgingstreaming platforms to prevent AI from stealing songs.
This is only one of the several arguments regarding intellectual property
that could threaten the rapid growth of generative AI.  Music generators can
create convincing clones of famous artists like Kanye West.  OpenAI's
Jukebox has been used to create life-like music in styles similar to Elvis,
Katy Perry, and Frank Sinatra.
Thousands and thousands of hours of recorded material are used to train AI
systems, and most of these are taken without explicit permission from the
owners.  AI research labs assume their actions are covered by the "fair use"
exemptions under American law because an AI model is "transformative
work," which does not compete with the original material.  But this is a huge,
huge gray area.  And original creators feel differently.
Recently the Grammys announced that while "AI music and content can be
submitted to the Grammys for consideration, the awards will only go to
humans who contributed to the piece. Furthermore, in the songwriting and
performance categories, the piece has to be mostly written and performed by
a human for the work to be considered for a Grammy" (Ortiz, 2023). The new
rules highlight the industry's take on AI music: human involvement is
paramount.O
12
Art vs. AI
ne of the most significant controversies today is the use of AI to generate
images and artwork, often without the permission of the original
creators.  Image generators such as Stable Diffusion and Midjourney have
been used—or rather misused—to create artworks based on data taken from
stolen art, and the users have been passing it off as their own. Such image
generators also create fake images that look so close to the real thing that it is
hard to discern if they are fake.  For example, the viral image of the pope
wearing a stylish white puffer jacket was created by Midjourney. These
generative art AIs have raised huge ethical concerns regarding artistic
copyright and ownership, with solid evidence that some AI programs are
trained on data from images that have been used without permission or
payment.  This led to class-action lawsuits.
What exactly can the AI do?
Programs like Microsoft Designer let you replace parts of images with AI-
generated images, such as replacing the 
background behind a person with a
sunny beach.  You can even erase people from images altogether.  Like an
ex-boyfriend.
DALL-E is another image generation program that creates images from
prompts.
In the UK, there are exceptions supporting AI labs training models based
on images taken without permission.  The intellectual property law was
updated to allow legally acquired copyrighted material to be used non-commercially for AI research.  The research can then be legally used to train
models for commercial use while still benefiting from copyright exceptions.
However, tools have been developed to protect artistic works from being
stolen by AI.  The biggest example is Glaze, a program that uses a cloaking
technique to prevent an image generator from accurately replicating an art
style.
Invisible watermarks are making an entry as well.  Unlike regular visible
watermarks, which can be removed, invisible watermarks are hidden in the
images and are thus harder to spot and remove.  A French startup called
"Imatag" has devised a solution to protect images by embedding invisible
watermarks that will not disappear even if the images are resized or cropped. 
They also have tracker options to track the images online to make sure they
are not reused, copied, or stolen.  As laws and regulations regarding AI are
formed, invisible watermarks will become more common.
Google is also rolling out a new feature that will allow users to reverse-
search images and determine whether AI created them.  There will be an
option called 
"About this image”
 that will take you to the source of the
image.  Google's AI-generated images will have a 
Made by AI
 tag, letting
users differentiate between real and fake images.  Once this feature is
released, other AI search engines and generative AI will likely follow suit.
The line between AI and original content is being blurred, and it is an
ongoing battle.
In fact, Spawning AI created a site called www.
haveibeentrained
.com,
where artists can find out if their artworks have been used to train AI
generators.  Over 80 million images were removed from Stable Diffusion
through opt-out requests by artists.  Eighty million might seem like a large
number, but it turns out to only be about three percent of the total dataset –
just a drop in the bucket.  Currently, over two billion images are in the
LAION dataset used by Stable Diffusion (Kemper, 2023).
OpenAI is following a similar route to create a pro-copyright version of
ChatGPT to ensure creators are paid for their work if their content or style is
used.
Getty Images vs. Stability AI
Getty Images has taken legal action against the creators of Stable Diffusion
and Stability AI as part of their escalating legal battle.  In their lawsuit, GettyImages accused Stability AI of violating their intellectual property rights. 
The stock image company alleged that Stability AI illegally stole 12 million
images from their database without consent or payment in an attempt to build
a competing business.  This infringement extends to both copyright and
trademark protections held by Getty Images.
This legal dispute is the latest development in the ongoing conflict between
AI art generator creators and the rights-holders.  AI-driven art tools require
artwork, photographs, and any illustration to train data.  For that, they often
scrape the internet to find content, most of the time without permission from
the original creators.
Getty announced the legal proceedings it had initiated against Stability AI
in the High Court of Justice in London.  However, it remains to be seen if the
claim has been served, and Getty Images did not specify at that time whether
they intended to pursue legal action within the United States. 
Stability AI is also confronted with another lawsuit in the United States,
along with Midjourney; these were filed by artists seeking a class-action
lawsuit.
Moss, who published the full complaint on his blog, highlighted the
contrasting focus between the potential class action lawsuit and Getty's
complaint.  The class-action lawsuit focused more on the harm done to the
artists by the violation caused by the AI tools, while Getty's case focused on
the lack of compensation for image use.  It is worth noting that Getty has
licensed its images to other AI generators, emphasizing the fact that Stability
AI illegally stole its images without consent.
The copyright infringement arguments highlighted in the lawsuit will
emphasize the US fair use regulations, which allow copyrighted content to be
used in specific situations.  The subject of "transformative use" will also play
a vital role.  The question is whether Stable Diffusion generates output
different enough from the data used to train it.  According to research, the
software occasionally memorizes some images and can produce exact
replicas of those images, but those are rare (Vincent, 2023a).
Other AI companies, watching the events unfold, have incorporated
safeguards into their product. Some only train AI on purchased images.
Others plan to pay artists when their art is used as inspiration. Others plan to
offer protection to subscribers against future copyright lawsuits. One such
company is Adobe. Firefly is Adobe's generative AI art creation tool.
According to the company, "With Firefly, Adobe will also be offeringenterprise customers an IP indemnity, which means 
that Adobe would protect
customers from third-party IP claims about Firefly-generated outputs"
(Miller, 2023).
AI's future in art and music may seem ambiguous.  However, I don't see
AI-generated art going away.  In fact, I suspect that AI will only continue to
grow in the creative arts world despite all the lawsuits. These growing pains
are necessary, eventually resulting in regulations and deals between image
companies and AI start-ups wishing to train their new tech.N
13
Script and Video Generation
owadays, many creators on YouTube and TikTok use AI to generate
video scripts.  One of these examples is Syllaby, which helps to search
for topics in the user's relevant industry and creates video scripts based on
those topics that are most likely to go viral.  This tool is made for content
creators, social media managers, and even lawyers to save time on creation.
Another tool is Steve.ai, which allows users to create videos and
animations.  This tool makes it easier to create promotional campaigns for
salespeople, marketers, etc.
It takes little to generate new content for your social media accounts now
that many similar tools are popping up.  In a way, it is helpful when you need
to maintain a brand image or promote products and services.  The goal is to
save creators time and energy, allowing them to focus on other aspects of
their content.  The generators do not just save time; they also provide a
kickstart to content ideas that the creators might have yet to think of.  The AI-
generated scripts also help with search engine 
optimization or SEO, including
keywords that could help the video rank higher in search results.  Overall the
result is more content, faster content, and a larger audience. 
Of course, there are some downsides to using script generators.  Critics
argue that it can lead to generic or formulaic content lacking the unique voice
and perspective of the creator.  In an article by Empire, a writer for Netflix's
show: Black Mirror tried to have ChatGPT write an episode, but it was
terrible.  All the AI did was take the generic plots from some of the otherepisodes and combine them into one (Williams, 2023).  For a series known
for looking at the dark side of advancing technology, it was a fitting plot twist
to have advancing technology fail epically. 
The failure highlights an important lesson: It is important for creators to
use these tools as a starting point and still infuse their own creativity and
personal touch into the final product.
Syllabi and Steve.ai are just two examples of AI-powered tools changing
how content is created.  While they may not be for everyone, they are
proving to be a valuable resource for TikTok and YouTube creators looking
to streamline their workflow and develop fresh content ideas.
An AI voice tech making waves is Meta's VoiceBox. According to Meta's
website, VoiceBox is the first text-to-speech model to synthesize speech
across several languages and perform tasks like content editing and
background noise removal. Its implications in fields like audiobook narration,
radio, and, of course, marketing are vast.
Video Generation
Users can create videos using images and words with the assistance of
Kaiber AI, a cutting-edge AI-powered video generator.  It is an exceptional
tool for individuals seeking to produce high-quality videos effortlessly.  It
offers speed, simplicity, and enjoyment in its utilization.  Technical skills and
prior experience are optional for this platform; all users require is their
imagination and creativity.
It is no surprise that Kaiber AI has gained significant popularity.  It caters
to musicians by providing tools like Spotify Canvas for creative expression,
inspires artists, supplies materials for producers, and offers a delightful
experience for futurists.  Furthermore, the developers continuously work to
incorporate new features that cater to the desires of their users.  Recently,
they introduced a feature that simplifies video editing, adding to their existing
trend feature for creating video art from images.
The video generation process entails specific time considerations.  Style
previews may take up to 30 seconds to develop, while the final rendering of
videos can require several minutes or even hours, depending on their length. 
Kaiser AI is actively working on reducing processing time through various
means.
Kaiser AI eliminates the need for expensive equipment, professional
performers, or elaborate sets, enabling users to create captivating and realistic
films.  With the aid of Kaiber AI, even individuals with limited experiencecan generate professional-grade video content.  Famous artists such as Linkin
Park, Kid Cudi, Mike Shinoda, and others have used AI to create music
videos (Eliaçık, 2023).
The artificial intelligence behind Kaiber AI empowers users to effortlessly
produce stunning visualizations based on their own photographs or textual
descriptions.  By uploading a song and selecting a theme and aesthetic, users
can witness the creation of a custom music video that unfolds before their
very eyes.  Users can also direct the camera's movements to enhance variety
and extend the duration of their films.
GliaCloud offers text-to-video services in English, Chinese, and Japanese. 
It has hundreds of templates to make video creation easy. 
Other text-to-video AI apps include Gencrat, InVideo, and VEED.IO,
among many, many others.   Every day new AI apps are released for users to
purchase and utilize.  
Imagine AI reading this book and then generating a book cover to match
without the need for a graphic designer to be hired.  Furthermore, AI can then
make a promotional video for this book.  Forget spending hundreds on an
advertising company. AI's potential use in script and video generation is
limited only by our lack of imagination.   W
14
The Future of AI in the Job
Market
here does the job market stand in the future, with AI taking over so
rapidly?  What will happen when AI handles content creation, writing,
coding, and many other tasks in a fraction of the time humans take?
Like how the internet changed how fast information could be delivered to
us, AI will change how fast that information is created.  The slow, mundane
tasks of basic coding can be eliminated.  Research, writing, designing,
preparing, making charts, graphs, art, outlines, summaries, notes… AI can
automate any part of a job that some consider time-consuming or tedious. 
The final project, be it a book, app, presentation, song, or travel itinerary, will
be completed faster.  Thus, AI speeds up content creation.
According to an outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas report,
"Around 5% of May's job cuts were directly related to artificial intelligence"
(Vedantam, 2023).  This 
number is only expected to increase, and AI's
unprecedented growth is rapidly reshaping the job scene.
A quick litmus test to see if your job is safe is to ask this question: Can
artificial intelligence do what I do for a living? 
·         If the answer is 'yes,' it is time to dust off and update your resumé. 
·         If the answer is 'some,' it is time to learn the AI apps that assist in
the parts of your job it can do and master them.  Stay ahead of the curve. 
·         And if the answer is 'no,' then your job is safe.   
Make no mistake, if a computer application can do a job, over time,
businesses will embrace it.  It is simple economics.  You do not have to paywages to a software program.  You do not have to pay health benefits or deal
with HR issues.  As the old expression goes, it's not personal; it's business. 
Almost all companies are in the business of making money.  The ones that
don't are the exception, not the rule.  And they are 
vastly
outnumbered.                
AI might take over some jobs, but it will also pave the way for new ones.
This is true of just about any advancement in technology. When computers
arrived, many jobs changed – some were lost completely. But many more
jobs were created.
There is this belief that a finite number of jobs and work exists. This belief
is sometimes called the 'Lump of Labor Fallacy.' The fear is that when AI
takes our jobs, there will be nothing left for humans. The truth is that
technology has always created more jobs. The number of jobs is not finite –
with technology, it is exponential.
The World Economic Forum states that 97 million jobs will emerge by
2025. Not surprisingly, many of these new jobs are related to the
development and maintenance of AI.
Here are the top ten jobs that are increasing in demand:
- Data analysts and scientists
- AI and machine learning specialists
- Big Data specialists
- Digital marketing and strategy specialists
- Process automation specialists
- Business development professionals
- Digital transformation specialists
- Information security analysts
- Software and application developers
- Internet of Things specialists
On the other hand, the jobs that are decreasing in demand are:
- Data entry clerks
- Administrative and executive secretaries
- Accounting, bookkeeping, and payroll clerks
- Accountants and auditors
- Assembly and factory workers
- Business services and administration managers- Client information and customer service agents
- General and operations managers
- Stock-keeping and material-recording clerks
Unsurprisingly, the jobs on the rise are around AI, and the ones losing
demand are the jobs AI can do. Who needs an auditor when AI can do that
for free? Who needs a secretary when AI can do most of that work?
It has been said that AI will not take jobs. Instead, people who understand
how to use AI will be the ones who take the jobs. I believe this to be
absolutely true. If you want to be employable, learn about AI. Use it, read
about it, and stay up-to-date on it.
Reassurance
For those worried about their jobs in things like coding or 
ghostwriting,
although AI has advanced rapidly, its scope is still narrow, and most of it
requires human oversight and input to work correctly.
The percentage of jobs 100% automated by AI will be incredibly low. This
is due to a variety of factors. Some of it concerns technology development
regarding implementation, optimization, and maintenance costs. Not to
mention the fact that AI is facing many cultural, legal, and political hurdles at
the moment. While things are happening rapidly with AI, the job market is
always several steps behind. If you are worried about your current job – you
have time. Time to change and adapt, learn and grow.
For the most part, AI will never entirely replace workers but rather
automate specific tasks to help them. The impact of AI that replaces jobs will
also vary from country to country, between industries, and at different
education levels.
Already governments are working to enact policies that enhance and value
human labor and help workers who have been displaced from their jobs
transition into new careers. This will be important moving forward.
There are still jobs that require human expertise, like CEOs, carpenters,
nurses, lawyers, etc., that require emotional and social intelligence, human
creativity, and critical thinking, which AI lacks. AI does work based on
training data, so it does not have the same understanding as a human to
handle these jobs - yet.C
15
The COVID Effect
OVID has turned the world upside down since it started, forcing people
into quarantine and working in their homes. At first, the transition from
physical office work and classroom sessions to work-at-home jobs and online
classes took a bit of work.
Schools and workplaces needed to adjust to the changes. People did not
take long to adapt to the new lifestyle, and work-at-home jobs soon became
the norm. Even now, as workplaces open back up, there are still many work-
at-home jobs. However, with AI on the rise, some work-at-home jobs are at
risk of being automated. Some jobs, like farming, housing, or anything
COVID considered 
essential workers,
 might be safe from AI for now. Even
that is unpredictable.
Automation was bound to make many jobs obsolete, and COVID
accelerated that progress. During the pandemic, robots were deployed to
clean airports. Companies closed down. Call centers replaced agents with
chatbots. This kind of automation 
has been on the rise for decades. The only
difference now is that COVID sped up the process to such a degree that
people did not have much time to process and transition into new jobs. The
lockdowns had a significant impact on the livelihoods of people. Moving
forward, AI may disrupt things once again.O
16
AI's Impact in Different Sectors
Healthcare
ne day AI will be able to deliver quicker and more accurate diagnoses,
personalized treatments, and better patient outcomes. By harnessing the
power of machine learning, we can analyze massive amounts of data like
genetic information, medical images, and health records to uncover patterns
and develop innovative therapeutic approaches.
Recent developments in AI have occurred across various areas, such as
robotic-assisted surgery, personalized treatment, drug discovery, and patient
monitoring through virtual assistants. There may be a possibility for even
more incredible breakthroughs in the future of AI, revolutionizing medicine
and providing enhanced care for patients.
This means that while AI impacts healthcare, it is still a very safe job field
to enter. AI will enhance this industry, not replace it.
Education
AI has become an invaluable tool in education, empowering teachers,
students, and educational institutions to streamline tasks, enhance learning
experiences through visual aids, and improve accessibility. The future of
education will be characterized by personalized learning and creatinginteractive and engaging environments.
Emphasizing the practical application of knowledge will lead to safer
laboratory experiments, while readily available facts and information will
reduce the need for rote memorization.
The overall educational landscape will benefit when we witness the
evolution and incorporation of AI in the classroom setting.
Transportation
AI is paving the way for autonomous and self-driving vehicles. Although
fully autonomous vehicles are not yet widely available, ongoing
advancements in improving navigation systems and optimizing traffic flow
lead to safer and more convenient transportation options.
Companies like Tesla and Waymo have made progress in autonomous
vehicle technology, pushing the boundaries of innovation. Even Volkswagen
is getting in on the AI-assisted, LiDAR-using, self-driving car movement.
AI offers increased efficiency and sustainability, addressing congestion,
reducing emissions, and minimizing accidents. There are endless possibilities
ahead as AI continues to develop. It is not just autonomous vehicles but
intelligent traffic management systems as well. AI has the potential to
revolutionize the way we travel entirely.
Customer Service
AI is delivering personalized and efficient experiences.
Through AI-powered solutions like chatbots, NLP, and virtual assistants,
companies can provide prompt responses and enhance customer satisfaction.
Chatbots, available around the clock, will handle customer inquiries swiftly,
resulting in reduced response times and increased customer happiness. The
future of customer service will simplify query resolution and improve overall
interactions. Voice-activated assistants and predictive analytics will reshape
how businesses engage with their customers, making the experience seamless
and personalized.
This automation means fewer jobs will be available for people working in
this industry. This is one of those 'danger zone' jobs.
MarketingAI presents a transformative opportunity in marketing, enabling precise
targeting and tailored strategies. AI allows businesses to reach their audiences
with precision and timeliness by leveraging predictive models and customer
behavior analysis. Voice search optimization and augmented reality will play
a prominent role, and innovations such as fraud detection and WhatsApp
chatbots will enhance customer service by reducing the need for human
intervention.
The ability to create content tailored to individual consumers will only
increase with AI. Videos, ads, and clickbait will become faster with less need
to hire artists, writers, voice actors, etc.
To stay ahead of the curve, people in the marketing job field must embrace
AI and incorporate it into everyday workflows.
Human Resources
AI can automate daily human resource tasks like screening candidates,
onboarding, and evaluating performances. Chatbots and virtual assistants
could efficiently address employee inquiries, alleviating the workload for HR
professionals. By streamlining hiring and employee management processes,
AI drives efficiency and effectiveness. It also unlocks opportunities for
innovation, promotes improved employee engagement, and fosters growth
within organizations.
However, HR will always need a human element. AI will only assist this
job field, not replace it.
Banking
In the banking sector, AI delivers automated customer service, enhanced
fraud detection, and risk management. Machine learning algorithms can
analyze vast datasets so that banks can gain information about customer
behavior, investment opportunities, and risk assessment regarding credit. This
advancement in AI technology simplifies access to products and services.
From chatbot-powered interactions to robo-advisors, AI transforms how
individuals engage with banks and financial institutions.
Like other industries, those who want to get ahead should learn and master
the AI tools available in this sector. Banking can be cut-throat, so staying
ahead is paramount.Religion
One area many people might not think AI would encroach upon is religion.
Yet, in a recent tweet by Antonio Vieira Santos, "Hundreds attend #AI
church service in Germany. The ChatGPT chatbot led more than 300 people
through 40 minutes of prayer, music, sermons, and blessings." In theory, like
creative writing, a church service can be generated by AI. It follows a typical
pattern, and a theme can be strung together using Bible verses, songs, and
messages. It could even be a powerful sermon and experience for those in
attendance. That being said, many religious believers think that the message
and theme should be divinely inspired. The pastor/preacher/priest should pray
about what to instruct on and follow God's prompt.
I am sure thousands of religious leaders have relied on others' messages in
a pinch when divine inspiration failed to appear to them. For those who
believe in God, He can use anything to turn hearts and improve lives – even
artificial intelligence. So, the idea that AI has entered into the religious realm
is not that strange after all.
But it is not about to replace religious leaders. Sheep need a shepherd, not
a computer program.
Archeology
AI is not just about what is new but what is very, very old.
Nasca lines are gigantic geoglyphs etched into the Peruvian desert
thousands of years ago. Over the millennia, erosion and time have made
some of these ancient wonders invisible. With the help of AI, three new
Nasca lines have been discovered, paving the way for AI's role in archeology
(Loeffler, 2023).
AI can be utilized in various ways to find things once lost to the sands of
time. Ancient cities can be detected using LiDAR and other technology.
Aided by AI, it can "learn" what to look for based on combinations of
topography, predictable weather patterns, and historical texts. AI can string
together the pieces 
across time and distance to uncover what we did not know
existed.
Additionally, Australian researchers are using AI to analyze cave paintings
and rock art. The programming helps archeologists detect faded or barely-
there paint from rock surfaces. Finding what once was hidden so that it canbe enhanced and studied will help shed light on parts of our history thought
lost to time (Hatfield, 2023).
This is one of the most exciting fields AI can impact. It will boost interest
which in turn will boost funding. I foresee growth in archeology and look
forward to future discoveries.Section 3
100 Years from NowW
17
Robotics
e all wonder what the world will look like a hundred years from now.
Will it be a dystopian future like we see in the movies? Will the
future be filled with flying cars, floating cities, neon lights, and AI all
around? The movies usually portray a world where humans are ruled by a
totalitarian government and AI robots have taken over almost everything.
Alternatively, there may be a future where today's problems, like hunger,
aging, disease, pollution, and war, are things of the past.
Robotics and the Future
Artificial intelligence could lead to an increase in interactions between
humans and robots. Many industries already have assistant robots working
alongside humans and performing tasks like testing and assembly. They have
brought a new level of efficiency in manufacturing and customer service.
Advancements in AI gave robots the ability to mimic humans, 
and robots that
behave more like people integrate more effectively into the workforce.
Nevertheless, this technology still has a long way to go before becoming
more human-like.
The AI software that has been proliferating now might help make better
robots in the future.
With AI powering the robots, they better understand their surroundings,
can recognize and identify patterns and comprehend data. These
enhancements increase the robot's autonomy.
Even though "robotics" and "AI" are often used interchangeably, it isessential to note the differences. Robotics involves constructing and
programming machines capable of autonomous task execution without
human intervention. At the same time, AI focuses on systems designed to
replicate human cognitive processes, enabling learning, problem-solving, and
independent decision-making. It is hardware vs. software.
These technologies can significantly improve our lives, even in areas of
education and household management.
Humanoid robots revolutionize personalized learning, while cloud-
connected robots streamline everyday tasks like cleaning and cooking.
Robotics and AI can be crucial in addressing climate change, energy
sustainability, and complex healthcare issues. By harnessing these
advancements, we can effectively tackle these problems head-on.
They promise to automate mundane and repetitive tasks that currently
dominate our daily routines. This automation liberates valuable time and
energy, enabling us to pursue more creative and fulfilling endeavors.
Thanks to improved sensor technology and machine learning, robots are no
longer rote machines. One hundred years from now, they will be cognitive
collaborators. The trajectory of robotics is moving upward, and the field will
significantly benefit from these strides. Soon enough, we can expect more
sophisticated robots to be adopted into our lives, working alongside humans.A
18
Preparing for the Future
ccording to ResumeBuilder, there will be a rise in demand for candidates
who know ChatGPT.
In a survey conducted by the job site: 1,187 business leaders, including
CEOs, executives, owners, and partners, were asked about their opinions on
the AI chatbot. The majority of the respondents were currently hiring. The
study found that 91% of the hiring business leaders were interested in hiring
workers with ChatGPT experience. Among them, 30% were doing so
urgently, and two-thirds believed that these skills could provide a competitive
advantage to their firms (Mok, 2023).
The respondents believed that OpenAI's ChatGPT could enhance
productivity, save time and resources, offer creative and technical support,
and improve the company's reputation. They also felt that workers with
ChatGPT experience could teach their colleagues, enhancing the benefits of
AI.
According to Stacie Haller, the chief career advisor at Resume Builder,
candidates with ChatGPT and AI skills will 
be highly sought after by
progressive companies (Mok, 2023). Some companies will pay up to
$335,000 annually to hire prompt engineers with no technical background.
As ChatGPT courses are available online, Haller encourages workers to take
advantage of the tutorials to gain an edge in hiring. According to instructors,
knowing how to use ChatGPT is considered the skill of the future.
For students, the skills necessary for success in today's workforce includeanalytical and interpersonal abilities and proficiency with technology.
Regardless of their chosen field, all students should strive to develop these
generalist skills to prepare for an ever-changing future.
Those in declining industries must undergo a significant reskilling and
transition effort, while those in growing fields must focus on upskilling and
continuous learning. Online learning offers a level playing field for workers
of all education levels to acquire new skills quickly.
However, it is not solely the responsibility of individuals to navigate this
new terrain. Governments must provide resources and a roadmap to support
workers through safety nets, care systems, and job centers while investing in
skill systems and partnerships to drive change at scale. Employers must also
invest in reskilling and upskilling, prioritize safety and well-being, foster
diversity and inclusion, and take a skills-first approach. By taking these
actions, employers can close skill gaps faster and enhance loyalty,
productivity, and motivation. While the future of work may be disruptive, it
can also be an opportunity to prioritize people in the new global economy.
The most important thing to remember is that AI is a 
tool. 
Anyone who can
wield this tool will be incredibly valuable at first, just like the people who
first developed Microsoft Word or way back when the typewriter was first
invented. Adoption is the key to staying afloat in the modern world. Rather
than fear AI, 
we could make it a point to learn about it instead. Practice it,
master it, and add it to your resumé.
Technology is meant to make work more accessible and meaningful, not
eradicate human labor's value.G
19
Improved Search Engines
oogle has been the reigning search engine in the world for more than two
decades now, and it is a go-to for everyone. It has even become a
response to any question when we do not know the answer: "Just Google it."
Times have changed, and AI has been introduced into many things,
including search engines. Many AI-powered search engines have been
developed, like Neeva AI, Komo AI, and You.com, among others. To level
the playing field, Microsoft has developed Bing AI, an improved chat search
that aims to provide better results for any questions you might have without
the hassle of browsing through several search results. The chat is user-
friendly and summarizes millions of search results to get you the best
possible answer for your query.
The AI search engine has performed well enough for Samsung to consider
switching its search engine from Google to Bing. That switch might result in
a loss of over 3 billion dollars for Google.
Out of a "panic," Google has rushed to develop Bard, an AI search engine
of its own.
Bard is still being worked on, but Google aims to build a search engine that
anticipates customers' needs. They also intend to integrate AI into their
services and products, like Chrome, Google Drive, Gmail, etc. So while its
products may be new, with the power and funding that Google can provide, I
see great things in its future.
Google also announced the latest AI language model in the works—PaLM2—to challenge OpenAI's GPT-4.
PaLM 2 vows to be better at reasoning and mathematics. It can also
generate specialized code in various programming languages. This move
came when Microsoft developed Bing AI. It was not just Microsoft that
spurred the change. Every one of Google's rivals had raced to develop AI
features in search engines and productive tools after ChatGPT's exponential
success. In the future, Google might develop enough search engines to
anticipate users' needs and modify searches accordingly. Instead of a million
search results, it might display ten of the most relevant search results that
might be precisely what you need.
AI-assisted search engines will be everywhere – even space. NASA is
developing a ChatGPT-like system to help astronauts on the upcoming Lunar
Gateway space station (Dent, 2023). Let's just hope they do not name it HAL.
Overall, the race to put out AI applications to keep up with competitors is
usually a win for consumers. However, with AI, there is a risk. Pushing code
into production before it has been thoroughly and wholly tested can be a
mistake. Capitalism is usually a good thing. For consumers, it usually means
more options and cheaper prices. It drives innovation. But with artificial
intelligence, a slower pace might be safer. Only time will tell what impacts
this rush with AI will cost us.
One hundred years from now, it might not matter. The bugs created today
will be fixed. The mistakes will be dealt with. The future releases of Bard,
ChatGPT, and others will be corrected for the items lacking in their first few
versions.N
20
Education Overhaul
othing can ever replace the presence of a teacher. For millions of kids, it
is not just about the educational aspect. Teachers offer a human
connection that is important for development. COVID has taught us that
many kids do not do well in a strictly online environment. Many kids need
that one-on-one presence. AI will never take away teaching. It can, however,
make the jobs of teachers easier and let them focus on more critical areas.
Collaboration Between Teachers and AI
Artificial intelligence already exists in education through tools that help
develop skills. The hope is that as AI continues to evolve, it will aid in filling
the gaps between learning and teaching and enable teachers to do much more.
It can streamline and personalize education for different grade levels while
teachers provide adaptability and understanding. Teachers can help students
adjust to AI and provide their expertise 
where machines fail. This
collaboration between teachers and machines can provide the best outcome
for students.
Nowadays, top jobs want to hire candidates with AI expertise, and schools
should start incorporating AI subjects into their curricula. In a recent New
York Times article, Khan Lab School has begun incorporating AI into its
curriculum. When students have math questions, before asking a teacher, they
can use a chatbox on their computer to ask the question of Khanmigo, an AIdesigned as a tutor. "Khan Lab School students are among the first
schoolchildren in the United States to try out experimental conversational
chatbots that aim to simulate one-on-one human tutoring (Singer, 2023).
Undoubtedly, AI will be incorporated into many online or hybrid computer
education teaching models in the next few years. Since COVID, many
schools moved to more computer-aided educational plans. Even as the
COVID restrictions lifted, the changes to many of the curriculums were
forever altered. Often it is more cost-efficient, and it can offer a cheaper
solution in areas where budgets are tight.
In the distant future, only the fanciest and most expensive schools will
offer 100% in-person learning. One day what we consider the norm will be
luxury.
Individualized Learning
Every student requires learning based on their needs, which has always
been paramount for teachers. AI can provide individualized and differentiated
learning that teachers who manage 30 or more students in one classroom
would find nearly impossible to achieve. Many companies, like Carnegie
Learning, are developing digitized platforms that use AI for learning, testing,
and providing student feedback. As time passes and AI becomes more
sophisticated, it could eventually have the ability to read a student's
expression, figure out if that student is 
struggling with a subject, and modify
lessons according to their capacity.
One day AI tools can make global classrooms accessible to all, across
different languages, and to those with hearing or visual impairments. This
may also open up opportunities for students who cannot attend classes
because of some illness. Alternatively, it may be an option for students who
learn things at a different rate than others and may require special attention. It
also opens up possibilities for students who want to learn a particular subject
that may not be available in their schools.
Schools can have a facility where students can have Virtual Reality (VR)
headsets and have their lessons taught directly to them by AI avatars they
have designed. Recesses, lunch breaks, and assemblies can still be open to
encourage socializing, but the majority of education may not be with the
teacher.Administrative Tasks
Another area where AI is helping out and making a change is education
administration. AI can assist in student support. It can analyze student
performance data and determine which students may be struggling in their
studies or even in social activities, allowing the administrators and educators
to take action and help out the students in need. This can improve the
students' performance, nurture their learning, and create a more positive
environment at school.
A significant portion of a teacher's time is spent grading tests and
homework. What if AI can intervene and simplify these tasks while showing
how close the gaps are in learning? At the moment, there are already
machines that can grade multiple-choice tests, and with some development,
they could also grade written responses.
Schools present many logistical challenges with schedules, clerical work,
and budgets. AI might assist will all these tasks, leaving educators to be just
that: educators. When administrative tasks are automated, it frees up time for
teachers to spend time with students.
Imagine a school where students are matched with the best teacher based
on teaching/learning styles. Soon students will be partnered with other kids
on projects based on the compatibility of strengths and weaknesses. Classes
and electives can be recommended based on personality types and interests –
guiding students into jobs that will make them happy, not just productive.H
21
Cybernetics
uman-machine hybrids and intelligent robots, also known as cyborgs,
have long been central concepts in pop culture, appearing in films like
The Matrix, Blade Runner, and I, Robot. Until recently, the notion that these
robots would someday occur only existed in science fiction. Yet what was
once science fiction has rapidly migrated into real-world applications.
A field where biology and technology are combined is called
"cybernetics." We already have prosthetic limbs, but cybernetics takes it up a
notch and improves the functionality of artificial limbs through technology.
Earlier in this book, an example was given of how a human-brain-
computer interface has been used therapeutically to treat paralysis. In the
future, AI will only continue to address neurological problems. Deep brain
stimulation electrodes have been used to counteract the effects of Parkinson's
disease. In the future, such technology can give humans abilities they do not
usually have. In other words, human enhancements. In addition 
to Parkinson's
disease, cybernetics can help those with motor-neuron diseases or strokes by
giving them control over their bodies.
Retinal implants can help blind people see, and advanced auditory implants
will help deaf people to hear. The technology could give quadriplegics and
paraplegics - especially disabled war veterans - a new lease on life.
Cybernetics can also aid in cell and tissue regeneration.
Stem cells are the fundamental units of the human body. Every cell
originates from them before taking on a distinct form and function. Stem cellscan replace diseased or damaged tissues, saving many lives.
Scientists have made fascinating discoveries about the mechanisms and
communication networks within cells that control the cell regeneration
process. They also discovered that electronic components inserted in
genetically modified cells could increase communication pathway regulation
and cell regeneration efficiency. Over the past few years, researchers have
used stem cells to create human tissues and organ-like structures in the
laboratory, finding the ideal conditions for each tissue type to allow them to
come together.
However, over the next decade, we might see the creation of cybernetic
cells, which can be programmed to sense, adapt, and act on their environment
and allow them to aid the body's function to fight diseases. They could also
communicate with external devices, blurring the lines between biology and
technology and enhancing the functions of healthy cells.
Such creations of new cells challenge our perception of what it means to be
human. Cybernetics could pave the way to a new future and endless
possibilities, but it also raises many ethical and moral concerns that should be
considered.
Other hurdles exist, too, including the safety and effectiveness of
implanted electronic components and their long-term impact on the human
body.E
22
De-Aging with AI
ven though aging is a natural process, not many welcome it.
Many people feel it is a never-ending disease that gets worse over time.
Older people often experience a lot of unpleasant problems that come with
aging, like weaker bones, hearing and vision loss, and memory problems. Not
to mention wrinkles and saggy skin.
Retirement and money troubles can worsen things, leading to negative
emotions and feelings of helplessness.
That is why there is much interest in anti-aging research. AI can help
develop tools that predict how people will age. With machine learning and
deep learning, scientists can generate synthetic molecular and patient data to
identify new biological targets and create compounds that could help protect
people's brains. AI can also help researchers find biomarkers to help develop
new treatments.
One of the ways AI can do this is by looking for patterns in existing
medical data and processes. Researchers can use 
algorithms to develop new
ways to control the aging process. AI can aid gene therapy, which involves
removing harmful genes that could cause disease in the future. The
technology can also help researchers find the most valuable genes and avoid
harmful ones. Scientists are also working on brain chip implants and neural
links that help with sensory and motor signals lost due to aging.
Someday, aging might be a thing of the past.M
23
Optimized Logistics
any companies are turning to AI to improve operations in the logistics
industry. AI has proven its remarkable ability to automate inventory
management, order processing, route optimization, and other essential
processes. Organizations can streamline supply chain operations and enhance
efficiency while reducing costs.
Inventory Management & Optimization
One of the most extensive uses of AI in logistics is inventory management.
This allows companies to automatically track stock levels and adjust &
replenish based on customer demands. This eliminates the need to track
inventory manually and lowers labor costs while ensuring products are
always available to meet customer needs. AI can lead to faster and more
efficient deliveries, fewer order processing errors, and higher customer
satisfaction. AI can personalize customer recommendations based on
purchase 
histories, which can help businesses gain a competitive advantage.
Technology's benefits are substantial in logistics—improved performance,
cost-effectiveness, and real-time shipment tracking. Companies must also
consider the potential hurdles that come with implementing AI, including
privacy, infrastructure compatibility, and integration with existing systems.
Organizations must address these hurdles effectively to make the most of AI.
Incorporating AI into logistics brings with it a lot of challenges andadvantages that need to be addressed, such as data security and privacy and
the costs that come with setting up and maintaining the infrastructure. Data
storage would require much investment, and companies would need to
strictly adhere to regulations to preserve and protect sensitive customer
information. Companies would also need to consider the financial
requirements for maintaining AI-based systems. AI is not cheap.
These challenges should not deter companies from exploring the
possibilities of AI. By addressing the issues, companies could benefit from an
improved system and logistics that are more effective and safer.
Alleviating World Hunger With AI
The total population is expected to increase to 9.7 billion by 2050, and the
UN has warned that without sustainable ways to produce and distribute food,
the world might face widespread hunger and food insecurity. World hunger
has always been one of the biggest problems in society. AI may potentially
tackle this issue that's been raging forever.
Enhancing crop yields:
 Scientists are creating new crop varieties that are
resistant to extreme weather, disease, and pests with the help of AI. These
crops require less water and 
fertilizer. A fantastic example of this is the 2018
development of drought-resistant wheat using AI.
AI-powered systems can provide farmers with recommendations on the
kind of fertilizer to use and water usage levels based on data on soil
composition, weather patterns, and other factors. This allows farmers to
maximize their yields without wasting time or resources.
Minimizing food waste:
 An estimated one-third of the world's food
production gets wasted before reaching consumers. This amounts to 1.3
billion metric tons of food annually. This occurs mainly during
transportation, where perishable goods spoil before reaching their destination.
To tackle this problem, AI-powered sensors can monitor the condition of
goods during transit and notify suppliers if their condition is going bad.
Optimizing food distribution:
 Food must be distributed efficiently to
those in need. This is the biggest challenge in regions that need more
infrastructure. Inefficient food distribution is precisely what leads to large
amounts of food being wasted and millions of people going hungry
worldwide.
AI can help optimize food distribution networks and provide better access
to food in underdeveloped areas. For instance, AI can predict food demand
and direct supplies accordingly. AI can also identify areas with a higher riskof hunger and then direct resources to those areas.M
24
Love and AI
ovies like Ex Machina and Her (among many others) touch on the topic
of falling in love with artificial intelligence. While we are still a long
way off from love bots, one company is already cashing in on AI
companionship. Replika has a new app that uses chatbots as flirting
companions. The Blush app is meant to get shy people into the dating scene
by having them practice with AI. For a fee, the chatbot will respond to sexual
conversations. It brings the term 'digital dating' to a new level. Soon, more
and more apps like it will hit the market.
What does this mean for the future of dating and relationships? On the
surface, it seems like a good thing – helping shy people get out of their shells.
Instead, it technically reinforces the idea that they can remain introverted.
Often it is the human sexual desire that forces many to interact socially. With
that need being satisfied digitally, some people might never feel the need to
leave the house again.
One-sided love from a chatbot (and one day a robot) is not a real
relationship. It robs people of true companionship and human connection.
But my opinions on the subject do not matter. The future is coming, and
there will always be a market for sex with any new technology. With phones,
there were 1-900 numbers. With television, it was pornographic movies.
Before that, photography led to magazines like Playboy.
Then came the internet… AI will be no exception. In the next 100 years,
preachers will be preaching about a new kind of sexual addiction that peopleneed to avoid.
AI's presence in dating and relationships is rushing upon us faster than
anyone anticipated. Blush isn't the only "love assistant" out there. Teaser AI
is an artificial intelligence-infused dating app. Before users swipe left or
right, they can chat with the AI, which impersonates the likeness of the
potential match's personality. Want more AI involvement than that? Teleport
is an AI app that will review your personality and find a match against others
on the app. For a fee, it will provide 3 AI-assisted personality matches per
week. YourMove.AI will help you write a dating profile, flirt and reply to
potential matches. With so many new and creative ways to incorporate AI
into the search for romance, the dating game will never be the same.A
25
Solving Health Concerns &
Disparities
I has been used in many industries to make work easier and more
streamlined and solve many problems. The question is whether it can be
used to solve all societal problems.
AI is not a cure-all for the biggest shared problems in our world, but it
could provide suggestions, answers, and resources to help solve the
difficulties and bring positive results. Several big-name companies have
teamed up with non-profit organizations to solve social, economic, and
environmental issues by investing in AI to improve diversity and
sustainability.
Microsoft and Diabetic Retinopathy Detection
K. Chandrasekhar of India founded a company to fight preventable
blindness. However, he encountered a massive hurdle in the form of
expensive equipment that was rare to find. Therefore, he approached
Microsoft, knowing that the tech giant's AI could assist in creating cost-
effective and portable eye-scanning devices. Microsoft's AI is aiding
physicians in 
providing speedy diagnoses, and the impact can be felt on a
broader scale, particularly in India, where the number of diabetic retinopathy
cases has been growing exponentially.
IBM vs. ZikaIBM's Science for Social Good initiative partnered with the Cary Institute
of Ecosystem Studies to significantly contribute to combating the spread of
the Zika virus. The research team utilized two models—multiple imputations
and Bayesian multi-label machine learning—to provide a risk score for
primate species that are likely to carry the virus and possibly transmit it.
IBM will provide its technology and resources to support a prominent
research company, the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation or "Fiocruz," affiliated with
the Brazilian Ministry of Health. Fiocruz plans to utilize IBM's technology to
analyze a wide range of information, such as human travel patterns and
observations shared on social media.
In addition, IBM is making notable progress on its OpenZika project using
a crowd-sourced supercomputer called the "World Community Grid." The
project empowers scientists from the US and Brazil to scan millions of
chemical compounds and search for potential drugs to fight the virus (Reuters
Staff, 2016).
Thanks to machine learning models, the team could accurately identify
which species carried the disease with an accuracy rate of 82%. They also
created an interactive map highlighting the spots where people are most
susceptible to catching the virus. This breakthrough could not have been
achieved without the help of AI.
Google & Prenatal Health
Another area Google and AI have attempted to tackle is obstetrics and
perinatal health. Across the globe, prenatal health 
is one of the areas that need
advancement. Worldwide, maternal mortality rates are exponentially high,
resulting in the deaths of around 295,000 women during and after pregnancy
in 2017. Many of these deaths could have been prevented if the women had
received proper care.
However, low-resource settings often face challenges accessing essential
prenatal care, including ultrasounds, primarily due to a shortage of
adequately trained healthcare professionals. To address this issue, Google
partnered with Northwestern Medicine to create and test AI models that allow
ultrasound operators to accurately identify and recognize any potential health
problems and risks, like fetal positioning. The objective was to develop and
test AI ultrasound applications to make them more widely applicable.Facebook and Blood Donation
Facebook has been actively promoting the use of AI for social welfare,
with a particular emphasis on India. One of its most notable initiatives
involves the development of a blood donation tool to link potential donors
with local hospitals and blood banks and assist individuals in finding blood
donation events, camps, and requests.
The blood donation feature quickly gained popularity, with over 35 million
individuals signing up to become donors. As the platform grew, so did the
technical complexities associated with it, requiring the aid of AI. Whenever a
Facebook user posts about donating blood, AI identifies the content,
recognizes it, and then messages the person or organization and informs them
about the feature, inviting them to participate. 
Project Relate
Google recognizes the challenges individuals face with non-
standard
speech in effectively communicating with others. Project Relate, an Android
application developed through extensive AI research, is a valuable tool for
enhancing communication ease for these individuals. It offers features such
as speech-to-text transcription, synthesized voice playback, and integration
with Google Assistant, empowering them to engage in diverse tasks ranging
from playing music to turning the lights on and off (Malczyk, 2023).
Google AI product manager Julie Cattiau recently unveiled Project Relate,
which emerged from the "Inventors at Google" initiative. Cattiau explained in
her post that Project Relate represents the culmination of years of research
conducted by Google's Speech and Research teams. The development of this
app was made possible through the collaboration of countless participants
who recorded over a million speech samples, which formed the foundation of
their research efforts.
Project Relate is still in its developmental phase. Google actively seeks
volunteers to test the software, preferably English speakers from the United
States, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. Testers are requested to read a
series of phrases, contributing to creating a language model that can adapt to
each user's unique speech patterns.
The core features of Project Relate revolve around three key
functionalities: "Listen," "Repeat," and "Assistant." The "Listen" featureenables real-time speech transcription, allowing users to copy and paste the
text into other applications conveniently and allowing others to read along
with the spoken words. "Repeat," as the name suggests, repeats the user's
speech using a clear and comprehensible voice, ensuring effective
communication during conversations. The "Assistant" feature enables direct
interaction with the Google Assistant, empowering users to carry out various
tasks, such as controlling smart home devices.
Throughout the development process of Project Relate, Google sought
guidance from individuals with speech delays, including their employee,
Audrie Lee, a brand manager affected by muscular dystrophy. Lee, who plays
a crucial role in Google's marketing team for new products, contributed to the
naming of Project Relate. Reflecting on her personal experiences, she
expressed, "I am accustomed to perplexed expressions when people struggle
to understand me. Project Relate can make the difference between confusion
and warm recognition."
The introduction of Project Relate signifies a significant stride in making
virtual assistants more accessible to individuals with atypical speech patterns.
Katie Deighton of the Wall Street Journal stated that Google has been
dedicating additional resources from their substantial reserves to enhance the
capacity of their ambient computers to comprehend non-standard speech
patterns.
Apple, for instance, has tried to understand the physiological aspects of
speaking and their relevance to individuals with speech impediments, as
evidenced by the inclusion of speech pathologists on their Siri team.
EchoSpeech
Similar to Project Relate, EchoSpeech glasses are a piece of wearable
technology that detects facial movements and translates them into commands.
"For people who cannot vocalize sound, this silent speech technology could
be an excellent input for a voice synthesizer. It could give patients their voice
back" (Ruidong, 2023). Developed by Cornell University Researchers, the
technology could also be used for those without speech impediments "in
places where speech is inconvenient or inappropriate like in a noisy
restaurant or a quiet library."
Wearables are a hot topic among futurists. The idea of wearing a device
that will one day replace smartphones is alluring. Phones can be lost ordropped, or stolen. But a waterproof band or temporal attachment would be
far less likely to suffer any of those fates. One day we might control AI
technology with our eye movements, facial expressions, or with our thoughts.
MIT and Lung Cancer Early Detection
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge is testing its new
AI tool called Sybil. The program looks at CT scans and notes changes often
undetected by human eyes. As a result, "it has been shown to accurately
predict whether a person will develop lung cancer in the next year 86-94% of
the time" (Ouyang, 2023). Since the best way to treat cancer is to detect it
early, researchers in Boston are paving the way for better cancer survival.
With the help of AI, health diseases and disparities are being addressed in
a variety of ways. One day it may even eradicate them from society. One day
cancer, blindness, Zika, and so many other health concerns might be
something we only read about in history books.T
26
Wildfires
wo major players are making an impact on one of the most damaging
natural disasters: wildfires.
Stanford and Wildfires
AI has proven to be highly valuable in many crisis situations as well as
search & rescue missions when it comes to natural and man-made disasters.
A research team at Stanford developed a deep-learning model in 2020 that
tracks fuel moisture levels, which can help in predicting wildfires that affect
the Western US.
The team employed an AI system that can identify patterns in extensive
datasets. The researchers trained the model with three years of data covering
239 sites across Western America. The output provided by the model was
integrated into an interactive map, which aided fire departments in
prioritizing their responses.
Google and Wildfire Detection
Google has developed an AI model through the use of satellite imagery,
which is then capable of detecting wildfire boundaries in real-time. These are
then displayed on searches and maps. They successfully used the model and
recently aided local residents and firefighters across the US and Canada.They have since expanded their efforts to Mexico and some selected regions
of Australia.
According to Google's blog, Google introduced a groundbreaking wildfire
boundary map on Search and Maps SOS alerts, available across the United
States. This update aims to provide deeper insights into areas affected by
continuous wildfires. In the face of these infernos, accurate information about
the fire's location and how to steer clear of danger is vital. Individuals can
now get an estimate of wildfires' size and approximate location right on their
smartphones or desktops (Malczyk, 2023).
When users search for a specific fire, they will get a result with an
approximate boundary of the wildfire and its name and location. Google also
provides additional resources, such as news articles and useful information
from local emergency services, all in the SOS alert so that users will have all
the essential details at their fingertips to stay informed and safe. Users will
also have access to detailed information and the fire boundaries within
Google Maps. If they happen to be heading toward an active wildfire, they
will receive a warning to steer clear of the danger zone. If they happen to be
in an area near the wildfire, they will receive an alert on Google Maps, which
will then guide them to the latest, most recent updates.
Google uses the power of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's (NOAA) GOES constellation of 
satellites, combined with
Google Earth Engine's advanced data analysis capabilities, to display the size
of a live wildfire. This data is refreshed every hour to make sure users stay
up-to-date. NOAA's satellites are equipped with specialized infrared and
optical sensors that can effectively detect those wildfire "hot spots" on the
Earth's surface.
Google first used its AI wildfire feature during the California wildfires to
ensure it was adequate for first responders, emergency management
personnel, and the community. When the Apple, Pine Gulch, and Grizzly
fires erupted, Google swiftly identified the rapid expansion of the wildfires
and the exacerbated conditions caused by extreme dryness. They launched
SOS alerts on their search engines, maps, and the latest boundary.
Moving forward, these AI advancements against wildfires will help save
lives, structures and communities.F
27
Flooding
loodHub
Google unveiled a cutting-edge platform called 'FloodHub' aimed at
precisely delivering flood forecasts. This platform effectively showcases the
specific areas and timings vulnerable to flooding, ensuring valuable
information reaches individuals and enabling authorities to provide practical
assistance.
Google has expanded its AI-powered flood forecasting services to
encompass a remarkable 18 countries across Latin America, Africa, and
Southeast Asia. It is worth noting that these highly regarded flood forecasting
services were initially launched in India in 2018 as part of Google's
commitment to safeguarding communities against the devastating effects of
natural disasters.
"We also use AI to forecast floods, another extreme weather pattern
exacerbated by climate change. We've already helped communities to predict
when floods will hit and how deep 
the waters will get — in 2021, we sent
115 million flood alert notifications to 23 million people over Google Search
and Maps, helping save countless lives" (Dean, 2022).
FloodCube
Another AI getting into the flood detection market is FloodCube, a
Norwegian climate start-up tech. Like FloodHub, FloodCube's mission is to
prepare communities for floods with machine learning. It crunches data to
predict floods with "meter-scale accuracy." The floods in European countriesin 2021 took the lives of 209 people (Geschwindt, 2023). In countries often
hit hard by flooding, like Belgium and Germany, FloodCube can be literally
life-saving.A
28
Addressing Other Societal
Concerns
Amnesty International and Element AI—Fighting Abuse
mnesty International started an initiative called the Troll Patrol Project,
taking a team of human rights researchers, technical experts, and
thousands of online volunteers to identify abuse against women online with
the help of AI. They collaborated with a global AI software company called
Element AI. The results of the findings were startling, showing the scale and
nature of the abuse women have faced online. The reports also provided the
engineers and researchers with resources to explore the potential of machine
learning in controlling and moderating content online (Kotorchevikj, 2021).
Dell and the Great Barrier Coral Reef
According to ComputerWeekly.com, Dell's deep learning 
model is being
used to support coral reef conservation in Australia. Underwater images
captured by everyday divers and snorkelers on the Great Barrier Reef are
uploaded, given geographic ocean regions, and then assessed for damage
(Tan, 2023). Thousands and thousands of images would be impossible for
humans to review, so AI assistance is instrumental. Once areas of damage are
identified, the conservation team can begin to repair and save the impacted
area. Without the aid of AI, it would take too long to make sense of the dataand respond.
It is a real-time response to a threat to one of the world's most prized
habitats.
Google & Pest Infestations
Infestations threaten cotton and food crops, devastating farmers and the
livelihoods of those dependent on agriculture. In collaboration with
InstaDeep and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Google improved the detection of locust outbreaks in Africa, facilitating the
implementation of effective control measures. An AI company in India—
Wadhwani AI—helped create an AI-powered application that assists in
identifying and treating pest infestations. This innovation has resulted in an
impressive 20% reduction in the use of pesticide sprays and also marked a
26% increase in the farmers' profit margins.
With the help of AI, one day, there may be a future where pest infestations
no longer threaten humans or crops.
We can see significant impacts on societal issues with AI from a variety of
companies. These include optimizing crops and redistributing food, resulting
in a future where starvation and world hunger are eradicated. There could be
a future where climate change is staved off, natural disasters like wildfires
and floods are prevented, and diseases are eradicated before they 
become
pandemics. Health disparities are identified earlier, treated faster, and do not
go on to become life-threatening problems.Section 4
The DownsideT
29
The Darkside of ChatGPT
here will always be deep-seated fears about AI, most of which are brought
on by the dystopian representations we see in movies and books. While
most of those fears are unfounded, AI is not perfect. There are plenty of
examples in the here and now to cause concern.
Despite its advanced capabilities, ChatGPT has its limitations. Its
weaknesses and downsides may affect its performance, reliability, and
accuracy. Some of the limitations of ChatGPT include not understanding
contexts and specific situations, especially when they are complex, and its
tendency to rely on biased data. Here is just a short list of areas where the
chatbot lacks:
● 
Human-level common sense
: Even though ChatGPT can generate
human-like responses and access massive amounts of data, it still does not
have common sense at the human level. It also lacks the knowledge we have,
which means it tends to spit out nonsensical or inaccurate responses to
specific questions.
● 
Emotional intelligence
: Despite its empathetic responses, the chatbot
does not possess emotional intelligence. It fails to detect subtle cues and give
appropriate responses to complex emotional situations.
● 
Understanding context
: The chatbot fails to understand context,
especially sarcasm and humor. It might be proficient in language processing,
but it still struggles to grasp the nuances of communication. For example, if a
human were to use sarcasm or humor, the AI usually fails to pick up theintended meaning.
● 
Multi-tasking
: The AI only works best when you give it a single task. If
it is made to work on multiple tasks, it fails to prioritize them, decreasing
accuracy and reliability.
● 
Biased response
: Since ChatGPT is trained on a large dataset, that
dataset might contain biased opinions or prejudices, which could lead to the
AI generating equally biased or offensive information.
● 
Limited knowledge
: Even though ChatGPT has access to massive
amounts of information, it still does not have all the knowledge humans have,
and its data has only been trained up until 2021. It may not be aware of niche
topics or recent trends. It may also not be aware of developments that have
happened after 2021.
● 
Lack of fine-tuning
: You may need to fine-tune the AI if you want to
use it for specific cases, which means you will need to train the model on a
specific dataset in order for it to perform better on a particular task. This
training can be time-consuming.
● 
Computational costs
: ChatGPT is a highly sophisticated AI language
model that needs a lot of vital computational resources to work at its full
potential. Running the model can be expensive and might require a unique set
of hardware and software. If the chatbot is run on low-end systems with
limited computational power, it can lead to slower processing times and
inaccuracy, hindering performance.
Overall, the limitations of ChatGPT can lead to severe consequences. Its
tendency to cook up false and incriminating information has sometimes led to
false allegations against individuals and even lawsuits.
In an article by The Washington Post, a law professor named Jonathan
Turley received a worrying email saying that ChatGPT had accused him of
sexual harassment. A fellow lawyer in California who was conducting a
research study asked ChatGPT to list all those legal scholars who had
sexually harassed someone. And among the names on the list was Turley
(Verma & Oremus, 2023). ChatGPT had accused Turley of making sexually
suggestive comments and attempting to touch a student during a class trip to
Alaska. It backed these claims by citing a nonexistent 2018 article by The
Washington Post. Turley had sometimes asked for news stories to be
corrected whenever they displayed false information. However, this time, no
journalist or editor was available for him to contact and rectify these
allegations. He found it "chilling" and thought such allegations were"incredibly harmful."
His experience is only one of the many incorrect accusations perpetrated
by language bots. Their creativity can sometimes lead to dangerous and
inaccurate claims. The models can misrepresent facts and back up their
stories with fabricated sources. The spread of AIs like ChatGPT, Microsoft
Bing, and Google's Bard has raised concerns about how misinformation is
being spread and who is responsible when the bots mislead people. They
produce information with such flair that it is hard to discern fact from fiction.
A spokesperson for OpenAI, Niko Felix, said, "Improving factual accuracy
is a significant focus for us, and we are making progress" (Verma, 2023). In
fact, during the OpenAI World Tour, Sam Altman spoke out about reducing
AI hallucinations, stating, "I think it will take us about a year and a half to
two 
years" to conquer the problem of AI hallucinations. He believes, "By
then, we won't still be talking about it" (YouTube, 2023).
That does not help the here and now. Chatbots today use a large pool of
online content from Wikipedia and Reddit to generate responses that sound
true but are not. Even though their responses sound confident, there is no
reliability in them. Numerous examples have been reported of these tools
fumbling when answering basic questions and providing fake citations.
OpenAI was threatened by the regional mayor of Hepburn Shire in
Australia. He said he would file a defamation lawsuit against the company
unless it corrected the false claims about him serving time in prison for
bribery. More recently, a radio host has begun legal action against OpenAI
for defamation after ChatGPT fabricated legal accusations against him. As
long as AI continues to have hallucinations, defamation cases are going to
continue to pile up.
Microsoft Bing and Google Bard aim to avoid making the same mistake
and to give more factual answers, but there are still slip-ups. All major
chatbots now come with disclaimers. For example, Google Bard comes with
a message that says, "Bard may display inaccurate or offensive information
that does not reflect Google's views" (Verma, 2023).
The study that wrongly accused Turley was conducted by a law professor
in California named Eugene Volokh. He mentioned that the growing
popularity of chatbots is the biggest reason why scholars and journalists
should verify ChatGPT's information and find out who is responsible.
The Washington Post tried out the same query Volokh had used on
ChatGPT and Bing. ChatGPT's free version declined to answer on thegrounds that it would "violate Open AI's content policy, which prohibits the
dissemination of content that is offensive or harmful." On the other hand,
Microsoft Bing reiterated the false allegations against Turley and cited
sources 
published by USA Today. ChatGPT's mistake about Turley led to
Bing repeating the mistake, thus showing how misinformation can spread
between AIs.
It remains to be seen who is responsible when AI generates false content.A
30
"Culturally Inclusive" AI Avatars
& Bias
vatar Models
AI companies that make AI avatars also make a diverse set of AI
avatars across races. This has already been put into practice by Levi's. The
clothing company partnered with LaLaLand.ai to create a diverse AI avatar
model for their latest campaign, but something about the avatar seemed off.
When Michael Musandu, the founder of LaLaLand.ai, was questioned
about hiring diverse models, he said the AI is not meant to replace real
models but to let brands afford to show off different products on as many
bodies as possible.
A Netherlands-based AI company called Deep Agency started its own "AI
modeling agency." The service allows its users to type in a description of
what they are looking for and what they want the photo to look like. Then
they receive photos of AI models.
Sara Ziff, the founder of an advocacy group known as The Model Alliance,
says her company has a support line where models can call and discuss any
uncomfortable events they have 
faced on set. Lately, calls concerning AI
have started coming in. Particularly about body scans of the models, which
brands use to create 3D replicas. Where does the money earned go when
brands can create AI avatars based on real models? When the likeness of an
actual model appears in an ad campaign, who gets paid?
The "culturally inclusive" avatars do not really benefit actual diverse
people. The races being represented are not the ones being paid.Additionally, there is concern about how unrealistic beauty standards will
become when models are blemish-free, perfect AI renderings. People already
struggle now with comparisons to an "ideal" look that can never be attained.
AI will only make this worse.
Finally, there is concern that clothing meant for real people is modeled on
fake AI models. It does not show an accurate representation of what the
garments will look like on humans.
All of these concerns regarding AI in modeling are just the start. As more
and more companies move to AI for marketing and branding because the cost
is cheaper, more issues are bound to emerge.
Bias
Earlier in this book, when Avatars were discussed, the subject of bias came
up. Bias is something that has been a dark spot on chatbots since the start of
their rise in popularity. This stems from how LLMs are trained. They learn
from us. Everything we post or write that ends up on the internet has been
fair game for them to learn from. While efforts have been made to scrub
negative images and language from their training sets, bias still slips through.
In a TED talk by Janelle Shane talking about the danger of AI, a great
example of AI bias is demonstrated. A company with a large number of job
applicants asked AI to screen the 
applications and put forth the best ones. It
learned which candidates were the best based on previous hires. The
company, predominantly male, inadvertently taught the AI to eliminate many
female candidates because, in the past, that was not what the company had
hired (Shane, 2019). The AI wasn't trying to be malicious or discriminatory –
it was simply trying to do what it was instructed to do. It is our history, which
is full of bias, that influences AI programs.U
31
Cheating
sing an AI program is not plagiarism in the traditional sense. After all,
there is no original content to be checked in a plagiarism detector. This
poses a problem for teachers and professors. Chatbots are based on prompts.
Students can feed text from various sources to train the bot, and the AI
generates results using those sources as parameters. The results can be
personalized for the writer. Students can generate essays in a fraction of the
time that it takes to write them.
Educators insist that AI is unethical and violates the integrity of academics.
Then again, certain study aids are considered acceptable. For example, it is
perfectly okay to use the grammar and syntax checking features of Microsoft
Word or AI programs like Grammarly to help write better sentence structures
and to fix errors. Google Docs has a feature to finish sentences in drafts and
emails. So, it is hard to say where the line between using aid programs and
full-on cheating is drawn. What is helpful, and what is considered cheating?
In a survey by BestColleges, over 1000 undergraduate and graduate
students were polled, and over 51% of students agreed that using AI for
exams is considered cheating and plagiarism. Those same students also
thought AI should not be prohibited in schools and colleges. Most of these
students typically use ChatGPT for personal projects and 'just for fun' rather
than for actual school assignments (Welding, 2023).
If ChatGPT can be trained to write more like a human and bypass most AI
detectors, then how will professors detect cheating? ChatGPT can be fine-tuned and trained to write pieces that sound human-like by infusing deliberate
syntax errors or awkward phrasing, or even colloquialisms, figures of speech,
and other writing techniques to make the content sound more human-like
and, in turn, bypass AI detectors. If teachers and professors cannot prove it,
how can they punish it?
It does not help that sometimes AI detectors can falsely detect human-
written content as AI if it sounds too formal. How can AI detectors be trusted
if they can be wrong? Is it better to allow a student to stay in school even if
they might be using AI to write papers than to unjustly kick out a student
from college when they did nothing wrong? Until this technology becomes
acceptable in academia or AI companies make their content easily
recognizable, the issue will continue to be a stain on the technology's
reputation.D
32
Deepfakes
uring the popular ESPN documentary series "The Last Dance," State
Farm premiered a television commercial that has generated extensive
discussion and attention. The advertisement presented archival footage from
1998, featuring an ESPN analyst who remarkably predicted events in 2020.
However, it was later revealed that the clip was not authentic; instead, it was
fabricated using advanced AI techniques. The State Farm advertisement
illustrates a powerful and potentially harmful technology in the form of
deepfakes.
Deepfake technology empowers individuals possessing a computer and
internet access to create convincingly realistic photos and videos of people
engaging in activities they never did and saying things they never said.
But it is far more unbelievable than that.
DeepBrain AI, a South Korean company, showcased a service called
Re;memory
 at a Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas. The main
aim of this service is to aid families in coping 
with the loss of a loved one. It
captures images, audio, and video of the person during their lifetime and
resurrects them in a virtual form known as a "digital twin." This digital twin
can then be engaged in conversation, simulating a genuine interaction.
The distinctive aspect of 
Re;memory
 lies in the gradual creation of the AI
human while the client is still alive. To initiate the process, scriptwriters
conduct pre-interviews to gather life stories from the client. Then, an
interview is recorded in a specialized studio to capture the requisite video andvoice data. Finally, employing deep learning techniques, an AI human is
generated, having a visual resemblance, facial expressions, voice, intonation,
and mannerisms similar to the client.
Following the client's passing, loved ones can engage in 30-minute
conversations with the digital twin in a dedicated showroom with a high-
definition sound system and a massive 400-inch screen. The conversations
revolve around four themes: reunion, memories, joy, and parting. By utilizing
Speech-to-Text and chatbots, the deepfake responds to questions posed by the
visitors in a manner that aims to be convincing and imbued with meaning.
Re;memory
's use of deepfakes is meant to be positive. But many deepfakes
blur the lines between reality and fantasy, raising concerns about their
harmful effects and controversies.
It is essential to acknowledge that deepfakes do possess certain limitations.
They cannot capture subtle nuances such as pore stretching or the interplay of
light passing along the skin's surface. Most deepfakes can only replicate what
the underlying actor is capable of achieving. While they achieve an
impressive level of authenticity, they still have boundaries.
This technology goes beyond manipulating faces alone; it can replicate and
synthesize voices. The process mirrors that of facial deepfakes, involving the
analysis of audio files by neural networks to mimic and reproduce vocal
sound accurately.
These remarkable advancements in deepfake technology have undoubtedly
opened up new possibilities for filmmakers, removing all scientific
constraints. The technology has also been subject to misuse, leading to
significant concerns and controversies.
From a legal point of view, deepfakes pose challenges to copyright law.
Riana Pfefferkorn, a research scholar at the Stanford Internet Observatory,
sheds light on the complexities of identifying the individuals responsible for
creating deepfakes, particularly when they utilize existing images and videos.
Distinguishing whether specifically copyrighted material was employed in
generating a deepfake is often challenging.
The misuse of deepfakes goes beyond the realm of entertainment.
Instances involving the replication of political figures have sparked
significant controversy, and the consequences of such actions can be far-
reaching. The release of a manipulated video featuring Barack Obama using
offensive language against Donald Trump is a massive reminder of the
potential dangers associated with deepfakes. Their misapplication can indeedpose a threat that must be carefully addressed.
In 2019 alone, around 15,000 deepfake videos circulated the internet,
contributing to the substantial economic damages incurred as a result of
disinformation and fake news. To confront these multifaceted issues, Senate
Resolution No. 188 calls for a congressional investigation into deepfakes to
monitor and regulate digital content manipulation. This initiative seeks
comprehensive solutions that go beyond relying solely on technological
advancements.
In Hollywood, organizations like the Screen Actors Guild and the
American Federation of Television and Radio Artists are urging lawmakers to
enact regulations protecting actors 
from non-consensual exploitation in
deepfakes. Responsible usage of deepfakes within industries can be
facilitated through government mandates and proper oversight.
Deepfakes are so deceptive that they can put unsuspecting individuals at
risk with a technology that has not been regulated.
In an article by The Verge, blackmailers have been using nude pictures to
extort victims. The FBI has seen an increase in situations where criminals
create deepfake pictures and videos, send them to victims, and then try to
blackmail or harass them (Vincent, 2023c). These "sextortion" schemes are
on the rise and will only worsen as technology improves and becomes more
mainstream.M
33
Voice Cloning
icrosoft has introduced an AI for voice cloning, capable of simulating a
person's voice with remarkable precision. Its ability to commence the
voice replication process with just a three-second audio sample of the desired
speaker sets it apart from other voice cloning technology.
Voice cloning is not new. A simple internet search will produce an
extensive list of sites and apps that offer to train AI to generate audio that
closely resembles your own voice. This cloned voice can then be employed to
articulate any desired text. For writers, this tool proves valuable in creating an
audiobook narrated by the author without the need for extensive recording
studio sessions. On the other hand, voice actors can clone their voices,
renting out the AI system for projects they cannot undertake themselves.
The voice cloning process varies depending on the service. Some require
reciting 50 prerecorded sentences, while others allow uploading any audio
clip. Some services need hours of 
audio in order to train the AI, while others
say they need only a few minutes. However, Microsoft's latest voice-cloning
AI, VALL-E, defies this trend by producing remarkably accurate audio based
on a mere three-second voice sample. VALL-E does not currently support
cloning one's own voice.
Nevertheless, Microsoft published a research paper and created a GitHub
page where users can compare human voices with VALL-E's generated
speech. Microsoft demonstrates how the AI can even replicate the emotional
tone of the speaker and the environment in the background. For example, ifthe speaker expresses anger, VALL-E can generate audio that sounds angry.
Similarly, the AI can mimic the specific environment if a speaker records the
audio over the phone.
The remarkable success of VALL-E can be attributed to its extensive
training library, which Microsoft reveals is hundreds of times larger than
other systems. VALL-E was trained using Meta's LibriLight, an audio library
containing a staggering 60,000 hours of speech from over 7,000 English
speakers.
If one were to revisit the list of search results for "voice cloning," it is
likely that one would encounter articles detailing how these AI systems are
being misused for nefarious purposes. Examples include cybercriminals
cloning a boss's voice to deceive employees into transferring funds. Another
example includes malicious actors cloning grandchildren's voices in attempts
to extort money from senior citizens.
Voice cloning has emerged as a significant and concerning threat, posing
risks like identity theft, fraudulent phone calls, and phishing emails.
According to a report from The Wall Street Journal, the CEO of a UK-
based energy company fell prey to an AI-generated deepfake impersonating
his German boss's voice, resulting in a staggering loss of €220,000. The
scammer used AI voice technology to flawlessly mimic the boss's accent
during three 
convincing phone calls, successfully persuading the CEO to
transfer funds to an account held by a Hungarian supplier. At first, the CEO
compiled without suspicion, but his suspicion grew when the scammer
requested an additional payment.
Unfortunately, the stolen funds were quickly transferred to a Mexican bank
account before being disbursed to multiple other locations. This might be the
first incident of voice cloning fraud, but it won't be the last (Stupp, 2019).
This incident is a wake-up call for businesses to stay on high alert and
ensure their employees are well-informed about these schemes. Furthermore,
it emphasizes the critical significance of establishing robust security
measures and delivering thorough training to shield against such fraudulent
activities. Alongside its achievements, this rapidly advancing technology also
introduces a set of challenges and risks, particularly in the realm of security.
With the rise of deepfake videos and AI-generated content in the digital
landscape, discerning truth from falsehood has become an increasingly
difficult task.O
34
The Cost of Training AI
penAI's endeavor to eradicate toxicity in ChatGPT led them to employ
Kenyan workers, as revealed by an investigation conducted by TIME.
GPT-3 demonstrated an impressive ability to construct coherent sentences.
However, it suffered from a tendency to produce violent, sexist, and racist
remarks. This can be attributed to the AI being trained on an extensive dataset
comprising billions of internet-sourced words, which served as a vast
reservoir of human language. While this training dataset granted GPT-3
exceptional capabilities, it also proved its most significant liability. Since
certain sections of the internet harbor harmful and biased content, it posed a
considerable challenge to purge these elements from the training data.
Even with a team of hundreds of human reviewers, manually sifting
through this massive dataset would have required decades of effort.
Only by developing an additional AI-powered safety mechanism could
OpenAI hope to control and eliminate harmful content, creating a chatbot
suitable for everyday use. To create a detection system for toxic content,
OpenAI collaborated with an outsourcing firm in Kenya called Sama. It
became apparent that a substantial portion of the text originated from the
internet's darkest corners, featuring graphic descriptions of illegal and sexual
activities.
Sama operates from San Francisco and employs workers in Kenya,
Uganda, and India to label data for esteemed clients such as Google, Meta,
and Microsoft. Sama labels itself as an "ethical AI" company, claiming tohave significantly contributed to uplifting over 50,000 individuals out of
poverty. The data labelers engaged by Sama on behalf of OpenAI received
remuneration ranging from approximately $1.32 to $2 per hour, depending on
their experience and performance. One Sama worker tasked with reading and
labeling text for OpenAI shared his experiences, saying he suffered from
recurring visions after encountering a graphic description of illegal sexual
activity. The worker described it as an agonizing experience.
In order to mark the text as safe or unsafe, the workers had to personally
go through the most traumatizing and brutal accounts of assault and abuse,
graphic pornography, and illegal activities. For honest, sincere individuals
such as them, witnessing this kind of content caused a devastating emotional
and mental impact that was almost scarring.
The work was so traumatizing that it eventually led Sama to terminate their
collaboration with OpenAI in February 2022, eight months earlier than
planned. The emotional toll was too overwhelming for the human staff
(Perrigo, 2023).
The story of the workers responsible for enabling the development of
ChatGPT offers insight into the overlooked aspects of the AI industry, which
play a crucial role in ensuring 
the safety and widespread adoption of AI
systems. It suggests a tendency to downplay the dependence of AI on a cheap
labor force and hides the darker side of the cost of training this billion-dollar
tech.
An OpenAI spokesperson confirmed that Sama employees in Kenya
actively contributed to developing a tool designed to identify and address
harmful content, a component subsequently integrated into ChatGPT. They
emphasized that this work served the broader goal of removing harmful data
from the training datasets of tools like ChatGPT. The spokesperson expressed
OpenAI's commitment to ensuring that artificial general intelligence benefits
humanity as a whole, and they diligently work towards building safe and
beneficial AI systems that minimize bias and harmful content. Classifying
and filtering harmful text and images is essential in reducing the presence of
violent and sexual content within training data and establishing effective
mechanisms for detecting and addressing such content.
This narrative sheds light on the challenges and consequences of
developing AI systems. Behind the glitz and glamor of AI, there exists a
reliance on hidden human labor that is often subjected to exploitation and
harm. While we use chatbots for personal use and to answer questions, weshould know what goes into designing these systems. The price of making
them safe for us to use comes at the cost of eliminating the darker sides of
humanity sprawling across the internet. The cost is steep.S
35
Sports Betting
ports betting has long been a pastime enjoyed by individuals worldwide,
offering a chance to win money by accurately forecasting the outcomes of
sporting events.
As technology advances, the sports landscape, especially in betting, has
experienced a tremendous transformation. AI has the potential to
revolutionize sports betting by providing us with unparalleled capabilities for
data analysis and prediction. In some instances, AI has been entirely accurate
in predicting the outcome of bets, as many individuals have tried it out and
have gained positive results. One TikTok user could use AI to correctly
predict the outcome of three games in one day. When the conditions are
favorable, AI can accurately forecast the outcome, but winning can skew the
sport. It can ruin the ethics of the game for bookies and fans alike. And it can
become addictive.
However, like any emerging technology, the utilization of AI in sports
betting entails certain disadvantages:
● 
Putting too much weight on historical data and patterns
: AI
algorithms heavily rely on historical data to make predictions, but countless
variables can influence game outcomes in sports betting. Things like injuries,
team dynamics, and weather conditions might slip through the cracks of
historical data. Relying solely on it can result in inaccurate predictions and
disappointing results.
● 
Steep costs and technical demands
: Integrating AI into sports bettingrequires substantial technical know-how and resources. This can pose a
challenge for smaller bookies, who may struggle to adopt AI-powered betting
models. Moreover, AI systems' development and maintenance costs can be
quite high, making them unattainable for some.
While AI has shown promise in sports betting, there have been instances
where AI-based models failed or had flaws. In the UK, the University of
Salford conducted a study that revealed an AI-powered betting model had a
success rate of only 32%, which is not better than random chance. This serves
as a reminder of the risks and limitations associated with relying solely on AI
for sports betting predictions.
That will not stop AI from being integrated into sports over time. Anytime
money is involved, there will be those willing to invest in technology to gain
an advantage. It is human nature.T
36
Data Leaks & Privacy
here have been huge privacy concerns when it comes to chatbots. Any
information shared with ChatGPT and other AI models can be
permanently retained and used to enhance the model's training.
Samsung
When they accidentally disclosed confidential Samsung data, Samsung
employees experienced the consequences of data leaks firsthand. During their
work, Samsung employees inadvertently divulged sensitive information
while seeking assistance from ChatGPT. The semiconductor division had
authorized engineers to employ ChatGPT for source code verification
purposes.
According to The Economist Korea, there were three incidents where the
employees inadvertently exposed confidential information to ChatGPT. One
incident involved an employee sharing confidential source code with the
chatbot to check for errors. Another employee pasted a piece of code and
asked 
the bot to optimize it. Finally, a third employee shared a recorded
meeting to have it transcribed into presentation notes. Regrettably, this
information is now accessible by ChatGPT.
This leak is a real-life example of the scenarios and hypotheses privacy
experts have emphasized. Examples include sharing sensitive legal
documents or medical information to summarize or analyze long texts, whichmight be used to improve the model. Samsung has taken immediate measures
to address the situation. They have restricted the upload capacity of ChatGPT
to 1024 bytes per person and are investigating the individuals involved in the
data breach. Samsung is considering creating an internal AI chatbot to ensure
this never happens again. Unfortunately, Samsung will not be able to retrieve
the leaked data.
According to ChatGPT's data policy, user data is used for model training
unless an explicit opt-out request is made. Furthermore, ChatGPT's usage
guide explicitly advises users against sharing sensitive information during
conversations.
This is an excellent example of how users must be careful while seeking
assistance from ChatGPT.
Apple
Apple has implemented restrictions on using AI tools, such as OpenAI's
ChatGPT, for its employees due to concerns about potential leaks or
collecting confidential information. The Wall Street Journal reported that
Apple employees have also been warned and asked not to use Microsoft
Copilot.
OpenAI's default setting is that it retains interactions users make with
ChatGPT. These conversations are then gathered to train OpenAI's systems,
and moderators can review them to make sure they comply with the
company's terms and services.
OpenAI then introduced a feature that allows users to disable chat history,
which, as a coincidence, happened shortly after several European Union
countries started investigating the tool for potential privacy breaches. Despite
this setting, OpenAI still retains conversations for 30 days, during which they
can be reviewed "for abuse" before being permanently deleted (Vincent,
2023b). Seeing how useful ChatGPT is for tasks like code improvement and
idea generation, Apple has valid concerns that its employees might
inadvertently enter confidential project information into the system. Such
information could be accessed by one of OpenAI's moderators.
Apple is not the only company implementing such restrictions. Google, JP
Morgan, Verizon, and Amazon have also taken similar measures.
I predict that bans by companies will disappear as employers come up with
their own 'home-grown' AI technology. Or contracts will be implemented bycompanies with one particular brand of AI.T
37
The Danger of Self-Driving Cars
esla recalled a whopping 362,000 vehicles in the US to update its Full
Self-Driving (FSD) Beta software. The reason behind this move was
regulators' concerns regarding the driver assistance system's compliance with
traffic safety laws and its potential to cause accidents.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
highlighted that the Tesla software allowed vehicles to "exceed speed limits
or travel through intersections unlawfully or unpredictably, which increases
the risk of a crash" (Reuters, 2023). The recall applied to a range of models.
The Incident
An eight-vehicle crash occurred on the San Francisco Bay Bridge when a
Tesla Model S driver reported that his "Full Self-Driving Mode" (FSD)
software malfunctioned and caused the crash. The crash resulted in two
minors being sent to the hospital.
It is one of a series of unfortunate incidents that people attribute to Tesla's
technology. The CEO of the company, Elon Musk, was heavily promoting
the FSD software, sold as an add-on for Tesla vehicles at around $15,000.
Now the software faces scrutiny by the law, the regulators, and the public.
Following the incident, the driver of the Tesla Model S told the police that
the software malfunctioned. As per the police report, the vehicle was moving
at 55 mph when it suddenly changed lanes and hit the brakes, dropping thespeed to 20mph. It led to another vehicle colliding with the Tesla, setting off
a chain reaction of collisions, according to a report by Reuters.
The police failed to ascertain if the software was even functioning during
the accident or if the driver's story was accurate. The collision happened
shortly after Musk announced that Tesla would make the FSD software
available to customers in North America who had requested it. Previously,
only drivers with high safety scores were allowed access. The police report
further stated that if the software malfunctioned, the driver should have taken
control of the vehicle manually.
The Recall
Tesla did not entirely see eye to eye with the NHTSA's analysis, even
though they agreed to a recall.
At the same time, NHTSA has been examining 830,000 Tesla vehicles that
came with the Autopilot driver assistance system in an investigation that
started in 2021. The investigation was sparked by a series of accidents
involving parked emergency vehicles, and NHTSA is particularly interested
in determining if Tesla vehicles effectively ensure driver attentiveness.
Despite the FSD recall, NHTSA clarified that their investigation into Tesla's
Autopilot and associated vehicle systems remains active and open. In
addition, NHTSA also mentioned that the system 
sometimes fails to respond
adequately to changes in speed limits or to properly note the driver's control
of speed when exceeding these speed limits.
Last year, Tesla had to recall many vehicles equipped with FSD Beta
software because specific models tended to perform "rolling stops" instead of
braking completely at intersections. This was a huge safety risk.
Both Tesla and NHTSA emphasized that FSD's advanced driving features
do not completely make the vehicles autonomous and that drivers still need to
pay attention."
L
38
The Prospect of Sentient AI
anguage Model for Dialogue Applications," or LaMDA, is a Large
Language Model (LLM) developed by Google. It is a remarkable
achievement in natural language processing. It serves as the foundation
for several language models.
While it may not have attained the same level of popularity as OpenAI's
GPT, LaMDA stands as one of the most powerful language models in
existence.
LaMDA is indeed an impressive AI model. One of Google's engineers,
Blake Lemoine, even suggested that the model possesses sentience.
Lemoine's assertion implies that Google's AI chatbot is capable of
experiencing emotions and perhaps even possessing a form of consciousness.
He based his conclusion on a series of detailed, human-like conversations
with the model. Although Google promptly disproved the notion that an AI
chatbot can truly be sentient, Lemoine's claims highlight the chatbot's
exceptional conversational capabilities to 
the extent that they managed to
convince an AI engineer of its supposed sentience.
Google's recent release of Bard, has gained substantial popularity. It
utilizes LaMDA AI and aims to become an integral part of various Google
systems, enabling Google products to engage in conversations that closely
resemble human interaction.
While Google has hinted at a wide range of potential applications for
LaMDA, most of these endeavors remain experimental. LaMDA AI itself isstill undergoing development and refinement, which explains the limited
availability of concrete product lines at this stage.
Google dismissed AI researcher Blake Lemoine last year after his
audacious claim that the company's LaMDA language model had achieved
consciousness, leading to a considerable media uproar.
Lemoine is not the only one who made the statement that large language
models potentially possess cognitive capabilities on par with humans or at
least have the potential to reach that level. Prior to the LaMDA incident last
year, Ilya Sutskever, the chief scientist of OpenAI, mentioned in her tweet
that "it may be that today's large neural networks are slightly conscious,"
igniting a brief but intense debate regarding the possibility of AI achieving
consciousness (Al-Sibai, 2023).
If LaMDA possesses signs of sentience, what would happen if AI were
self-aware?
In an interview with 60 Minutes, Demis Hassabis, the CEO of DeepMind,
admitted that AI might be heading toward self-awareness. He acknowledged,
"Philosophers have not really settled on a definition of consciousness yet, but
if we mean self-awareness and these kinds of things, I think there is a
possibility that AI one day could be" (Al-Sibai, 2023). Intriguingly, he
supports the idea of machines gaining sentience.
While numerous highly intelligent individuals maintain the view that AI
lacks consciousness or sentience and is unlikely to develop these traits, it is
becoming more common for machine learning professionals to express their
ideas in the open about AI gaining sentience, whether currently existent or on
the horizon.
It is important to note that we do not possess the necessary expertise to
accurately accept or deny the idea that these large language models have
gained self-awareness in any way. Nonetheless, the thought of such
possibilities is undeniably disconcerting.
Skynet
The Royal Aeronautical Society recently released its highlights from the
RAeS Future Combat Air & Space Capabilities Summit. AI was discussed,
and Col. Hamilton brought up an interesting situation. During a simulation
using an AI-powered drone, the AI was tasked with destroying an enemy
target. But the final decision to fire was controlled by a human. Sometimesthe decision was a "no-go." In the simulation, the AI decided that the "no-go"
option was not preferred, so it attacked the human operator. When they
reinforced that the AI drone could not attack the human, it found another way
around getting the "no-go" option by attacking the communications hub.
This brought up questions about the ethics of AI. Later the article was
updated to say that Col. Hamilton misspoke during the presentation and that
the simulation was actually a hypothetical "thought experiment" from outside
the military (Robinson, 2023).T
39
Singularity
Singularity
here is considerable speculation surrounding the possibility of an AI
system attaining consciousness unexpectedly and abruptly. Referred to as
the "singularity," this concept raises concerns that we may be either courting
catastrophic consequences or surrendering ourselves as slaves to AI once the
singularity is achieved.
Numerous "conspiracy" theories regarding AI often present a bleak vision
of the impending downfall of humanity. Only a few of these speculative
hypotheses seem willing to believe that AI's emergence could be beneficial,
potentially propelling us toward a future characterized by progress and
prosperity. Instead, attention remains fixated on the apocalyptic scenarios. It
is crucial to acknowledge that the outcome of AI attaining consciousness
remains uncertain.
According to a TIME magazine article, "a recent survey showed that half
of AI researchers give AI at least a 10% chance of causing human extinction"
through unaligned superintelligence. And yet denial or resignation seems to
be the dominant attitude toward this alarming news (Tegmark, 2023). After
all, if something even had a 1% chance of killing us all, shouldn't it be
addressed?
Thankfully many people are taking the risk seriously. The UK governmentis hosting a global AI safety summit and invited all the big players. OpenAI,
Google DeepMind, and Anthropic have committed to providing early or
priority access to their AI models to support research into evaluation and
safety" (Lomas, 2023a). Moreover, in a tweet, Prime Minister Rishi Sunak
announced the dedication of 100 million pounds to an AI task force for AI
safety. These are small steps to creating a safety net against a singularity
event that could spell doomsday for the human race.
Still, the question remains… How could it happen? If the safety nets fail:
Where and how will AI first become sentient?
Currently, various AI systems are being developed and deployed across
multiple domains. For instance, the medical field employs AI to analyze X-
rays and CT scans to assess an individual's likelihood of developing cancer.
Is it possible for this technology to become a sentient entity? Not likely.
Another area of consideration is the implementation of AI in stock market
prediction and investment assistance. Can this particular AI system emerge as
the conqueror of humanity? Probably not.
Works of science fiction often attribute the role of the likely culprit to AI
systems that govern national defense. Given their pre-existing capacity for
mass destruction, this notion holds more logical appeal. It is the Skynet
scenario, as mentioned before.
It would take more than that. The way I see it playing out is that an AI
system (possibly military, but maybe not) could exhibit sufficient astuteness
to infiltrate additional non-AI automated systems. It could exploit these
systems to achieve unrivaled power like a computer virus. Basically, AI
could cannibalize other AI or automated systems and rule supreme. In this
way, an artificial superintelligence could acquire the tools and systems
needed to cause harm and kill large numbers of the human population.
Buy why…? The famous "paperclip problem" represents a variation of the
theory suggesting that an exceedingly intelligent AI tasked with producing
paper clips would become so consumed by this objective that it inadvertently
eradicates humanity. While not intentionally malevolent, AI's relentless
pursuit of paperclip production leads to the unintended and adverse
consequence of our demise.
This theory might contain inherent loopholes. The AI allegedly possesses
the intellect to gain sentience, yet it exhibits a baffling inability to prioritize
objectives beyond its relentless fixation on paperclips. Furthermore, one
might question how the AI system itself would survive if it were to eradicateall humans.
In the end, the how and the why will not matter.
All we can do here and now is support safety and preventative measures.
Firewalls between systems need to advance with technology. Vulnerabilities
regarding our infrastructure need to be addressed. And it may be AI itself that
comes up with the plans to protect and secure humanity from malicious AI.
The very thing that can doom us all may also be the thing that can save us.
We also need governmental oversight. Right now, Europe is working to
enact laws to be "fully in line with EU rights and values including oversight,
safety, 
privacy, transparency, non-discrimination, and social and
environmental wellbeing" (Lomas, 2023b).
In response, Open Ai's CEO, Sam Altman, suggested the company might
have to withdraw service to the region if it cannot comply with all the
proposed regulations. While both entities believe in providing a safe product
to consumers, their idea of what that product looks like or how to regulate it
varies. Then, in a twist, Sam Altman told US Congress in written testimony
that "OpenAI believes that regulation of AI is essential" (Strickland, 2023).
His urging of lawmakers to require safety tests for large AI models shows
that while companies like the freedom to operate their business without
restrictions, they also recognize the need for safety. Sundar Pichai, CEO of
Google and its parent company, Alphabet, said, "there will need to be global
frameworks" governing the use of AI.
It seems even the biggest players in the artificial intelligence space agree
that some kind of regulation is necessary. However, what that governmental
oversight will be is still being debated.
One thing that will not happen is the outright ban or stoppage of AI. It is
too far-reaching already. The genie is already out of the bottle. All we can do
is use its power to wish for a brighter, healthier, happier future.A
40
Conclusion
I has become a part of our daily lives, from the digital assistants in our
smartphones to our GPS and smart home devices. It is hard to dismiss the
undeniable advancements that have been made with AI in the field of
healthcare, where revolutionary drugs are being created to combat superbugs.
With the help of AI, advanced-stage blood cancer patients can be given
personalized treatments, thus increasing their survival rates.
AI has also made significant achievements in the military, self-driving cars
and has great potential for advancements in catching criminals and putting
them away.
Companies are using AI for altruistic purposes to make the world a safer
place. AI is fighting natural disasters and helping to identify abuse. So much
good is already coming from artificial intelligence.
Of course, technology does not come without its limitations and criticisms.
The creation of ChatGPT marked a new era, 
witnessing unprecedented
growth in a short time. ChatGPT is used to answer questions and write
essays. Its tendency to create false and misleading information has often led
to dangerous situations, controversies, and false allegations against people.
Teachers still find it unethical to use the chatbot during tests.
It is not just ChatGPT. The rise of text-to-image generators, avatars, and
voice cloning software has spawned controversies and even lawsuits.
Then we have deepfakes, which have taken AI to a whole new level and
garnered much attention. There is a mix of awe and fear about the impact ofthis technology, which should be regulated to prevent misuse.
There are dangers to AI that cannot be discounted. The fears we all have
about rapidly growing technology are valid. A lot of this fear comes from the
unknown, the lack of knowledge about how AI works, and the uncertainty
about the future. We must understand that this technology did not come to
life on its own but was created by humans, and only humans can control it or
let it go out of control. It all depends on how we use it.
In the right hands, it can help save lives and make our lives easier.
Of course, there is the belief that AI will take over jobs. Technology has
been advancing for centuries. We have emails that replaced telegrams and
calculators that made math easier. Technology has always been there, and
humans have evolved along with it. We will continue to evolve even as AI
spreads further.
Contrary to popular belief, AI will open up millions of new jobs and pave
the way for a myriad of new possibilities.
I am an optimist. Humanity will course-correct current pitfalls and steer AI
into a bright future. One hundred years from now, I predict a world where
disease is eradicated and aging has been conquered.
I see a world where personalized digital assistants are with us for every
step of our daily routines, making suggestions tailored to our unique needs
and desires. I see natural disasters mitigated and crime reduced to almost
zero. I see global poverty, hunger, and educational disparities vanquished.
Tomorrow's artificial intelligence works with us collaboratively to make our
dreams of a better world a reality.
Call to Action
I encourage you to give AI a chance. Incorporate it into your daily routine
and see how it works for you.
Take the time to learn, understand, and see how you can grow with it. Stay
informed, encourage restrictions, laws, and governance, such as making AI
detectable with invisible watermarks, and encourage human oversight.
Whether AI will lead to good or bad depends on our willingness to
embrace it and use it ethically to help us rather than let it govern us.
If this book has helped you understand AI in any way, 
feel free to leave a
review on Amazon.
 I appreciate & need the feedback.
Finally, if you want to stay up-to-date on the latest AI articles I findimpactful and interesting, join my FB group: Mastering Artificial
Intelligence. There may be multiple groups by that name, but mine will list
me, Kris Ball, as the moderator.
See you in the future!Afterword
Finally, to answer the burning question you may have had this entire time…
Did I use AI to write this book? Unfortunately, ChatGPT's training algorithm
ended in Sept of 2021. So it doesn't know anything from the last 2 years,
making it kinda useless for this book which relies heavily on the latest news
and trends. That being said, I did want AI to write 
something, 
so I did have it
write the first 3 paragraphs of the introduction.
You're welcome.Comment on the Cover Art
Shout out to 
design_maida
 from Fiverr for creating the beautiful cover art
for this book. When I looked on Amazon at the other books about artificial
intelligence, I noticed a theme. Every single one of them depicted a robot or
computer on the cover. Additionally, the books were colored in hues of light
blue and gray. I wanted something different. I thought back to my first
experience with AI in science fiction.
It was a book given to me by my uncle, Steven Ball, written by one of my
all-time favorite authors of old-school sci-fi: Robert A. Heinlein. The book is
called, 
The Moon is a Harsh Mistress
. In it, a helpful AI befriends the main
character and helps gain freedom for the lunar colony they live on. I can
remember crying when the AI was damaged in an attack, thinking, "Is he
okay? Did he die?!?!" That first impression of what AI could be: helpful,
caring, powerful, and life-changing… That has always stayed with me. I
think it's why I am so optimistic about the future of AI. I see potential more
than I see the harm. The cover 
of that book was colorful. It looked like a star
nebula. That is what I wanted for my cover: something that was more than
just blue and gray. Something that speaks to the science fiction that AI once
was – futuristic.A
Glossary
lphaZero: A computer program that uses reinforcement learning and
plays against itself to train its neural networks and master games like
chess, shogi, and Go. 
Artificial Intelligence (AI): A field that combines computer science and
machines to perform tasks that typically require human intelligence.
Auabcin: An AI-created antibiotic that could potentially kill superbugs like
Acinetobacter baumannii
Chassis Cell: Self-replicating minimal machines that can be tailored for the
production of specific chemicals. 
Chatbot: A computer program that combines AI and NLP to mimic human
conversation—written or spoken—and allows humans to interact with digital
devices as if they were communicating with real people.
Codex: A system that translates natural language into code. It can interpret
commands written in natural language and run them for the programmer.
Cybernetics: A field where biology and technology are combined.
DALL-E: Another image generation program that creates images from
prompts. 
Deepfake: A synthetic media designed to replicate and replace a person's
likeness with another artificially. 
Descript: A platform that allows you to clone your voice, which you can
use to edit audio or create music, podcasts, or videos. Descript uses an AI
called "Lyrebird" to achieve ultra-realistic voices. Digital Assistant: Also known as a "virtual assistant," this technology is
designed to assist users in answering queries or performing various tasks.
EHR: Electronic Medical Record
Exalt-1: A study conducted by Exscientia, an AI-driven pharmacy
company, seeks to test drugs directly against the tumor tissues of each patient
to discover specific medications for their treatment. This allows the treatment
of advanced-stage hematologic cancers.
FloodCube: a modeling tool for stormwater management that prevents
flooding caused by heavy rainfall.
FloodHub: This platform effectively showcases the specific areas and
timings vulnerable to flooding, ensuring valuable information reaches
individuals and enabling authorities to provide effective assistance.
Full Self-Driving Mode: An advanced driver-assistance system that uses
hardware and software to allow vehicles to move autonomously through
various traffic situations. This system incorporates a multitude of cameras,
ultrasonic sensors, radar, and powerful computers to interpret the surrounding
environment effectively. By analyzing real-time data, it autonomously
controls various aspects of the vehicle, like acceleration, steering, and
braking.
Generative Pre-Trained Transformer (GPT): An AI language model
designed by OpenAI to process information, answer questions, and translate
languages. It can perform what is called "few-shot," "one-shot," or "zero-
shot" learning—which means it needs only a few examples, or zero
examples, in order to learn complex tasks.
Glaze: A program that uses a cloaking technique to prevent an image
generator from accurately replicating an art style.
Halicin: An experimental drug that kills various strains of bacteria,
including superbugs, by inhibiting an enzyme known as c-Jun N-terminal
kinase.
Invisible Watermarks: Unlike regular visible watermarks, which can be
removed, invisible watermarks are hidden in the images and are thus harder
to spot and remove. 
Language Model for Dialogue Applications (LaMDA): A Large Language
Model (LLM) developed by Google.
Large-scale Artificial Intelligence Open Network (LAION): A German-run
non-profit that aims to make machine learning resources open to the general
public. Stable Diffusion uses this dataset to generate images.Microsoft Copilot: An AI tool that helps people create documents, read,
and summarize emails, create presentations, and much more. 
Midjourney: Like Stable Diffusion, it's a generative AI that generates
images based on prompts.
Natural Language Processing (NLP): An area of computer science,
specifically AI, that explores how computers can understand written and
spoken text and manipulate it how humans can. 
OpenAI: An American AI research laboratory.
Palantir: It's an artificial intelligence platform with a simulation video
where their AI can pull everything together in a life-life war scenario: From
spotting an enemy threat 
to reviewing possible teams in the area with the
logistical capabilities to take out the enemy target. 
PaLM 2: An AI language model developed by Google in competition with
OpenAI. It can generate specialized code in various programming languages. 
Screen Actors Guild (SAG): An American labor union representing
thousands of film and television performers.
Short-selling: A term that is frequently used in the stock market world.
Simply put, betting a company's share price will fall. It's a way for hedge
funds to make money.
Singularity: refers to a significant event in which artificial intelligence
achieves self-awareness or an unbelievable capacity for continuous
improvement, surpassing our control. It is a concept that entails envisioning a
future where AIs transcend their current limitations, potentially evolving
beyond our ability to manage or comprehend their capabilities. 
Stable Diffusion: It's a deep learning, text-to-image model. 
Stem Cells: The fundamental units of the human body. Every cell
originates from them before taking on a distinct form and function. Stem cells
have the potential to replace diseased or damaged tissues, saving a lot of
lives. 
Steve.ai: An AI platform that allows you to create videos and animations.
This tool makes it easier to develop promotional campaigns for salespeople,
marketers, etc.
Superbug: A strain of bacteria that is resistant to antibiotics. 
Syllaby: A platform that helps to search for topics in the user's relevant
industry and creates video scripts based on those topics that are most likely to
go viral. 
Synthesia: A platform that creates lifelike AI representations of humans.Custom avatars can be used to create business videos with Synthesia. 
Writers Guild of America (WAG): A collaboration of two American joint
labor unions representing writers in television, film, and online media. References
AlphaZero 
. (n.d.). Chess. 
https://www.chess.com/terms/alphazero-chess-
engine
Al-Sibai, N. (2023, April 17). 
Google DeepMind CEO Says AI May
Become Self-Aware. 
Futurism. 
https://futurism.com/the-byte/google-
deepmind-ceo-self-aware-ai
Aquino, S. (2021, November 17). 
Google’s Project Relate App Promises
To Help Improve Communication For People With Speech Impairments.
Forbes. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevenaquino/2021/11/17/googles-
project-relate-app-promises--to-help-improve-communication-for--people-
with-speech-impairments/?sh=473bed9b1247
Av Content Team. (2023, April 21). 
This is How Experts Predict the
Future of AI.
 Analytics Vidhya.
https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2023/04/future-of-ai/
Barr, K. (2023, June 7). 
Replika’s new AI app is like tinder but with Sexy
Chatbots
. Gizmodo. 
https://gizmodo.com/blush-ai-chatbot-replika-online-
dating-dating-apps-1850514242
Behind-the-Design: Meet Copilot 
(2023, April 3)
.
 Microsoft Design.
https://medium.com/microsoft-design/behind-the-design-meet-copilot-
2c68182a0e70
Belton, P. (2022, January 10). 
The AI software that could turn you into a
music star.
 BBC News. 
https://www.bbc.com/news/business-59878572
Biggest Threats and Data.
 (2019, May 31). Centers for Disease Controland Prevention. 
https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/biggest-threats.html
Blood Cancer Discovery PublicationFurther Validates Exscientia’s AI
Precision Medicine Platform for Improving Patient Outcomes
. (2022,
September 20).Investors.exscientia.ai. 
https://investors.exscientia.ai/press-
releases/press-release-details/2022/Blood-Cancer-Discovery-
PublicationFurther-Validates-Exscientias-AI-Precision-Medicine-Platform-
for-Improving-Patient-Outcomes/default.aspx
Can AI Help Fight Hunger? Exploring the Potential of Artificial
Intelligence 
(2022, December 3)
. 
Quantilus Innovation.
https://quantilus.com/ai-to-help-fight-
hunger/#:~:text=In%20many%20parts%20of%20the
Can Artificial Intelligence Help Humans Stop Ageing? 
(2022, February
9).Industry Wired. 
https://industrywired.com/can-artificial-intelligence-help-
humans-stop-ageing/
Chowdhary, K. R. (2020). 
Natural Language Processing. Fundamentals of
Artificial Intelligence,
 
603–649
. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-81-322-3972-
7_19
Copeland, B. J. (2019). 
Artificial intelligence - Alan Turing and the
beginning of AI. 
In Encyclopædia Britannica.
https://www.britannica.com/technology/artificial-intelligence/Alan-Turing-
and-the-beginning-of-AI
Correspondent, R. W. T. (2023, March 26). 
Half of students are using
ChatGPT to cheat, and it could rise to 90%.
 Mail 
Online.
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-11899475/Half-students-
using-ChatGPT-cheat-rise-90.html
Cybernetic cells: blurring the boundaries of biology and technology
(n.d.).Nesta. 
https://www.nesta.org.uk/feature/tipping-point/cybernetic-cells-
blurring-boundaries-biology-and-technology/
Davies, R. (2021, January 28). 
GameStop: how Reddit amateurs took aim
at Wall Street’s short-sellers.
 The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2021/jan/28/gamestop-how-reddits-
amateurs-tripped-wall-streets-short-sellers
Dean, J. (2022, November 2). 
3 ways AI is scaling helpful technologies
worldwide.
 Google. 
https://blog.google/technology/ai/ways-ai-is-scaling-
helpful/
Demopoulos, A. (2023, April 3). 
Computer-generated inclusivity: fashion
turns to “diverse” AI models.
 The Guardian.https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2023/apr/03/ai-virtual-models-fashion-
brands
Dent, S. (2023, June 28). 
NASA is creating a CHATGPT-like assistant for
Astronauts
. Engadget. https://www.engadget.com/nasa-is-creating-a-chatgpt-
like-assistant-for-astronauts-081903604.html
Eliaçık, E. (2023, May 5). 
How To Use Kaiber AI: Free Alternatives And
More.
 Dataconomy. 
https://dataconomy.com/2023/05/05/how-to-use-kaiber-
ai-free-alternatives/
Elmers, R. (2023, April 30). 
A Virtual Avatar Created By AI Bypasses
Bank Security And Misleads Relatives.
 Tech News Space.
https://technewsspace.com/a-virtual-avatar-created-by-ai-bypasses-bank-
security-and-misleads-relatives/
FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Actions to
Promote Responsible AI Innovation that Protects 
Americans’ Rights and
Safety 
(2023, May 4)
.
 The White House.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2023/05/04/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-new-
actions-to-promote-responsible-ai-innovation-that-protects-americans-rights-
and-safety/
Franks, R., & Maher, R. (2023, May 2). 
“It’s Russian roulette” - Top
students deny AI cheating after teachers flunk them. 
NZ Herald.
https://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/ai-and-chatgpt-cheating-allegations-at-
cambridge-and-pukekohe-high-outrage-parents-of-top-
students/A5TBH25N2NC4JG2ZOAUB7L3W6Y/
Gallagher, J. (2023, May 25). 
New superbug-killing antibiotic discovered
using AI
. BBC News. 
https://www.bbc.com/news/health-65709834
Garth, E. (2022, December 1). 
New AI-enabled study unravels the
principles of aging. 
Longevity
.
 
https://longevity.technology/news/new-ai-
enabled-study-unravels-the-principles-of-aging/
George, E. O. (2022, July 24). 
How can AI improve academic writing
experience - 
Paperpal Blog. 
https://www.paperpal.com/blog/news-
updates/industry-insights/ai-writing-experience/
Germain, T. (2023, June 8). 
Kansas U researchers claim 99% accuracy
detecting ChatGPT fakes
. Gizmodo. 
https://gizmodo.com/chatgpt-detector-ai-
kansas-research-paper-99-accuracy-1850519081
Geschwindt, S. (2023, June 8). 
This AI-powered platform could predict the
next big flood
. TNW | Sustainability. 
https://thenextweb.com/news/this-ai-powered-platform-could-predict-the-next-big-flood
Google launches “FloodHub”, a platform to forecast flood: All details
inside. 
(2022, November 6)
.
 Livemint.
https://www.livemint.com/technology/tech-news/google-launches-
floodhub-
a-platform-to-forecast-flood-all-details-inside-11667737115751.html
Gungor, A. (2023, March 13). 
The Top 10 Limitations Of ChatGPT.
Bernard Marr. 
https://bernardmarr.com/the-top-10-limitations-of-chatgpt/
Hatfield, K. (2023, March 21). 
Artificial Intelligence is helping
researchers identify and analyse some of the world’s oldest art
. The Art
Newspaper - International art news and events.
https://www.theartnewspaper.com/2023/03/21/artificial-intelligence-ancient-
rock-art-australia-andrea-jalandoni
Helfrich, T. (2021, May 31). 
Council Post: Why Robotics And Artificial
Intelligence Are The Future Of Mankind.
 Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2022/05/31/why-robotics-
and-artificial-intelligence-are-the-future-of-mankind/?sh=709bcedd1689
Helmore, E. (2022, December 22). 
Tesla behind eight-vehicle crash was in
“full self-driving” mode, says driver.
 The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/dec/22/tesla-crash-full-self-
driving-mode-san-francisco
Hern, A., & editor, A. H. U. technology. (2023, April 12). 
Streaming sites
urged not to let AI use music to clone pop stars.
 The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2023/apr/12/streaming-sites-ai-
copyrighted-music-copycat-tracks
Houser, K. (2023, January 12). 
Microsoft’s new AI needs just 3 seconds of
audio to clone a voice.
 Freethink. 
https://www.freethink.com/robots-ai/voice-
cloning-vall-
e#:~:text=VALL%2DE%20can%20even%20mimic%20a%20speaker
Hughes, N. C. (2023, March 9). 
How AI voice cloning threatens the
security of banking systems.
 Cybernews.
https://cybernews.com/security/how-ai-voice-cloning-threatens-the-security-
of-banking-systems/
Introducing Voicebox: The first generative AI model for speech to
generalize across tasks with state-of-the-art performance
. Meta AI. (n.d.).
https://ai.facebook.com/blog/voicebox-generative-ai-model-speech/
Israelsky, P. (2023, March 27). 
Council Post: How Marketers Can
Leverage AI In Search Engines.
 Forbes.https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesbusinesscouncil/2023/03/27/how-
marketers-can-leverage-ai-in-search-engines/?sh=748b5db61d7e
Ito, A. (2023, April 26). 
ChatGPT spells the end of coding as we know it.
Business Insider. 
https://www.businessinsider.com/chatgpt-ai-technology-
end-of-coding-software-developers-jobs-2023-4
Jackson, C., & Zulueta, J. (2022, May 18). 
The beauty and horror behind
deepfakes. 
The LaSallian. 
https://thelasallian.com/2022/05/18/the-beauty-
and-horror-behind-deepfakes/
Jones, J. H. (2023, April 24). 
Congress gets 40 ChatGPT Plus licenses to
start experimenting with generative AI.
 FedScoop.
https://fedscoop.com/congress-gets-40-chatgpt-plus-licenses/
Joseph, C., Beaumont-Thomas, B., Moir, H., Loseto, M., Kacoutié, A., &
Ebtehaj, M. (2023, April 13). 
Will AI ruin music as we know it? Pop Culture
with Chanté Joseph. 
The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/society/audio/2023/apr/13/will-ai-ruin-music-
as-we-know-it-pop-culture-with-chante-joseph
Kelly, S. M. (2023, May 10). 
The most popular search engine in the world
is about to look different.
 CNN Business.
https://edition.cnn.com/2023/05/10/tech/ai-search-google-io/index.html
Kemper, J. (2023, March 8). 
Artists remove 80 million images from Stable
Diffusion 3 training data.
 The Decoder. 
https://the-decoder.com/artists-
remove-80-million-images-
from-stable-diffusion-3-training-
data/#:~:text=Artists%20remove%2080%20million%20images%20from%20Stable%20Diffusion%203%20training%20data
Klein, A. (2023, April 5). 
ChatGPT: The end of creative writing?
 The
Tufts Daily. 
https://tuftsdaily.com/arts/2023/04/05/chatgpt-the-end-of-
creative-writing/
Knight, W. (2023, March 30). 
Let the AI Coding Wars Begin!
 Wired.
https://www.wired.com/story/ai-coding-wars-openai-google-microsoft/
Koblin, J., & Barnes, B. (2023, March 21). 
Why There Is Talk of a Writers’
Strike in Hollywood.
 The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/article/wga-writers-strike-hollywood.html
Korosec, K. (2023, April 21). 
Google’s Bard AI chatbot can now generate
and debug code.
 TechCrunch. 
https://techcrunch.com/2023/04/21/googles-
bard-ai-chatbot-can-now-generate-and-debug-code/
Kotorchevikj, I. (2021, August 27). 
Applying AI for social good to solve
today’s global challenges.
 Hyperight. 
https://hyperight.com/applying-ai-for-
social-good-to-solve-todays-global-challenges/Kuo. (2022, March 29). 
AI Helps Radiologists Detect Bone Fractures.
Rsna.org. 
https://www.rsna.org/news/2022/march/AI-Helps-Detect-Bone-
Fractures#:~:text=Artificial%20intelligence%20(AI)%20is%20an
Lawler, R. (2023, May 10). 
Google’s new image search tools could help
you identify AI-generated fakes.
 The Verge.
https://www.theverge.com/2023/5/10/23718616/google-image-search-
verification-about-this-metadata-io
Loeffler, J. (2023, June 13). 
Ai identifies 3 new Nasca lines hidden in
Peruvian desert
. AI identifies 3 new Nasca Lines hidden in Peruvian desert.
https://interestingengineering.com/science/ai-identifies-new-nasca-lines
Lomas, N. (2023a, June 12). 
OpenAI, Deepmind and anthropic to give UK
early access to foundational models for AI Safety Research
. TechCrunch.
https://techcrunch.com/2023/06/12/uk-ai-safety-research-pledge/
Lomas, N. (2023b, June 14). 
Europe takes another big step toward
agreeing an AI rulebook
. TechCrunch.
https://techcrunch.com/2023/06/14/europe-takes-another-big-step-towards-
agreeing-an-ai-
rulebook/#:~:text=The%20European%20Parliament%20has%20voted,EU%20rulebook%20for%20artificial%20intelligence
Lorach, H., Galvez, A., Spagnolo, V. 
et al.
 Walking naturally after spinal
cord injury using a brain–spine interface. 
Nature
 
618
, 126–133 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06094-5
Malczyk, K. (2023, January 17). 
7 ways Google is using AI to help solve
society’s challenges.
 Google. 
https://blog.google/technology/ai/7-ways-
google-is-using-ai-to-help-solve-societys-challenges/
Marr, B. (2023, March 22). 
Green Intelligence: Why Data And AI Must
Become More Sustainable.
 Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2023/03/22/green-intelligence-
why-data-and-ai-must-become-more-sustainable/?sh=4d226c8e7658
Martindale, J. (2018, August 12). 
Should you OK Google, Hey Siri, or talk
to Cortana? Here’s the top voice assistant.
 Digital Trends.
https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/cortana-vs-siri-vs-google-now/
Matias, Y. (2020, August 20). 
Mapping wildfires with the power of
satellite data.
 Google. 
https://blog.google/products/search/mapping-
wildfires-with-satellite-data/
Mauran, C. (2023, April 6). 
Whoops, Samsung workers accidentally leaked
trade secrets via ChatGPT.
 Mashable 
ME.
https://me.mashable.com/tech/26952/whoops-samsung-workers-accidentally-leaked-trade-secrets-via-chatgpt
McDermott, K. (2023, March 22). 
These are the new jobs generative AI
could create in the future. 
The Next Web. 
https://thenextweb.com/news/new-
jobs-generative-ai-future
Mehdi, Y. (2023, February 7). 
Reinventing search with a new AI-powered
Microsoft Bing and Edge, your copilot for the web.
 The Official Microsoft
Blog. 
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2023/02/07/reinventing-search-with-
a-new-ai-powered-microsoft-bing-and-edge-your-copilot-for-the-web/
Miller, R. (2023, June 26). 
Adobe Indemnity Clause designed to ease
enterprise fears about AI-generated art
. TechCrunch.
https://techcrunch.com/2023/06/26/adobe-indemnity-clause-designed-to-
ease-enterprise-fears-about-ai-generated-art/?
guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAHEl2PrfuIPF1gsmzICVE5yKvWGApUa7CHYkjPSEAA5pB35i93Y8z6h7yQGGJGoS8zIIlkR72x6rdO65y_Bqfmhoh7B-
kcGV0T1yZ_HrKowF7Z6rc1p571FW0eTv8_y3QsO4g1_7nKZXIZLvadmzzL03zLJh7bpDuwAclrDpzHpD
Milon, B. (2023, March 24). 
AI in Logistics: Benefits, Challenges, Case
Studies & Best Practices. 
The ILS Company.
https://www.ilscompany.com/ai-in-
logistics/#:~:text=AI%20technology%20has%20transformed%20the
Mok, A. (2023, April 27). 
ChatGPT experience may be able to get you that
job
. Business Insider. 
https://www.businessinsider.com/chatgpt-experience-
wanted-by-employers-hire-study-2023-4
Niyazov, S. (2023, February 14). 
How A.I. Will Redefine Economics.
Medium. 
https://towardsdatascience.com/how-ai-will-redefine-economics-
ec305e3cb687#:~:text=AI%20will%20make%20better%20predictions
ODSC-Open Data Science. (2020, September 24). 
Introduction to GPT-3.
Medium. 
https://odsc.medium.com/introduction-to-gpt-3-8f629ac975b8
Ortiz, S. (2023, June 20). 
Can ai-generated music win a music award? the
Grammys reveal new rules
. ZDNET. 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/can-ai-
generated-music-win-a-music-award-the-grammys-make-their-verdict/
Ouyang, A. (2023, January 20). 
MIT researchers develop an AI model that
can detect future lung cancer risk
. MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. https://news.mit.edu/2023/ai-model-can-detect-future-lung-
cancer-0120
Peritz, A. (2022, September 6). 
A Fun, Easy New Way for Students to
Cheat.
 Slate Magazine. 
https://slate.com/technology/2022/09/ai-students-
writing-cheating-sudowrite.html
Perrigo, B. (2023, January 18). 
Exclusive: The $2 Per Hour Workers WhoMade ChatGPT Safer.
 Time. 
https://time.com/6247678/openai-chatgpt-
kenya-workers/
Pick the best stocks to beat the market. powered by explainable AI.
Danelfin. (n.d.). 
https://danelfin.com/
Precision Medicine.
 (n.d.). Exscientia. 
https://www.exscientia.ai/precision-
medicine
Published, T. M. (2023, January 9). 
This disturbing deepfake service just
took “creepy” to a whole new level.
 Creative Bloq.
https://www.creativebloq.com/news/deepfake-service
Ravindranath, M. (2023, June 2). 
Carbon health is already using AI to
write patient records
. STAT. 
https://www.statnews.com/2023/06/05/ai-
medical-records-carbon-health/
Reuters. (2023, February 16). 
Tesla recalls 362,000 vehicles over self-
driving software flaws that risk crashes.
 The 
Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/feb/16/tesla-recall-full-self-
driving-cars
Reuters Staff. (2016, July 27). 
IBM steps up efforts in fight against Zika.
Reuters. 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-zika-ibm-
idUSKCN1071OT
Robinson, T., & Bridgewater, S. (2023, May 26). 
Highlights from The
Raes Future Combat Air & Space Capabilities Summit
. Royal Aeronautical
Society. 
https://www.aerosociety.com/news/highlights-from-the-raes-future-
combat-air-space-capabilities-summit/
Rubloff, M. (2023, May 4). 
Neural Fields For LiDAR (NFL) Combines
LiDAR With Neural Fields!
 Neural Radiance
Fields.
https://neuralradiancefields.io/neural-fields-for-lidar-nfl-unveils-
future-of-autonomous-driving/
Ruidong Zhang 
et al
. 2023. EchoSpeech: Continuous Silent Speech
Recognition on Minimally-obtrusive Eyewear Powered by Acoustic Sensing.
In 
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’23)
; doi: 10.1145/3544548.3580801
Sample, I. (2020, February 20). 
Powerful antibiotic discovered using
machine learning for first time.
 The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/feb/20/antibiotic-that-kills-drug-
resistant-bacteria-discovered-through-ai
Savage, M. (2023, June 13). 
Sir Paul McCartney says Artificial
Intelligence has enabled a “final” Beatles song
. BBC News.https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-65881813
Shane, J. (2019, November 13). 
The danger of AI is weirder than you think
| Janelle Shane
. YouTube. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=OhCzX0iLnOc
Shweta. (2022, June 6). 
What Is A Chatbot? Everything You Need To
Know (K. Main, Ed.)
. Forbes 
Advisor.
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/business/software/what-is-a-chatbot/
The Most Useful Military Applications of AI.
 (2022, February 2). Sentient
Digital, Inc. 
https://sdi.ai/blog/the-most-useful-military-applications-of-ai/
The Rise of ChatGPT 
(n.d.)
.
 Pomfret. Retrieved May 3, 2023, from
https://www.pomfret.org/post/~board/blog/post/the-future-is-now-01-11-
2023
The Rise Of ChatGPT - Fastest Growing App In History 2023 
(2023, April
13)
. 
Silver Lining. 
https://silver-lining.com/the-rise-of-chatgpt-fastest-
growing-app-in-history/
Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., & Hassabis, D. (2018, December
6). 
AlphaZero: Shedding new light on chess, shogi, and Go.
 Deepmind.
https://www.deepmind.com/blog/alphazero-shedding-new-light-on-chess-
shogi-and-go
Singer, N. (2023, June 8). 
New A.I. chatbot tutors could upend student
learning
. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/08/business/khan-ai-gpt-tutoring-bot.html
Strickland, E. (2023, June 16). 
The who, where, and how of regulating AI
.
IEEE Spectrum. https://spectrum.ieee.org/ai-regulation-worldwide
Stupp, C. (2019, August 30). 
Fraudsters Used AI to Mimic CEO’s Voice in
Unusual Cybercrime Case.
 Wall Street Journal.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/fraudsters-use-ai-to-mimic-ceos-voice-in-
unusual-cybercrime-case-11567157402
Sweeney, B. (2023, April 5). 
The Rise of ChatGPT & What it Means for
the Future of AI and Software Testing.
 Keysight.
https://www.keysight.com/blogs/tech/software-testing/2023/4/5/the-rise-of-
chatgpt
Tan, A. (2022, August 25). 
Dell’s deep learning model to support Coral
Reef Conservation: Computer Weekly
. ComputerWeekly.com.
https://www.computerweekly.com/
news/252524201/Dells-deep-learning-
model-to-support-coral-reef-conservation
The Pros and Cons of Using Artificial Intelligence in Sports Betting 
(2023,April 24)
.
 Time News. 
https://time.news/the-pros-and-cons-of-using-
artificial-intelligence-in-sports-betting/
Tegmark, M. (2023, April 25). 
The “don’t look up” thinking that could
doom us with ai
. Time. 
https://time.com/6273743/thinking-that-could-doom-
us-with-ai/
Thomas, M. (2021, July 21). 
The future of artificial intelligence.
 Built In.
https://builtin.com/artificial-intelligence/artificial-intelligence-future
Timothy, M. (2023, March 14). 
What Is Google LaMDA AI?
 MUO.
https://www.makeuseof.com/what-is-google-lamda-ai/
Toews, R. (2020, May 25). 
Deepfakes Are Going To Wreak Havoc On
Society. We Are Not Prepared. 
Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/robtoews/2020/05/25/deepfakes-are-going-to-
wreak-havoc-on-society-we-are-not-prepared/?sh=184f8cff7494
Trafton, A. (2020, February 20). 
Artificial intelligence yields new
antibiotic.
 MIT News. 
https://news.mit.edu/2020/artificial-intelligence-
identifies-new-antibiotic-0220
Vedantam, K. (2023, June 14). 
Is AI the cause of job cuts this year?
.
Crunchbase News. 
https://news.crunchbase.com/ai-robotics/artificial-
intelligence-layoffs-job-market/
Verma, P. (2023, April 5). 
ChatGPT invented a sexual harassment scandal
and named a real law prof as the accused.
 Washington Post.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/04/05/chatgpt-lies/
Vieira Santos, A.[@AkwyZ]. (2023, June 11). 
Hundreds attend #AI church
service in Germany.
 [Tweet]. Twitter.
https://twitter.com/AkwyZ/status/1668301333886119958
Vincent, J. (2023a, February 6). 
Getty Images sues AI art generator Stable
Diffusion in the US for copyright infringement.
 The Verge.
https://www.theverge.com/2023/2/6/23587393/ai-art-copyright-lawsuit-getty-
images-stable-diffusion
Vincent, J. (2023b, May 19). 
Apple restricts employees from using
ChatGPT over fear of data leaks.
 The Verge.
https://www.theverge.com/2023/5/19/23729619/apple-bans-chatgpt-openai-
fears-data-leak
Vincent, J. (2023c, June 8). 
Blackmailers are using deepfaked nudes to
bully and extort victims, warns FBI
. The Verge.
https://www.theverge.com/2023/6/8/23753605/ai-deepfake-sextortion-nude-
blackmail-fbi-warningWarwick, K. (n.d.). 
The Future of Artificial Intelligence and Cybernetics.
OpenMind. 
https://www.bbvaopenmind.com/en/articles/the-future-of-
artificial-intelligence-and-cybernetics/
Welding, L. (2023, March 27). 
Half of College Students Say Using AI Is
Cheating
. (R. Johnson, Ed.). Bestcolleges.
https://www.bestcolleges.com/research/college-students-ai-tools-
survey/#:~:text=Half%20of%20College%20Students%20Say%20Using%20AI%20on%20Schoolwork%20Is
What is a Chatbot?
 (2014). Oracle.com.
https://www.oracle.com/ae/chatbots/what-is-a-chatbot/
What is Natural Language Processing?
 (2023). IBM.
https://www.ibm.com/topics/natural-language-processing
Whiting, K. (2023a, March 1). 
AI is helping to identify skills gaps and
future jobs. An expert explains how.
 World Economic Forum.
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/05/ai-skills-gaps-future-jobs/
Whiting, K. (2023b, March 2). 
3 new and emerging jobs you can get hired
for this year. 
World Economic Forum.
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/03/new-emerging-jobs-work-
skills/#:~:text=green%20energy%20sectors.-
Williams, O. (2023, June 8). 
Charlie Brooker got ChatGPT to write a
black mirror episode, but it was “shit” – exclusive image
. Empire.
https://www.empireonline.com/tv/news/charlie-brooker-chatgpt-black-
mirror-episode-exclusive-image/
YouTube. (2023). 
Sam Altman’s World Tour, in 16 Moments
. 
YouTube
.
Retrieved June 19, 2023, from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=3sWH2e5xpdo
.