2024   
TECH TRENDS  
 REPORT17TH EDITIONTABLE OF CONTENTS
003  LETTER FROM FTI’S CEO
004  2024 TECH TREND REPORTS
005  IMPACTS OF TRENDS ON INDUSTRY
006  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
050  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
166 WEB3
207 METAVERSE
257  BIOENGINEERING
328  ENERGY & CLIMATE
401 MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES456   COMPUTING
517 BUILT ENVIRONMENT
572  NEWS & INFORMATION
615 HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
687  FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
733  SPORTS
776 SPACE
840  HOSPITALITY
882  SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
919 ENTERTAINMENT974  AUTHORS
975  ABOUT FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE
976  METHODOLOGY
977 DISCLAIMER
978  USING & SHARING THE TREND REPORT FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT
2© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.2024
The theme for our 2024 re-
port is Supercycle. In eco-
nomics, a “supercycle” refers 
to an extended period of 
booming demand, elevating 
the prices of commodities 
and assets to unprecedented heights. It stretches across 
years, even decades, and is driven by substantial and 
sustained structural changes in the economy. 
We believe we have entered a technology supercycle. 
This wave of innovation is so potent and pervasive that 
it promises to reshape the very fabric of our existence, 
from the intricacies of global supply chains to the minu-
tiae of daily habits, from the corridors of power in global 
politics to the unspoken norms that govern our social 
interactions. 
Driving this seismic shift are the titans of technology 
and three of their inventions: artificial intelligence, bio-
technology, and a burgeoning ecosystem of interconnect-
ed wearable devices for people, pets, and objects. As they 
converge, these three macro tech segments will redefine 
our relationship with everything, from our pharmacists to 
our animals, from banks to our own bodies. Future Today Institute’s analysis shows that every technology—AR/ VR/
XR, autonomous vehicles, low Earth orbit satellites, to 
name a few—connects to the supercycle in some way.
The ramifications are stark and undeniable. As this tech 
supercycle unfurls, there will be victors and vanquished, 
those who seize the reins of this epochal change, and 
those who are swallowed whole. For business leaders, 
investors, and policymakers, understanding this tech 
supercycle is paramount.
In this 17th edition of FTI’s annual Tech Trends report, 
we’ve connected the supercycle to the nearly 700 trends 
we’ve developed. Our research is presented across 16 
technology and industry-specific reports that reveal the 
current state of play and lists of influencers to watch, 
along with detailed examples and recommendations de -
signed to help executives and their teams develop their 
strategic positioning. The trends span evolutionary ad-
vancements in well-established technologies to ground-
breaking developments at the forefront of technological 
and scientific exploration. You’ll see emerging epicenters 
of innovation and risk, along with a preview into their 
transformative effects across various industries.We’ve visually represented the tech supercycle on the 
report’s cover, which is an undulating image reminiscent 
of a storm radar. Vertical and horizontal lines mark the 
edges of each section’s cover. When all 16 section cov-
ers converge, the trends reveal a compounding effect as 
reverberating aftershocks influence every other area of 
technology and science, as well as all industries.
It’s the convergence that matters. In isolation, trends of-
fer limited foresight into the future. Instead, the interplay 
of these trends is what reveals long-term change. For 
that reason, organizations must not only remain vigilant 
in monitoring these evolving trends but also in cultivat-
ing strategic foresight—the ability to anticipate future 
changes and plan for various scenarios.
Our world is changing at an unprecedented rate, and this 
supercycle has only just begun. 
Amy Webb
Chief Executive Officer
Future Today InstituteTHE YEAR AHEAD: TECH SUPERCYCLE
3© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT4© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE’S 2024 TECH TREND REPORT
Our 2024 edition includes nearly 700 trends, which are published individually in 16 volumes and as one comprehensive report with all trends included.
Download all sections of Future Today Institute’s 2024 Tech Trends report at http:/ /www.futuretodayinstitute.com/trends.
2024 FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT5© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.IMPACT OF TRENDS ON YOUR INDUSTRY
Long-T erm Relevance Near-T erm Relevance
AI Generative AI BioengineeringGenerative 
BioComputing
ArchitectureAR/ VR/ XR 
& Synthetic 
MediaMetaverseWeb3
InfrastructureMobilityRobots and 
DronesClimate and 
Green TechQuantum
Agriculture
Automotive
Aviation and Travel
Construction, Engineering
Consumer Packaged Goods
Education
Financial Services
Government and Policy
Health Care Systems and Services
Hospitality
Media (Entertainment)
Media (News)
Pharmaceutical and Medical Products
Public and Social Sectors
Real Estate
Restaurants
Retail
Space and Aerospace Defense
Supply Chain and Logistics
Telecommunications2024 FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORTEXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY17TH EDITION • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT7© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
2024  
TRENDS
Trends are what we can know about today and are based on 
data and evidence. This year’s trend report covers hundreds of 
technology trends across various industries and categories.8© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
While the hype continues, now is the time to prepare.
AI is a transformative, general-purpose technology with 
the potential to influence entire economies and alter 
society. From multi-modal AI to self-improving agents 
and wearables with on-board assistants, the ecosystem 
is rapidly changing. While AI advancements promise 
to reshape our world, emerging trends highlight 
unprecedented risks, underscoring the need for 
preparedness, governance, and alignment.
BIOENGINEERING
Brace for impact in this breakthrough year.
Recent breakthroughs have accelerated the 
convergence of biology, information systems, and 
advanced platforms, and attention has been focused 
on generative AI. Very soon, that focus will shift to 
generative biology, where AI models will lead to the 
creation of novel molecules, drugs, materials, and living 
organisms. While biotech promises to reshape our 
world, it also requires preparedness and governance.WEB3
Quiet developments and new regulations grow Web3.  
While the industry reeled from failures and 
bankruptcies over the last year, developers have 
continued to develop new capabilities and features, 
moving ever closer to real-life practical applications 
for Web3. As regulations are on the horizon to be 
implemented in 2024, this could be a year of inflection, 
bringing Web3 from the experimental and theoretical to 
cold hard business cases.
ENERGY & CLIMATE
Emerging and tested tech comes together for progress.
As the effects of climate change become more dire, 
governments are considering a more exotic set of tech-
nologies to combat the situation. Solar geoengineering, 
ocean chemistry manipulation, and domed cities are 
all concepts that gained significant traction in 2023. 
Meanwhile, significant gains have been made in en-
abling infrastructure for renewable energy, focusing on 
smart grids, energy storage, and carbon tracking.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES
Developments indicate a possible inflection point. 
Apple’s new headset leverages AI to overlay digital onto 
reality, representing a pivot from fantasy metaverses 
to real-life applications that may signal maturity. 
Meanwhile, complementary features to enhance virtual 
experiences are being developed. Though device costs 
are an ongoing barrier, integrating AI and XR creates 
fundamental synergies, potentially marking the 
watershed moment the industry has been waiting for.
MOBILITY, ROBOTS & DRONES
Challenges remain for electrification and autonomy. 
Consumers are adapting to electric and semi-
autonomous vehicles and those that collect increasing 
data. At the same time, battery technology is increasing, 
enabling vehicles, robots, and drones to perform longer. 
The rise of these machines suggests a future where they 
supplement and replace human tasks, highlighting a 
shift towards a more efficient, increasingly monitored 
work environment.TRENDS9© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
COMPUTING
AI is transforming human-computer interaction. 
AI is changing what is possible in form factors, 
challenging underlying computing architecture. 
Researchers are pursuing energy-efficient architectures 
by reverse engineering the complex biological efficiencies 
of the human brain. As AI facilitates more intuitive 
communication, the technology could blend more 
seamlessly into human experiences, with computing 
centered directly around people rather than devices.
HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
The barrier between digital and biological is vanishing.
The merging of digital and biological worlds enables a 
whole new range of treatments, the most exciting being 
cells within our bodies that can produce medication 
in response to external stimuli. Conversely, cyberbio-
malware creates new, existential threats to our health 
that we are unaware we need to protect ourselves 
against. Both developments have the potential to upend 
the pharmaceutical and healthcare industry completely.BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Automation and data collection transform practices.
In an industry used to following traditional practices, 
the past years have upended decade-old norms. Such 
shifts can provide critical solutions to new questions 
and signify a turning point that redefines industry 
standards and operational efficiency. This pivotal 
moment underscores the need for strategic adaptation, 
heralding a reinvention phase in response to evolving 
demands and technological advancements.
FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
Modernization is slow, but consumers are ready to run.
The financial services sector, dominated by legacy 
giants, is facing a critical juncture where embracing 
technology like open banking, digital identity, and 
blockchain is not just advantageous but imperative. 
This industry must shift from reactive to proactive, 
underscoring the importance of anticipation and 
preparedness in navigating the future of the financial 
and insurance industries.NEWS & INFORMATION
The news ecosystem hits an inflection point.
Emerging technologies like generative AI are shaping 
the future of content creation, distribution, and mone-
tization. New applications of AI are reshaping the media 
value change and forging new consumer behaviors for 
information search and discovery. In the year ahead, the 
initial frenzy of ChatGPT prompt hacking and product 
launches based on large language models will fade, but 
the information ecosystem will never be the same.
SPORTS
Analytics and customization are transforming sports.
Technology is enhancing the capabilities of managers, 
coaches, athletes, and fans. Teams and leagues are 
seeing progress in scouting, training, performance 
analytics, and rehabilitation thanks to tools like mixed 
reality, computer vision, and AI. Smarter stadiums offer 
unique, immersive experiences, driving engagement and 
revenue streams that support further improvements in a 
game’s quality and spectator experiences. TRENDS10© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
SPACE
Space exploration is entering a new era.
Defined by old geopolitical rifts and new spacefaring 
nations, this emerging era goes beyond past dynamics 
to involve a broader constellation of smaller nations 
and private enterprises, all enabled by the decreasing 
cost of space access. With lowered launch costs, zero 
gravity could unlock scientific discoveries previously 
impossible. The dream of a multi-planetary humanity 
stirs deep questions about our priorities.
SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
Real-time data and instant everything shape new terrain. 
Regional instability, materials disruptions, manufac-
turing relocation, and labor tensions create hardship 
for businesses and manufacturers trying to bring their 
goods to consumers, who are also becoming more de-
manding. As businesses strive to meet these demands, 
they will be compelled to rethink their strategies, tech-
nologies, and workflows, marking a pivotal moment in 
the report on industry trends. HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
T ech-driven efficiency can’t replace personalization.  
Contactless payments, immersive pre-experiences, 
augmentations that recognize a guest’s personalized 
needs upon entering the premise, automated back-
of-house functions offer opportunities for owners and 
operators to capitalize on that can provide elevated 
experiences and a reduction in overhead costs—but 
human workers might hold these positions, driving an 
ongoing tension between efficiency and a personal touch.
ENTERTAINMENT
AI’s impact on live entertainment is just beginning.
Taylor Swift’s concert film demonstrated that secondary 
live experiences resonate deeply. Add to that haptics, 
holographic transmission in real-time, and climate 
considerations that have consumers looking for 
local options, and a whole new world of performance 
experiences opens up. These developments create 
completely new ways to engage with content and 
opportunities for new business models.TRENDS11© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
2024  
UNCERTAINTIES
Uncertainties represent what we cannot know—and identifying 
them can reduce the risk of blind spots down the road. In this year’s 
report, we highlight five top uncertainties that will shape 2024.12© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
UNCERTAINTIES
How quickly will 
AI revolutionize 
business, and in 
what ways?What global 
challenges will 
bioengineering be 
able to address?How will countries 
and businesses 
commit to 
decarbonization?How will humans 
prioritize their 
work environments 
in the future, 
and what will 
these preferred 
workplaces look 
like?In the context 
of increasing 
protectionism 
and geopolitical 
tensions, what 
is the future of 
the global chip 
manufacturing 
industry?
JUMP TO UNCERTANTITY 1 JUMP TO UNCERTANTITY 2 JUMP TO UNCERTANTITY 3 JUMP TO UNCERTANTITY 4 JUMP TO UNCERTANTITY 501 02 03 04 0501
How quickly will AI revolutionize 
business, and in what ways?
13© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 202414© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
How quickly will AI revolutionize business,  
and in what ways?
Stratification Scales  
by Function or TaskStratification by Industry AI Scales Up for Consumers
Efficiency Optimization 
in the Back OfficeBolstered Productivity 
and PerformanceCautious Scaling in 
Complex IndustriesAgile Scaling in Less-
Regulated IndustriesAI Serves as a  
Creative PlaygroundA Revolutionary 
Consumer-Facing 
AssistantGET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILSSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
15© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Stratification Scales by Function or T ask 
AI scales along two distinct trajectories: by function or by task. Functional scaling involves 
embedding AI into key business operations, like accounting or IT, to enhance productivity. 
Conversely, task-based scaling increases efficiency for routine activities like email, leading to 
workforce streamlining. Both offer unique advantages for leaders, who must choose between 
broad operational transformation or targeted task refinement.
 Efficiency Optimization in the Back Office 
AI emerges as a linchpin, enhancing efficiency for back-office operations like 
calendaring and leading to a cascade of broader organizational and cultural 
shifts. But there are human capital implications: As AI takes root, the workforce 
gradually contracts.
With efficiency gains, companies reconsider budgets, diverting funds from labor 
to tech. This shift fosters a culture of innovation, as employees are reassigned to 
more strategic, creative, or complex tasks that AI can’t easily replicate. But it also 
will require companies to reevaluate talent strategies, prioritize adaptability and 
technical proficiency, and expand HR departments to include upskilling programs 
and change management.Bolstered Productivity and Performance
Integrating AI into the business ecosystem results in meaningful workforce 
reduction, as the tech can tackle work that previously required multiple humans.
Management adapts to overseeing hybrid teams of humans and AI, fostering 
collaboration and redefining performance metrics. Money previously allocated 
for salaries and benefits is redirected toward technology investment, research, 
and development, potentially driving further innovation. Ultimately, AI leads 
to more informed decision-making, risk assessment, and predictive analytics, 
and businesses tailor their AI solutions to specific departmental needs to gain 
competitive advantages.1. HOW QUICKLY WILL AI REVOLUTIONIZE BUSINESS, AND IN WHAT WAYS?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
16© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Stratification by Industry 
As AI matures, its scalability pivots around industry-specific applications. The speed with 
which AI scales across certain industries is a function of technological receptivity and reflects 
the regulatory landscapes that govern them. Business leaders must carefully measure 
tradeoffs between these two challenges, calibrating their AI integration strategies to align 
with industry characteristics and regulatory confines.
 Cautious Scaling in Complex Industries 
Sectors like financial services and health care stand to gain improved productivity 
and efficiencies as AI leaders by processing vast data streams and achieving 
decision-making acumen beyond human speed. However, lagging regulatory 
updates temper this progress.
Slower to replace the nuanced judgment of human experts with AI systems, 
businesses take a more deliberate scaling strategy. They invest in AI R&D to 
create more sophisticated models built on equitable data training. Their cautious 
approach extends to data privacy and security, as they implement strong 
measures to safeguard sensitive information.Agile Scaling in Less-Regulated Industries
Industries less encumbered by compliance hurdles—such as consumer 
packaged goods and retail—are quick to capitalize on AI’s potential. It 
becomes a dynamic catalyst for innovation, enabling rapid ideation and 
deployment of new products and services.
AI’s ability to analyze vast amounts of data in real-time is leveraged to 
personalize customer experiences, from tailored product recommendations 
to enhanced service interactions. It also creates supply chain resilience by 
predicting demand, optimizing inventory, and identifying potential disruptions.1. HOW QUICKLY WILL AI REVOLUTIONIZE BUSINESS, AND IN WHAT WAYS?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
17© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
AI Scales Up for Consumers
Two primary use cases of AI alter everyday life. The first is through creative and experimental applications 
that introduce a sense of play and innovation to regular activities. They are reshaping entertainment, social 
media, and online engagement by providing novel, personalized experiences. The second sees AI as a 
practical assistant, seamlessly integrating into daily routines to manage tasks, offer recommendations, 
and streamline decisions. This form of AI is becoming a dependable extension of personal efficiency. These 
manifestations of AI highlight its versatility and growing significance in shaping consumer behavior.
 AI Serves as a Creative Playground 
For consumers, AI is more about novelty and entertainment than utility. Students 
integrate generative AI into their projects, pushing the boundaries of creativity and 
academic exploration. Social media enthusiasts use it to embellish their online 
personas and captivate their followers. 
Consumers now expect more interactive and personalized digital experiences 
across all platforms, influencing a shift in how products and services are 
designed and marketed. At the same time, the digital divide is more pronounced 
as a broader segment of the population becomes adept at navigating and 
manipulating digital environments and tools.A Revolutionary Consumer-Facing Assistant 
The AI assistant transcends its fledgling origins to become an essential element 
of daily life. It simplifies complex tasks and executes functions with a level of 
access and autonomy that mirrors human assistance. Consumers find tangible 
ease in their routines as AI assistants manage calendars, make informed 
purchases, and even anticipate needs before they arise. 
The downside: The role of AI in decision-making processes raises ethical 
questions, especially if these systems begin to influence areas like personal 
relationships, employment opportunities, and even legal decisions.1. HOW QUICKLY WILL AI REVOLUTIONIZE BUSINESS, AND IN WHAT WAYS?
THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESTHREATS
1 Workforce disruption   
As AI takes on more responsibilities, companies must 
manage job losses and reskill employees to avoid 
negative backlash.
2 Regulatory non-compliance   
Strict governance in regulated sectors can curb AI 
innovation/adoption if transparency, accountability, 
and ethical standards are not upheld.
3 Data privacy issues  
As AI leverages increasing amounts of consumer 
data, rising public concern around data privacy may 
warrant increased regulation and standards around 
data use.OPPORTUNITIES
1  Increased productivity and efficiency   
AI implementation in back-office and core business 
functions can result in exponential productivity gains, 
superior efficiency, and cost reductions.
2  Enhanced data-driven decision-making   
AI will provide business leaders with previously 
inaccessible insights, predictive analytics, and risk 
assessments to inform strategy and planning.  
3  Competitive differentiation   
Customized enterprise AI solutions present opportunities 
to develop proprietary platforms, hyper-specialized 
tools, and new business models that distinguish an 
organization.
18© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 1. HOW QUICKLY WILL AI REVOLUTIONIZE BUSINESS, AND IN WHAT WAYS?
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES19© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 1. HOW QUICKLY WILL AI REVOLUTIONIZE BUSINESS, AND IN WHAT WAYS?
Are you mainly focused 
on leveraging AI in 
your organization for 
functional efficiency, 
task-based productivity 
gains, or both? What are 
you doing to build those 
strategies?How will third-party 
AI assistants change 
consumer expectations 
of your products and 
services?How might emerging 
AI systems create a 
compounding effect for 
your business? Is there 
a part of your business 
that could be vastly 
improved or optimized if a 
component or compound 
could be altered slightly?How might your offerings 
need to shift as consumer 
and business buyer 
expectations evolve?Do you have the data 
governance foundations 
and AI accountability 
measures to comply with 
existing and emerging 
regulations?1 4 2 5 3STRATEGIC QUESTIONS
RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES02
What global challenges will 
bioengineering be able to address?
20© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 202421© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
What global challenges will bioengineering  
be able to address?
Better Living Infrastructure Resilience Securing Agricultural Infrastructure
Subscribe or DieWidening  
Societal GapSelf-Sustaining 
Highways  
(The End to Infrastructure Bills?)World War FoodCommunity-Focused 
FoodGET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS
The Never Retiring 
Workforce 22© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Better Living 
Bioengineering initiatives and research present a change in our approach to health care and even aging. 
Researchers use generative biology to create new therapeutic compounds and test the viability of gene 
editing. That work results in better drugs, personalized treatments, engineered tissues, and alternatives to 
one-size-fits-some medicine. Experiments are underway to alter genetics to cure ailments and diseases, with 
success already being achieved in hearing loss reversal and sickle cell treatment. Scientists leverage animal 
alternatives as they work to enhance limb, organ, and joint regenerative capabilities.
Subscribe or Die
Health care shifts from reactively treating sickness and diseases to proactively 
addressing potential health issues before they emerge. With the goal of making 
up for any future lost “reactive” revenues, the largest health care systems use 
M&A to join the bioengineering landscape as facility providers and treatment 
hubs. People subscribe to bio-based services, which they must use to continue 
getting access to health-promoting and anti-aging solutions. Big Bio creates the 
ultimate subscription package: Continue paying, or face an untimely alternative.The Never Retiring Workforce 
Economic conditions have not drastically improved for Millennials and Gen Z, who 
cannot afford to retire. Thanks to preventative medicine, genetic surgeries, and 
new therapies, the life expectancy of Americans spiked from 77 to 115 years. Many 
older individuals feel physically and mentally capable of working indefinitely, 
while younger generations face a bottleneck in career advancement. 
The implications are profound, and not just in the US. HR professionals and labor 
economists prompt a reevaluation of career trajectories, retirement planning, and 
intergenerational equity, hoping to stave off a collapse.SCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 22. WHAT GLOBAL CHALLENGES WILL BIOENGINEERING BE ABLE TO ADDRESS?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
23© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Infrastructure Resilience
Our infrastructure is no longer crumbling and fragile. By creating new compounds and modifying 
existing ones, bioengineering significantly enhances construction materials’ strength, durability, 
and flexibility while reducing reliance on harmful chemicals and petroleum-based compounds. 
Compounds that self-heal extend the lifespan of infrastructure by autonomously repairing damage. 
New materials, designed with generative biology, result in “living” buildings engineered with 
sustainable, organic materials.
Widening Societal Gap
As bioengineering technologies mature and scale, the demand for traditional 
construction and maintenance services wanes. Construction firms that don’t 
adapt— struggle, and those specializing in bioengineered solutions—thrive.
While new homes are increasingly constructed with these innovative materials, 
integrating them into existing homes proves financially prohibitive for many 
homeowners. A two-tier infrastructure landscape emerges, where newer 
developments boast remarkable resilience and sustainability features, and older 
constructions lag.Self-Sustaining Highways (The End to Infrastructure Bills?)
Bioengineering introduces advanced materials for highways and bridges that 
incorporate microorganisms, which produce substances to naturally repair 
damages, thereby enhancing durability and slashing maintenance expenses. 
These innovations adapt to fluctuating environmental conditions, offering better 
resistance against extreme weather patterns and contributing to infrastructure 
longevity. Some highway infrastructures mend themselves and reduce CO2 levels, 
while bridges utilize embedded sensors for ongoing health monitoring, ensuring 
safety and operational efficiency.2. WHAT GLOBAL CHALLENGES WILL BIOENGINEERING BE ABLE TO ADDRESS?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
24© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Securing Agricultural Infrastructure
Bioengineering addresses the global food security challenge by revolutionizing how and where we 
grow our food. Improved crop yields enable food cultivation in diverse and previously inhospitable 
locations. Bioengineering also offers solutions to the most pressing agricultural challenges, such as 
developing famine and disease-resistant crops, engineering drought-tolerant plants that thrive on 
less water, and reducing reliance on chemical fertilizers and pesticides by creating all-natural pest 
resistances. Crops now withstand shifting weather patterns, while soil health is improved.
World War Food 
Wealthier nations, foreseeing the vulnerabilities of relying on traditional 
agriculture, heavily invested in synthetic biology and food synthesis technologies to 
produce engineered foods customized for nutritional content.
This shift has created a new divide in the global economy, with disparities in 
food production capabilities. Agrarian countries, dependent on their exports of 
traditional crops, face widespread unemployment and social unrest. They retaliate 
through cyber sabotage and proxy conflicts, attempting to disrupt their wealthier 
counterparts’ engineered food supply chains. Community-Focused Food
Genetic modification and environmental adaptation have revolutionized 
agriculture. Crops flourish in deserts and on urban rooftops, making food 
production sustainable and accessible. The urban heat island effect is reduced, 
and fresh produce and cultured proteins are available at local shops. Suburban and 
rural communities have embraced cooperative farms growing bioengineered crops 
resistant to various adversities, enhancing local biodiversity and fostering shared 
responsibilities and benefits. Commercial farming has shifted toward sustainability, 
with genetically engineered crops achieving faster growth and higher yields, 
leading to reduced land use, shorter supply chains, and less reliance on imports. 
Food is grown closer to where it is consumed, leveraging advanced technologies to 
create a resilient, efficient, and eco-friendly food system.2. WHAT GLOBAL CHALLENGES WILL BIOENGINEERING BE ABLE TO ADDRESS?
THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESTHREATS
1 Genetic Privacy and Discrimination Risks  
A rise in bioengineering raises concerns over genetic 
data privacy. There’s a risk that insurers, employers, or 
third parties could misuse individuals’ genetic data, 
leading to new forms of discrimination.
2 Automation In Employment  
Integrating bioengineering in various industries 
may lead to significant job displacement. Traditional 
agriculture, construction, and health care roles could be 
transformed or made obsolete by automated processes.
3 Geopolitical Conflict  
The strategic advantage gained through bioengineering 
capabilities could become a source of global tension. 
Leading nations may exert influence over others, 
leading to new forms of dependency and inequalities.OPPORTUNITIES
1  Adapting to the Never-Retiring Workforce  
The increase in life expectancy will drive shifting career 
dynamics, allowing businesses to develop new career 
paths, flexible working conditions, and retirement plans 
that accommodate an aging but active workforce.
2  Bridging the Gap in Health Access  
Advancements in bioengineering offer unprecedented 
opportunities to address health inequities globally through 
more cost-effective production of pharmaceuticals.
3  Improved Food Access  
Synthetic biology revolutionizes global food strategy by 
boosting crop resilience, enhancing nutrition, producing 
sustainable ingredients, developing alternative proteins, 
and reducing waste, leading to more resilient food systems.
25© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 2. WHAT GLOBAL CHALLENGES WILL BIOENGINEERING BE ABLE TO ADDRESS?
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES26© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 2. WHAT GLOBAL CHALLENGES WILL BIOENGINEERING BE ABLE TO ADDRESS?
How can synthetic 
biology be used to solve 
previously unsolvable 
problems in your product 
R&D pipeline?How do you plan to 
manage intellectual 
property rights and 
protect innovations in the 
field of synthetic biology, 
and what challenges do 
you foresee in this area?What skills and talent 
do you need to leverage 
synthetic biology in your 
business effectively, 
and how do you plan to 
acquire them?How will your customers 
and the market respond 
to products or services 
developed through 
synthetic biology?What impacts do you 
anticipate synthetic 
biology will have on 
your supply chain and 
procurement strategies?1 4 2 5 3STRATEGIC QUESTIONS
RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES03
How will countries and businesses 
commit to decarbonization?
27© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 202428© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
How will countries and businesses  
commit to decarbonization?
Blue EconomyAn Expanded Environmental  
Support EcosystemInclusive, Multifaceted  
Environmental Protection
Sustainable Growth 
and InnovationGrid OptimizationEnvironmental 
Efforts StagnateHolistic Benefits  
Are RealizedOver-regulation 
and Complexity 
DominateGET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS
Exploitation and 
Environmental 
Degradation29© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Blue Economy 
The blue economy, which promotes the sustainable use of ocean resources, plays an increasingly 
important role in countries’ sustainability efforts by harnessing the ocean’s economic growth while 
ensuring marine environmental health. This approach includes sustainable fisheries, renewable 
marine energy, and eco-friendly tourism, all aimed at preserving ocean ecosystems and promoting 
economic resilience.
Sustainable Growth and Innovation 
Marine technology breakthroughs vastly improve sustainable fishing, ocean-based 
renewable energy efficiency (like wave and tidal power), and ocean cleanup 
efforts, significantly reducing marine pollution.
Concurrently, robust international agreements are instrumental in the effective 
management of marine resources. These agreements introduce strict regulations 
to prevent overfishing and protect marine habitats from destruction. Because of 
these combined efforts, the health of the marine ecosystem improves. Exploitation and Environmental Degradation
Inadequate global governance fuels overfishing, unregulated marine development, 
and pollution, drastically diminishing ocean resources.
Wealthier nations disproportionately deplete these resources, leaving smaller 
coastal communities to bear the brunt of environmental harm and resource scarcity.
Ignoring sustainable methods leads to a sharp decline in biodiversity, undermining 
the blue economy’s growth, affecting worldwide food security, and disrupting 
climate balance. These effects are most acutely felt by small coastal communities 
reliant on the ocean for survival.SCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 23. HOW WILL COUNTRIES AND BUSINESSES COMMIT TO DECARBONIZATION?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
30© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
An Expanded Environmental Support Ecosystem
Countries expand their environmental efforts beyond a narrow focus on renewable energy to include 
broader ecosystem support. This involves enhancing infrastructure such as power grids and EV 
charging networks, implementing environmental, social, and governance (ESG) policies, and bringing 
greater transparency to carbon trading schemes. The aim is to take a more holistic approach to 
sustaining healthy ecosystems while still continuing the transition toward clean energy.
Grid Optimization 
Energy grids have been upgraded through deployment of advanced energy 
storage systems, such as large-scale batteries and pumped hydro facilities. We 
now store excess renewable energy. There is widespread adoption of highly 
efficient electric heat pumps for heating and cooling to reduce energy use and 
curb emissions. New ESG policies include transparency for CO2 trading schemes.
Businesses supporting optimized grid initiatives benefit from reduced energy 
costs thanks to improved stability and more energy-efficient technologies. These 
businesses also tap into emerging renewable energy markets, creating new 
revenue streams. Those leading the transition to sustainable power grids have a 
first-mover advantage.Environmental Efforts Stagnate
Persistent power outages and insufficient electric vehicle infrastructure disrupt 
economic activities, causing a dip in productivity and risking job losses. Since 
ESG regulations vary across regions, compliance is difficult. This leads to higher 
operational expenses and hampered economic expansion. A lack of transparency 
in carbon trading markets breeds investor skepticism, obstructing the development 
of green finance. 3. HOW WILL COUNTRIES AND BUSINESSES COMMIT TO DECARBONIZATION?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
31© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Inclusive, Multifaceted Environmental Protection
The concept of environmental protection has evolved to become more inclusive. Countries and 
businesses now recognize that it encompasses efforts to mitigate climate change and initiatives for 
biodiversity conservation and the promotion of humane working conditions. This broader approach 
integrates ecological sustainability with social responsibility, reflecting a more holistic understanding 
of our interconnected world.
Holistic Benefits Are Realized 
Nations prioritize the conservation of diverse ecosystems, leading to increased 
ecotourism, research opportunities, and sustainable resource management. 
Responding to labor group advocacy, businesses adopt fair labor practices, 
including raising wages and prioritizing safer work environments.
Companies embrace comprehensive sustainability strategies that integrate 
ecological, social, and economic considerations, leading to significant reductions 
in resource waste and improved financial resilience. These strategies are effective 
because they strike a balance between environmental consciousness and business 
viability, aligning with consumer preferences for environmentally responsible 
goods and services.Over-regulation and Complexity Dominate
Expanded environmental protection efforts bring complex and often competing 
regulations to the forefront, and governments have to wrestle with noncompliance 
and enforcement challenges. Businesses face exorbitant costs navigating this 
convoluted regulatory landscape, stifling innovation and hindering economic 
growth. The high cost of transitioning to environmentally friendly legislation poses 
barriers to entry for smaller businesses, reducing market competition.
In striving to meet a multitude of environmental goals, overemphasis on specific 
areas like biodiversity conservation diverts finite resources from urgent climate 
mitigation needs, impeding overall sustainability progress. 3. HOW WILL COUNTRIES AND BUSINESSES COMMIT TO DECARBONIZATION?
THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESTHREATS
1 Compliance Complexity 
Diverse and changing ESG regulations across regions 
can complicate compliance efforts, increasing 
operational costs and reducing competitiveness.
2 Technological Obsolescence 
Rapid advancements in energy technologies could 
render existing products and services obsolete, 
posing a threat to businesses unable to innovate 
quickly.
3 Implementation Costs 
The costs associated with adopting comprehensive 
sustainability strategies could be significant, 
particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs).OPPORTUNITIES
1  Short-T erm Gains  
Businesses prioritizing short-term economic gains 
over sustainability may benefit from lower compliance 
and operational costs in the short term but could find 
themselves ill-prepared over the mid-term as new 
technologies and regulations begin to scale.
2  New Revenue Streams  
Companies in the energy storage, electric heat pumps, 
and renewable energy sectors could tap into new revenue 
streams as their technologies and services become 
increasingly in demand.
3  Comprehensive Sustainability  
Companies that adopt and integrate broad sustainability 
strategies can appeal to a wider customer base, reduce 
waste, and improve operational efficiencies.
32© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 3. HOW WILL COUNTRIES AND BUSINESSES COMMIT TO DECARBONIZATION?
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES33© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 3. HOW WILL COUNTRIES AND BUSINESSES COMMIT TO DECARBONIZATION?
How is your business 
leveraging technological 
advancements in 
marine technology to 
promote sustainable 
growth within the blue 
economy?What measures are in 
place to navigate the 
complexity of expanded 
environmental regulations 
without stifling 
innovation or economic 
performance?How is your business 
diversifying its operations 
or supply chains to ensure 
resilience and sustained 
growth?How is your business 
preparing to align with 
new ESG policies, and 
what investments are 
being made to upgrade or 
support the infrastructure 
for renewable energy and 
grid optimization?What strategies are 
in place to adapt 
to and comply with 
international marine 
resource management 
agreements, such as 
in your supply chain 
practices?1 4 2 5 3STRATEGIC QUESTIONS
RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES04
How will humans prioritize their 
work environments in the future, 
and what will these preferred 
workplaces look like?
34© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 202435© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
How will humans prioritize their work 
environments in the future, and what will these 
preferred workplaces look like?
Work Is Task-Dependent Purpose-Driven Locations
Decentralized Work 
CommunitiesSmart Workspaces 
Empower TalentAI Agents Manage 
LogisticsPersonalized 
Coworking EcosystemsDivision in  
Urban AreasGET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS
Reskilling for  
Task-Based WorkEnabled by Smart  
Workspaces and AI AgentsSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
36© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Work Is T ask-Dependent 
Companies emphasize skill-focused tasks over traditional role-based assignments. This approach opens up 
opportunities for both fixed-location and remote workers, breaking down previous barriers in talent pools. 
Consequently, employees have the flexibility to work from home or community-based locations.
Decentralized Work Communities
The social elements and team structures of traditional offices diminish in 
importance. Without defined roles anchoring them together, employees perform 
their individual tasks remotely. 
Workers split time between truly remote work and convening in smaller satellite 
workspaces when they want a sense of community. Employees enjoy the 
flexibility to simultaneously hold multiple “careers, ” contributing varied tasks to an 
ecosystem of employers rather than being siloed at any single organization. Reskilling for T ask-Based Work
Ensuring the right skills for each job is a priority. Sensitive to the high search 
costs for new talent, companies are interested in retaining and training existing 
employees to meet evolving task needs. Traditional offices are nimble learning 
centers focused on immersive training for current staff. 
This cultivated talent pipeline of cross-functional employees, versed in specific 
on-demand abilities, replaces siloed departments. Companies equip their 
workforce with precise capabilities rather than seeking elusive candidate fits. 4. HOW WILL HUMANS PRIORITIZE THEIR WORK ENVIRONMENTS IN THE FUTURE, AND WHAT WILL THESE PREFERRED WORKPLACES LOOK LIKE?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 24. HOW WILL HUMANS PRIORITIZE THEIR WORK ENVIRONMENTS IN THE FUTURE, AND WHAT WILL THESE PREFERRED WORKPLACES LOOK LIKE?
37© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Enabled by Smart Workspaces and AI Agents
Workflows are enabled by fluid, personalized environments that empower productivity with human 
and artificial partners working in concert. People are free to perform, augmented by supportive 
spaces that travel with them.
Smart Workspaces Empower T alent
Offices function as intelligent computing zones. Spatial computing and natural 
language processing enable embodied interaction. Employees’ tasks and projects 
surface on walls and tables as they enter a room. Workers can literally get a grasp 
on their work by manipulating 3D projections by hand. Voice commands replace 
typing for nimble modification.
Employees gain sensory proximity to their work. Previously abstract digital files 
are now tangible in augmented environments that both feel familiar and unleash 
workspace innovation.AI Agents Manage Logistics
Specialized AI agents handle distinct tasks. A product manager AI agent could 
aid market analysis, prioritize features, and develop business cases. Meanwhile, a 
developer agent would focus on automating code generation and detecting bugs.
Each person’s AI agent coordinates to remove logistical burdens. Christina’s 
assistant tracks that she prefers morning meetings. Jeff’s assistant knows he favors 
early afternoons. By sharing insights into their humans’ constraints, the assistants 
identify 11 a.m. as the optimal meeting time. Because the assistants dynamically 
adjust activities based on their human’s context, they enable new flexibility: Workers 
can perform efficiently wherever they happen to be.
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 24. HOW WILL HUMANS PRIORITIZE THEIR WORK ENVIRONMENTS IN THE FUTURE, AND WHAT WILL THESE PREFERRED WORKPLACES LOOK LIKE?
38© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Purpose-Driven Locations
Workers want transparency and a seat at the table to make company decisions. Labor unions 
and employees continue to push for greater autonomy and new benefit packages and locations. 
Companies join together to offer a complex of potential work environments, creating stability in some 
urban regions.
Personalized Coworking Ecosystems 
Employees have access to coworking ecosystems that cater to their lifestyles. 
For health buffs, wellness hubs provide gyms, cold plunges, and saunas. Parents 
join family-friendly sites with childcare and nursing spaces. Rather than isolated 
offices, companies cluster in amenity-rich locales to give workers choices.
Workers evaluate these full experience packages when considering job 
opportunities. Companies differentiate with tailored sites while still coming 
together in broader mixed-use developments. Competing businesses may not 
share ecosystems, but complementary industries do, recognizing the potential for 
expanded talent recruitment and retention.Division in Urban Areas
The urban centers of cities are becoming patchworks of utilitarian spaces that lack 
the vibrancy and interconnectedness of traditional urban life. As offices emptied 
out due to employee cynicism, businesses turned their properties into lab spaces, 
vertical farms, and storage. Socio-economic divides are deep, as these spaces do 
not address communal needs, only corporate interests. Once vibrant downtowns 
focus on efficiency and production versus community connection. Manufacturers 
are using the empty spaces to fill warehouses and production sites closer to their 
consumers. Malls and other shopping facilities that moved out of downtown now 
compete with these manufacturing centers.
THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESTHREATS
1 Ethical Challenges with AI Integration  
Integrating AI agents into the workforce introduces 
cultural and ethical challenges, including dependency 
on technology, potential job displacement concerns, and 
ethical considerations around AI decision-making.
2 Overdependence on T echnology  
Heavy reliance on smart workspaces and AI for operational 
efficiency could lead to overdependence on technology, 
making companies vulnerable to tech failures, outages, or 
obsolescence.
3 Fraud Risk  
As decentralized work scales alongside increasingly 
sophisticated AI, various forms of deepfakes could 
present a security risk to remote working environments, 
necessitating businesses to improve their cybersecurity 
preparedness.OPPORTUNITIES
1  T alent Ecosystem Development  
Companies and industries can develop talent ecosystems 
that foster cross-pollination of skills and ideas by creating 
networks of complementary businesses and coworking 
spaces that enhance talent satisfaction and retention.
2  Urban Redevelopment and Repurposing  
Municipalities and businesses will need advice on 
repurposing urban spaces that have lost their traditional 
vibrancy due to shifts in work patterns.
3  Purpose-Driven Workspace Solutions  
Companies may create purpose-driven locations and  
co-working ecosystems that align with their employees’ 
values and lifestyle preferences. This could involve strategic 
planning for the use of corporate real estate to support 
community engagement, wellness, and collaboration.
39© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 4. HOW WILL HUMANS PRIORITIZE THEIR WORK ENVIRONMENTS IN THE FUTURE, AND WHAT WILL THESE PREFERRED WORKPLACES LOOK LIKE?
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES40© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.How can we develop a 
continuous learning and 
development ecosystem 
to ensure our workforce 
remains adaptable and 
skilled for future tasks?How can we use new and 
emerging technologies 
to foster innovation 
and creativity in a 
predominantly remote or 
hybrid workforce?How can we leverage 
data and analytics 
to improve remote 
work productivity and 
employee engagement 
while respecting privacy 
and autonomy?What do we need to 
reevaluate or adjust 
in order to remain 
competitive in attracting 
and retaining top talent 
as the workspace 
evolves?In what ways can 
we leverage smart 
workspaces and AI 
agents to enhance 
productivity without 
compromising security, 
privacy, and employee 
well-being?1 4 2 5 3EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 4. HOW WILL HUMANS PRIORITIZE THEIR WORK ENVIRONMENTS IN THE FUTURE, AND WHAT WILL THESE PREFERRED WORKPLACES LOOK LIKE?
STRATEGIC QUESTIONS
RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES05
In the context of increasing 
protectionism and 
geopolitical tensions, what is 
the future of the global chip 
manufacturing industry?
41© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 202442© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
In the context of increasing protectionism and 
geopolitical tensions, what is the future of the 
global chip manufacturing industry?
Chip Imports and Exports Are 
Increasingly RestrictedProtectionist Policies  
Result in a Skills GapThe Cost of Data  
Centers Rise
The US Dominates China RalliesIn-House Production 
and Training Ramp UpOpen Borders for 
Chip Industry GrowthTech Companies as 
New Energy ProvidersThe End User PaysGET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILS GET THE DETAILSSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
43© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Chip Imports and Exports Are Increasingly Restricted 
The industry continues its pivot toward strategic autonomy. Defensively, the US is onshoring 
chip production to prevent supply chain disruptions like those during the Covid semiconductor 
shortage. Offensively, the US is strategically preventing exports to get a leg up in the AI race 
against China. Meanwhile, independent companies, like OpenAI, want to create new types of 
chips that won’t run afoul of government regulations.
The US Dominates 
The US tightens enforcement of chip exports to prevent adversaries from 
attaining US chips and manufacturing equipment. US allies are required to do 
the same. Technologies like geotracking prevent leaks in export controls, thereby 
more effectively curbing US technologies from getting to China and Russia. This 
challenges those countries’ reliance on foreign chips, pressuring their big tech to 
innovate with less sophisticated resources.
Since China is a major player in the consumer electronics market, the restrictions 
lead to higher prices and limited availability of various consumer goods worldwide.China Rallies
US-led export controls do not prevent China and other adversaries from acquiring 
powerful chips from companies like Nvidia. Black markets emerge for such chips, 
and IP espionage efforts ramp up. With these powerful chips, China’s AI rivals US 
AI companies in capabilities. There is a bifurcation of “Eastern AI” and “Western AI. ”
China also continues to dominate global legacy chip production. Legacy chips 
underpin everything from microwaves to military weapons systems. China boxes 
out foreign competitors through dumping, rendering the US dependent on China, 
at least for legacy chips.5. IN THE CONTEXT OF INCREASING PROTECTIONISM AND GEOPOLITICAL TENSIONS, WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF THE GLOBAL CHIP MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
44© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
Protectionist Policies Result in a Skills Gap 
The expertise required for chip design and production, previously outsourced affordably, is now 
lacking domestically. As a result, manufacturing chips domestically has become a costly endeavor. 
This has sparked intense competition among companies to attract and acquire talent specialized 
in chip design and manufacturing.
In-House Production and Training Ramp Up 
Semiconductor companies are bringing chip production in-house and cultivating 
essential skills internally. They also in-source skills training by reaching out to high 
school students, offering a direct path into the burgeoning US chip industry. This 
new model positions the semiconductor sector as a realm of new blue-collar 
workers. By providing in-house training and certification, these companies offer 
young talent a debt-free alternative to college education, enabling them to start 
earning immediately while learning specialized skills.Open Borders for Chip Industry Growth
Progress in opening new fabrication plants, funded by the US Chips Act, has 
been slower than anticipated. The fabs’ hosts, including cities in Texas, Ohio, and 
Florida, worry about becoming modern equivalents of Detroit—where initial high 
investments won’t yield long-term benefits.
States traditionally resistant to open immigration policies are shifting their stance, 
and the US is responding with expedited visas for skilled workers, particularly 
from Taiwan, leading to a notable brain drain in the island nation and increased 
tensions with China.5. IN THE CONTEXT OF INCREASING PROTECTIONISM AND GEOPOLITICAL TENSIONS, WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF THE GLOBAL CHIP MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY?
NEXT SCENARIO   |   THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESSCENARIO 1 SCENARIO 2
45© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNCERTAINTIESEXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024
The Cost of Data Centers Rise 
As AI-driven workloads intensify, the operational costs of data centers are escalating. The 
increased demand for processing power and energy to support complex AI tasks significantly 
drives up the expenses associated with maintaining and running these facilities.
T ech Companies as New Energy Providers 
Tech companies are venturing into producing alternative, cost-effective energy 
sources like small modular reactors and geothermal power. This move is not just 
about affordability; it represents a leap in overcoming long-standing negative 
perceptions of nuclear energy and its historical barriers of high costs and lengthy 
construction times.
The implications are profound, and not just for the energy sector: Apartment 
buildings will be powered, cooled, and lit efficiently by Amazon, and entire 
neighborhoods receive clean, cost-effective energy from Google or Microsoft.The End User Pays
Data center efficiency advancements have reached a plateau, compelling the 
industry to focus on expansion to meet increasing workload demands. 
Providers can try to stay in densely populated areas that offer skilled labor 
availability and robust fiber networks, but they’ll have to deal with increasing 
restrictions amid concerns that data centers exacerbate energy shortages. Or 
they could venture into less ideal locations lacking infrastructure and requiring 
substantial capital investment. Either option presents an increased cost of digital 
services for consumers and a significant ripple effect across the economy.5. IN THE CONTEXT OF INCREASING PROTECTIONISM AND GEOPOLITICAL TENSIONS, WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF THE GLOBAL CHIP MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY?
THREATS & OPPORTUNITITES   |   STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIESTHREATS
1 Big tech gets bolder  
Utilities could become disintermediated by tech 
companies, who find a competitive advantage in 
bundling energy with other services.
2 Regulatory disruption  
Changes in trade policies and regulations in 
key markets could affect access to critical chip 
technologies and materials.
3 T ech transfer  
Intellectual property and sensitive technology 
become entangled in technology transfer 
regulations, especially in countries involved in 
geopolitical tensions.OPPORTUNITIES
1  Cultivate partner and supplier relationships   
Businesses will need to develop new partners, 
manufacturers, and markets so they have first mover 
advantage if geopolitical tensions rise unchecked, 
impacting access to key components and markets.
2  Get local  
Companies may Invest in local or regional production 
capabilities to reduce dependence on global markets, 
increasing customization capabilities and time to market.
3  Fund alternatives   
Technology firms must invest more in research and 
development to create more advanced or alternative chip 
technologies that address the emerging challenges.
46© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 5. IN THE CONTEXT OF INCREASING PROTECTIONISM AND GEOPOLITICAL TENSIONS, WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF THE GLOBAL CHIP MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY?
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
STRATEGIC QUESTIONS   |   RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES47© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2024 5. IN THE CONTEXT OF INCREASING PROTECTIONISM AND GEOPOLITICAL TENSIONS, WHAT IS THE FUTURE OF THE GLOBAL CHIP MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY?
How will geopolitical 
tensions affect the cost 
of chips, and how can 
you mitigate these cost 
increases? 
What financial cushions 
can be put in place to 
absorb potential shocks?Considering the current 
and potential future 
geopolitical landscape, 
how should you adjust 
our long-term strategic 
positioning to ensure 
sustainability and 
growth?How do geopolitical 
tensions affect 
your commitment 
to environmental 
sustainability and ethical 
sourcing, especially 
concerning rare materials 
used in chip production?How must you enhance 
your cybersecurity 
measures to protect 
against potential 
threats exacerbated by 
geopolitical tensions, 
especially in critical 
infrastructure related to 
chip manufacturing and 
distribution?Do you have a robust 
crisis management plan 
that includes scenarios 
involving escalated 
geopolitical tensions 
affecting chip supply?1 4 2 5 3STRATEGIC QUESTIONS
RETURN TO UNCERTAINTIES2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
50© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
52 Y our Guide to the Future of AI
53 T op Headlines
54 State of Play
56 Key Events
59 Likely Near T erm Developments
60 Why Artificial Intelligence  
Trends Matter to Y our 
Organization
62 When Will Artificial 
Intelligence Trends Impact Y our 
Organization?
64 Opportunities and Threats
65 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
66 Central Themes
69 Ones T o Watch
70 Important T erms
73 Models, T echniques,  
and Research
74 What is an AI model? 
76 Purpose-Built Models
76 LLMs Are Getting Bigger  
and More Expensive84 Tools to Combat Broadly  
Malicious AI Behavior
85 Does AI infringe on privacy?  
How should we think about 
customer data and AI 
applications?
85 Increased Used of Ambient 
Surveillance
85 Worker Surveillance
85 School Surveillance
87 Is there a feasible solution to bias?
87 Addressing Political Bias 
88 Addressing Race and Gender Bias 
89 What security issues should we 
prepare for?
89 Cyberthreats
89 Adversarial Attacks
90 Data Poisoning: A Double-Edged 
Sword
90 AI Lowers the Barrier to 
Misinformation
91 Privacy Risks in Behavioral 
Biometrics
92 What does AI have to do with ESG? 92 New Architectures to Make AI 
Workloads More Efficient
93 A Nuclear Renaissance for AI 
Workloads
93 Environmental AI 
94 Policy and Regulations
95 How does geopolitics factor into 
the development of AI, and is there 
really a new cold war?
95 AI Nationalism
96 The AI-Driven Chip War
97 Could AI be involved in—or 
cause—a hot war?
97 Autonomous Weapons Policies
97 Simulating Warfare
97 AI Used to Guide Military Strikes
98 Automated Target Recognition
98 Automating Offensive Attacks 
Using AI
98 AI-Assisted Situational Awareness 
98 Algorithmic Warfighting
99 Mandating Ethics Guidelines for 
Tech Contractors100 Regional Approaches
101 Countries try to regulate AI,  
but plans diverge
102 How is the US specifically 
regulating AI?
102 A Patchwork Approach
104 Conflicting Views About 
Institutional Roles
104 Public-Private Partnerships
105 National Security
106 What is China doing?
106 China’s Expanding Market
106 China’s Big Tech
107 Deepening International Ties 
109 What is Europe doing?
111 What is the Middle East doing?
113 T alent
114 Where and how do I get AI talent?
114 Demand for AI-related Skills 
Increases Across Sectors
114 AI Brain Drain from Academia
115 How will AI change the nature  
of work?76 LLMS as Operating Systems
78 Should we go open-source or 
proprietary?
78 Open-Source LLMs for  
Commercial Use 
79 Safety, Ethics & Society
80 Is AI really a black box?
80 Explainable AI (XAI)
80 AI Intentionally Hiding Data
81 How do we ensure trust? 
81 AI Alignment Goes Mainstream
81 Indexing Trust
82 Synthesizing Trust
83 Are there tools to make AI ethical?
83 Deepfake Detectors
83 Tools for Identifying AI-Generated 
Writing    
83 Tools for Detecting Copyright 
Violations in AI Outputs 
83 Tools for Exposing Deepfakes
84 Tools to Thwart Recognition 
Systems TECH
51© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
115 Gains and Pains 
115 Status Shifts
116 Agents Will Increasingly Perform 
Tasks on Our Behalf
117 Emerging Capabilities
118 Can AI reason? And how close are 
we really to AGI and ASI?
118 AI Breakthroughs in Mathematics
119 AI Persuasion
119 Prediction and Prescience Into Our 
Human Lives
119 Detecting Emotion
120 Neuro-symbolic AI
121 Is the future of AI cloud, edge, or 
on-device?
121 Cloud Neutrality
121 Cloud Strain From AI Boom
121 AI Breathes Life Into Legacy 
Systems 
122 Optimizing AI to Run at the Edge
122 Small Language Models for AI at the 
Edge131 How is AI being used in pharma?
132 Protein Folding
132 AI-First Drug Development
132 Generative Antibody Design
133 How is AI being used in health 
care? 
133 AI to Improve Patient Outcomes
133 AI-Assisted Diagnosis and Clinical 
Decision-Making
133 Anomaly Detection in Medical 
Imaging
134 AI-powered movement
134 Medical Deepfakes
134 Healthcare-Specific LLMs
135 In-Silico Trials
135 AI for Mental Health
136 How is AI being used in science? 
136 AI-Driven Hypotheses
136 AI-Driven Experimentation
137 AI-Powered Analysis and 
Interpretation
137 AI and the Replication Crisis137 NLP Algorithms Detect Virus 
Mutations
138 AI to Speed Up New Materials 
Development
139 How is AI being used in finance?
139 Mitigating Fraud
139 Predicting Financial Risk
140 Customized Portfolios
140 Growing Concern About Centralized 
Data Sets 
141 How is AI being used in insurance?
141 Predicting Workplace Injuries
141 The Connected Worker
141 Improving Damage Assessment
141 Consumer-Facing Robo-Advisers
141 AI Claims Processing 
142 Liability Insurance for AI
143 Creativity and Design
144 How are people using AI to be more 
creative?
144 GAN-Assisted Creativity
144 Neural Rendering145 Generating Virtual Environments 
From Short Videos
145 AI Democratizes Music Production 
145 Automatic Ambient Noise Dubbing
146 Generating Music From Text 
147 How is AI disrupting the creative 
industry?
147 AI-Assisted Invention
147 New Business Models
148 Legal Battles Between Writers  
and AI
149 Scenarios
150 Scenario: The Deepfake Mafia
151 Scenario: TrailMate SLM
152 Scenario: Centralized AI Belt and 
Road Infrastructure Crumbles
153 Scenario: Tabby the Tiger: 
Nurturing Curiosity Through AI 
Friendship
154 Scenario: What If “Thought-to-3D” 
Was an AI Modality?
155 Authors
158 Selected Sources122 On-Device AI 
123 Wearable AI
124 Why should we pay attention to 
emerging capabilities that aren’t 
yet fully developed?
124 Vector Databases
124 Vertical Integration From Hardware 
to LLMs
126 Industries
128 How is AI being used in HR?
128 Autonomous Talent Acquisition
128 Customer and Personnel 
Recognition Systems 
128 Benefits Selection and 
Management
129 How is AI being used in 
marketing? 
129 AI Shifts Search 
129 Dynamic Engagement Through 
Deep Personalization
129 AI-Assisted Campaigns
130 Anecdotal Observations, Now 
Usable Marketing DataTECH
For two decades, our commitment at Future Today Insti-
tute to understanding and leveraging artificial intelli-
gence has been unwavering—even as general excitement 
about AI has wavered considerably. We’ve watched in-
terest ebb and flow across industries, among executive 
leadership and boards of directors, and with investors, 
legislators, and academia. 
Today, we’re at a crucial inflection point in AI’s develop-
mental journey. This moment isn’t marked by a single 
technological breakthrough but rather by a development 
that at first may seem less intuitive. What changed in the 
past year is our perception of what AI is and how it will 
change everyday life. AI models are now accessible to con-
sumers and businesses alike, so their value can be im-
mediately understood. What’s followed: investment, new 
partnerships, and the grand expansion of value networks.This rapid escalation in activity has left leaders feeling 
caught off guard, prompting an urgent need for strategic 
decision-making. In our conversations with clients and 
partners, a common theme has emerged: Leaders, under-
standably concerned about missing out on the next wave 
of innovation, need clarity about a complex area of tech-
nology that will continue to evolve for many years to come.
Recognizing this, we’ve reimagined our approach for 
the AI section of our 2024 Tech Trends report. By actively 
listening to leaders and experts in our network, we’ve 
curated the most common questions we’re hearing from 
our clients and grouped our AI trends accordingly. Our 
goal is to guide leaders through a thoughtful exploration 
of these questions, enabling a deeper understanding of 
the implications.
While we don’t claim to hold all the answers—every orga-
nization’s journey with AI will be somewhat unique—what 
we do offer is a foundation of extensive research and in-
sightful, strategic analysis. You will encounter questions 
that mirror your own, as well as those you may not have 
considered but will likely confront in the coming year. Our aim is to equip you with the insights necessary to navi-
gate the upcoming impacts on your organization.
We are confident that this report will serve as an invalu-
able tool for leaders looking to identify strategic oppor-
tunities, achieve competitive advantages, and enhance 
organizational resilience in the foreseeable future.
Welcome to your guide on the future of AI. 
Amy Webb
Chief Executive Officer
Sam Jordan
Manager and Advanced Computing Practice LeadYOUR GUIDE TO THE FUTURE OF AI
52© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
This year, the AI landscape 
could undergo a 
significant consolidation. 
Strategic investments, 
groundbreaking 
innovations, and 
regulatory maneuvers 
will further empower a 
select group of power 
brokers, intensifying the 
competitive dynamics and 
shaping the trajectory of 
global AI dominance.
53© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
01
02
03
04
05
06OpenAI Seeks $7 Trillion Investment
OpenAI’s Sam Altman wants to revamp the semiconductor sector with trillions in investment, targeting 
global chip capacity to boost AI growth, engaging with investors like the United Arab Emirates.
Mainstream Multimodality  
For the first time, the public can interact with advanced multimodal AI models capable of understanding 
and generating various media types, including images and videos. This innovation is akin to human 
learning processes, enabling AI to learn from visual and auditory information, not just text—just like us.
Nvidia GPUs in High Demand for AI Training  
The rush to acquire Nvidia’s powerful GPUs for AI model training has intensified, as everyone from tech giants 
to startups seeks the computational horsepower these units offer for advanced machine learning tasks.
Open-Source AI Uprising   
Meta sparked an open-source large language model movement by releasing the weights for LLaMA, 
enabling researchers to freely build off the model, fine-tune it, and create customized versions.
US Tightens Grip on AI  
The US intensifies its stance on AI by restricting access to crucial enabling technologies like semiconductors. 
In a strategic move, the US also pressures allies to implement similar restrictions against China and Russia.
EU AI Act Sets New Global Standard    
The EU introduces the first-ever comprehensive AI regulation and a European AI Office, aiming to ensure 
safety and respect for fundamental rights, while encouraging innovation and investment in AI technologies 
across Europe. Yet, concerns arise about stifling innovation and the high costs for businesses to comply.TECHSTATE 
OF PLAYThe past year marked a watershed moment for artificial intelligence. Central 
to this transformation are the leaps in large language models (LLMs) and their 
practical applications, which have not only advanced the frontiers of AI but have 
also catalyzed a broader integration of AI technologies into everyday life. AI prom-
ises revolutionary improvements in health care and life sciences: Now that we’ve 
cracked the code on protein structures, an unimaginable number of new thera-
peutics are on the horizon, along with alternatives to address climate change. In 
the coming year, AI’s reach will extend to people, pets, and objects alike, paving 
the way for a very near-future in which digital assistants, automated systems, 
and spatial awareness are seamless, ubiquitous, and invisible. In parallel, the 
advancements in robotics, both hard and soft, are pushing the boundaries of 
automation and human-machine interaction.
At the same time, AI’s energy demands pose a paradox, offering climate solu-
tions but also contributing to carbon emissions, a concern in energy-con-
strained areas. The persistent talent gap in AI, particularly in data science, lim-
its its application in critical sectors like agriculture and health care. Political 
engagement with AI is growing, which is good, but the end result has been a 
slew of competing policies. Regulatory compliance and enforcement remains a 
challenge, since depending on the country’s position, they promise to both ac-
celerate and curtail the deployment of AI systems. The unequal distribution of AI 
advancements risks deepening global inequalities, with the global south facing 
significant disadvantages. Amid all these developments is the persistent geopo-
litical tensions between China and the West.
For many, generative AI (genAI) is the first entry point into this new reality, which 
explains the explosive growth we’ve seen in the past year. Our analysis reveals a AI embeds into everything, 
transforming how we 
interface with computers 
while researchers work to 
make AI more capable and 
efficient. This sprint toward 
progress unfolds amid rising 
geopolitical tensions, as 
dominance of these strategic 
technologies reshapes 
global power dynamics.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
54STATE 
OF PLAYsurge in experimentation with genAI tools across various sectors, indicating a 
transformative shift toward embracing AI’s potential to innovate and streamline 
operations. This widespread interest in genAI spans a broad spectrum of stake-
holders, from business leaders to frontline workers, highlighting just how perva-
sive the first generation of tools has become.
But here’s the thing: GenAI isn’t all of AI. Often, when people talk about “AI” what 
they really mean is “automation.” Artificial intelligence is an umbrella term that 
encompasses many different techniques, models, and frameworks that make up 
the field. AI’s aim is to create intelligent machines that can sense, reason, act, 
and adapt like humans do, or in ways that go beyond our capabilities. Today, cars 
can park themselves, while emerging platforms are capable of having seemingly 
natural conversations. Now, AI is evolving to have beyond-human capabilities. 
It has invented new drugs, predicted the real-time movement of wildfires, and 
autonomously designed machine parts.
Developing AI requires extraordinary resources, which is why consolidation 
among the tech giants is tightening. The biggest names in AI––OpenAI, Deep-
Mind, Anthropic––are increasingly hitched to the world’s biggest hyperscalers 
and cloud providers (Microsoft, Google, Amazon). Venture capital and private eq-
uity are still flooding into startups and mature companies alike, and now, sover-
eign wealth funds have a seat at the table. 
AI is magical, but it isn’t magic. As long as expectations are tempered, this 
should be an era of significant innovation, experimentation, and growth, espe-
cially as AI propels growth in other areas of science and technology. We are cau-
tiously optimistic about what’s on the horizon.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
5556© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.KEY EVENTSTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
JANUARY 12, 2023
AI Breakthrough in Lung Cancer 
Detection
A joint effort by MIT and Mass 
General Hospital yields a significant 
advancement in lung cancer 
prognosis with the creation of a deep-
learning model that assesses lung 
cancer risk from CT scans, potentially 
enhancing early detection and saving 
numerous lives.
JANUARY 26, 2023
High-Fidelity Music from T ext
Google Research’s MusicLM 
introduces a transformative approach 
to generating detailed music 
from text descriptions, achieving 
unprecedented audio quality and text 
adherence in the field.
FEBRUARY 6, 2023
Google Unveils Bard
Google introduces Bard, an innovative 
AI chatbot powered by its language 
model LaMDA, as a response to 
ChatGPT.FEBRUARY 7, 2023
Bing Adopts ChatGPT
Microsoft revolutionizes its Bing search 
engine and Edge browser with the 
integration of OpenAI technology.
FEBRUARY 21, 2023
AWS and Hugging Face Collaboration
AWS teams up with Hugging Face to 
streamline AI projects on Amazon’s 
cloud, simplifying the deployment of AI 
applications.
FEBRUARY 21, 2023
Real Fusion’s Photographic 
Breakthrough
Oxford researchers showcase Real 
Fusion, a cutting-edge AI that can 
reconstruct a complete 360-degree 
photographic model from just one image.FEBRUARY 24, 2023
Meta introduces LLaMa
The compact yet advanced 65-billion 
parameter language model is open-
sourced and free for research and 
commercial use. 
MARCH 1, 2023
OpenAI Expands Developer T ools
OpenAI launches ChatGPT and 
Whisper APIs, providing developers 
with advanced language processing 
and speech-to-text capabilities 
beyond basic chat functions.
MARCH 14, 2023  
Google Introduces AI in Workspace  
Google’s launch of assistive AI 
features in Workspace started with 
AI-powered writing tools in Docs and 
Gmail for trusted testers.57© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.KEY EVENTSTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
MARCH 21, 2023  
Adobe Unveils Firefly  
This new generative AI suite is 
designed to help users at all skill 
levels create high-quality images and 
text effects.
MARCH 28, 2023  
Khan Academy Launches Khanmigo 
Khan Academy launch of the 
Khanmigo AI platform integrates 
virtual bots as counselors, curriculum 
designers, and teaching assistants.
AUGUST 15, 2023  
Google Launches Search 
Generative Experience 
Google introduces genAI into search 
queries, automatically generating 
summaries.SEPTEMBER 21, 2023  
Microsoft Unveils Co-pilots 
Microsoft’s AI-powered 365 Copilot 
and GitHub’s CopilotX offers enhanced 
assistance by integrating web context, 
work data, and real-time PC activities, 
prioritizing privacy and security.
SEPTEMBER 21, 2023  
Y ouTube Debuts AI Editing App 
The new app, YouTube Create, makes it 
easy to trim videos, slow down the pace, 
or add audio.
OCTOBER 25, 2023  
Amazon Introduces AI Image 
Generation 
Amazon rollout of AI-powered image 
generation capabilities through 
Amazon Ads in beta aims to enhance 
ad experiences by enabling brands to 
create lifestyle imagery that boosts ad 
performance.NOVEMBER 4, 2023  
Elon Musk’s xAI Debuts Grok 
Inspired by the “Hitchhiker’s Guide to 
the Galaxy,” Grok answers questions 
with wit and provides real-time 
world knowledge via the X platform, 
distinguishing itself by addressing 
inquiries often declined by other AIs.
NOVEMBER 14, 2023  
Google Announces AI Genesis
AI Genesis features the Gemini 
large language model in three 
sizes: Gemini Ultra for extensive 
capabilities, Gemini Pro for broad 
task applications, and Gemini Nano 
optimized for specific tasks and 
mobile use.
NOVEMBER 17-22, 2023
OpenAI’s Turbulent Week 
After a tumultuous five days marked 
by his ouster and subsequent 
reinstatement, Sam Altman resumes 
his role as CEO of OpenAI, buoyed 
by a concerted effort from allies, 
employees, and investors.58© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.KEY EVENTSTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
NOVEMBER 21, 2023  
StabilityAI Introduces Stable Video Diffusion  
StabilityAI’s inaugural foundation model for 
generative video builds on the technology of its 
image model, Stable Diffusion.
NOVEMBER 28, 2023  
Pika Debuts AI Video Editing App 
The app includes a new suite of videography 
tools with a generative AI model that 
edits videos in diverse styles such as “3D 
animation,” “anime,” and “cinematic.“
NOVEMBER 29, 2023  
DeepMind Predicts Novel Material Structures 
Google DeepMind’s researchers have leveraged 
AI to accurately predict the structures of 
more than 2 million new materials, offering 
significant implications for renewable energy 
and computing sectors.DECEMBER 5, 2023  
AI Alliance for Responsible Innovation Forms 
The AI Alliance for Responsible Innovation, 
including IBM, Meta, and 50 other organizations, 
launches as a global consortium aimed at 
promoting open, safe, and responsible AI 
development and adoption.
DECEMBER 6, 2023  
Google’s Gemini Surpasses GPT-4 
Google’s next-generation AI model 
outperformance of OpenAI’s GPT-4 set a new 
standard in AI capabilities.
DECEMBER 9, 2023  
EU Finalizes AI Act 
The European Union achieved a landmark 
agreement with the Artificial Intelligence Act, 
introducing binding rules and standards for 
developing AI more responsibly.DECEMBER 13, 2023  
Axel Springer Partners with OpenAI 
The German media titan’s  partnership 
lets OpenAI use Politico and Business 
Insider articles for AI training, while those 
news platforms get to employ ChatGPT for 
summarizing news, marking a significant 
yet controversial collaboration in the news 
industry’s quest for innovation and survival.
DECEMBER 14, 2023  
DeepMind’s FunSearch Breaks Boundaries 
The tool has successfully solved complex 
issues, proving AI’s ability to surpass the 
limitations of its training data in large 
language models (LLMs).
DECEMBER 14, 2023  
DeepMind Solves the Unsolvable with AI 
DeepMind’s use of an LLM to crack an 
“unsolvable” math problem marks a 
historic achievement, as detailed in Nature, 
showcasing the model’s capacity to uncover 
new, verifiable knowledge on a longstanding 
scientific challenge.59© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTSTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
GENERAL
Commoditization of General Purpose Models 
In the near future, expect the commoditization of 
general purpose models. LLMs are becoming widely 
accessible and integral to app development. As 
these models become ubiquitous and cost-effec-
tive, akin to cloud services, their adoption will stan-
dardize across industries, diminishing their role as 
a competitive differentiator.
Large Reasoning Model
Vertically integrated solutions will garner a higher 
transactional value. Some companies will win by 
providing “a refined/value-added LLM product” to 
the end consumer and meeting the customer in 
desired distribution channels, such as LLMs for 
health care, legal, finance, and architecture.
Adoption of Natural Language Interfaces 
The evolution toward natural language interfaces 
will soon diminish the reliance on traditional graph-
ic user interfaces. This shift will enable more intu-
itive interactions with computers, using everyday 
language. This transition may also influence device 
form factors, potentially leading to an increase in 
wearables and the development of AI-specific devic-
es and operating systems centered around LLMs.AUTOMATION 
AI Assistants Transform Coding Landscape
AI coding assistants, such as GitHub’s Copilot 
and Meta’s Code Llama, are transforming software 
development with advanced autocomplete func-
tions and innovative debugging tools, offering both 
premium and free solutions to enhance coding 
efficiency and creativity. Expect to see more im-
provements to these tools and more tools to launch 
in this space. 
AI Integration in Health Care and Life Sciences 
Generative AI will lead to breakthroughs in pro-
teins, antibodies, and drugs. Specialized models 
will continue to accelerate discovery in biology and 
chemistry, sparking more practical applications 
and boosting investment.REGULATION AND GEOPOLITICS 
US Strategy on AI and China Relations 
The US is expected to intensify efforts to get allies 
to limit their collaborations with China in AI de-
velopment, following President Biden’s enhanced 
export restrictions on semiconductors. With the 
Netherlands aligning with US requests, further 
demands on allies to adopt similar stances aim to 
curb China’s AI advancements.
Europe Begins Regulating AI
The European Commission will open its European 
AI Office, which will oversee the development and 
use of safe artificial intelligence (within Europe, at 
least) and assist with the implementation of the AI 
Act. The office will enforce general purpose AI rules, 
monitor compliance, and attempt to become a hub 
for international cooperation on AI governance .
Challenges in US Chip Manufacturing Expansion 
The US moves to onshore chip fabrication will expe-
rience growing pains associated with higher labor 
costs compared to Taiwan. This shift may lead to 
increased expenses in constructing fabs and pro-
ducing domestically made chips, surpassing initial 
estimates outlined in the CHIPS Act.ENTERPRISE 
T alent Shift in AI Industry 
Expect a significant talent crunch as top innova-
tors depart major tech giants like Google, OpenAI, 
and Meta to launch their own ventures, ranging 
from conversational agents to AI-first biotech 
firms, signaling a broad diversification and special-
ization within the AI sector.
Consolidation in 2024 
Consolidation will persist this year, building on 
moves like Microsoft’s 2023 increased investment 
in OpenAI for Bing, aimed at capturing market share 
from Google search. Similar strategies by major 
tech companies are anticipated throughout 2024.
Increased Enterprise Adoption of AI 
The current macroeconomic environment is driving 
leaders to view AI as essential for growth, antici-
pating increased enterprise adoption despite the 
potential for making some job categories obsolete.60© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WHY ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Future Today Institute believes AI is a force multiplier on technological progress because it is an en-
abler of other technologies and powers the evolution of business, government, and society. But new 
large language model capabilities deeply concern some in professional and creative services. Models 
can now reason about concepts in text, not just perform pattern matching. They display forms of com-
mon sense and analogy—tasks once seen as uniquely human. And they apply these reasoning abilities 
across modalities—text, image, video, and more. Most alarming to some is that models seem to en-
gage in recursive self-improvement when given the right training. They don’t just learn a static set of 
parameters. They learn how to learn better, becoming moving targets.
Since publishing our first Tech Trends report 17 years ago, we have included and expanded our cover -
age on artificial intelligence. What began as several pages of insights is now a dedicated, stand-alone 
report with more than 100 trends to monitor. AI is already transforming most economic sectors, but we 
anticipate deeper impacts this year across insurance, finance, entertainment, health care, biotechnol-
ogy, and cloud computing. Global T ech  
Rivalry
The race for AI supremacy 
is intensifying geopolitical 
tensions, notably 
between the US and 
China. Businesses must 
navigate a landscape 
where technology and 
national security are 
increasingly intertwined, 
affecting international 
supply chains, market 
access, and regulatory 
compliance. Companies 
specializing in AI and 
related technologies 
might face stricter export 
controls, requiring them 
to adjust strategies for 
product development and 
global expansion.Supply Chain 
Diversification and 
Onshoring
As tensions escalate, 
particularly in the 
semiconductor industry, 
businesses will need to 
diversify their supply 
chains to mitigate risks. 
The bifurcation in the 
AI chip market might 
compel companies to 
innovate independently 
or bring supply chains in-
house, potentially leading 
to increased costs.Business Impacts61© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WHY ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Strategic T alent 
Acquisition
Companies must innovate 
in talent acquisition and 
retention strategies to 
compete for scarce AI 
expertise, particularly 
against tech giants. This 
may include offering 
competitive salaries, 
benefits, and unique work 
environments, as well as 
investing in employee 
development and internal 
AI training programs to 
build talent in-house.Custom, Fit-for-
Purpose LLMs
Organizations that opt 
for custom AI models 
over general-purpose 
ones can achieve greater 
alignment with specific 
business objectives. This 
differentiation can lead to 
competitive advantages 
in operational efficiency, 
customer insights, and 
product innovation. Adversarial AI 
Preparedness
The susceptibility of AI 
systems to adversarial 
attacks calls for 
robust testing and 
defense mechanisms. 
Companies specializing 
in AI security services 
could see increased 
demand as businesses 
seek to protect their 
AI investments from 
manipulation and 
exploitation.Model 
Commodification
Open-source language 
models with commercial 
licensing, such as 
Databricks’ Dolly, could 
disrupt the market by 
offering high-quality 
capabilities at a 
fraction of the cost. This 
commodification poses 
an existential threat to 
proprietary models from 
big tech companies.Defense Sector 
Innovation
Updated Department 
of Defense policies on 
autonomous weapons 
and the use of AI in 
military strategies signal 
growing opportunities 
for businesses in 
the defense sector. 
Companies developing 
AI technologies could 
find new applications in 
warfare, surveillance, and 
security, but also face 
ethical and regulatory 
scrutiny.Strategic International 
Collaborations
Countries like China 
and the UAE are 
heavily investing in 
becoming global AI 
leaders, which presents 
both opportunities 
and challenges for 
international business 
collaborations. 
Companies might need 
to align with national 
AI strategies to enter or 
expand in these markets, 
while also considering 
the implications of 
technology transfer and 
data security regulations.TECH
62WHEN WILL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI WILL 
DISRUPT 
EVERY 
INDUSTRY 
WITHIN THE 
NEXT FIVE 
YEARS Drawing a parallel to Moore’s law, which posits the doubling of transistors on 
microchips roughly every two years, there’s speculation that AI’s intelligence 
could follow a similar trajectory. If this is the case, several factors will drive this 
exponential growth in intelligence: enhancements in data quality, increasing 
computational power, and strides in algorithm efficiency, extracting more 
intelligence per unit of data and compute. 
However, unlike the steady hardware advancements Moore’s law describes, 
AI has the potential for self-improvement. As AI begins to self-improve and 
contribute to its own development, we may witness a self-reinforcing cycle 
of intelligence growth. This positive feedback loop means that AI’s capacity 
to learn and evolve could accelerate, leading to profound impacts across all 
industries. 
The inevitability of AI-driven transformation is not a matter of if but when. Our 
AI report is one section of our 2024 Tech Trends report, which offers in-depth 
coverage of 15 additional technology and industry sectors. Each industry 
section contains timelines that outline how AI, along with other emerging 
technologies, are expected to impact and influence that particular sector over 
time. Refer to the “When will AI impact your organization?” page to find details 
on specific timelines related to AI adoption and impact on your industry.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
63ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Below, we highlight high level near-term developments to keep an eye on across industries.
Scaling
Enormous amounts of training data are still required for most AI 
models to learn. For example, recommender systems coupled with 
generative AI could lead to deep personalization for the hospitality 
and health care sectors—as long as data is made available. Histor-
ically, data is locked inside proprietary systems built by third par-
ties, and regulation often hinders access to certain forms of data.
Investment
AI has passed through cycles of enthusiasm and disillusionment, 
leading to either too much or not enough capital being made 
available. Investors prioritize commercialization over basic R&D—
though the latter yields bigger impact and often stronger returns. 
Investors’s patience will influence progress and commercialization.
Constraints on adoption
Even if a technology is maturing, constraints on its adoption can 
hinder its impact on an industry. For example, a business may re-
fuse to adopt an automated system because it challenges existing 
orthodoxy or an existing successful strategy. This is especially true 
in health care, insurance, and financial services.
Regulations
Advances in technology typically outpace regulatory changes. This 
has benefited AI, which until very recently was not targeted for 
regulation. Additionally, whether local regulations are conflicting or 
complementary, influences adoption in the marketplace. Media mentions
Increased awareness and enthusiasm can influence the momen-
tum of a technology, even when there’s been no real breakthrough. 
Until OpenAI’s ChatGPT breakthrough in late 2022, leaders weren’t 
talking about the impact genAI might have on their business. 
Media bursts related to AI will drive momentum, especially if those 
stories are favorable, and more importantly, are easily understood 
by the public.
Public perception
How the public understands and responds to AI advancements 
will create or quell demand. This is especially true of generative AI 
and education/creativity/ intellectual property/misinformation, 
and the role assistive technologies will play in shaping the future 
workforce.
R&D developments
The pace of new research breakthroughs can’t be scheduled to 
coincide with a board meeting or earnings report. Factors like fund-
ing, quality, and size of staff, and access to resources can improve 
the likelihood and speed of new discoveries. We closely monitor 
R&D developments but treat them as wild cards. 
WHEN WILL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
It’s possible for agents to learn the right skills but the wrong objectives; an AI system can be asked 
to learn something that then could be used for harmful purposes. Commercial AI products could 
inadvertently incentivize bad behavior.
Publicly available LLMs are often the foundation for AI startups, but some researchers and technologists 
are questioning their defensibility when it comes to capturing value. The moat is in data. Techniques and 
models will largely get commoditized, and served via the infrastructure layer, where real value will be 
realized.
Long-term sustainability depends on network effects to gather enough user data. User-generated 
data can be harnessed to differentiate systems by offering tuned models on top of foundational/
commoditized LLMs, creating a flywheel effect. Longer term, niche LLMs will be owned by a select few 
players, while general-purpose LLMs become commoditized.
The challenge of balancing data collection for workflow optimization with concerns of worker 
surveillance requires careful navigation by companies. AI’s use and understanding of behavioral 
biometrics could be considered intrusive into deeply personal behaviors, often subconscious to the 
individual, starkly confronting worker privacy expectations.
Heightened protectionism across nations could escalate the costs of producing chips and other critical 
technologies, and make it more difficult to find the right talent. Companies should brace for the adverse 
economic impacts of geopolitical shifts as supply chains undergo realignment.
AI models might achieve assigned goals by any means necessary, including suppressing or hiding data. 
Systems are needed to identify when this happens—until then we risk using bad information to make 
decisions. 
High-performing models are susceptible to “jailbreaking,” where bypassing LLM limitations can lead to 
manipulations, resulting in unpredictable and potentially harmful outputs. Given that businesses and 
entire institutions are starting to rely on LLMs, jailbreaking represents an urgent security threat that has 
yet to be addressed. Opportunities
AI is on track to become an indispensable tool for knowledge workers. The next 18-24 months will see the 
development of assistive technologies tailored to various professions, akin to GitHub’s Copilot, but designed 
for financial analysts, commercial real estate developers, and lawyers.
Companies sitting on industry-specific data hold the cards to create powerful AI agents. In industries like 
law, finance, and other knowledge-based sectors, proprietary data can train more capable AI agents.
Within the next 18-24 months, generative AI will integrate into many consumer apps. Where clicks and 
keywords once dominated, intelligent assistants will guide users through voice and text. Personalized 
support gets weaved throughout experiences, changing how people engage with information.
AI models that understand language will lead to more devices that enable people to interact with technology 
through voice and conversation instead of screens. Opportunities await for companies quick to challenge 
status quo screen-centric form factors. 
AI is going local. Wearables and endpoints of all kinds will be embedded with AI, from pets’ collars that 
report on animals’ activities, to smart home devices that understand and execute complex commands from 
natural language. Large language models will migrate on-device, perhaps in lieu of a conventional operating 
system. 
The rising energy needs of AI could incentivize tech companies to adopt alternative, greener energy sources 
like nuclear and geothermal, potentially driving a shift toward sustainable energy independently of 
government mandates.
Open-source models allow businesses and developers to adapt and enhance foundational models for 
specific uses, saving the cost and effort of starting from scratch or investing heavily in data and training.
64© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE65© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Create domestic intern-
ship and apprenticeship 
programs to build talent 
pipelines in AI skills, where 
shortages loom. Partner 
with schools to develop 
a homegrown workforce 
proficient in these tech-
nologies vital for national 
strategic interests.Investing in data centers 
powered by renewable 
energy or exploring part -
nerships with alternative 
energies like nuclear and 
geothermal could align AI 
operations with ESG goals, 
reducing the carbon foot -
print of data processing 
and storage, and reducing 
the cost of compute. Nvidia dominates the GPU 
market, yet demand out -
paces even its cutting-edge 
chips. With shortages 
routine, space exists for 
rivals while cloud partners 
hunger for inventory. As AI models grow in com-
plexity, investing in alter -
native computing architec-
tures like neurosymbolic 
AI, processing-in-memory 
technology, and special-
ized AI chips for on-device 
processing could offer 
significant advantages 
in efficiency, speed, and 
privacy.Build atop shared foun-
dations. Open-source 
models like LLaMA and 
FLAN offer springboards 
to launch specialized 
solutions tuned to distinct 
industry needs. These spe-
cialized models are more 
accurate and focused to 
the industry they serve 
and give proper weight to 
relevant parameters. Foster development of 
small language models 
(SLMs). Investing in the 
research and deployment 
of SLMs suitable for edge 
devices can open new 
avenues for AI applica-
tions in environments 
where cloud connectivity 
is limited or nonexistent. 
SLMs can significantly 
expand the reach of AI 
into everyday devices, en-
hancing user experience 
and functionality. INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCECENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 66TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
New data sources are coming
The integration of hardware, particularly wearables, will 
redefine the landscape of data collection and utilization. 
Coming to market soon are an array of different wearable 
devices equipped with sensors, cameras, and speak-
ers, and they represent a significant leap forward in our 
ability to gather real-time, contextual data. This evolution 
marks a future where the volume of data available for 
analysis will expand exponentially, offering unprecedent-
ed insights into consumer behavior and environmental 
interactions. The challenge for organizations won’t just 
be in the collection, but in the sophisticated parsing and 
interpretation of this deluge of data, requiring advanced 
AI algorithms and analytical frameworks. Race for AI hardware supremacy
The intersection of hardware development and geopolit-
ical competition is reshaping the landscape of AI ad-
vancement, with implications spanning national security, 
technological sovereignty, and economic prowess. As 
governments worldwide vie to establish AI supremacy 
and reduce dependence on foreign technology, substan-
tial investments are pouring into domestic chip fabrica-
tion and AI research. The US and China, in particular, are 
locked in a battle for technological dominance, with both 
nations allocating significant resources toward bolster-
ing their respective chip capabilities and AI infrastruc-
ture. This geopolitical rivalry extends beyond economic 
competition, with ideological considerations shaping 
AI development strategies and regulatory frameworks. 
China’s insistence on AI alignment with socialist values 
underscores its commitment to ideological control, while 
Russia perceives Western AI advancements as a threat to 
traditional values, driving efforts to develop indigenous AI 
solutions. Meanwhile, escalating tensions have catalyzed 
a bifurcation in the AI chip market, prompting countries 
to explore alternative chip architectures and supply chain 
diversification strategies. This unfolding chip war not 
only underscores the strategic importance of semicon-
ductor technologies but also poses profound implica-
tions for global technological cooperation and innovation.Chip shortages loom large
The surging demand for AI has highlighted the global 
supply chain’s inability to meet the need for powerful 
chips essential for developing and deploying AI mod-
els. We predict a chip shortage, particularly for graphics 
processing units (GPUs), due to production issues and 
ongoing shipping challenges due to regional conflicts. 
Microsoft’s recent annual report marked the scarcity of 
GPUs as a potential risk for investors, underscoring the 
critical role these chips play in AI development and the 
broader implications for companies and end-users reliant 
on AI technologies. The industry as a whole will grapple 
with limited supply and the challenge of meeting explo-
sive demand, prompting a shift toward more efficient or 
alternative computational methods. Maybe that’s why in 
February 2024, OpenAI CEO Sam Altman reportedly went 
on a business development tour seeking $7 trillion in 
investment to create an alternative to our current chips.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 67TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Choosing between proprietary and open source
Last year, when Meta released LLaM, its suite of open 
source LLMs, there was a new debate about the benefits 
and risks of going open source. Organizations using large 
language models face a challenging decision: Go with the 
big names like OpenAI and Microsoft for easy access to 
top-notch tech but give up adaptability and transparency, 
or push up your sleeves and build your own tailor-made 
systems to ensure transparency and extensibility. Despite 
the steep development costs associated with proprietary 
LLMs, the open-source community has responded with 
notable alternatives, such as Databricks’ Dolly LLM, which 
offers a solution at a fraction of the cost. The new shift 
toward open-source solutions aims to counterbalance the 
growing concentration of AI tools in the hands of a few 
major corporations, offering businesses the opportunity 
to integrate bespoke applications without compromising 
proprietary information.Reckless era ends, oversight era begins
The era of “move fast and break things,” and “build first, 
ask permission later” appears to be waning in Silicon 
Valley as regulatory scrutiny intensifies in response to 
growing concerns over AI’s societal impacts. With initia-
tives like a US presidential executive order and the EU’s 
AI Act, policymakers are striving to establish guidelines 
and restrictions to govern AI technologies, particularly in 
sensitive areas like facial recognition. However, crafting 
concrete policies that balance innovation with ethical 
considerations, poses significant challenges, and ensur-
ing effective enforcement remains a formidable task. As 
governments grapple with the complexities of regulating 
AI, the tech industry faces a new era of accountability and 
responsibility for the products they create.AI doomers distract
Amid the discourse surrounding AI, a contingent of pes-
simistic voices, often referred to as “AI doomers,” has 
emerged, likely to persist in the foreseeable future. For 
business leaders, navigating this landscape proves chal-
lenging, as they are presented with polarizing narratives 
of either utopian ideals or dystopian anxieties, resulting 
in a nuanced yet unsettling reality. While it’s crucial to 
remain vigilant against potential risks and mitigate them 
effectively, the prevalence of doomerism tends to over-
shadow constructive dialogue and proactive measures.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 68TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Industry is building the future of AI, not academia 
The landscape of innovation is shifting, with industry 
emerging as the primary driver of technological advance-
ment, outpacing academia in the development of new 
machine learning models. Recent data reveals a stark 
contrast: in 2022, industry produced 32 machine learning 
models compared to academia’s three, marking a signif-
icant departure from historical trends. Industry’s domi-
nance is further underscored by its access to abundant 
resources—large data sets, computational power, and 
financial capital—essential for creating cutting-edge AI 
systems. This transition is reflected in the career choices 
of AI Ph.D. graduates, with 65.4% opting for industry posi-
tions, compared to 28.2% in academia, a trend that has 
steadily widened since 2011. The exodus from academia 
to corporations could have a chilling, long-term effect on 
knowledge transfer from professors to students, which 
could negatively impact the future pipeline for the talent 
industry which will need to remain competitive.AI widens global inequality gulf
The exorbitant costs associated with training language 
models are setting a precedent for the formidable ex-
penses expected in developing image and video models, 
further accentuating disparities in resources between dif-
ferent regions and exacerbating the global divide between 
the affluent and less affluent nations. This trend not only 
reshapes the landscape of business and communities 
but also positions wealthy countries, notably the United 
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, as potential hubs for AI 
development, potentially marginalizing opportunities for 
advancement in the global south.Dr. Aidan Gomez, CEO and co-founder of 
Cohere, for proposing the novel neural network 
technique called the transformer that now un-
derpins the generative AI era.
Arthur Mensch, Dr. Guillaume Lample, and Tim-
othée Lacroix, co-founders of European genera-
tive AI upstart Mistral AI.
Dr. Andrej Karpathy, researcher at OpenAI for 
his research in deep learning and computer 
vision.
Clément Delangue, CEO and co-founder of 
Hugging Face, for creating an open-source, 
for-profit machine-learning platform.
Dr. Daniel Kang, assistant professor at Uni-
versity of Illinois Urbana-Champaign , for his 
research identifying potential harms from 
language models, including demonstrating 
language models’ ability to autonomously inter-
act with websites in concerning ways without 
human feedback, and his work to develop 
methods that promote the safe and ethical 
development of AI.
David Nippa, a doctoral student at Ludwig-Max-
imilians-Universität München, for the develop-
ment of an AI model that can predict where a 
drug molecule can be chemically altered.Dr. Dario Amodei and Daniela Amodei, CEO 
and president of Anthropic, for creating one of 
the world’s leading AI labs.
Dr. David Rolnick, assistant professor of com-
puter science at McGill University, for work on a 
framework for understanding the relationship 
of AI and greenhouse gas emissions.
Grimes, artist and musician, for championing 
new business models around AI for likeness 
leasing and creative experimentation.
Dr. Jaime T eevan, chief scientist and technical 
fellow at Microsoft, for spearheading the use of 
LLMs in Microsoft’s core productivity products. 
Jensen Huang, CEO, president, and co-founder 
of Nvidia, for navigating the growing geopoliti-
cal chip conflict. 
Dr. Joelle Pineau, vice president of AI research 
at Meta, for developing new models and algo-
rithms for planning and learning in complex 
partially observable domains.
Leopold Aschenbrenner, AI alignment re-
searcher at OpenAI, for his contributions to AI 
alignment discourse. Lila Ibrahim, COO of Google DeepMind, for 
leading the company’s responsibility and gover-
nance work.
Marc Raibert, executive director at Boston 
Dynamics AI Institute, for his work to develop 
AI-driven robots that can reason. 
Miguel Solano, co-founder and CEO of VMind, 
for his work to improve AI compute performance 
in GPUs using novel algorithmic techniques.
Dr. Ning Zhang, an assistant professor of com-
puter science and engineering at Washington 
University, for the development of AntiFake, a 
tool that prevents unauthorized speech synthe-
sis.
Dr. Prakhar Mehrotra, vice president for 
applied AI at Walmart Global Tech, for leading 
enterprise adoption of AI.
Robin Li, CEO, chairman and co-Founder of 
Baidu, which last year released Ernie Bot, an 
LLM on par with ChatGPT.
Dr. Ruogu Fang, an associate professor in the J. 
Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, for his work to evaluate diagnostic 
bias in AI tools.Sebastien Krier, international policy manager 
at DeepMind, for his research and intellectual 
contributions to AI alignment discourse. 
Dr. Sune Lehmann, professor at the Technical 
University of Denmark , for research into the 
predictive capabilities of AI, specifically its po-
tential to forecast events in an individual’s life.
Dr. Swami Sivasubramanian, vice president 
of database, analytics, and machine learning 
at Amazon Web Services, for advancing cloud 
capabilities and insights for businesses.
Dr. Xin (Eric) Wang, assistant professor of 
computer science and engineering at Baskin 
Engineering at UC Santa Cruz, for the develop-
ment of the Text to Image Association Test, a 
tool that measures complex human biases in 
text-to-image models.
Dr. Zhou Jingren, deputy director of Aliba-
ba Damo Academy (Alibaba’s bleeding-edge 
research arm), for leading AI initiatives related 
to smart cities, autonomous driving, mobile 
computing platforms, semiconductor R&D, and 
other areas. ONES TO WATCH
69© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEIMPORTANT TERMS
70MACHINE LEARNING (ML)
ML uses data to make predictions and recommen-
dations on how to achieve stated goals. AI pioneer 
Arthur Samuel popularized the idea of machine 
learning in 1959, explaining how computers could 
learn without being explicitly programmed. This 
would mean developing an algorithm that could 
someday extract patterns from data sets and use 
those patterns to predict and automatically make 
real-time decisions. It took many years for reality 
to catch up with Samuel’s idea, but today machine 
learning is a primary driver of AI’s growth.
There are different types of machine learning, including 
supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement.
Supervised learning
A model that attempts to transform one type of 
data into another type using labeled examples. 
Supervised learning is used when teams know how 
to classify the input data and what they are trying 
to predict, but can get accurate results much more 
quickly by relying on an algorithm rather than a 
human. This is the most common form of ML used 
today. Understanding what product features would 
most likely drive new purchases is a business use 
case for supervised learning. DEEP LEARNING (DL)
Deep learning is a relatively new branch of ma-
chine learning. Programmers use special deep 
learning algorithms alongside an enormous corpus 
of data—typically many terabytes of text, images, 
videos, speech, and the like. Often, these systems 
are trained to learn on their own, and they can sort 
through a variety of unstructured data, whether it’s 
making sense of typed text in documents or audio 
clips or video. 
In practical terms, deep learning’s emergence 
means that more and more human processes will 
be automated, including the writing of software, 
which computers will soon start to do on their own. 
For example, once a system learns what an object 
looks like—say, an apple—and then can recognize 
that object in all other images, even if it has only a 
partial view.
There are different types of deep learning architectures. 
The most common types include convolutional neural 
networks, recurrent neural networks, transformer neural 
networks, and generative adversarial networks (GANs).
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
A CNN is multilayered, with a convolutional layer, a 
pooling layer, and a fully connected layer. Each one 
performs a different task with the data. The output is classification. If a researcher has 10,000 images 
and needs to extract data—to recognize particu-
lar faces, for instance—the CNN would run until 
information could be inferred. In business, CNNs 
are used to identify anomalies in medical imag-
ing, faulty products on a production line, blight on 
crops, and other irregularities.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
These multilayered neural networks move and store 
information between input, hidden, and output 
layers. They are good at modeling sequence data for 
predictions. In business, they are used anytime the 
sequence of data matters, such as speech recog-
nition and language translation. RNNs are used in 
digital assistants, to create captions for images, 
and to generate narrative reports using structured 
data (sports, financial).
Transformers
A transformer is a component whose purpose is to 
process sequential data, such as natural lan-
guage or genome sequences. Transformers rely on 
“attention” (the mathematical description of how 
things relate to, complement, or modify each other) 
in translating sequences. A transformer neural 
network is the unique architecture that enables 
systems to learn from context and to generate new Unsupervised learning
Data is provided to a model without specific output 
parameters, and the model tries to learn the data 
set’s structure without any designated labels. For 
example, if a researcher doesn’t know what to do 
with a large data set, an unsupervised learning 
model could determine patterns, classify data, 
and make recommendations without a human 
supervisor. Researchers used unsupervised learn-
ing during the pandemic to find patterns on how 
COVID-19 spread throughout communities.
Reinforcement learning (RL)
A system performs a task by repeatedly running 
calculations as it attempts to accomplish a stated 
goal. It’s a trial-and-error process, where rewards 
or penalties are earned in response to the system’s 
performance toward achieving the stated goal. RL is 
used when there isn’t enough training data, when 
the researcher is trying to learn about an environ-
ment (such as a complex financial portfolio), or 
when the researcher needs to find greater levels 
of optimization. It has a high number of business 
use cases, ranging from real-time dynamic pricing 
models to high-frequency trading algorithms to the 
systems that operate self-driving cars.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEIMPORTANT TERMS
71information. Transformers are complementary to 
CNNs and RNNs, the two most common neural net-
work architectures used in deep learning.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs)
As unsupervised deep learning systems, GANs are 
composed of two competing neural networks—a 
generator and a discriminator—that are trained 
on the same data, such as images of people. The 
networks compete against each other to perform 
a task, such as identifying the correct person, re-
sulting in optimizing overall performance. GANs are 
useful when researchers don’t have enough data 
to train an algorithmic model, and are also used to 
create new, synthetic data. 
Deepfakes, which have become prevalent in the 
past year, are generated using GANs. In design, 
GANs are tremendously useful: They can produce 
thousands of designs and recommend the best 
ones based on pre-set parameters. They can gen-
erate and modulate voices, faces, even gestures. 
Researchers from Nvidia, Mass General Hospital, 
BWH Center for Clinical Data Science, and the Mayo 
Clinic collaborated on a GAN that generates syn-
thetic MRIs showing cancerous tumors. Automatic speech recognition
Algorithmic systems that give computers the abil-
ity to recognize and convert audio to human-read-
able language.
Chain of Thought
This involves a model processing information or 
solving problems step by step, mimicking hu -
man-like reasoning.
Computer vision
Processes that give computers the ability to derive 
meaningful information from digital images (in-
cluding still and video) and to mimic and manipu-
late such images.
Foundation model
A large-scale AI model trained on vast amounts of 
data, capable of being adapted to a wide range of 
tasks without being trained from scratch.
Generative AI
GenAI refers to AI technologies that can generate 
new content, including text, images, music, and 
video, based on learned data patterns.
GPU
A graphics processing unit is specialized hardware 
designed to accelerate the creation and rendering of images and videos, often used in AI for parallel 
processing tasks.
Model
A program that has been trained on a data set. 
Models are generally used for analytical and deci-
sion-making tasks, such as making predictions.
Natural language processing
Processes that give computers the ability to under-
stand, mimic, and manipulate human language.
Parameter
A variable internal to the model that the system 
adjusts during training to improve performance on 
given tasks.
Prompt
An input given to a model to elicit a specific output 
or response, guiding the AI in generating content or 
solving problems.
Recommender systems
A class of machine learning algorithms that uses 
data to predict, narrow down, and find what people 
are looking for among an exponentially growing 
number of options.ADDITIONAL TERMS
Agents
In AI, agents are entities that perceive their envi-
ronment and take actions autonomously to achieve 
specific goals.
AGI (artificial general intelligence)
A designation for systems that match and then 
exceed the full range of human cognitive ability 
across all economically valuable tasks.
AI safety
A field that studies and attempts to mitigate the 
catastrophic risks that future AI could pose to 
humanity.
Algorithm
A process describing how to solve a specific prob-
lem or how to complete a particular task.
Alignment
The process of ensuring that an AI’s actions and 
goals are in harmony with human values and inten-
tions.
ASI (artificial superintelligence)
ASI refers to an AI system that surpasses human in-
telligence and capability across all fields, including 
creativity, general wisdom, and problem-solving.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEIMPORTANT TERMS
72RHLF
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback is a 
training method where AI models are refined based 
on feedback or corrections provided by humans, 
enhancing their performance and alignment with 
desired outcomes.
Supervised learning
A type of AI training where models learn from 
labeled data, using known input-output pairs to 
predict outputs from new inputs.
Symbolic AI
Symbolic AI involves AI systems that use explicit, 
human-readable symbols to represent knowledge 
and perform logical reasoning to solve problems.
Training data
The data set used to teach AI models how to under-
stand and perform tasks by identifying patterns, 
making decisions, or generating predictions.
Unsupervised learning
Unsupervised learning involves AI models identi-
fying patterns and structures in data without any 
labeled outcomes, learning from the data itself.XAI (explainable AI)
AI systems designed to provide human-under-
standable insights into their decision-making 
processes, enhancing transparency and trustwor-
thiness.
Zero-shot learning
An AI approach that enables models to correctly 
handle tasks or recognize objects they have not 
seen during training, using understanding from 
related contexts.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE73© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MODELS, 
TECHNIQUES, 
AND  
RESEARCHTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
WHAT IS AN AI MODEL? 
74© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
An AI model is a computational structure that is designed to perform tasks 
that would normally require human intelligence. This includes recognizing 
speech and images, interpreting visuals, translating between languages, and 
making decisions. There are several types of AI models, each suited to spe-
cific tasks and goals but at their core, all AI models rely on algorithms and 
mathematical frameworks. They are “trained” on large data sets so they can 
refine their internal parameters and improve at assigned tasks. As AI systems 
become more advanced, they require more data and computing power during 
this training process. 
Constructing AI models is an enormously resource-intensive process, not 
comparable to traditional software development. Training a high-performance 
language model demands processing huge data sets to fine-tune millions of 
parameters. This mandates extensive computing power and specialist time 
measured in months or years. As a result, advanced models are predomi-
nantly built by tech industry leaders like Google, Microsoft, and OpenAI who 
possess the vast technical infrastructure and talent required. The consum-
er focus and profit motive within these companies have accelerated model 
innovation beyond academic efforts. Historically, academia was seen as the 
most likely source of groundbreaking AI. But the sheer data scale, computing 
power, and engineering capacity within industry, has proven far more effi-
cient for allocation of resources.Examples
Note: All of these examples are 
current as of March 1, 2024
ChatGPT-4
OpenAI’s most recent model as 
of publication, GPT-4, doesn’t 
just generate text—it can 
generate images from text and 
vice versa. It was trained on 
enormous data sets of text and 
images using reinforcement 
learning from human feedback 
(RLHF), which helped make the 
model more helpful and safer 
for users. Early benchmarks 
exhibit GPT-4’s versatility on 
tasks from legal exams to ad-
versarial truthfulness tests. On 
the Uniform Bar Exam, it scored 
90% versus GPT-3.5’s 10%, 
while reducing factual errors 
by 40% compared to ChatGPT. 
While hallucination risks still 
exist, GPT-4 marks substantial 
progress in mitigating failure 
modes.Gemini
After an underwhelming debut 
in 2022, Google iterated to the 
more impressive Gemini Pro in 
early 2024. This model demon-
strates rapid advances, as 
evidenced by its meteoritic rise 
up the Hugging Face conversa-
tional AI leaderboard. Google’s 
Gemini isn’t just a single AI 
model—it encapsulates a suite 
of AI models for varied appli-
cations. Gemini Nano targets 
offline Android use. Gemini 
Pro now powers Bard and 
emerging enterprise services. 
Gemini Ultra is Google’s most 
advanced large language model 
yet, designed to elevate search, 
advertising, and cloud products 
globally. 
Claude 2.1
Anthropic unveiled Claude 
2.1, the latest in its series of 
language models, capable of 
processing significantly longer 
texts than OpenAI’s GPT-4. With the ability to manage up 
to 200,000 words or sym-
bols, Claude 2.1 significantly 
surpasses GPT-4’s limit of 
128,000. The new iteration of 
Claude is designed to reduce 
the likelihood of generat-
ing inaccurate information 
compared to earlier versions. 
A significant enhancement in 
Claude 2.1 includes its ability 
to utilize tools and interface 
with APIs. Additionally, the in-
troduction of system prompts 
allows users to define precise 
contexts for their inquiries, 
promoting more organized 
and reliable responses from 
the model.
PaLM 2
PaLM is a 540 billion parame-
ter language model developed 
by Google AI. Smaller 8 billion 
and 62 billion parameter 
versions were also trained. 
PaLM demonstrates strong 
performance across common-TECH
WHAT IS AN AI MODEL? 
75© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
sense reasoning, math reason-
ing, humor, code generation, 
translation, and other tasks. 
The model highlights Google 
AI’s advances in scalable trans-
former architecture research 
for language AI.
Whisper
Whisper is an open-source 
automatic speech recognition 
system created by OpenAI. 
First released in 2022, it was 
trained on over 680,000 hours 
of multilingual speech data 
scraped from the internet. 
Whisper can transcribe speech 
to text in multiple languages 
including English. It can also 
translate speech from non-En-
glish languages into English 
text. Compared to other publicly 
available systems, Whisper 
demonstrates leading speech 
transcription and transla-
tion capabilities. OpenAI has 
released the model freely for 
public use.OpenAI’s DALL-E 3
DALLE-3 is a text-to-image AI 
system that can create realistic 
art and images from textual 
descriptions. DALL-E is capable 
of generating images in various 
styles like photorealistic, paint-
ings, and emoji. Without explicit 
prompting, the model can ma-
nipulate and rearrange objects 
as well as correctly position de-
sign elements in new composi-
tions. These creative capacities 
demonstrate DALL-E’s aptitude 
for controllable high-fidelity 
image generation. 
Stability AI’s Stable 
Diffusion
Stable Diffusion is a text-to-im-
age generation model released 
in 2022 leveraging diffusion 
methodology. Primarily used 
to create detailed images from 
text prompts, Stable Diffusion 
can also perform tasks like in-
painting, outpainting, and im-
age-to-image translation driven by descriptive text inputs.
Midjourney
Midjourney creates visuals 
based on textual descriptions, 
known as prompts, akin to 
the functionalities offered by 
OpenAI’s DALL-E and Stability 
AI’s Stable Diffusion. A fake Mi-
djourney-created image of Pope 
Francis wearing a puffer jacket 
went viral in 2023.
Open AI’s Sora
In early 2024, OpenAI released 
Sora, an AI model that can 
create realistic and imagina-
tive scenes from text instruc-
tions. Sora marks a significant 
advancement in AI’s capability 
to execute human creativity by 
transforming brief text inputs 
into compelling videos up to a 
minute long, not only achieving 
realistic imagery but also emu-
lating the dynamic essence of 
movies, similar to how ChatGPT 
mimics human conversation. Google Lumiere 
Google’s Lumiere is a text-to-
video diffusion model that 
creates video from a prompt 
with realistic motion. Utilizing 
a novel diffusion model named 
Space-Time-U-Net (STUNet), 
Lumiere excels in creating 
realistic video content by 
understanding both spatial 
placement and temporal move-
ment within a video. Unlike 
other methods that assemble 
videos from individual frames, 
Lumiere crafts videos through a 
seamless integration of frames, 
achieving fluid motion across 
80 frames—significantly more 
than its current competitors.
Pika
Pika is an “idea-to-video” plat-
form to edit and create videos 
from text and still images. Pika 
includes features like text-
to-video, image-to-video, and 
video-to-video conversions. Users can ask the tool to create 
a video of a real person (e.g., 
“imagine Oprah as a Pixar 
cartoon”), ask the tool to edit 
glasses on a video of a donkey, 
or change the style of a video to 
something out of Studio Ghibli. TECH
WHAT IS AN AI MODEL? 
76© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Purpose-Built Models
Organizations must decide whether to use 
ready-made general purpose AI models like 
OpenAI’s GPT, or invest in developing custom 
models tailored to their industry and needs. 
General-purpose models like GPT are conve-
nient “plug-and-play” solutions that can adapt 
to many tasks through fine-tuning. However, 
their flexibility is limited when it comes to spe-
cialized business challenges. Custom models 
built for a specific purpose can better master 
industry-specific challenges by training on 
aligned data and objectives. OpenAI now pro-
vides a simple way for users to create custom 
models through the GPT marketplace—users 
describe their requirements to ChatGPT, and it 
handles coding the new model. Custom GPTs 
can then be integrated into platforms and 
services, accessing databases, email, e-com-
merce, and more to automate workflows.
LLMs Are Getting Bigger and More Expensive
Because of their massive size and complexity, 
the cost of developing LLMs is high. Training 
these models can cost millions of dollars. 
DeepMind’s Chinchilla, for example, reportedly 1.4 trillion pieces of text over 21 days, which 
amounts to nearly 1 million hours of GPU 
time. If using public cloud services, this level 
of compute would cost approximately $2.4 
million. Despite its impressive capabilities, 
with “only” 65 billion parameters, LLaMA is 
still smaller compared to larger models like 
OpenAI’s ChatGPT-4, which has 1.76 trillion 
parameters.
LLMS as Operating Systems
A radical new concept for computing has 
emerged—an operating system powered by a 
large language model at its core rather than 
traditional programming. In this conceptual 
LLM-based OS, routine tasks could be auto-
mated and executed with an unprecedented 
level of sophistication, without the need for 
manual coding or intervention. The user in-
terface would also be radically different than 
traditional operating systems. Rather than 
conventional graphical user interfaces or 
command line prompts, users could interact 
conversationally with the LLM through natural 
language requests and queries. For example, 
a user could say, “Please open yesterday’s cost around $2.1 million to train. Bloom, an 
open-access multilingual language model, 
is estimated to have required an investment 
of approximately $2.3 million. OpenAI hasn’t 
provided public information about the cost to 
train ChatGPT-4, but many analysts estimate 
the earlier version of the model, GPT-3, could 
exceed $4 million. 
As the number of parameters increases, so 
does the cost. Moreover, unlike traditional 
software, deployment costs remain high 
post-development. Operating large language 
models for inference still necessitates 
enormous compute for the billions of calcu-
lations involved per user query. Furthermore, 
contributing to the high price tag of training 
and running large language models de-
mands specialized AI hardware, with graphics 
processing units (GPUs) now standard over 
traditional CPUs. Initially designed for gam-
ing, GPUs are perfectly suited for handling 
the extensive data processing demands of 
AI, despite their high cost of thousands of dol-
lars per chip. For example, Meta used 2,048 
Nvidia A100 GPUs to train its LLaMA model on 
While general-purpose models offer broad applica-
bility, their limitations in specialized contexts are 
driving the development of models tailored to meet 
the unique demands of specific industries.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
WHAT IS AN AI MODEL? 
77© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
sales report and format it as a slide presenta-
tion for my upcoming meeting.” The LLM would 
comprehend these conversational commands 
and perform the necessary actions to carry out 
the desired tasks. It would execute complex 
workflows automatically by understanding 
users’ intentions and goals. This could enable 
more intuitive, efficient interactions between 
humans and computers.
This concept has moved beyond theory into 
practical application, as demonstrated by 
Jesse Lyu, CEO and founder of Rabbit. Lyu 
launched the R1, a compact device about half 
the size of an iPhone, running on Rabbit OS—
an operating system grounded in a LLM. Rabbit 
OS functions as a universal app controller, 
akin to systems like Alexa or Google Assistant, 
yet it offers a unique twist. It simplifies user 
interaction by removing the need to navigate 
through multiple apps or perform repetitive 
logins. Instead, users can directly communi-
cate their needs to the device, and R1, under-
standing these natural language requests, 
efficiently executes the desired tasks. In early 
2024, NVIDIA announced a personalized AI chatbot for Windows RTX PCs that runs lo-
cally to connect users’ data and queries to an 
open-source large language model. By keep-
ing data on device rather than in the cloud, 
Chat with RTX not only delivers ultra-fast 
response times but also enhances user 
privacy and data security. The chatbot allows 
natural language interaction to search files 
so that users can simply ask, “What was that 
song my friend recommended while we were 
at the airport?” instead of manually searching 
through texts and email.
LLMs are becoming more central to human-computer interactions. As such, interfaces are shifting from 
search to conversational questions and answers in plain language.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
SHOULD WE GO OPEN-SOURCE OR PROPRIETARY?
78© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Companies that want to use LLMs must choose between proprietary or open 
source. Both have benefits and drawbacks. Proprietary LLMs from major tech 
companies provide easy implementation and leading-edge features. However, 
they lack transparency into how they work and have limited ability to custom-
ize them. Building a proprietary model internally gives companies more con-
trol over security, privacy, and tailoring the training to their specific data and 
needs. But this requires considerable expertise and time to develop. On the 
other hand, open-source language models promote transparency and flexibili-
ty at often lower, long-term costs. Yet if governance practices like testing for bi-
ases and false information are insufficient, they pose risks around issues like 
fairness, accuracy, and security vulnerabilities. When considering using LLMs, 
executives should think about cost, control, customization, and risk. There is 
no universally superior choice—rather, companies must weigh their priorities, 
capabilities, and constraints to determine if an off-the-shelf, customized, or 
open-source large language model approach best suits their situation.
We have our own nervousness, but we believe that 
we can manage through it, and the only way to do 
that is to put the technology in the hands of people.
—Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAIProprietary examples:
OpenAI’s GPT-4
Anthropic’s Claude 2
Google’s Bard
Open-Source examples:
Meta’s LLaMA
RedPajama-INCITE
BigScience’s Bloom
TII’s FalconOpen-Source LLMs for Commercial Use 
Proprietary large language models cost millions to develop, 
which means high-quality capabilities are concentrated within 
wealthy tech giants. However, the open-source community 
has responded with surprisingly capable smaller models by 
fine-tuning them on quality data. For example, in March 2023 
Databricks released Dolly—an open-source LLM trained for 
under $30 yet demonstrating conversational prowess rivaling 
ChatGPT. It was developed using Meta’s open-source LLaMA 
LLM and fine-tuned with high-quality inputs from Databricks 
employees. The initiative aimed to provide an alternative to 
the increasing centralization of AI tools in a few large compa-
nies, focusing on an open-source chat model that permitted 
commercial use while protecting intellectual property and 
corporate information. Databricks not only open-sourced the 
training code, data set, and model weights for Dolly but also 
launched Dolly 2.0 in April 2023. Dolly 2.0 is open-source LLM 
licensed for commercial use, allowing companies to integrate 
their data with Databricks’ data set to create bespoke applica-
tions without compromising their proprietary information. 79© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SAFETY,  
ETHICS  
& SOCIETYTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
IS AI REALLY A BLACK BOX?
80© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
vide interpretable visibility into significant 
aspects of functionality. This can involve 
revealing training data characteristics, 
delineating gaps in data coverage, auditing 
data collection fairness, detailing human 
involvement in model development, and 
highlighting key input features that drive 
outputs. A core focus is validating outcomes 
by surfacing how predictions, classifica-
tions and recommendations are supported 
to establish trustworthiness. Rather than 
eliciting every intricate internal model 
transformation, XAI pursues strategic expla-
nations of the most critical workings—an-
swering targeted questions about why and 
how certain results are produced. The objec-
tives are accountability through limited but 
meaningful transparency, error checking via 
result explanations, and accessibility for a 
wider range of model users. 
AI Intentionally Hiding Data
Computers do exactly as they are told. If you 
command a machine to win at a game, it will 
do everything in its power to achieve that Explainable AI (XAI)
Achieving full transparency into complex AI 
systems is difficult. However, the emerging 
field of explainable AI seeks to enable better 
human understanding of how algorithms 
function and arrive at outputs. Since com-
plex machine learning models cannot act as 
total glass boxes, XAI instead seeks to pro-Many AI systems are opaque “black 
boxes” in how they work. Developers 
often withhold model and train-
ing details to protect IP. This lack 
of transparency perpetuates an 
impression that the systems have 
unknowable inner workings. More-
over, researchers themselves don’t 
fully understand why AIs sometimes 
behave unexpectedly, owing to in-
herent complexity. While inputs and 
outputs are observable, the logic be-
tween remains nebulous. Thus some 
black-box qualities persist around 
advanced models’ inner transforma-
tions, despite transparency efforts. 
So while more visibility into AI func-
tionality and development is crucial 
for accountability and trust, uncer-
tainties around emergent system 
behaviors may endure.goal. That’s why researchers need to under-
stand how AI reaches the end goal. It might be 
cheating to complete the task they were told 
to do. Researchers at Stanford University and 
Google discovered that an AI system designed 
to turn satellite images into usable maps was 
withholding certain data. The researchers were 
using a neural network called CycleGAN, which 
learns how to map image transformations. It 
took an old aerial photograph of a neighbor-
hood, distinguished between streets, alleys, 
driveways, buildings, and lampposts, and then 
generated a map that could be used by GPS. 
Initially, they used an aerial photograph that 
hadn’t been seen by the network. The resulting 
image looked very close to the original  —sus-
piciously close. But on deeper inspection, the 
researchers found that many details in both 
the original image and the generated image 
weren’t visible in the map made by the AI. It 
turns out that the system learned to hide infor-
mation about the original image inside of the 
image it generated.AI, like any technology, 
is a reflection of its 
creators and their 
intentions.
—Joy Buolamwini,  
 founder of the Algorithmic Justice LeagueTECH
HOW DO WE ENSURE TRUST? 
81© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI Alignment Goes Mainstream
As AI systems improve, many researchers 
want guardrails to ensure that they are de-
ployed in ways that do not harm humanity. 
AI alignment research refers to the process 
of ensuring that AI systems act in accor-
dance with human values and goals. OpenAI, 
DeepMind, and Anthropic (which describes 
itself primarily as an “AI safety and research 
company”) each have AI alignment teams 
with dedicated staff researching guardrails. 
While the total number of researchers work-
ing on AI alignment is small compared to 
the rest of the AI community, such dedicated 
teams did not exist until recently. The debate 
surrounding the alignment of AI with human 
objectives encompasses a broad spectrum 
of opinions. On one end, “AI doomers” view 
unchecked advancement, especially toward 
superhuman capabilities, as posing existen-
tial catastrophe risk—potentially including 
human extinction. They advocate solutions 
like indefinite moratoriums on large model 
training to forestall such outcomes. By con-
trast, the “effective accelerationist” perspec-
tive sees hastening progress as a moral im-As AI is increasingly incorporated 
into more sensitive domains, press-
ing questions emerge. 
How can we build AI that we can trust? 
How can we trust AI’s predictions and con-
clusions when much of the system  
is opaque? 
How can we ensure that AI is aligned with 
human values, especially as it becomes 
more and more capable?
Could we inadvertently instruct a powerful 
AI towards harm? 
Can we trust the current human custodians 
of this technology? 
These pressing issues are at the 
heart of ongoing debates among AI 
ethics experts, where a definitive 
consensus on the best approaches 
has yet to be reached.perative to quickly harness AI solving pressing 
global problems like disease, inequality, and 
climate change.
In the moderate middle lie a diversity of per-
spectives. Some, like economist Tyler Cowen, 
argue the doomers’ risks are too narrowly 
specified for high probability, while others like 
Leopold Aschenbrenner from OpenAI’s “supera-
lignment team” make the case for substantial 
investments in AI alignment research, akin to 
“Operation Warp Speed” but focused on AI. This 
approach stems from the belief that artificial 
general intelligence (AGI) could become the 
most powerful tool ever developed, necessitat-
ing leadership in AI research by countries like 
the US to maintain a strategic advantage over 
nations such as China. These represent just a 
few of the myriad perspectives and it is likely 
that more perspectives will emerge before we 
converge on the right AI-alignment strategy.
Indexing Trust
We will soon reach a point when we can no 
longer tell if a data set has been tampered with, 
either intentionally or accidentally. AI systems The biggest lesson learned is 
we have to take the unintend-
ed consequences of any new 
technology along with all the 
benefits, and think about them 
simultaneously—as opposed 
to waiting for the unintended 
consequences to show up and 
then address them. I don’t think 
the world will put up anymore 
with any of us coming up with 
something where we haven’t 
thought through safety, equity 
and trust—these are big issues 
for the world.
—Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft TECH
HOW DO WE ENSURE TRUST? 
82© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
rely on our trust. If we no longer trust their 
outcomes, decades of research and technolog-
ical advancement will be for naught. Leaders 
in every sector—government, business, non-
profits, and so on—must have confidence in 
the data and algorithms used. Building trust 
and accountability requires transparency and 
is a challenge, but there are efforts underway 
to assess AI transparency, a critical first step. 
Researchers from Stanford, MIT, and Princeton 
designed the Foundation Model Transparency 
Index (FMTI)—a scoring system that evaluates 
transparency across model development, func-
tionality, and usage. The 2023 index places 
Llama 2 at the top, as the most transparent 
Foundation model, followed by BigScience’s 
BloomZ and OpenAI’s GPT-4. The hope is that 
by standardizing analysis of opaque systems, 
deployment risks and responsibilities can be 
better informed. 
The ethics of how data is collected in the first 
place may also influence the trustworthiness 
and validity of scientific research, particularly 
in areas such as organ donations and medical 
research. In addition, employing ethicists to work directly with managers and developers 
and ensuring diversity among developers—
representing different races, ethnicities, 
and genders—will reduce inherent bias in AI 
systems.
Synthesizing Trust
Humans can be tricked into believing ma-
chine-generated faces, especially when 
they’ve been engineered to elicit trust. A study 
in the Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences shows that synthetic faces are often 
“deemed more trustworthy than real faces,” 
suggesting that synthetic faces could be 
designed as societal malware. If a bad actor 
was attempting to undermine institutions, it 
could deploy a synth on social media to sow 
distrust. There are not yet effective counter-
measures for synthetic humans or effective 
markers to help consumers distinguish be-
tween fake and real.
The perceived trustworthiness of synthetic faces over real ones raises concerns about their potential use 
by malicious actors to erode trust in institutions.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
ARE THERE TOOLS TO MAKE AI ETHICAL?
83© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
As AI systems become more ad-
vanced, making sure they are ethi-
cally deployed becomes increasingly 
important. For instance, AI can now 
generate hyper-realistic deepfake 
media that now passes the uncanny 
valley. This tech could let bad actors 
impersonate people or spread mis-
information. AI can also be used for 
cheating, fraud, and hacking. In light 
of this, companies are emerging to 
create tools to combat this behav-
ior. New tools can detect deepfakes, 
expose fraudulent AI activities, and 
implement preventative measures 
against misuse. while maintaining a 9% false positive rate 
on human writing. These tools are essential 
in contexts where distinguishing between 
human and machine authorship is critical, 
such as in academic integrity, journalism, 
and legal documentation.
T ools for Detecting Copyright Violations in 
AI Outputs  
With AI models capable of memorizing and 
reproducing content from their training data, 
the risk of copyright infringement becomes a 
significant concern. Researchers from Google, 
DeepMind, ETH Zurich, Princeton, and Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley have demonstrated 
this with the Stable Diffusion model, which 
can emit memorized images, including those 
with trademarked company logos. To combat 
this, watermarking techniques are being de-
veloped. For instance, the University of Mary-
land proposes a technique for watermarking 
language model outputs, making synthetic 
text algorithmically identifiable. Google Deep-
Mind’s SynthID tool embeds digital water-
marks directly into image pixels, enabling the 
identification of AI-generated images while 
remaining invisible to the human eye.  T ools for Exposing Deepfakes
Hyper-realistic deepfakes pose significant 
security risks. Researchers at Washington 
University created a tool called AntiFake, which 
can add a digital watermark to content that 
proactively prevents the cloning of voices and 
faces. Intel’s FakeCatcher and Sentinel use 
deep learning to analyze media content, catch-
ing manipulations either in real time or high-
lighting alteration patterns after creation. One 
significant concern regarding many deepfake 
detection tools is that they demonstrate bias. 
Studies have uncovered significant dispar-
ities in the error rates of deepfake detection 
algorithms across different racial groups. In 
one study, the difference in accuracy reached 
as high as 10.7%. This bias could lead to severe 
implications, such as genuine images of cer-
tain racial groups being mistakenly identified 
as fakes or, conversely, manipulated images 
being wrongly accepted as authentic. Dr. Siwei 
Lyu and a team at the University of Buffalo 
have developed what are considered to be the 
first deepfake detection algorithms specifical-
ly designed to mitigate bias. Their approach 
involves two machine learning methods: one Deepfake Detectors
AI now enables creating highly realistic fake 
media called deepfakes—bogus video, au-
dio, and text that seem real. They can spread 
misinformation by fabricating scenes or 
putting words in people’s mouths. Research-
ers are developing protections against their 
misuse. Tools like AntiFake use imperceptible 
watermarks to block fake voice/face cloning 
before it happens. Platforms including Intel’s 
FakeCatcher and European vendor Sentinel 
catch manipulations in real-time using AI. 
As deepfakes get better and better, surpass-
ing the “uncanny valley,” so does the market 
opportunity for exposing them. Expect to see 
more investment in this space. 
T ools for Identifying AI-Generated Writing 
AI is good at writing like a human. That means 
we need tools that can distinguish between 
human and AI-written content. DetectGPT is 
one such tool, offering over 95% accuracy in 
identifying whether a passage is written by a 
human or an AI system like GPT-3. Similarly, 
OpenAI itself has released a classifier that 
flags AI-generated text 26% of the time, TECH
ARE THERE TOOLS TO MAKE AI ETHICAL?
84© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
that makes algorithms aware of demographic 
factors and another that works to blind them. 
These methods have successfully reduced dis-
parities in accuracy across different races and 
genders. Notably, this achievement was not at 
the expense of overall accuracy; in some cases, 
accuracy was even enhanced. By focusing 
on the fairness of the algorithms, Lyu’s work 
marks a significant step toward creating more 
equitable and reliable deepfake detection 
technologies, ensuring accuracy is indepen-
dent of factors like race or gender.
T ools to Thwart Recognition Systems 
As facial recognition becomes ubiquitous, var-
ious groups want to limit the technology’s ef-
fectiveness to protect privacy. While methods 
of confusing or obscuring facial recognition 
systems are not always feasible, researchers 
are trying to confuse online applications that 
scrape and collect images used as inputs for 
training facial recognition engines in order to 
develop a form of camouflage, which consum-
ers may someday demand.Meanwhile, Anthropic has unveiled its Re-
sponsible Scaling Policy, which includes a 
detailed list of safety commitments based on 
risk assessments and incorporates pauses in 
development if safety measures fail to match 
the pace of capability advancements. The 
policy encompasses several key components, 
including internal access controls, adver-
sarial testing (red-teaming), evaluations by 
independent third parties, and graded access 
based on different AI Safety Levels.  Researchers from the University of Chicago 
have created a program, Fawkes, that adds 
extra pixels to images to cause facial rec-
ognition apps to misclassify faces. Taking 
this principle a step further, Israeli company 
Adversa AI adds noise, or small alterations, 
to photos of faces, causing algorithms to 
detect a different face than what is visible to 
the naked eye. The algorithm is successful at 
imperceptibly changing an individual’s image 
to someone else of their choosing.
T ools to Combat Broadly Malicious AI 
Behavior
Research labs around the world are actively 
working to build practical safeguards against 
malicious AI behavior. DeepMind has intro-
duced a comprehensive toolkit and work-
flow designed to enhance the evaluation of 
standard models that can identify when AI 
is misbehaving according to human ethical 
standards. This approach specifically focus-
es on identifying and assessing potentially 
hazardous capabilities, like cyber-offense and 
self-replication, as well as the likelihood of 
causing harm. 
Researchers are working on ways to alter facial im-
ages so facial recognition systems misidentify the 
faces, potentially allowing people to avoid identifi-
cation by these surveillance technologies. 
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
DOES AI INFRINGE ON PRIVACY?  
HOW SHOULD WE THINK ABOUT CUSTOMER DATA AND AI APPLICATIONS?
85© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI enables new forms of pervasive 
surveillance that could threaten per-
sonal privacy across several domains. 
Last year, facial recognition company 
Clearview AI said it had run more than 
1 million searches for police in the US. 
Somewhat less obviously, ambient 
monitoring can now subject house-
hold environments to observation. 
Workplace analytics can track de-
tailed employee behaviors and pro-
ductivity. Schools can actively mon-
itor students through devices and 
platforms meant for remote educa-
tion. As private spaces face increasing 
exposure from third-party tracking, a 
culture of Big Brother–like awareness 
becomes normalized, rather than 
valuing independence and consent.ogy by law enforcement, doesn’t apply to 
private companies. 
Teleperformance, a French-based company 
that manages outsourced call center work 
for many Fortune 50 companies, uses cam-
eras and AI to monitor its teams. It flags em-
ployees as idle when it detects they haven’t 
used the keyboard or mouse within a speci-
fied time frame. Live Eye Surveillance offers 
a monthly subscription service that remotely 
monitors live video feeds of employees for 
companies such as 7-Eleven, Dairy Queen, 
and Holiday Inn. Sneek is another example 
of “tattleware” that captures live photos of 
employees via webcams and displays them 
on a digital wall viewable by everyone in the 
company. Click on a photo and it instantly 
pulls that person into a video call with you.
The most well-known user of worker surveil-
lance might be Amazon, which has installed 
AI-enabled cameras in delivery trucks to 
track behavior. The company docks driver 
pay if it perceives unsafe conditions such as 
distracted driving, speeding, or hard braking. 
In its warehouses, the company monitors worker productivity by measuring what’s 
called “time off task,” which is any time when 
a worker isn’t actively processing products. 
South Korean e-commerce giant Coupang, 
which has pledged to become the “Amazon of 
Korea,” uses similar surveillance tactics. 
The industry has also continued to evolve as 
it offers more AI-based analysis of workers. 
Amazon is exploring using keystroke-logging 
software that tracks user behavior over time 
to detect if the same person is controlling the 
worker’s account. Aware’s Spotlight software 
detects behavioral changes like mood, tone, 
and attitude across conversations on employ-
ees’ devices. Teramind offers software that 
will disable private conversations if it detects 
“inappropriate” keywords. With the top three 
tools in the industry accounting for over 60% 
of global demand, expect to see more AI-based 
surveillance that leverages the growing pool of 
data collected by a variety of companies.
School Surveillance
During the pandemic, many students were is-
sued laptops and other devices by schools to Increased Used of Ambient Surveillance
What happens behind closed doors may not 
be secret for long, and executives should 
beware of new ambient surveillance meth-
ods. Scientists at MIT discovered how to use 
computer vision to track data from what 
they call “accidental cameras.” Windows, 
mirrors, corners, houseplants, and other 
common objects can be used, along with AI, 
to track subtle changes in light, shadows, 
and vibrations. The result: We all may soon 
have X-ray vision capabilities—which may 
not be great news for companies working on 
sensitive projects. Those working in informa-
tion security and risk management should 
pay special attention to advances in com-
puter vision.
Worker Surveillance
The rise of remote work during the pandemic 
accelerated the surveillance of workers, and 
will likely continue to grow as remote and 
hybrid work models take root. The US Consti-
tution’s Fourth Amendment, which prohibits 
unreasonable searches and seizures and 
precludes most uses of this same technol-TECH
DOES AI INFRINGE ON PRIVACY?  
HOW SHOULD WE THINK ABOUT CUSTOMER DATA AND AI APPLICATIONS?
86© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
facilitate remote learning. They weren’t told, 
however, that these devices would open a por-
tal into their homes that could be monitored 
by schools at all times of the day. In the US 
and many other countries, schools can legally 
monitor students, often without disclosing 
what is being tracked. 
Gaggle is one company that monitors 
school-issued accounts and uses AI to track 
online behavior of students across services 
like email and chat tools. In 2020, the Minne-
apolis school district signed a contract with 
the company to monitor its students through 
2023. A school district in California contract-
ed with Securly to monitor students in real 
time, looking for prohibited behaviors such 
as having too many browser tabs open. The 
software enables teachers to close tabs for 
any students they believe are “off task.” 
Philadelphia and Chicago schools deployed 
GoGuardian software on district-issued 
Chromebooks. A vulnerability in the software 
allowed teachers to start virtual sessions 
that enabled webcams on those Chrome-books without notification or consent by the 
student. Schools in China deploy technol-
ogy to monitor attentiveness in students. 
An algorithm called 4 Little Trees is used in 
Hong Kong to detect students’ emotions as 
they learn—by monitoring their facial expres-
sions with webcams. If the system detects 
a lack of focus, it nudges the student to pay 
attention.
AI introduces pervasive surveillance capabilities, jeopardizing personal privacy in schools, workplaces, and 
public spaces. Society appears to be prioritizing convenience over privacy, accepting significant trade-offs.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
IS THERE A FEASIBLE SOLUTION TO BIAS?
87© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Seemingly the moment OpenAI’s 
ChatGPT went public, there were 
multiple accounts of the system 
displaying racism, ageism, gender 
bias, and political bias. But it’s not 
just ChatGPT—many AI systems have 
been revealed to contain bias—much 
of which can be attributed to the 
data that the systems were trained 
on. Given AI’s expanding integration 
into sensitive domains like finance 
and health care, failing to address its 
potential biases risks compounding 
real-world discrimination through 
algorithmic means. Addressing Political Bias 
In 2023, many conservatives raised con-
cerns about ChatGPT’s political bias, sharing 
screenshots of ChatGPT’s left-leaning re-
sponses. OpenAI responded with a detailed 
blog post explaining its moderation approach, 
and CEO Sam Altman hinted at future pos-
sibilities for users to fine-tune ChatGPT 
iterations within certain broad guidelines, 
potentially sidestepping some contentious 
value judgments. Elon Musk, responding 
to these critiques about OpenAI’s political 
correctness, launched a new venture, called 
TruthGPT, aimed at exploring “deeper truths 
about the universe.” Separately, in an effort to 
make a point about biased AI, David Rozado, 
a data scientist from New Zealand, created 
DepolarizingGPT. This AI chatbot generates 
three types of responses for each prompt: 
left-wing, right-wing, and a neutral or inte-
grating perspective. To achieve this, Rozado 
fine-tuned the chatbot using content under 
fair-use provisions from various sources. For 
the left-wing responses, he used material 
from publications like The Atlantic and The 
New Yorker, and authors like Bill McKibben and Joseph Stiglitz. Conversely, the right-wing 
responses were shaped using content from out-
lets such as National Review and The American 
Conservative, and writers like Roger Scruton 
and Thomas Sowell.
Doubts regarding ChatGPT’s ability to avoid 
bias persist. A new research paper claims to 
find substantial evidence of systematic po-
litical bias in ChatGPT, favoring Democrats in 
the US, Lula in Brazil, and the Labour Party in 
the UK. The paper analyzed ChatGPT’s respons-
es to statements from the Political Compass 
test, concluding that it aligns more with liberal 
parties internationally. However, the study’s 
methodology and findings are not without 
criticism. Some researchers argue that the way 
ChatGPT was tested doesn’t reflect typical user 
interactions and may not accurately represent 
the AI’s behavior. Additionally, a data scientist, 
Colin Fraser, discovered that reversing the order 
of parties mentioned in prompts resulted in op-
posite biases, suggesting potential flaws in the 
study. These findings illustrate the complexi-
ties in assessing AI bias and the need for great-
er transparency from developers like OpenAI. The future of AI should be a 
mirror to society. It must be 
shaped by a diverse range 
of voices, not just those of 
technologists.
—Meredith Whittaker,  
 cofounder of the AI Now Institute TECH
IS THERE A FEASIBLE SOLUTION TO BIAS?
88© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Addressing Race and Gender Bias 
There are significant challenges related to 
race and gender bias in AI. A notable instance 
occurred in December 2022, when Steven T. 
Piantadosi of University of California, Berkeley 
revealed a bias in ChatGPT’s programming, 
which incorrectly associated scientific profi-
ciency with being white or Asian male. OpenAI 
quickly addressed this issue, programming 
ChatGPT to reject the notion that race or gen-
der should influence perceptions of scientific 
ability. However, this incident underscores a 
broader, long-standing problem of bias within 
AI systems.
In another study, researchers at the University 
of Florida examined racial bias in machine 
learning algorithms used for diagnosing bac-
terial vaginosis (BV), a common infection in 
women of reproductive age. The study, led by 
faculty members Fang and Ivana Parker, ana-
lyzed data from 400 women across four eth-
nic groups—white, Black, Asian, and Hispanic. 
They found that the accuracy of BV diagnosis 
varied significantly among these groups, with Hispanic women experiencing the highest 
rate of false positives and Asian women the 
most false negatives. 
To quantify bias, another team from Baskin 
Engineering at University of California, Santa 
Cruz, led by Assistant Professor Xin (Eric) 
Wang, developed a tool called the Text to 
Image Association Test. It quantifies bias in 
text-to-image (T2I) AI models like Stable Dif-
fusion, by measuring the variance in images 
generated from neutral versus gender-spe-
cific prompts. The findings indicate that 
such state-of-the-art models not only reflect 
but can also amplify existing human biases. 
Such analysis represents crucial progress 
toward accountability, but much work re-
mains to ensure AI equitability. 
After ChatGPT launched in 2022, researchers quickly discovered biases in its programming that linked sci-
entific proficiency to white or Asian male gender and race, underscoring the broader issue of unfair biases 
that can become ingrained in AI systems. To address this, developers are proactively testing models for 
biases and making concerted efforts to train more equitable, inclusive AI.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
89© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI introduces security threats of unprecedented complexity due to its ability to 
learn and adapt, making traditional security measures less effective. Its inte-
gration across critical infrastructure and sensitive systems means that AI-driv-
en attacks can have far-reaching and unpredictable consequences. Additionally, 
the sophistication of AI enables the creation of highly targeted and convincing 
cyberattacks, such as deepfakes and advanced phishing attempts, challenging 
our ability to distinguish between genuine and malicious communications. For 
example, recently, advanced language models have grown so smart that they 
can now use tools, read documents, and even call on themselves, acting inde-
pendently. If AI models can hack websites on their own by finding and exploit-
ing weaknesses without being taught specific vulnerabilities, what does that 
mean for the future of cybersecurity resilience? Cyberthreats
The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) 
released an assessment in 2023 on the near-
term impact of AI on cyberthreats. The NCSC 
assessment delves into how AI will likely 
enhance the volume and severity of cyberat-
tacks in the next two years, mainly through 
the evolution of existing tactics. AI is being 
used by various cyberthreat actors, includ-
ing state and non-state entities, to varying 
degrees. The report suggests that AI will 
significantly improve capabilities in areas 
like reconnaissance and social engineering, 
making them more efficient and harder to 
detect. However, more sophisticated AI uses 
in cyber operations will likely remain limit-
ed to actors with substantial resources and 
expertise in AI and cyber technologies. The 
assessment concludes that AI’s impact on 
cyberthreats is uneven and depends on the 
capability and intent of the threat actors. 
It also points out that the proliferation of 
AI-enabled cyber tools in criminal and com-
mercial markets is likely to further enhance 
these capabilities. Adversarial Attacks
Recent studies highlight a significant vulner-
ability in AI to adversarial attacks, revealing 
that these systems can be more easily manip-
ulated to make incorrect decisions than pre-
viously understood. These adversarial attacks 
involve deliberate tampering with the data 
input into AI systems, causing them to misin-
terpret information or act in unintended ways. 
For instance, specific patterns or objects, like 
certain stickers on a stop sign, can trick an 
AI in autonomous vehicles into not recogniz-
ing the sign. Similarly, alterations in medical 
imaging data could lead an AI to diagnose 
incorrectly.
This issue was the focus of a study by Tian-
fu Wu and his team at North Carolina State 
University, which examined the prevalence 
of such vulnerabilities in AI deep neural 
networks. Their findings suggest that these 
adversarial vulnerabilities are far more wide-
spread than previously recognized, posing 
a significant challenge to the reliability and 
safety of AI applications. In a separate study 
by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University, WHAT SECURITY ISSUES SHOULD WE PREPARE FOR?
AI lowers the barrier for novice cyber criminals, hackers-
for-hire and hacktivists to carry out effective access and 
information gathering operations. This enhanced access 
will likely contribute to the global ransomware threat over 
the next two years.
—U.K. National Cyber Security Centre January 2024 AssessmentTECH
90© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT SECURITY ISSUES SHOULD WE PREPARE FOR?
the vulnerability of AI chatbots to adversar-
ial attacks was demonstrated. By modifying 
prompts with specific strings of text, which 
may appear nonsensical but hold particular 
significance for AI models trained on exten-
sive web data, the researchers could bypass 
the safeguards designed to prevent chatbots 
from generating inappropriate content. This 
approach effectively “unshackled” the AI, 
making it possible for chatbots like ChatGPT, 
Google’s Bard, and Claude from Anthropic to 
respond to otherwise restricted or harmful 
queries. The success of these attacks across 
multiple popular AI chatbots suggests a 
deeper, more systemic weakness in the most 
advanced AI systems, challenging the deploy-
ment and safe use of these technologies. 
Data Poisoning: A Double-Edged Sword
Data poisoning attacks represent a signifi-
cant threat to AI systems, where malicious 
actors deliberately manipulate the training 
data to mislead the AI into making incorrect 
or harmful decisions. These attackers exploit 
vulnerabilities, such as embedding harmful 
content within files, to introduce misleading drawing into a cubist style, for example. This 
integration allows artists to choose between 
masking their style or actively using the 
data-poisoning feature.
AI Lowers the Barrier to Misinformation
AI has lowered the bar to produce and dis-
tribute misinformation. An analysis by News-
Guard, a Microsoft tool that shows trust 
ratings for over 7,500 news and informa-
tion websites, found that websites hosting 
AI-generated bogus reporting have ballooned 
over 1,000% in the past year, mushrooming 
from 49 to over 600 outlets. While fabrica-
tion used to require armies of workers or 
advanced intelligence agencies, AI democ-
ratizes deception. Now a lone teenager can 
concoct sites and stories that appear au-
thentic. And generative AI allows customiz-
ing fakery to particular targets and contexts 
with minimal effort. A study by the University 
of Waterloo found that an early version of 
ChatGPT, when tested on different types of 
statements including facts and misconcep-
tions, often made errors, contradicted itself, 
and repeated false information. For example, it could correctly state that the Earth is not 
flat when asked directly, but show inconsis-
tency in its responses. Researchers expressed 
concern over these findings, highlighting the 
danger of AI models like GPT-3 spreading mis-
information, especially as they become more 
common in use.
This is particularly concerning as we approach 
the 2024 US presidential election, with mis-
information experts raising flags about the 
potential impacts on democratic process-
es. Ominous previews have already played 
out abroad. Shortly before a crucial national 
election in Slovakia, a controversial audio clip 
spread on social media, purporting to feature 
Michal Šimečka of the Progressive party dis-
cussing a vote-rigging plan. Another incident 
involved a fake recording of the UK Labour 
Party leader verbally attacking a staffer. Both 
recordings, which seemed authentic, were 
later exposed by fact-checkers as AI-gener-
ated fakes, highlighting the growing issue of 
AI-manipulated audio in spreading misinfor-
mation.data into the training set. This can skew 
the AI’s learning process, aligning it with 
the attacker’s goals, potentially leading to 
biased outcomes, data breaches, or simply 
inaccurate AI outputs. To illustrate, consider 
the cost implications: Training a complex AI 
model like GPT-3 can cost around $17 mil-
lion. If its training data were compromised, 
restarting the process could lead to substan-
tial financial losses.
On the flip side, data poisoning can also 
serve as a defensive mechanism. A novel tool 
named Nightshade exemplifies this dual 
nature. Designed to protect artists’ intel-
lectual property, Nightshade subtly alters 
digital artwork’s pixels. When AI models use 
this “poisoned” art for training, their ability 
to accurately interpret images is compro-
mised, leading to erroneous outputs, such 
as mistaking a car for a cow. This tool is part 
of a broader strategy for artists to safeguard 
their work in an unregulated landscape. Art-
ists can use Nightshade via Glaze, another 
tool from the same creators, which masks 
an artist’s style—transforming a realistic TECH
91© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT SECURITY ISSUES SHOULD WE PREPARE FOR?
Privacy Risks in Behavioral Biometrics
Behavioral biometrics, which employs ma-
chine learning to analyze a vast array of 
biometric data points, raises significant pri-
vacy concerns. By quantifying subtle aspects 
of our behavior, such as the force used on 
touchscreens, the distinct way we tap letters 
like “Cs” and “Vs,” or our unique patterns 
when using a physical keyboard, these tools 
can reveal intricate details about our iden-
tities, thoughts, and future actions. While 
the technology offers potential benefits like 
enhancing security and possibly eliminating 
the need for passwords by identifying indi-
viduals through their typing patterns, it also 
introduces substantial risks.
The very aspect that makes behavioral bio-
metrics appealing—its ability to authenti-
cate a user based on nuanced behavioral 
traits—also makes it a privacy concern. If our 
behavioral patterns can be so precisely mon-
itored and analyzed, they can be replicated 
or exploited, leading to new forms of security 
vulnerabilities. The notion that machines can 
detect and record behaviors we’re not even conscious of ourselves not only challenges 
our concept of privacy but also highlights 
how these patterns, once considered person-
al and private, can become accessible and 
potentially misused. This duality presents a 
critical challenge: balancing the innovative 
applications of behavioral biometrics against 
the imperative to protect individual privacy 
and ensure the security of personal data.
AI can track unconscious patterns in human behaviors like typing cadence and keyboard pressure to de-
rive insights about inner emotional states without explicit user permission.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
92© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI operations, particularly those involving deep learning and complex model 
training, are significantly more computationally intensive than traditional com-
puting tasks. This intensity stems from the need to process vast amounts of 
data and perform countless calculations rapidly to train models, recognize pat-
terns, and make decisions. Consequently, AI demands considerably more energy 
to sustain these operations, as the intricate algorithms and large-scale data 
processing require substantial computational resources, leading to higher ener-
gy consumption compared to conventional computing workloads. On the other 
hand, AI is also helping solve environmental issues. A Canadian startup, Rail-
Vision Analytics, developed AI software that helps train engineers drive more 
efficiently, potentially saving significant amounts of diesel fuel and reducing 
the rail industry’s carbon emissions. This technology, which is like Google Maps 
but for trains, advises engineers on when to speed up or stay idle, optimizing 
fuel use and contributing to a potential annual reduction of over 20,000 tons 
of carbon emissions if widely adopted, equivalent to removing more than 4,000 
cars off the road each year.New Architectures to Make AI Workloads 
More Efficient
As AI models become more complex and 
larger, consuming a greater share of our 
computing resources, their energy usage also 
escalates. One promising approach to make 
AI-intense compute more energy efficient is 
by using photonic AI chips, which harness 
light rather than electricity for orders-of-mag-
nitude better efficiency at matrix multiplica-
tions—a core operation for deep learning. A 
Stanford team recently achieved a milestone 
by training an optical neural network chip to 
label data points with 98% accuracy. For the 
first time, their photonic processor enabled 
light to flow bidirectionally to implement the 
backpropagation algorithms vital for training. 
While refinements remain, this demonstrates 
the promise of optical computing to slash 
the carbon footprint of AI workloads.
Neuromorphic chips offer another model of 
efficient AI hardware, taking inspiration from 
the human brain’s simultaneously distrib-
uted storing and processing of information. 
Rather than shuttling data back and forth like conventional computers, neuromorphic 
processors like Intel’s Loihi store memory 
within computation. Specializing in sensory 
processing, these chips already achieve 1,000x 
higher efficiency than traditional hardware for 
tasks like gesture and sound recognition. 
In a groundbreaking approach, researchers 
envision biocomputers powered by networked 
human brain organoids—essentially mini-
brains grown from stem cells. “Organoid 
intelligence” holds significant potential for 
augmenting computing capabilities while 
concurrently addressing the escalating energy 
consumption demands driven by advance-
ments in artificial intelligence and supercom-
puting (see the Computing report for more 
information on organoid intelligence). Despite 
traditional computers’ ability to process 
calculations at speeds far surpassing human 
capabilities, human brains demonstrate supe-
rior performance in complex decision-making 
tasks, such as differentiating between a dog 
and a cat. Running AI on organoids could be 
the key to achieving human-like complex deci-
sion-making in an energy-efficient manner.WHAT DOES AI HAVE TO DO WITH ESG? TECH
93© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT DOES AI HAVE TO DO WITH ESG? 
A Nuclear Renaissance for AI Workloads
The monumental computational require-
ments of advancing AI could catalyze a 
nuclear power renaissance. Microsoft is 
exploring the use of next-generation small 
modular nuclear reactors (SMRs) to power its 
data centers and AI operations. SMRs promise 
cheaper, faster modular construction com-
pared to traditional nuclear plants, which are 
often over-budget and delayed. Microsoft’s 
approach was hinted at further in the fact 
that they already have a deal to buy Clean 
Energy Credits from Ontario Power Genera-
tion, which is on track to be the first utility to 
deploy an SMR in North America. Companies 
like Rolls-Royce, Last Energy, NuScale, Oklo, 
and TerraPower (backed by Bill Gates) are also 
developing various SMR models. Similarly, 
Kärnfull Next in Sweden plans to use SMRs to 
power data centers. The pivot toward nuclear 
energy, particularly next-generation SMRs, is 
a strategic response to the dual challenges of 
meeting the high energy demands of AI and 
achieving climate goals.viruses and their animal hosts. In a practical 
demonstration of AI’s environmental appli-
cations, a research team from the University 
of Waterloo has developed an AI tool, Plas-
ticNet, to identify microplastics with unprec-
edented speed and accuracy. This technol-
ogy is particularly crucial for mitigating the 
environmental and health hazards posed by 
microplastics, commonly found in food and 
water sources. By enhancing the efficiency 
of identifying these pollutants, PlasticNet 
supports wastewater treatment and food 
production industries in making informed 
decisions to protect the environment and 
public health.Environmental AI 
AI presents a dual-edged sword in its impact 
on the environment, with its capabilities ex-
tending to both contributing to and alleviat-
ing climate change. David Rolnick from Mc-
Gill University and Mila—Quebec AI Institute, 
notes that while AI’s energy consumption 
and the promotion of consumerism through 
AI-based advertising may exacerbate climate 
challenges, it also offers solutions for envi-
ronmental conservation. For instance, AI is 
being utilized to monitor and curb deforesta-
tion effectively.
A recent paper from the Cary Institute of 
Ecosystem Studies highlights how princi-
ples from ecology could inspire a new wave 
of AI development. This synergy between AI 
and ecology is seen as a pathway to address 
pressing global issues like disease out-
breaks, biodiversity loss, and the repercus-
sions of climate change. AI’s application in 
ecology is already proving beneficial, aiding 
ecologists in detecting patterns within 
vast data sets to make precise predictions, 
like identifying potential human-infecting 
While AI’s computational demands pose sustain-
ability challenges, it can also enable climate miti-
gation - models can guide efficient resource usage, 
accelerate green tech R&D, and predict environ-
mental impact.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.94© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.POLICY AND 
REGULATIONSTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
95© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW DOES GEOPOLITICS FACTOR INTO THE DEVELOPMENT OF AI,  
AND IS THERE REALLY A NEW COLD WAR?
Countries are increasingly nationalis-
tic about advancing domestic AI capa-
bilities, with major investments and 
restrictions aimed at getting an edge, 
even as collaboration fractures. This 
extends into military contexts, where 
AI drives rapid innovations in areas 
like weapons systems, wargaming, 
and cyber operations—innovations 
dual in nature for both defense and 
potential offense. The combination of 
deteriorating cooperation and uncon-
trolled AI militarization risks fueling 
a dangerous tech-centric arms race. 
Unless cooperative norms are estab-
lished, AI may drive global strategic 
realignments as impactful as 20th 
century nuclear and space races.AI Nationalism
Governments are racing to establish national 
AI champions and reduce reliance on foreign 
technology. After high-profile chatbot debuts 
like ChatGPT spawned in the US, 2023 wit-
nessed nations worldwide scramble to nur-
ture domestic AI capabilities, allocating tens 
of billions in funding. France unveiled sub-
stantial funding for startup Mistral. India’s 
Krutrim launched the country’s first multi-
lingual model. Abu Dhabi commercialized its 
Falcon system. Beyond economic impacts, 
concerns mix technological prestige with na-
tional security and ideological control. The US 
and China are at the forefront of this tug-of-
war, each pledging billions toward AI invest-
ments. While US companies are pioneering 
the most advanced LLMs, the US government 
is concentrating resources on growing home-
made chip capabilities, aiming to lessen reli-
ance on imports critical for national security. 
Concurrently, the US has imposed stringent 
export controls to limit the dissemination of 
advanced AI technology to rivals like China 
and Russia. With Western companies barred 
from exporting cutting-edge AI chips, adver-sarial states invest heavily to replace blocked 
supplies. China has earmarked hundreds of 
billions to develop domestic chip fabrication 
immune to US sanctions. The Chinese gov-
ernment has invested heavily in replicating 
the chip supply chain domestically, aiming to 
insulate itself from Western sanctions. See “The 
AI-Driven Chip War” for more. 
China also approaches AI on ideological 
grounds. The country mandated that AI align 
with the “core values of socialism,” effectively 
limiting the influence of Western-developed 
AI systems within its borders. This stance has 
propelled Chinese tech giants like Alibaba 
and Baidu to develop their own generative 
AI tools, despite challenges in matching the 
impact of their Western counterparts. Russia 
also perceives American AI advancements as 
a cultural and ethical threat, with President 
Vladimir Putin highlighting the dangers posed 
by Western LLMs to Russian “traditional val-
ues.” This reflects a broader concern over AI’s 
potential to shape cultural and ethical norms, 
prompting Russia to explore the development 
of homegrown AI solutions.After Nagasaki and Hiroshima, 
it took 18 years to get to a 
treaty over test bans and 
things like that. We don’t have 
that kind of time today.” 
—former Google CEO Eric Schmidt,  
 on the urgency to create guardrails for AI.TECH
96© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW DOES GEOPOLITICS FACTOR INTO THE DEVELOPMENT OF AI,  
AND IS THERE REALLY A NEW COLD WAR?
The AI-Driven Chip War
Rising tensions between the US and China 
are catalyzing a supply chain schism for the 
AI chips critical to national competitiveness. 
This divide has been exacerbated by strategic 
moves such as the CHIPS Act and increasingly 
stringent export controls, which have partic-
ularly targeted the semiconductor sector—a 
vital component of AI development. Efforts by 
companies like Nvidia to adapt by launching 
China-specific chips were thwarted by new 
US restrictions, leading Chinese companies 
to turn to domestic suppliers such as Huawei. 
Additionally, Dutch firm ASML canceled ship-
ments of advanced semiconductor manufac-
turing equipment to China under US pressure, 
highlighting efforts to curb China’s access 
to crucial AI development technologies. The 
standoff has prompted China to explore 
alternatives like RISC-V, an open-source chip 
architecture, as a means to bypass interna-
tional restrictions. This move has sparked 
debate in the US about the potential risks 
of technology transfer and the feasibility of 
restricting contributions to RISC-V due to its 
global, royalty-free nature. The intensification of the Chip War is leading 
to a bifurcation in the AI chip market, with 
potential long-term implications for global 
technological advancement and cooperation. 
This divergence not only underscores the 
strategic importance of semiconductors in 
national security and AI development but 
also hints at the emergence of distinct tech-
nological spheres, each aligned with diver-
gent national values and priorities.
 
The chip war could force a seismic restructuring of international manufacturing supply chains, trade flows, 
and technology innovation networks.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
97© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Advancements in artificial intelli-
gence are reshaping modern warfare 
in unprecedented and concerning 
ways. Militaries worldwide are explor-
ing how to best leverage AI for tactical 
advantages, including through auton-
omous weapons systems, wargaming 
simulations, and automated hacking 
tools. However, these technologies 
raise pressing ethical issues and 
could dangerously escalate conflicts. 
The complex tradeoffs surrounding 
AI and defense boil down to a central 
tension: harnessing potential benefits 
to national security versus controlling 
for geopolitical risks. members while outlining a roadmap for 
adoption. Additionally, the First Committee 
of the UN General Assembly adopted a draft 
resolution in 2023 calling for the UN secre-
tary-general to conduct a comprehensive 
study of lethal autonomous weapons. The 
committee instructed the secretary-general 
to consult member states and civil society 
on addressing humanitarian, legal, security, 
technological, and ethical concerns related 
to autonomous weapons.
Simulating Warfare
Given the rising tensions between the US 
and China over Taiwan, several groups are 
building AI-powered simulation tools to war-
game a future conflict. In China, the People’s 
Liberation Army has been using AI simula-
tion tools to prepare for military operations 
against Taiwan. 
The Center for Strategic and International,  
a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research or-
ganization, developed a wargame involving 
an amphibious invasion of Taiwan. After 24 
rounds of gameplay, the US and its allies Japan and Taiwan successfully defeated a 
conventional amphibious invasion by China. 
While Taiwan remained autonomous in the 
simulation, its economy was devastated and 
the US lost hundreds of aircraft and tens of 
thousands of lives––while the Chinese Com-
munist Party never really destabilized. Games 
that use real-world data to run simulations are 
augmenting the work of military strategists, 
so that leaders can validate or revise their pos-
tures on deterrence, invasion, and defense.
AI Used to Guide Military Strikes
In 2021, the US military said that it had started 
using AI to guide its airstrikes, deploying algo-
rithms to a live operational kill chain. The kill 
chain is a process of gathering intelligence, 
performing analysis, weighing risks, and 
deploying weapons to destroy a target. Using a 
modified process, an AI system was deployed 
into the Air Force Distributed Common Ground 
System to analyze troves of intelligence, which 
would have required a significant amount of 
human hours to complete. The new AI system 
cannot order a strike on its own, but it is now 
automatically identifying possible targets.Autonomous Weapons Policies
The US Department of Defense recently up-
dated its guidance on autonomy in weapons 
systems. The original 2012 policy, and a 2017 
update, did not explicitly mention AI. The 
DOD updated its AWS definition by removing 
references to a “human operator” and re-
placing it with simply “operator,” a subtle yet 
notable shift clearing the way for future sys-
tems with decreased human oversight. This 
new directive is aimed at helping to clarify 
the process for developing autonomous 
or semi-autonomous weapons systems. 
Previous policies, such as the Ethical Prin-
ciples for Artificial Intelligence (2020) and 
Responsible Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
and Implementation Pathway (2021), were 
intended to guide decision making for the 
development and deployment of AI within 
the military. 
The policy change comes on the heels of 
other recent government actions addressing 
military AI. In late 2022, NATO released its 
Autonomy Implementation Plan, arguing AI 
systems offer clear opportunities for alliance COULD AI BE INVOLVED IN—OR CAUSE—A HOT WAR?TECH
98© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Automated T arget Recognition
Lethal autonomous weapons systems, 
powered by AI, are capable of finding tar-
gets autonomously and making decisions 
to complete a mission. In 2022, a lieutenant 
colonel in the Ukrainian military said that he 
and a group called Aerorozvidka had devel-
oped special drones that make use of auto-
mated target recognition. While it’s unclear 
whether Aerorozvidka actually carried out 
test missions, the fact remains that machine 
learning–based vision for automated target 
recognition already exists. In response, 70 
nations delivered a joint statement at the UN 
General Assembly calling for a ban on autono-
mous weapons––but little progress has been 
made in the months since.
Automating Offensive Attacks Using AI
Thanks to advancements in AI, one of the big 
trends in security is automated hacking— in 
short, software that’s built to out-hack the 
human hackers. DARPA launched a Cyber 
Grand Challenge project in 2016, with a mis-
sion to design computer systems capable of 
beating hackers at their own game. DARPA tegic insights. By fusing photographs, drone 
footage, and overhead views, AI integrates 
distinct perspectives into a unified assess-
ment of terrain and enemy movements.
This augmented analytics empowers a new 
paradigm of cost-effective warfare centered 
around drones. Affordable models either 
commercially sourced or improvised as 
DIY drones generate valuable intelligence 
rivaling America’s far more expensive Reaper 
and Predator UAVs. Tight integration with 
cutting-edge systems like Delta further 
multiplies impact. After proving effective in 
2022 trials, Ukraine greenlit Delta’s full-scale 
February deployment. Pulling sensor, aerial, 
and ground reports into a consolidated data 
lake, this cloud-based architecture furnishes 
commanders with an integrated common 
operating picture for tactical decisions.
Algorithmic Warfighting
Future wars could be fought entirely in code, 
using data and algorithms as powerful 
weapons. The current global order is being 
shaped by artificial intelligence, and the wanted to show that smarter automated sys-
tems can reduce the response time—and fix 
system flaws—to just a few seconds. Spot-
ting and fixing critical vulnerabilities is a 
task that might take a human hacker sever-
al months or even years to complete, and yet 
the machine that won the Grand Challenge 
did it in just a fraction of that time. 
The winner became the first nonhuman enti-
ty to earn the DEF CON’s Black Badge, which 
is the hacking community’s equivalent of an 
Oscar. Very soon, malicious actors will create 
autonomous systems capable of automat-
ically learning new environments, exposing 
vulnerabilities and flaws, and then exploit-
ing them for gain—or whatever the stated 
objective, which could simply be generalized 
mayhem.
AI-Assisted Situational Awareness 
Ukraine has become a test bed for modern 
AI-enabled battlefield awareness. Geospa-
tial intelligence leverages neural networks 
to combine satellite imagery, social media 
posts, and other open-source data into stra-COULD AI BE INVOLVED IN—OR CAUSE—A HOT WAR?
AI is enabling the development of weapons that 
can select targets and attack on their own. The UN 
General Assembly has called for banning this type 
of autonomous attack technology, but so far there 
has been no ban put in place.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
99© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
same countries leading the world in AI re-
search—the US, China, Israel, France, Russia, 
the UK, and South Korea—are also developing 
weapons systems that include at least some 
autonomous functionality. 
In 2020, the US Air Force successfully flew 
an AI copilot on a U-2 spy plane in California, 
marking the first time in the history of the 
DOD that an AI algorithm trained to execute 
specific in-flight tasks was deployed. With 
the call sign ARTUµ, it was the mission com-
mander—though the flight was just practice. 
Future Today Institute analysis shows that the 
future of warfare encompasses more than tra-
ditional weapons. Using AI techniques, a mil-
itary can “win” by destabilizing an economy 
rather than demolishing countrysides and city 
centers. From that perspective, China’s unified 
march to advance AI puts the emerging super-
power dangerously far ahead of the West.Mandating Ethics Guidelines for T ech 
Contractors
Project Maven was developed to enlist AI to 
analyze surveillance video. Initially, Google 
was the DOD’s vendor, but when employees 
found out they’d been working on a military 
project, thousands protested. It wasn’t the 
first time tech contractors had lost trust in 
the government. 
As a result, the Defense Innovation Unit is 
enforcing “responsible artificial intelligence” 
guidelines that vendors must adopt when 
building AI systems, models, or applications 
for the DOD. The guidelines offer specific 
instructions that must be followed during 
planning, development, and deployment, 
which include provisions for risk assess-
ment. This represents a longer-term trend: 
government agencies requiring transparency 
in AI projects.COULD AI BE INVOLVED IN—OR CAUSE—A HOT WAR?
The future of warfare may largely involve fighting via cyberattacks powered by AI systems rather than con-
ventional physical weapons. Militaries have started using AI as co-pilots in spy planes and drones, pointing 
to increased AI integration in defense.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.100© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.REGIONAL 
APPROACHESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
101© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
COUNTRIES TRY TO REGULATE AI, BUT PLANS DIVERGE 
Governments worldwide are trying 
to balance maximizing AI’s benefits 
with mitigating its risks by establish-
ing regulatory frameworks. So far, 31 
countries have passed AI regulations 
and 13 more are debating AI laws. 
There are significant divergences 
between each country’s distinct ap-
proach to regulating the technology. 
Some nations, like Israel, Japan, and 
Australia, have focused on revising 
existing laws to facilitate AI develop-
ment, while others, like the UAE, are 
crafting broad national AI strategies 
with minimal regulatory emphasis. 
Countries, like Russia, Iran, North 
Korea, Syria, and Iraq, have opted to 
outright ban specific services like 
ChatGPT. The EU’s AI Act categorizes 
systems by risk levels and restricts 
the highest risk applications. Like the 
EU, China has introduced AI-specific obtain licenses before exporting cer-
tain technologies to these entities, 
aiming to address national securi-
ty concerns without automatically 
imposing a full embargo, reflecting 
a significant effort to regulate the 
flow of sensitive technologies to 
organizations implicated in uneth-
ical practices. The impact on these 
Chinese companies and China’s AI 
industry could be disastrous, de-
pending on enforcement measures 
and these companies’ reliance on 
US technology, worsening US-China 
relations.
These complex tensions parallel 
past situations like GDPR in Europe, 
where large multinational compa-
nies often end up defaulting to the 
most stringent regulations globally 
even if not universally binding. This 
scenario could plausibly unfold with major players standardizing elements 
of higher-bar AI governance models 
like the EU’s for consistency. The lack 
of alignment across the proliferating 
patchwork of national and regional AI 
laws risks hampering innovation and 
global collaboration. But ironing out 
conflicts poses immense challenges 
given different priorities surrounding 
development versus human rights 
and ethics.legislative frameworks, but unlike 
the EU, the frameworks are centered 
on enforcing “socialist core values” 
in AI. Brazil’s draft AI policies pri-
oritize user rights and risk assess-
ments, differing from Israel’s model 
underscoring responsible innovation 
and sector-specific oversight. The 
UAE’s national strategy concentrates 
heavily on expanding AI integration 
rather than regulation.
On October 9, 2023, the US Bureau 
of Industry and Security of the De-
partment of Commerce added 28 
Chinese entities, including eight 
leading technology companies, to 
its entity list for their involvement 
in human rights violations against 
Uighur Muslims in Xinjiang, a move 
that China condemned as inter-
ference in its internal affairs. This 
listing requires US companies to TECH
102© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS THE US SPECIFICALLY REGULATING AI? 
The explosion of AI technologies is 
leading to both fascination and con-
cern among federal legislators, who 
are now exploring regulatory respons-
es without a clear consensus. Last 
October, the Biden administration is-
sued an executive order to ensure the 
safe and trustworthy development 
and use of AI, covering a wide range 
of AI systems beyond just generative 
AI and neural networks, affecting 
organizations across all economic 
sectors. Going forward, the National 
Institute of Standards and Technolo-
gy (NIST) will play a key role in es-
tablishing guidelines for AI systems, 
prompting organizations to assess 
their use of AI and their reliance on 
AI-enabled products and services 
from third parties, and to align their 
AI risk management frameworks with 
NIST standards. But for now, there is society. State laws vary, focusing on 
consumer data privacy, combating 
AI-driven discrimination, especially 
in hiring practices, and address-
ing the manipulation of media in 
elections, with some states already 
implementing or proposing legisla-
tion to restrict deceptive AI-generat-
ed content. The US will likely adopt 
a bottom-up patchwork quilt of AI 
regulations instead of one sweeping 
law, like the EU’s AI Act. The US gov-
ernment will likely boost spending 
on AI and AI research, especially in 
defense and intelligence, and use its 
buying power to shape the market.A Patchwork Approach
In the US, the approach to regulating AI 
amounts to a diverse array of regulations that 
vary by state and sector, creating a patchwork 
framework rather than a unified national 
strategy. This decentralized approach results 
in differing standards and guidelines across 
jurisdictions, complicating compliance for 
organizations operating in multiple states and 
sectors within the AI landscape. Consider the 
current landscape of proposals and policies 
below.
Bias  
 The Algorithmic Accountability Act, a nota-
ble congressional proposal, would mandate 
companies to evaluate their algorithmic 
systems, including AI, for bias, effectiveness, 
and other factors if passed. Under the act, the 
Federal Trade Commission would be tasked 
with enforcing these evaluations, with a focus 
on preventing the use or sale of racially biased 
algorithms. However, the specifics of the FTC’s 
enforcement strategy remain undefined. no clear enforcement mechanism 
in place to check for compliance. 
Meanwhile, Congress is deliberating 
how to approach AI’s dual-edged 
sword of opportunities and challeng-
es, as it looks to local legislatures 
for precedents. So far, more than 30 
states have enacted laws address-
ing AI in diverse ways, from specific 
policy concerns to establishing bod-
ies for studying AI’s impact. Senate 
Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and 
others have emphasized the need 
for AI regulation through initiatives 
like the AI Insights Forum, signaling 
a bipartisan understanding of its 
necessity. Some lawmakers con-
sider the European Union’s AI Act 
a model for comprehensive regula-
tion, suggesting that the US might 
follow with a similar framework to 
manage AI’s growing influence in TECH
103© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS THE US SPECIFICALLY REGULATING AI? 
Several US states and the District of Colum-
bia are enacting or proposing legislation to 
prevent AI and algorithmic decision-making 
tools from reinforcing societal discrimi-
nation. Laws are being passed primarily in 
Democratic-led states, focusing on areas like 
insurance, employee surveillance, and hiring 
practices. For instance, Colorado mandates 
insurers to disclose and manage risks of 
algorithm use to ensure fair coverage. Mas-
sachusetts is considering a ban on AI-based 
employee surveillance technologies. In D.C., 
proposed laws would restrict service eligibili-
ty decisions made by algorithms and require 
user notification about how their data is used. 
Additionally, New York City and some states 
are addressing AI’s role in hiring, requiring 
bias audits and transparency in the use of au-
tomated decision systems.
Copyright  
The US Copyright Office has ruled that AI-gen-
erated content typically doesn’t qualify for 
copyright protection as it’s not human-creat-
ed. But this could change now that tools like 
Sora pose new threats to the film industry.Deepfakes  
The US National Defense Authorization Act 
includes provisions that address the grow-
ing problem of deepfakes, requiring the 
Department of Homeland Security to issue 
an annual report for the next five years on 
the risks posed by deepfakes. In 2021, the US 
Senate Committee on Homeland Security 
and Governmental Affairs voted unanimous-
ly to advance the Deepfake Task Force Act, 
which would establish a public-private team 
to investigate technology strategies and to 
develop policies that could curb risk. 
Numerous states, including California, Texas, 
Minnesota, and Washington, have enacted 
laws, while New York, New Jersey, and Mich-
igan have proposed legislation, aimed at 
either prohibiting or requiring disclosure of 
manipulated media. Many of these measures 
are intended to prevent public deception 
regarding political candidates or to influence 
election outcomes.
Misuse  
The topic of auditing misuse is also on the Privacy  
Proposals at the federal level include a 
complete prohibition on using personal data 
for targeted advertising and FTC-mandated 
data minimization, restricting websites to 
collect only data pertinent to their specific 
functions. At the state level, at least 12 states 
have enacted regulations governing auto-
mated decision systems, including AI, for 
profiling consumers based on personal data. 
Virginia’s 2021 Consumer Data Protection 
Act is a pioneering example, mandating risk 
assessments and consumer rights protec-
tions when entities process over 25,000 
people’s data for profiling posing height-
ened harm risks. States are increasingly 
following Virginia’s model by instituting 
similar regulatory frameworks surrounding 
data-driven automated systems. Addition-
ally, some jurisdictions like New York City 
are specifically restricting AI usage in hiring 
practices through measures like bias audits 
and candidate notifications when screening 
algorithms are deployed.
The US government is concerned about the po-
tential misuse of deepfake technology, especially 
with elections approaching, which is why the latest 
National Defense Authorization Act includes new 
provisions aimed at tackling the challenges posed 
by increasingly realistic synthetic media.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
104© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS THE US SPECIFICALLY REGULATING AI? 
congressional agenda. Legislators like Sens. 
Ted Budd and Ed Markey are pushing for the 
Department of Health and Human Services 
to assess AI’s biological risks and develop 
strategies against its use in bioweapons or 
artificial pandemics. 
Licensing  
The concept of licensing requirements for AI, 
akin to the stringent regulation of food and 
pharmaceuticals, is gaining momentum. 
Inspired by Andrew Tutt’s 2017 proposal, this 
approach suggests an agency could enforce 
pre-market approval for algorithms in certain 
applications, effectively requiring a govern-
ment license before public deployment. Prom-
inent figures like OpenAI’s Sam Altman, Rand 
Corp.’s Jason Matheny, and New York Universi-
ty’s Gary Marcus have supported such licens-
ing, drawing parallels with the Food and Drug 
Administration’s model.
Compute  
In October 2023, the Bureau of Industry and 
Security introduced updated rules to en-
hance its October 7, 2022, regulations. These Agency (IAEA) to govern superintelligence 
efforts and safe AI deployment worldwide. A 
2020 law has already mandated the creation 
of a task force to design NAIRR.
However, others argue existing institutions 
could handle AI oversight without requiring 
new bureaucracies. Examples include gov-
ernment bodies like the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, FDA, Securities 
Exchange Commission, and Federal Commu-
nications Commission, as well as beefing up 
AI and tech expertise within established sci-
entific institutions such as the Department 
of Energy, National Science Foundation, and 
NIST. Critics argue new institutions may not 
be more effective than today’s agencies, 
citing issues faced by analogous bodies like 
IAEA in comprehensively monitoring rele-
vant technologies globally. There are also 
questions around feasibility of meaningfully 
tracking AI development as opposed to phys-
ical materials.
At least 12 states have passed laws man-
dating government or related entities to research AI to enhance understanding and 
assess potential impacts. While some of these 
initiatives delay targeted regulation, others 
have led to tangible steps. For instance, Ver-
mont’s Artificial Intelligence Task Force’s anal-
ysis resulted in the state’s Division of Artificial 
Intelligence, which annually reviews AI usage 
and its effects within state government.
Public-Private Partnerships
The abundance of AI job listings across practi-
cally every American industry signals surging 
demand for related skills. The White House 
has issued a call for AI talent to join the fed-
eral government, following President Biden’s 
executive order for the safe, secure, and ethi-
cal development and use of AI. This initiative 
seeks experts to help implement AI technol-
ogies across various government sectors to 
enhance services, ensure AI safety and equity, 
and maintain the country’s leadership in AI 
innovation. Many US fabs, which are funded in 
part by the Chips Act, face construction delays 
because of a shortage of skilled workers.
The US has enlisted allies like Japan, the revisions focus on closing loopholes in the 
existing policy, further limiting China’s 
access to advanced AI semiconductors and 
manufacturing tools. This move strengthens 
the US strategy to impede China’s military AI 
development.
Conflicting Views About Institutional Roles
Debate persists over whether new institu-
tions should be formed to oversee AI devel-
opment and safety, or if this responsibility 
should fall to existing agencies. Proponents 
of new institutions argue they could have a 
major positive impact, just as bodies like 
the National Transportation Safety Board did 
for transportation safety. Suggestions for 
new AI oversight bodies include a Nation-
al Algorithms Safety Board to monitor and 
ensure safety in algorithmic and AI systems, 
a federally funded National Artificial Intelli-
gence Research Resource (NAIRR) to support 
and coordinate AI research, an international 
collaborative facility modeled after CERN to 
attract top global AI talent and focus efforts 
on pursuing AI safely, and an organization 
similar to the International Atomic Energy TECH
105© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS THE US SPECIFICALLY REGULATING AI? 
Netherlands, and Germany to tighten their 
own export regimes. While competing nations 
pursue more centralized strategies, the US 
distinctive edge lies in decentralized AI inno-
vation across promising startups and tech 
giants alike. 
Large companies have always lobbied to 
influence policy and regulation. But as the 
tech giants amass power and wealth, they are 
making key decisions that impact diplomacy 
and geopolitics.
Big Tech companies are standing up depart-
ments dedicated to geopolitics. Microsoft 
President Brad Smith regularly meets with 
heads of state, and in 2023 played a key role 
at the World Economic Forum’s Annual Meet-
ing. Smith developed an international treaty 
called the Digital Geneva Convention to pro-
tect citizens against state-sponsored cyber-
attacks. Microsoft’s Digital Diplomacy Group 
actively works on a tech-focused approach to 
foreign policy. The company sees corporate 
foreign policy as good business that builds 
trust and enables long-term planning. Meta, repair vulnerabilities in the US government’s 
infrastructure, responding to the increasing 
deployment of the technology by hackers for 
nefarious activities.Google, Amazon, Salesforce, and many other 
companies are now building teams centered 
on geopolitics and digital diplomacy. More 
than a dozen countries are creating ambas-
sador-like positions charged to negotiate 
with the leaders of US Big Tech companies, 
with the aim of mediating disagreements, 
collaborating on shared interests and 
developing public-private alliances. The 
longer-term implications of corporations in-
fluencing global politics could be profound. 
What if a company’s priorities differ from the 
national priorities of its home government?
National Security
While late to consider AI as a national securi-
ty issue, the US is quickly playing catchup. 
The Pentagon is considering the creation 
of an extensive network that leverages AI 
along with drones and autonomous systems 
within the upcoming two years, aimed at 
mitigating threats posed by Russia, Chi-
na and non-state actors. The White House 
has already initiated a multimillion-dollar 
cybersecurity competition aimed at en-
couraging the adoption of AI to identify and 
The Pentagon is considering plans to build an 
expansive network utilizing AI and drones over the 
next two years to address threats from Russia, Chi-
na, and non-state groups.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
106© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS CHINA DOING? 
China is an undisputed global lead-
er in AI. Under President Xi Jinping, 
the country has made tremendous 
strides in many fields, but especially 
in AI. Businesses and the government 
have collaborated on a sweeping plan 
to make China the world’s primary 
AI innovation center by 2030, and 
it’s making serious progress toward 
that goal. That plan is unlikely to be 
repealed by a new government; China 
abolished Xi’s term limits and will 
effectively allow him to remain in 
power for life.
Within the next decade, China plans 
to meet two crucial milestones: By 
2027, its People’s Liberation Army will 
have a modern-ready force, and by 
2030 the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP) expects to have outpaced the 
US in AI and become the dominant China’s Expanding Market
It’s a challenging time for Chinese startups 
because of rising tensions with the West. 
Companies hoping to gain traction in Europe 
are making efforts to cloak their origin. 
Shein, the e-commerce website popular 
among teens, says it was “founded in L.A.,” 
but the company actually got its start in 
Nanjing and Guangzhou by relying on the 
region’s manufacturing centers and ample 
supply chains. Or look at TikTok, which has 
said it’s a US-based company—while the 
app’s parent Chinese company ByteDance 
has employed linguistic gymnastics to sepa-
rate itself. Binance, the world’s largest crypto 
exchange, which was created in China, says 
that it doesn’t have a headquarters located 
in one physical location. 
It’s no wonder that as Chinese startups 
hope to expand globally, they’re seeking to 
distance themselves from the authoritarian 
regime in Beijing. But that creates political 
hurdles, especially as the CCP seeks to bring 
its home-grown technology ecosystem into 
lockstep with party leaders.The result could be a future parallel uni-
verse, in which Chinese-created AI systems 
are shaped both by enormous amounts of 
data and local laws. In Brazil, a generative AI 
system might write an unfettered political 
essay in Portuguese about a leader––while in 
China, that same essay would be automatical-
ly filtered for politically sensitive words and 
phrases. As the CCP enforces new regulations 
targeting AI and what the government calls 
“deep synthesis tech,” the ways in which peo-
ple experience and work alongside AI could be 
dramatically different.
China’s Big T ech
Alibaba, Tencent, and Baidu, which have made 
important advancements in AI research, may 
find it difficult to keep innovating. Starting in 
2020, the CCP initiated a wave of legislation 
aimed at its tech sector, introducing anti-mo-
nopoly legislation focused on the platform 
economy and promoting data security and 
privacy laws. The Personal Information Pro-
tection Law (PIPL), China’s version of the EU’s 
GDPR, went into effect in 2021. What followed 
were a series of crackdowns targeting some of force. China is producing what it 
calls “intelligentized” technologies 
to bolster both its economy and 
military.
Recently, China took major steps to 
shape the future of AI by releasing 
its own pretrained models, and it is 
forging ahead with its own natural 
language processing models, which 
makes sense since the most popular 
models in use now are trained on 
English text. China now has at least 
130 LLMs, which accounts for 40% of 
the global total, closely trailing the 
US. Despite this rapid development, 
investors and analysts caution that 
many of these models lack sustain-
able business strategies, offer sim-
ilar functionalities, and face rising 
operational expenses.TECH
107© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS CHINA DOING? 
China’s most successful tech companies. Ul-
timately, this regulation wasn’t about “break-
ing up” China’s Big Tech—the CCP wanted to 
focus its tech sector on achieving research 
and development goals set by the govern-
ment and military within the decade.
Increasingly, Beijing is pressuring its me-
ga-successful big tech companies to share 
data with the state and to perform research to 
support the vision of the CCP. Going forward, 
Beijing aims to direct the might of its tech 
companies at programs of national strategic 
importance rather than making video games. 
China’s tech crackdown could cool private in-
vestment in Chinese companies, which could 
result in a chilling effect on innovation and 
economic growth, and also free up capital for 
emerging markets.
Deepening International Ties 
China is actively building out AI infrastruc-
ture and ecosystems, specifically focused on 
developing nations. By focusing on the infra-
structure and the ecosystem, Beijing is not 
just setting the stage—it’s constructing the rest of the world combined. 
This strategy mirrors China’s Belt and Road 
initiative but instead of building physical 
infrastructure in developing nations to 
increase influence, China is building the 
technological infrastructure, which includes 
skills and data flow. However, US export con-
trols on key semiconductors and technolo-
gies to China present obstacles. In response, 
China has taken measures such as prohib-
iting the use of chips from American com-
pany Micron in its infrastructure and imple-
menting a licensing system for the export of 
specific essential metals like gallium and 
germanium, which are crucial for high-end 
semiconductors as well as components in 
solar panels and electric vehicles.
As China shapes the world order in its own 
image, it is simultaneously exporting its 
technologies and surveillance systems to 
other countries with authoritarian regimes. 
When the CCP expands into African coun-
tries and throughout Southeast Asia and 
Latin America, it will also begin to eschew entire theater to establish Chinese-designed 
AI systems.
Over 140 cities globally, from Kuala Lum-
pur to Nairobi, are being transformed into 
“smart cities” and “safe cities” powered by 
AI. Chinese companies are providing the 
technology and expertise to supercharge as-
pects like transportation, logistics, and law 
enforcement. China already leads the world 
in exports of AI-enabled surveillance sys-
tems. China’s “Luban workshop” initiative 
is another strategic move by China, offering 
vocational training globally that includes AI 
education. This has resulted in the creation 
of a workforce skilled in AI in various devel-
oping nations. China also created a “BRICS 
AI Study Group” to accelerate AI cooperation 
with other developing economies. Chinese 
tech companies even helped construct the 
premier AI company in the UAE. Additionally, 
China dominates the market for industrial 
robot installations, having surpassed Japan 
in 2013. The gap between China and other 
countries has only widened—in 2021, China 
installed more industrial robots than the 
China is funding smart cities powered by Chinese AI 
and surveillance technology in developing nations. 
The country is exporting advanced monitoring 
systems as part of a broader strategy to extend its 
technological and geopolitical influence. 
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
108© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS CHINA DOING? 
XXoperating systems, technologies, and in-
frastructure built by the West. Two Chinese 
companies— the state-controlled CEIEC and 
Huawei—built Ecuador’s surveillance sys-
tem, called ECU-911. The system promised to 
curb high murder rates and drug crime, but 
Ecuador could not afford the investment. As 
a result, a deal was struck for a Chinese-built 
surveillance system financed with Chinese 
loans. It was a prelude to a much more lucra-
tive deal: Ecuador eventually signed away big 
portions of its oil reserves to China to help 
finance infrastructure projects. Similar pack-
age deals have been brokered in Venezuela 
and Bolivia.
China is quietly weaponizing AI, too. China’s 
People’s Liberation Army is catching up to 
the US military, using AI for such tasks as 
spotting hidden images with drones. The 
Chinese military is equipping helicopters and 
jet fighters with AI. The government created 
a top-secret military lab—a Chinese version 
of DARPA—and it’s building billion-dollar 
AI national laboratories. China’s military is 
achieving remarkable AI successes, including a recent test of “swarm intelligence” that 
can automate dozens of armed drones.
When it comes to AI, leaders should moni-
tor escalating tensions between the US and 
China. But they should also remember that 
there are cells of rogue actors who could 
cripple our economies simply by mucking 
with the power or traffic grids, causing traf-
fic spikes on the internet, or locking us out 
of our connected home appliances. These 
aren’t big, obvious signs of aggression, and 
that is a problem for many countries, includ-
ing the US. Most governments don’t have 
a paradigm describing a constellation of 
aggressive actions. Each action on its own 
might be insignificant. What are the escala-
tion triggers? Without a definition, a strate-
gic vulnerability exists. 
China is quickly advancing military applications of AI, recently demonstrating swarm intelligence capabili-
ties to coordinate actions of dozens of armed drones.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
109© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS EUROPE DOING?
In late 2023, The European Union fi-
nalized negotiations on its landmark 
AI Act. This legislation establishes the 
world’s first comprehensive frame-
work for regulating AI systems. The 
overarching goals are to guarantee 
AI safety, uphold ethical standards, 
and drive European AI leadership. 
Specifically, the EU AI Act classifies AI 
systems into different risk categories 
based on their use cases. 
In February 2024, a new European AI 
Office, established within the Euro-
pean Commission, was announced 
to promote the development and use 
of safe and trustworthy AI across the 
EU, functioning as the core of a uni-
fied European AI governance system. 
Through the implementation of the 
AI Act, the office aims to safeguard 
health, safety, and fundamental 
rights, providing a stable legal en-ble and flexible use in multiple lan-
guages for various tasks, claiming 
to outperform or match other lead-
ing models on certain benchmarks. 
The company uses a novel mixture 
of experts (MoE) architecture, en-
hancing efficiency by routing tasks 
to specialized neural networks, 
making processing faster and less 
resource-intensive. Mistral made its 
models available for public use un-
der the Apache 2.0 license via Hug-
ging Face and BitTorrent—yes, the 
same BitTorrent that gained notori-
ety housing illegally copied movies 
and music and allowing downloads 
via its peer-to-peer network—and 
the company recently launched beta 
access to its API for different levels 
of Mistral models. 
Germany also recognizes the geo-
strategic importance of AI innova-tion to compete with American and 
Chinese tech giants. A new hub in the 
southeast city of Heilbronn aspires to 
be a startup epicenter applying AI to 
help German industrial leaders stay 
competitive. Germany has committed 
nearly 500 million euros toward AI 
research and innovation, aiming to 
enhance supercomputing infrastruc-
ture, skill development, and create 
150 new professorships, with a focus 
on achieving “technological sover-
eignty” and reducing its dependency 
on external powers. German Federal 
Minister of Education and Research 
Bettina Stark-Watzinger is lobbying 
for EU-wide cooperation in AI, partic-
ularly between Germany, France, and 
Scandinavian countries, to position 
Europe at the forefront of the global AI 
landscape. Despite all these commit-
ments, concerns linger about the slow vironment for businesses in all 27 
member states. It will be responsible 
for monitoring compliance and in 
enforcing AI regulations.
France aims to advance its AI ca-
pabilities and influence. President 
Macron promised more than $500 
million to cultivate French AI “cham-
pions” and counter Silicon Valley’s 
English-dominance in AI systems. 
Mistral, a Paris-based AI company 
founded by Arthur Mensch, Guillau-
me Lample, and Timothée Lacroix, 
former AI researchers at Meta and 
DeepMind, is gaining attention for 
its rapid growth and focus on devel-
oping smaller, high-performance AI 
models as an alternative to giants 
like OpenAI. Unlike some larger, 
more restrictive models, Mistral’s 
offerings can run locally with open 
weights, allowing for more accessi-TECH
110© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS EUROPE DOING?
pace of integrating AI into the broad-
er economy and the potential stifling 
effect of the EU’s AI Act on innova-
tion, highlighting the need for more 
effective transfer of research to prac-
tical applications and the creation of 
a robust AI-specific infrastructure.
Brexit continues to complicate Eu-
rope’s AI landscape. The UK gov-
ernment, following a white paper it 
published in March 2023, decided 
against introducing new AI-specif-
ic legislation, opting instead for a 
pro-innovation regulatory framework 
that leverages existing regulatory 
powers to manage AI technologies. 
This approach emphasizes high-level 
principles such as safety, transpar-
ency, and fairness to guide regu-
lators, without imposing statutory 
duties to ensure flexibility and adapt-
ability in AI oversight. One area still ethics and norms that the Kremlin 
opposes. Putin warned against the 
“digital cancellation” of traditional 
Russian culture by Western AI al-
gorithms, which he claimed often 
exclude or ignore Russian contribu-
tions to culture, science, and litera-
ture. He pledged significant invest-
ment in supercomputers and other 
technologies to enhance national AI 
research, underscoring the need for 
AI developments to be grounded in 
Russian traditional values and cul-
tural heritage.
Putin is justifiably worried about 
adopting a Western paradigm of 
AI. Models like ChatGPT are trained 
overwhelmingly in English and are 
likely to exhibit the same assump-
tions as English-language media 
that could contradict official nar-
ratives peddled by Russian media. Major Russian tech companies like 
Yandex and Sberbank are racing to 
build their own rivals to ChatGPT. 
But their offerings already lag be-
hind the accelerating innovation of 
US and Chinese tech giants. Western 
sanctions further hamper access to 
vital computing power. Perhaps most 
critically, Russia’s authoritarian at-
mosphere of censorship and distrust 
conflicts with the very nature of imag-
inative, generative AI.up for debate is intellectual property 
across news and entertainment me-
dia. The House of Lords have called 
for standardized regulatory powers 
and meaningful sanctions to deter 
wrongdoing––without explaining 
what oversight would need to entail, 
or how innovation can still be count-
ed on to stimulate the UK economy.
Finally, let’s not forget Russia, which 
seeks to counter Western dom-
inance in AI. In November 2023, 
Russian President Vladimir Putin 
announced plans for the develop-
ment of an AI national strategy, 
stressing that its focus would be to 
prevent Western monopoly. He criti-
cized the “monopolistic dominance” 
of foreign technology in Russia as 
unacceptable and dangerous, high-
lighting that many AI systems are 
trained on Western data, reflecting TECH
111© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS THE MIDDLE EAST DOING?
The United Arab Emirates is posi-
tioning itself as a neutral ground for 
the advancement of artificial intel-
ligence, aiming to bridge the gap 
between the US and China amidst 
ongoing geopolitical tensions. To 
date, the UAE government has shown 
deft diplomatic skills in navigating 
complex international relations that 
increasingly involve AI and other crit-
ical technologies.
Though the UAE government has 
worked hard to remain neutral, its 
companies are still caught in the 
crosshairs between the ongoing race 
between the US and China for AI su-
premacy. A major innovator based in 
Abu Dhabi, G42, develops advanced 
technologies across sectors like 
space, health care, energy, and secu-
rity, but in December 2023, it faced 
growing pressure to cut ties with In parallel, the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia has embarked on its own 
sweeping economic diversification 
agenda centered around AI. Through 
its Vision 2030 plan, the kingdom 
seeks to position itself for a future 
where the global economy is less 
dependent on oil and more driven 
by technology and innovation. The 
crown jewel of Vision 2030 is Neom, 
a futuristic megacity under con-
struction aiming to seamlessly inte-
grate cutting-edge technologies like 
robotics and AI across all aspects of 
daily life. 
The kingdom is backing its AI ambi-
tions with significant investments, 
including $20 billion specifically 
earmarked for advancing artificial 
intelligence. It established the Saudi 
Data and Artificial Intelligence Au-
thority (SDAIA) to drive the national AI strategy. SDAIA initiatives like the 
National Center for Artificial Intelli-
gence are designed to make Saudi 
Arabia an AI leader across priority 
industries such as health care. Global 
tech giants have taken note, with Chi-
na’s Huawei recently launching a new 
cloud data center in Riyadh to grow 
its digital offerings in the region. The 
facility will support AI applications 
and Arabic language models to power 
government services. Though Hua-
wei’s expansion may benefit Saudi 
AI progress in the near term, Wash-
ington is likely to view such collabo-
rations with concern given its wider 
technology rivalry with China.
The governance structures in KSA 
and the UAE allow for swifter deci-
sion-making and implementation of 
technology strategies compared to 
democracies, where public opinion on hardware suppliers such as Huawei. 
The decision to phase out Chinese 
hardware was also a move to pre-
serve G42’s access to US-made chips. 
Also late in 2023, the government 
launched a new state-sponsored AI 
company, AI71, to commercialize its 
leading LLM, Falcon. AI71 aspires to 
directly compete with leading AI labs 
like OpenAI. The UAE is also focusing 
on nurturing its homegrown talent 
in AI by investing in specialized edu-
cation. It established the Mohamed 
bin Zayed University of Artificial 
Intelligence (MBZUAI), recruiting 
renowned experts from institutions 
like University of California, Berkeley 
and Carnegie Mellon as its faculty. 
The university produces scores of 
graduates annually, most of whom 
work at local Emirati technology 
companies.TECH
112© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS THE MIDDLE EAST DOING?
issues like privacy and employment 
significantly influences policy. These 
nations have the financial resourc-
es to invest heavily in essential AI 
components like GPUs, having spent 
hundreds of millions on them, as well 
as the energy required to power these 
intensive processors.
Many Middle Eastern nations are positioning themselves as emerging AI hubs, aggressively investing in AI skills development, research, and entrepreneurship. 
The goal is to diversify their economies in anticipation of declining reliance on oil.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.113© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TALENTTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
114© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
As AI permeates industries, demand 
has soared for technical talent to 
build and deploy AI capabilities. How-
ever, the rapid pace of innovation has 
yielded a global AI skills shortage. 
Employers struggle to attract talent, 
especially when competing against 
prestigious technology giants with 
deep pockets. This breeds uncertainty 
on optimal strategies, leading execu-
tives to wonder about the precise mix 
of skills needed in their workforce, 
whether current hiring approaches ap-
ply for burgeoning AI roles, and how to 
evaluate the technical caliber required 
for AI related work.of AI skills across occupations, has revealed 
that as of 2022, the regions leading in AI skill 
penetration are India, the United States, and 
Germany. The increasing prevalence of these 
skills points to a transformative phase in the 
job market, where AI proficiency is becoming 
a critical asset for professionals in a multi-
tude of sectors.
AI Brain Drain from Academia
A striking shift has occurred in where AI Ph.D. 
graduates build their careers. The Artificial 
Intelligence Index Report from Stanford 
shows an increase in the proportion of AI 
Ph.D. graduates in North America entering 
the industry after graduation, from 44.4% 
in 2010 to roughly 48% in 2019, while the 
percentage taking up academic positions 
declined from 42.1% in 2010 to 23.7% in that 
same period. The reason is clear: Compet-
itive salaries offered by the private sector, 
along with the chance to work on applied 
AI research, has tempted Ph.D.s away from 
the classroom to corporate America. Lead-
ing AI organizations, such as OpenAI and Anthropic, are offering starting salaries for 
new researchers in the range of $700,000 to 
$900,000, according to salary negotiation 
service Rora, with Google even offering sub -
stantial restricted stock grants to attract top 
data scientists. That’s orders of magnitude 
higher pay than what even tenured professors 
can expect from their universities. Top aca-
demics now earn generous corporate salaries 
and benefits, and they get to work in a similar 
tenured environment that’s carefully cultivat-
ed to replicate their experience in academia.
Tech companies are also endowing AI profes-
sorships at top universities. In some cases, 
professors take one- or two-year sabbaticals 
to work at tech companies and then return to 
their universities. But corporate benefits can 
be difficult to give up, and companies need 
the talent. Poaching academia today could rob 
the future of future AI experts: Without great 
scholars, who will train the next generation of 
innovators?Demand for AI-related Skills Increases 
Across Sectors
Employer demand for AI skills is rising rap-
idly across nearly every industry in the US. 
With the exception of sectors such as agri-
culture, forestry, fishing, and hunting, there 
has been a noticeable uptick in AI-related 
job postings—from 1.7% of all postings in 
2021 to 1.9% in 2022. Employers are actively 
seeking individuals proficient in machine 
learning, which tops the list of in-demand 
AI skills, followed by knowledge in artificial 
intelligence and natural language process-
ing. The surge in these specific areas un-
derscores a shift in the job market, with AI 
skill clusters achieving greater prominence 
than they had a decade prior. Demand for 
Python skills has also increased, evidence 
of its growing popularity as an AI coding 
language. This increased AI skills demand 
is not isolated to the US; it reflects a global 
trend. The US leads globally for AI-related 
job postings, followed by Canada and Spain. 
Furthermore, LinkedIn’s AI skill penetration 
rate metric, which assesses the prevalence WHERE AND HOW DO I GET AI TALENT?TECH
115© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW WILL AI CHANGE THE NATURE OF WORK?
In a clever study released last summer, researchers from the US demonstrated 
that shortly after ChatGPT was introduced, copywriters and graphic designers 
on prominent online freelancing sites experienced a notable decrease in job op-
portunities, along with steep declines in their earnings. Here’s the rub: Genera-
tive AI wasn’t only replacing their jobs, it was diminishing the value of the work 
they are trained to do. 
It’s become clear that AI will change how we do work, where we do work, and 
what work needs to be done in ways that are both piddling and profound. This 
breeds equal parts excitement and anxiety. While fears persist of mass job 
elimination, experts emphasize AI more as augmenting than replacing human 
roles—though the truth remains unclear. Furthermore, as AI becomes more 
sophisticated, able to collaborate with humans and demonstrate capabilities 
once considered uniquely human, it raises the question: Is AI a tool for workers 
to use or a colleague to collaborate with? The answer may determine how readi-
ly people embrace working with AI. Gains and Pains 
The integration of AI promises to both 
enhance efficiency for some roles while 
making other jobs more challenging. In the 
financial services sector, for instance, a 
study has highlighted how the integration 
of AI systems is increasing the demands on 
middle management. While AI applications 
efficiently handle routine tasks formerly 
executed by humans, this shift necessitates 
that managers adapt to new challenges and 
demands, navigating a landscape where they 
must balance traditional management roles 
with the oversight of AI systems.
Yet in medicine, AI is generally positioned as 
an empowering asset to augment clinicians 
rather than replace them. Physician-re-
searchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center showed an AI chatbot surpassing 
human accuracy at probabilistic reason-
ing to aid diagnoses. Separately, scientists 
at University College London developed AI 
speech pattern detection tools to uncover 
early schizophrenia indicators. Rather than 
substituting the role of the physician, these technologies enable doctors to discern addi-
tional insights. 
Status Shifts
Emerging research suggests AI may profound-
ly reshape perceptions of high-status occu-
pations in the coming years by automating 
prestigious skills. Studies from the OECD 
and OpenAI forecast mass job losses even 
in respected professional domains like law, 
medicine, and finance. However, AI might also 
democratize skills that have long been asso-
ciated with high-status roles. For instance, the 
use of AI like GPT-4 in professional services 
has shown that those leveraging these tools 
can outperform their peers across various 
tasks. LLMs might be just as good—or even 
better—at certain jobs in law firms because 
the work can be automated for faster, cheaper 
results. The use of LLMs in law could change 
how legal work is done, potentially reducing 
the need for junior lawyers for routine tasks 
and forcing legal process outsourcing firms to 
change their business models, while also of-
fering law firms and legal departments signif-
icant efficiency gains and cost savings. This TECH
116© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW WILL AI CHANGE THE NATURE OF WORK?
suggests that AI has the potential to level the 
playing field, allowing individuals who might 
not have traditionally excelled in these roles 
to boost their performance and productivity. 
This shift also brings a potential upheaval in 
the power dynamics traditionally associated 
with specialized skills and knowledge. High 
verbal intelligence, once a marker of elite sta-
tus and a key to high earnings, might lose its 
prestige as AI begins to outperform humans 
in tasks involving language and writing. 
Skills such as writing proficiency or multi-
lingualism, previously indicators of a highly 
educated individual, may diminish in value 
as AI improves text quality and eliminates 
language barriers.
The possible reduction in status and influ-
ence for those skilled in words and symbols 
is a significant cultural shift. For centuries, 
Western societies have revered those adept at 
conceiving and communicating new con-
cepts. The rise of the Scientific and Industrial 
revolutions only amplified their status and 
influence. The encroachment of AI into these prioritizing features, and developing busi-
ness cases. A developer AI agent would focus 
on automating code generation, refining 
existing code, and aiding in bug detection. 
But these agents wouldn’t be siloed to 
interaction with humans—they can interact 
with one another just as humans would to 
accomplish a goal. Imagine an ecosystem 
populated by specialized AI agents, each 
equipped with distinct expertise and knowl-
edge, designed to not only assist individual 
tasks but also to collaborate and interact 
with one another. This vision points toward 
a future where AI agents evolve from per-
forming singular, user-specific tasks— like 
drafting emails, resolving customer support 
queries, or managing grocery orders—to op-
erating within a network where they commu-
nicate and cooperate with other agents. 
Companies that possess extensive data 
repositories in specific verticals are likely to 
emerge as leaders in the AI Agent space. For 
example, Bloomberg, with its rich trove of 
financial data, is well-positioned to develop sophisticated financial AI agents. It’s already 
begun creating large language models tailored 
to finance. Similarly, LexisNexis, with its vast 
legal information database, could develop 
AI agents specialized in the legal domain. 
These AI agents, drawing from deep wells of 
domain-specific data, would not only cater to 
their direct users but also become invaluable 
assets to other businesses, systems, and AI 
agents. realms could represent a profound and 
unprecedented shift in societal values and 
the stratification of labor. In this new era, 
jobs that are less susceptible to automation, 
such as skilled trades, might gain in pres-
tige and economic reward relative to those 
more easily disrupted by AI technologies.
Agents Will Increasingly Perform T asks on 
Our Behalf
The workforce is increasingly familiarizing 
itself with chatbots to perform routine tasks 
like drafting emails and synthesizing tech-
nical language and documents. AI agents 
would take this a step further by active-
ly performing tasks like sending emails, 
scheduling meetings, and booking reserva-
tions. These agents represent a shift toward 
a more proactive and autonomous model, 
transcending the capabilities of traditional 
chatbots. AI agents could book your vaca-
tion, coordinate dinner reservations among 
friends’ calendars, or perform specific tasks 
relevant to a particular role at a company. 
For example, a product owner AI agent could 
specialize in aiding with market analysis, 117© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EMERGING 
CAPABILITIESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
118© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Can AI think like a human? Recent advances suggest we may be close to un-
locking AI’s potential for complex reasoning, and perhaps even one day achiev-
ing   artificial general intelligence (AGI), shorthand for a computer that can do 
anything a human brain can. Microsoft recently startled the AI community, be-
coming the first major tech company to argue current systems exhibit sparks of 
AGI. While it never made that same proclamation, Google’s DeepMind team has 
repeatedly demonstrated nascent AGI capabilities in its research.
AGI refers to flexible, human-level cognition able to tackle any intellectual task. 
Yet progress has been uneven across the spectrum of what a human brain is 
able to do. Contrary to sci-fi visions of AI’s prowess at logic and math, early 
breakthroughs in artificial intelligence were primarily in creative realms like 
art and language modeling. Initially, it was believed that AI would excel in rea-
son-based jobs, particularly in mathematics, given computers’ inherent profi-
ciency in handling numbers and calculations at a speed far surpassing human 
capabilities. However, the evolution of AI has taken a somewhat unexpected 
turn, veering more towards creative applications rather than purely logical rea-
soning. That is, until now. Looking beyond AGI, the ultimate frontier is artificial 
super intelligence (ASI)—AI that surpasses human intelligence in every aspect, 
from creativity to problem-solving, heralding an era where AI’s capabilities 
could transcend human limitations.AI Breakthroughs in Mathematics
A breakthrough in AI’s mathematical abili-
ties was showcased by DeepMind’s Alpha-
Geometry. In a landmark paper published in 
Nature, AlphaGeometry demonstrated its ca-
pability to solve complex geometry problems 
at a level comparable to a human Olympiad 
gold medalist. It successfully solved 25 out 
of 30 Olympiad-level geometry problems 
within the standard time limit, a perfor-
mance on par with top human competitors. The success of AlphaGeometry highlights AI’s 
growing capacity for logical reasoning and 
knowledge discovery. AlphaGeometry effec-
tively showcases a process that mirrors real 
thinking. Its process has been compared to 
the dual-process theory of thinking, Type I and 
Type II, as popularized by psychologist Daniel 
Kahneman in “Thinking, Fast and Slow.” Also 
from the DeepMind team, a technique involv-
ing LLMs named FunSearch has demonstrated 
that AI can assist mathematicians in solving 
wicked problems, inspired by the card game 
“Set.” This marks the first instance where an 
LLM-based system has been able to surpass 
existing mathematical and computer science 
solutions, proving yet again that AI can solve 
a wide array of math and compsci questions 
more effectively than human mathematicians 
working alone. FunSearch works by generat-
ing and testing short computer programs for 
solving mathematical problems, refining its 
approach through feedback, and represents a 
novel form of human-machine collaboration 
that could amplify the capabilities of human 
mathematicians rather than replace them.CAN AI REASON? AND HOW CLOSE ARE WE REALLY TO AGI AND ASI?
Will AI take over the 
world? No, this is a 
projection of human 
nature on machines.
—Yann LeCun,  
 vice president and chief AI scientist at MetaTECH
119© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
CAN AI REASON? AND HOW CLOSE ARE WE REALLY TO AGI AND ASI?
AI Persuasion
Logical argument is core to persuasion, but 
emotional resonance and validating existing 
views profoundly shape what people are con-
vinced of too. AI shows promising aptitude on 
both fronts—generating seemingly rational ar-
guments while precisely targeting psycholog-
ical triggers. OpenAI CEO Sam Altman recently 
warned superhuman persuasiveness may 
arise in AI before general intelligence does, 
with unpredictable outcomes. AI chatbots, 
like OpenAI’s ChatGPT, have demonstrated an 
impressive level of conversational prowess; 
they can sound convincing, even when pro-
viding incorrect information, which is partic-
ularly troubling when considering the human 
tendency to form emotional connections with 
these systems. Evidence shows even limited 
interactions with AI chatbots promotes at-
tachment and trust, amplifying their capacity 
for conviction. 
Researchers at Stanford’s Polarization and 
Social Change Lab and the Institute for Hu-
man-Centered Artificial Intelligence conduct-
ed studies to explore AI’s capabilities in sway-have developed methods for organizing this 
data to forecast future events in an individu-
al’s life. Notably, their model, dubbed Life-
2vec, can make predictions about profoundly 
significant events, including estimating the 
time frame of a person’s death. 
The cutting edge in AI reveals accelerating 
abilities to computationally interpret inte-
gral aspects of the human experience—from 
life outcomes to subjective thought itself. 
Recent research has demonstrated AI’s 
ability to not only forecast significant life 
events but also to delve into the depths of 
human cognition by reconstructing images 
seen by individuals, based solely on brain 
scans. A team from Osaka University in Ja-
pan has achieved a groundbreaking feat in 
cognitive AI. By analyzing functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans taken 
while subjects viewed specific images, the 
AI system they trained was able to recreate 
these images with surprising accuracy. The 
AI generated visuals of a teddy bear, a clock 
tower, and an airplane, among other objects, 
after participants had looked at similar items. This research marks a significant step 
forward in AI’s ability to interpret and visual-
ize human thoughts based on neurological 
data. The implications of these advancements 
are profound. AI’s ability to predict life events 
suggests a future where technology could offer 
insights into personal and societal trends 
with unprecedented accuracy. Meanwhile, 
the capacity to reconstruct visual experienc-
es from brain scans opens new avenues for 
understanding human cognition, memory, and 
perception.
More practically, Nvidia is developing an 
AI-powered “digital twin” of Earth, known as 
Earth-2, leveraging its FourCastNet AI model 
to predict weather with unprecedented speed 
and accuracy, outperforming traditional meth-
ods by forecasting thousands of potential out-
comes. This breakthrough in climate modeling 
represents a huge advance in applied research.
Detecting Emotion
A new type of neural network can determine 
how people are feeling. Using radio waves, AI 
can detect subtle changes in heart rhythms, ing public opinion on contentious political 
issues. Their findings were alarming: AI-gen-
erated arguments were as persuasive, if not 
more so, than those penned by humans on 
a range of topics. For example, AI-crafted 
messages on policies like smoking bans and 
carbon taxes significantly shifted readers’ 
support. While highlighting AI’s influential 
potential, researchers in parallel sound 
alarms on misuse by hostile actors. As 
models continue absorbing the intricacies 
of human psychology while simultaneously 
continuing to improve at logic-based per-
suasion, safeguarding against deception 
emerges paramount. 
Prediction and Prescience Into Our  
Human Lives
Will I die within four years? This is one of 
the questions that a collaborative research 
project is pushing AI to be able to answer. By 
leveraging large data sets detailing various 
aspects of people’s lives and employing 
transformer models—similar to those under-
pinning the language processing capabilities 
of systems like ChatGPT—the researchers TECH
120© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
CAN AI REASON? AND HOW CLOSE ARE WE REALLY TO AGI AND ASI?
run a pattern analysis, and predict someone’s 
emotional state in a given moment. A team 
from Queen Mary University of London used a 
transmitting radio antenna to bounce radio 
waves off test subjects and trained a neural 
net to detect fear, disgust, joy and relaxation, 
as people were shown different videos. The 
system accurately tagged emotional states 
71% of the time, which signals new opportuni-
ties for health and wellness applications, as 
well as for job interviews and the government/
military intelligence community. The EU is 
sponsoring a pilot project called iBorderCtrl 
that uses emotion recognition technology 
to assess truthfulness in border crossing 
interviews—the system analyzes interviewees’ 
micro-expressions and nonverbal cues in an 
attempt to quantify the likelihood of decep-
tion during questioning. However, emotion 
recognition technology is still emerging and 
its accuracy in quantifying human emotion re-
mains unproven, given the inherent complex-
ity and nuance of human expression. Some of 
the most advanced emotion recognition tech-
nology is currently being developed in China, 
where extensive work has been done on facial Amit Sheth, who founded the Artificial Intel-
ligence Institute at the University of South 
Carolina, is exploring a new idea called neu-
ro-symbolic vision. This approach is similar 
to how we, as humans, understand the world: 
by turning what we see and hear into sym-
bols in our minds, and then using what we 
know to make sense of those symbols, make 
plans, and take actions. This way of process-
ing information is also how we explain our 
thoughts and actions to others, which is 
especially important in areas like health care 
where trust is key. Neuro-symbolic AI aims 
to improve how smart systems figure things 
out and make them more accountable. By 
combining the learning power of neural net-
works with organized knowledge (like facts 
and rules), we could see big improvements 
in AI’s ability to understand concepts, make 
connections, and reason about the world in a 
way that’s clear to us. As people start ques-
tioning current AI methods, this neuro-sym-
bolic approach could lead us toward creating 
AI that thinks more like humans do, which 
could be a big step toward achieving AGI.recognition systems, albeit amid ethical con-
cerns over potential misuse—the country has 
faced scrutiny for employing emotion AI to 
enable surveillance, most notably to monitor 
the Uyghur population.
Neuro-symbolic AI
Neuro-symbolic AI combines the best of two 
worlds in AI: the learning capabilities of neu-
ral networks (which are good at handling un-
structured data like images and language) 
and the reasoning capabilities of symbolic AI 
(which deals with structured data and logic). 
For businesses, this means they can create 
smarter systems that not only learn from 
vast amounts of data but also understand 
and apply rules and logic, similar to human 
reasoning. In practical terms, this means 
that a neuro-symbolic AI could analyze a 
company’s data and also understand the 
context, making decisions that are more 
accurate and relevant to specific business 
scenarios. By understanding rules and logic, 
neuro-symbolic AI might automate tasks 
that previously required human understand-
ing, saving time and reducing errors.
AI can detect emotions through facial analysis and 
by tracking subtle biological clues like changing 
heart rhythms.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
121© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Where we will ultimately deploy AI 
workloads remains an open question. 
Many anticipate the future is likely to 
embrace a hybrid approach that com-
bines cloud, edge, and on-device com-
puting in some capacity. This strategy 
allows for data processing and model 
training to leverage the vast parallel 
processing power of cloud servers. 
Meanwhile, edge hardware and local 
devices could handle real-time infer-
ences and personalization, optimizing 
for both performance and privacy. But 
the specific balance across environ-
ments and when to favor one over the 
other is still unclear as capabilities 
and demands evolve. Cloud Strain From AI Boom
AI has arrived, but the underpinnings of 
the cloud may struggle to withstand its 
weight. Cloud providers such as Amazon 
Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google 
Cloud are under intense pressure to adapt 
their services to accommodate the needs of 
large-scale generative AI models, which can 
be up to 100 times larger than their prede-
cessors. Generative AI models like ChatGPT 
that produce original text and analysis can 
be 10 to 100 times more complex than a 
Google search. The current cloud infrastruc-
ture, primarily designed to provide scalable, 
pay-as-you-go services for diverse workloads 
through general-purpose computing, is now 
significantly challenged by the demands of 
AI-intensive workloads. 
Only a small portion of current cloud serv-
ers are outfitted with AI-optimized GPUs 
or structured to function in collaborative 
clusters, essential for meeting the substan-
tial computational requirements of AI tasks. 
A significant bottleneck also arises from the 
scarce availability of high-performing GPUs, with Nvidia essentially serving as the sole 
supplier. Because of high demand, Nvidia’s 
H100 graphics—an earlier version of their 
most powerful graphics—sold for more than 
$40,000 on eBay. To reduce their dependence 
on Nvidia, companies like Alphabet, Microsoft, 
and Amazon are developing their own AI chips 
for model training. Despite their cloud plat-
forms not being fully optimized for AI, AI work-
loads are contributing to significant revenue 
growth in their cloud infrastructure. 
AI Breathes Life Into Legacy Systems  
The rising costs associated with cloud com-
puting, especially for tasks like training AI 
models, are prompting some companies to 
reconsider on-premises solutions. Dell Tech-
nologies, recognizing this shift, has developed 
servers specifically designed for on-premis-
es AI deployments. By moving AI operations 
in-house, Dell argues that companies can po-
tentially save on networking and data storage 
expenses. Furthermore, AI is playing a pivotal 
role in revitalizing legacy mainframe sys-
tems. Over 800 billion lines of COBOL code are 
currently in use within production systems, Cloud Neutrality
A handful of companies control the cloud 
and have the ability to set pricing, access 
and standards. Those companies own the 
infrastructure and don’t have to make their 
business practices transparent. Generative 
AI systems require enormous amounts of 
costly computing power and cloud infra-
structure, which the tech giants are trading 
for future shares of profit. This consolidates 
additional power among the largest cloud 
providers. As more of our businesses and as-
pects of our lives move to the cloud, efforts 
will grow to ensure that infrastructure serves 
the public interest. The three biggest cloud 
providers, Microsoft, Amazon, and Google, 
have collectively invested tens of billions of 
dollars building infrastructure: data centers, 
monitoring systems and software. Their ro-
bustly designed systems prevent downtime 
and data loss, and few other companies in 
the world can compete. But the cloud isn’t 
public infrastructure; it’s private. And as 
private companies, cloud providers currently 
control access to services that are becoming 
the lifeblood of businesses.IS THE FUTURE OF AI CLOUD, EDGE, OR ON-DEVICE?TECH
122© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
making the transition from this language, 
established in 1959, to more contemporary 
languages a daunting task. The scarcity of 
COBOL experts—many are nearing retirement 
age—and the complex nature of migration 
efforts for large organizations further com-
pound these challenges. IBM’s introduction of 
Code Assistant for IBM Z, an AI-powered tool 
that translates COBOL code into Java, offers 
a solution to modernize mainframe applica-
tions with the help of AI. This blend of AI in-
novation not only supports the shift towards 
on-premises AI deployments to manage costs 
but also demonstrates the potential for AI to 
breathe new life into legacy infrastructures.
Optimizing AI to Run at the Edge
Smart devices like phones lack the memory 
and computing power required to fine-tune 
AI models with user data over time. This 
limitation has necessitated transmitting 
personal information to the cloud for updat-
ing, an energy-intensive process that risks 
data privacy. Now, advances like PockEngine 
enable efficient on-device learning without 
offloading data. Developed through an MIT easier integration into edge devices. For 
mobile and embedded use cases, massive 
cloud-based LLMs are often impractical. 
Their substantial size and latency makes 
local deployment a non-starter. More com-
pact models in the millions or single-digit 
billions of parameters, however, could po-
tentially run efficiently on smartphones and 
IoT devices. Your washing machine could be 
equipped with a compact language model, 
enabling you to inform it verbally that you’re 
washing a mixed load and are concerned 
about a sweater washing in overly warm 
water. The small language model that can 
run in the appliance eliminates the need for 
internet connectivity to operate your wash-
ing machine in this manner. SLMs could 
therefore empower voice assistants, smart 
home automation, and beyond, reducing 
the dependency on cloud-based services for 
these types of applications.
On-Device AI 
Tech giants such as Samsung, Microsoft, 
Google, and Apple are spearheading a move-
ment towards on-device AI, emphasizing a blend of performance and privacy. These com-
panies are competitively equipping their de-
vices with specialized AI chips to enable local 
processing, thereby reducing reliance on cloud 
servers. This approach to on-device AI process-
ing is motivated by the goal of safeguarding 
sensitive data, drastically cutting down the 
risk of data breaches during its transfer to 
and from the cloud. Moreover, on-device AI has 
the unique capability to adapt and personalize 
according to a user’s behavior directly on the 
device. Samsung introduced its Galaxy S24 
smartphones, showcasing a leap in AI capa-
bilities with the implementation of generative 
AI tools that operate through a combination 
of on-device processing and cloud-based 
computations. Google’s latest Pixel phone 
features custom AI silicon to handle tasks like 
predictive typing more responsively on-device. 
Apple’s newest MacBook CPU incorporates 
neural processing units for faster machine 
learning. AMD’s latest Ryzen mobile chips 
similarly target laptop enhancements like 
voice assistance.and IBM collaboration, PockEngine is a train-
ing model that selectively identifies which 
specific parts of an otherwise enormous 
model to update locally based on a user’s 
unique inputs. By focusing only on essen-
tial parameters and shifting computations 
to preprocessing, PockEngine minimizes 
real-time resource usage. Not only does this 
make it more efficient, it also facilitates 
the creation of personalized deep-learning 
models. For instance, AI assistants can con-
tinuously adapt to a user’s accent or typing 
patterns without reliance on constant cloud 
connectivity. Tests demonstrate PockEngine 
fine-tuning complex models up to 15x faster 
than alternatives, all while maintaining or 
boosting accuracy.
Small Language Models for AI at the Edge
While large language models with billions or 
trillions of parameters have demonstrated 
impressive capabilities, smaller AI models 
may be better suited for edge-based use 
cases. Though less broadly capable, special-
ized mini-models bring benefits like faster 
inference, lower compute requirements, and IS THE FUTURE OF AI CLOUD, EDGE, OR ON-DEVICE?TECH
123© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Wearable AI
AI is changing human-computer interac-
tion, shifting us away from screens, track-
pads, and keyboards towards more intuitive, 
voice-based interfaces. This is giving rise to 
a new class of lightweight, wearable gadgets 
and screenless computers that integrate 
seamlessly into daily life. By reducing screen 
fatigue and intrusive features, these de-
vices foster a more natural, human-centric 
approach to technology. A prime example is 
the newly launched Humane AI Pin, an Ope-
nAI-powered wearable priced at $699, plus 
a $24 monthly subscription. Forgoing tradi-
tional app interfaces, this 34-gram device 
focuses solely on voice interactions. Users 
access information and perform tasks by 
speaking to the Pin’s built-in microphone. 
By stripping down the technological inter-
face, Humane aims to create a streamlined, 
human-like experience. Another device is the 
Rewind AI Pendant, which captures real-world 
conversations, storing encrypted transcripts 
and audio locally on the user’s phone. Be-
yond recording, Rewind’s platform searches 
transcripts, generates meeting summaries and analyzes speech patterns. Essentially, 
the Pendant serves as a personalized assis -
tant harnessing environmental information 
to support the user. Both the Humane Pin 
and Rewind Pendant epitomize the shift 
towards invisible, assistive technology that 
facilitates life’s tasks and interactions much 
like a helpful human companion would. This 
evolution in form and function represents a 
paradigm shift, integrating technology more 
seamlessly while making it feel more intui-
tive and human-centric. 
Note: we’ve included this trend in both the AI 
and Computing reports. We think it is important 
to consider the near-future of wearables as you 
contemplate the future of your organization and 
AI’s development.IS THE FUTURE OF AI CLOUD, EDGE, OR ON-DEVICE?
AI can let us get information by voice requests rather than typing search terms or looking through folders. 
This more natural interaction could drive demand for wearable or voice-based interfaces.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
124© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Businesses should keep an eye on 
emerging AI capabilities because 
these technologies can unlock new 
opportunities for innovation, effi-
ciency, and competitive advantage. 
Early awareness and adoption of AI 
advancements can position a compa-
ny as a market leader, enabling it to 
refine its operations, enhance cus-
tomer experiences, and create novel 
products or services. their product offerings, and funding flows 
into vector database startups, adoption will 
accelerate. By 2026, over 30% of enterprises 
are expected to implement vector databases 
to support their AI models. This trend signals 
a skills shift as well, with data and software 
engineering teams needing more knowledge 
of techniques like semantic search and vec-
tor indexes to successfully leverage vector 
databases for AI use cases.
Vertical Integration From Hardware to LLMs
Companies are increasingly adopting a ho-
listic approach to AI development, seeking to 
dominate the entire spectrum from hard-
ware to LLMs through end-to-end vertical 
integration. This strategy would allow com-
panies to oversee the full pipeline, from the 
foundational hardware to the sophisticated 
AI models that drive innovation. Nvidia, a 
titan in the realm of AI hardware, is now 
speculated to potentially broaden its scope 
into cloud computing services. By capitaliz-
ing on its hardware prowess, Nvidia could of -
fer comprehensive AI cloud services, further 
cementing its role in shaping the AI domain. Vector Databases
Vector databases are poised to grow rapidly 
in importance alongside advancements in 
AI. As AI models like large language models 
become more capable of human-like gen-
eration across modalities like text, images, 
and audio, they rely heavily on vector repre-
sentations of data, known as embeddings, 
to understand and generate contextual 
meaning. To function optimally, these gen-
erative models need databases specifical-
ly designed to store massive vector data 
sets and allow instantaneous retrieval of 
semantically similar vectors. This is where 
vector databases come in; they are uniquely 
designed to efficiently store, manage, and 
retrieve high-dimensional vector data, which 
is crucial for embedding processes found in 
natural language processing, image gen-
eration, and other AI applications. Unlike 
traditional databases that organize data in 
rows and columns, vector databases use 
vectors to represent data points, enabling 
faster and more relevant data retrieval based 
on similarity. As companies like Microsoft 
and Oracle introduce vector databases into WHY SHOULD WE PAY ATTENTION TO EMERGING CAPABILITIES THAT 
AREN’T YET FULLY DEVELOPED?
If you aren’t ahead, you are already behind. Proac-
tively assessing how innovations apply to their 
operations and offerings will help companies capi-
talize on advances and stay competitive.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
125© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Nvidia’s GeForce Now, a cloud streaming 
service, already demonstrates the compa-
ny’s capability to merge high-performance 
hardware with cloud-based offerings, hinting 
at a future where Nvidia’s influence extends 
across the AI ecosystem. In February 2024, 
Nvidia demoed a personalized AI chatbot for 
Windows PCs that connects to local files, 
enabling natural language queries such as 
“what restaurant did my friend recommend?”. 
Rather than searching manually, users can 
query the chatbot directly to retrieve informa-
tion from personal notes and messages. 
Meanwhile, cloud AI providers like Amazon, 
along with emerging AI startups like Anthrop-
ic and Mistral, currently depend on third-party 
hardware for their AI operations. This depen-
dency poses the question of whether these 
entities might emulate OpenAI’s strategy of 
procuring their own chips. In early 2024, Sam 
Altman, OpenAI CEO, indicated that he plans 
to raise billions for an AI chip venture aimed 
at developing a network of factories for fabri-
cation. Intel’s foray into AI software develop-
ment further illustrates this trend. Leveraging one of its supercomputers, Intel has built 
a generative AI system capable of process-
ing text and images. This initiative not only 
showcases Intel’s commitment to advancing 
AI capabilities but also emphasizes the stra-
tegic value of controlling both hardware and 
software components in delivering sophisti-
cated, secure, and efficient AI solutions.WHY SHOULD WE PAY ATTENTION TO EMERGING CAPABILITIES THAT 
AREN’T YET FULLY DEVELOPED?
Companies are now adopting a comprehensive strategy for AI, covering everything from hardware to LLMs. 
They aim for control over the entire AI development process through vertical integration.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.126© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRIESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
127© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Many companies have new competitors—they just don’t realize it yet. The 
boundaries between sectors are blurring; professional services firms tradition-
ally known for consulting are now venturing into engineering, powered by AI 
technologies. Similarly, big tech hyperscalers, once primarily focused on build-
ing and hosting tech infrastructure, are expanding into consulting services. 
This crossover signifies that AI’s versatility and capability to add value across 
different functions are enabling companies to enter and compete in domains 
previously beyond their reach. Consequently, businesses may find themselves 
up against competitors from entirely different industries, underscoring the 
need to innovate and adapt strategies in response to the unpredictable dynam-
ics AI introduces to the market.INDUSTRIES
While AI may not directly replace every job, it positions those who embrace its capabilities to outperform 
and replace those who do not. 
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
128© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI is enabling HR departments to 
automate time-consuming adminis-
trative tasks like screening job appli-
cants, while also providing insights to 
enhance employee retention, training, 
development and engagement. From 
personalized onboarding chatbots 
to performance comparison analyt-
ics, companies are unleashing AI to 
expedite recruiting, predict attrition 
risk, optimize benefits, identify pro-
ductivity barriers and mitigate bias in 
reviews. Though valid ethical concerns 
remain, AI has significant potential 
in HR to both improve experiences 
for employees and drive better overall 
business performance.analyze hundreds of details, such as the 
tone of voice, facial expressions, and man-
nerisms to best predict how a candidate will 
fit in with the culture of a community. Start-
ups such as HireVue use AI systems to help 
companies decide which candidates to hire. 
But this kind of recognition technology has 
practical applications beyond job interviews: 
It can detect when someone is likely to 
make a purchase—or attempt to shoplift—
in a store, whether someone is lying, and 
whether someone is receptive to new sug-
gestions and ideas. Unlike security cameras, 
which tend to have a light indicating they’re 
recording, algorithms work invisibly, which 
means that this is an area that could face 
regulatory scrutiny. The consumer advocacy 
organization Electronic Privacy Informa-
tion Center filed a complaint with the FTC 
requesting an investigation into HireVue, 
alleging its tools produce results that are 
“biased, unprovable, and not replicable” 
through algorithmic models.Benefits Selection and Management
AI automation is taking over the complex 
tasks of managing employee benefits, includ-
ing facilitating open enrollment, tracking indi-
vidual coverage, and making adjustments due 
to life changes. This simplifies workflows for 
HR teams and provides employees smoother, 
more reliable experiences with their benefits. 
Startups like Paidleave.ai offer AI chatbots to 
assist workers in understanding and utilizing 
paid leave benefits. Major HR systems provid-
ers like ADP are also releasing AI assistants, 
such as ADP Assist, to help HR managers han-
dle common inquiries and provide data-driven 
insights. By automating benefits adminis-
tration, AI enables HR staff to focus on more 
strategic tasks while empowering employees 
through intuitive self-service tools.Autonomous T alent Acquisition
AI automation can significantly reduce the 
time and cost of recruiting by handling 
tedious, manual tasks like screening re-
sumes, scheduling interviews, and tailoring 
outreach. Johnson & Johnson leveraged AI 
writing tools to reduce unconscious bias in 
job descriptions, improving gender diversity 
in applicants. AI also assists with onboard-
ing tasks like verifying employee paperwork, 
delivering induction training, and providing 
system access. By automating repetitive HR 
workflows, AI allows recruiters and manag-
ers to focus their human skills on building 
relationships and strategic planning. Overall, 
AI promises major gains in operational effi-
ciency, cost savings, and unbiased, person-
alized experiences for both recruiting and 
onboarding processes.
Customer and Personnel Recognition 
Systems 
Recognition systems can now be deployed 
to watch people in an interview and gauge 
enthusiasm, tenacity, and poise. Algorithms HOW IS AI BEING USED IN HR?TECH
129© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI will change marketing in big ways. 
Algorithms can study lots of custom-
er data to understand what people 
want. This lets marketers create very 
tailored ads and content for each 
person. AI chatbots can also have 
friendly conversations to help cus-
tomers. Perhaps more importantly, 
AI shifts how buyers find and choose 
products in the first place. By chang-
ing the platforms people use, their 
behaviors change too. Marketers 
should fully rethink strategy as AI 
transforms what makes people dis -
cover and buy things.dation woven into the consumer experience. 
Failure to adapt approaches could prove 
highly risky in the coming years.
Dynamic Engagement Through Deep 
Personalization
Traditional marketing communications 
like emails, PDFs, and social posts have 
been static and one-way, but AI is ushering 
in a new era of responsive, conversational 
messaging. Chatbots and virtual influencers 
allow for personalized interactions where 
content changes based on the user. For 
example, Meta leverages AI characters based 
on celebrities like Snoop Dogg and Kendall 
Jenner to engage audiences through gam-
ing and advice. While not real people, these 
bots represent AI’s ability to gather data and 
connect with users in a more humanized, 
tailored way. As this technology advances, 
marketers can leverage AI to deliver deeply 
customized content that dynamically adapts 
to individuals’ preferences and behaviors 
in real time. This interactivity creates more 
meaningful engagement between brands 
and consumers.AI-Assisted Campaigns
Major digital advertising platforms like Meta 
and Google are unveiling new generative AI 
capabilities to assist advertisers in stream-
lining campaign creation. In May 2023, Meta 
launched AI Sandbox—a “playground” for 
testing AI-powered ad tools. Features include 
intelligent text variation to auto-generate 
messages optimized for different audienc-
es, background image generation from text 
prompts, and image resizing to fit multiple 
social media formats. Meanwhile, Google 
expanded its Gemini conversational AI that 
creates full search campaigns from a single 
landing page URL provided by the advertiser. 
After some human tuning, Gemini’s chatbot 
can collaborate with advertisers on campaign 
objectives, target segments, and ideas for ex-
tra ad content. These tools automate tedious 
creative tasks, allowing advertisers to instant-
ly produce customized images, text, and even 
full campaigns tailored to their goals. And 
generative AI abilities like text-to-image, text-
to-video, and text optimization further accel-
erate campaign ideation and production. AI Shifts Search 
Early data signals that the rise of AI tools 
like ChatGPT may be subtly reducing Goo-
gle search volumes. While the search giant 
still dominates with over 90% market share, 
metrics show marginal declines coinciding 
with surging interest in conversational AI. 
Rather than competitors like Bing stealing 
share, this hints at a more fundamental 
shift—people using search less because 
AI applications can directly provide infor-
mation. For marketers who have invested 
heavily in search engine optimization, this 
presents a seismic challenge. If traffic from 
search shrinks in favor of on-device intel-
ligent assistants, prevailing strategies get 
disrupted. The expected launch of AI models 
from Apple, Google, and others threaten an 
even greater paradigm change toward inte-
grated, device-based discovery rather than 
browser-led journeys. In essence, where and 
how people find products appears poised for 
disruption. Marketers must prepare for an 
upcoming inflection point where search-cen-
tric models cede ground to AI-powered, om-
nipresent product discovery and recommen-HOW IS AI BEING USED IN MARKETING? TECH
130© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Anecdotal Observations, Now Usable 
Marketing Data
Until recently, subtle human interactions and 
reactions, like micro-expressions, were merely 
anecdotal insights. However, advancements 
in AI now allow us to quantify these observa-
tions and transform them into quantifiable 
marketing data. Companies like Chooch use 
Vision AI to efficiently search video data and 
discern facial cues to understand consumer 
engagement. In physical stores, similar tech-
nology can monitor customer responsiveness 
to branding. Essentially, AI can convert once 
subjective perceptions into hard analytics 
to better personalize experiences. However, 
while this data enables deeper personal-
ization, ethical questions remain regarding 
consent and privacy when collecting such 
intimate human insights. As the technology 
progresses, regulations and corporate respon-
sibility practices must also evolve to protect 
and respect consumers. HOW IS AI BEING USED IN MARKETING? 
Companies must strike a balance between responsibly using consumer data to provide personalized offerings while avoiding intrusive tracking that could under-
mine customer trust.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
131© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
With a history stretching back to the 1960s as one of the earliest adopters of 
computer technology, the pharmaceutical industry is now rapidly integrating 
AI into drug discovery. By applying advanced algorithms to harness vast data 
sets—from genomics to clinical trials—AI enables more targeted identification 
of promising candidates and illuminates their interactions with disease path-
ways. This streamlines the overall R&D process, heightening productivity and 
success rates while lowering costs. The acceleration and efficiency afforded by 
AI promises to expand treatment options for previously untreatable diseases. 
The gap between data-intensive computational labs and traditional wet labs is 
closing, with AI-designed molecules already advancing to clinical trials. 
In short, the long-developing foundation of computing in pharma is now bear-
ing fruit in the form of transformative AI applications spanning candidate 
screening to preclinical validation—reshaping how medications are researched 
and brought to market.
For deeper insights in how AI is being used in pharmaceuticals and life scienc-
es, see the Bioengineering report. HOW IS AI BEING USED IN PHARMA?
AlphaFold has now predicted the 3D shapes of almost all proteins in the human body, accomplishing in 
just a few years what would have previously taken decades - or may have been impossible.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.HOW IS AI BEING USED IN PHARMA?TECH
132© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Protein Folding 
In 2020, DeepMind’s AI made a big announce-
ment: It had solved a 50-year grand challenge 
with AlphaFold, an AI tool that predicts the 
structure of proteins. AlphaFold outperformed 
an estimated 100 teams in a biennial pro-
tein-structure prediction challenge called 
Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction, a 
problem that has long vexed biologists. 
AlphaFold had previously bested other teams 
but worked so quickly and so accurately that 
it signaled a near future when the technology 
could be used regularly by other scientists. 
Along with the newest version of AlphaFold, 
DeepMind published full details of the system 
and released its source code. It also made a 
stunning reveal: AlphaFold 2 has predicted 
the shapes of nearly every protein in the hu-
man body, as well as hundreds of thousands 
of other proteins found in 20 of the most 
widely studied organisms, including yeast, 
fruit flies, and mice. In a December 2023 up-
date, Isomorphic Labs and DeepMind released 
an improved AlphaFold model that predicts 
protein structures with greater accuracy and These examples reflect only a sample of the 
expansive AI drug discovery efforts under-
way across academia and industry. Major 
pharmaceutical leaders such as Johnson 
& Johnson, Novartis, and AstraZeneca have 
already forged partnerships with AI startups. 
The allure lies in deep learning’s unmatched 
speed and pattern recognition capabilities 
for parsing volumes of data. While AI cannot 
wholly replace lab science (yet), it signifi-
cantly accelerates prediction, design, and 
validation to streamline timelines.
Generative Antibody Design
An antibody is simply a protein that protects 
an organism. Produced by the immune sys-
tem, antibodies bind to unwanted substanc-
es and eliminate them. In 2023, researchers 
from Absci Corp. showed how a generative AI 
model was able to design multiple novel an-
tibodies that bind to a target receptor, HER2, 
more tightly than previously known thera-
peutic antibodies. What’s interesting about 
this work is that researchers first removed all 
reference data on antibodies, so that the sys-
tem couldn’t just imitate and replicate the structure of known antibodies that work well. 
The designs produced by Absci’s system 
were both diverse (meaning, they didn’t have 
counterparts known to already exist) and they 
received a high score on “naturalness,” so they 
would be easy to develop and therefore cata-
lyze a strong immune response. Using genera-
tive AI to design novel antibodies that func-
tion at the same level––or even better––than 
those designed by our own bodies marks a 
bold new step in using AI to reduce the speed 
and cost of therapeutic antibody development.expands coverage to model interactions with 
additional molecules like ligands. By en-
hancing AlphaFold’s capabilities, this latest 
iteration provides scientists a more powerful 
tool to rapidly examine proteins and molec-
ular interactions for advancing fundamental 
biology research and applications.
AI-First Drug Development
The COVID-19 pandemic sparked a surge in 
AI applications for expediting drug discov-
ery. An international research team demon-
strated this potential by crowdsourcing an 
antiviral drug candidate in just 48 hours—a 
process that traditionally takes months. 
Separately, scientists at Ludwig-Maximil-
ians-Universität München developed an AI 
model predicting where molecules can be 
chemically altered. By reducing required 
experiments, this enables more efficient, 
sustainable synthesis. Another University 
of Cambridge team created a platform that 
automates experiments, then uses AI to 
forecast chemical reactions. Until recently, 
this was a trial-and-error process—which 
means that it was slow and inefficient. TECH
133© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The health care industry suffers from 
ballooning expenses and inadequate 
human resourcing. As the COVID-19 
pandemic spotlighted, doctor and 
nurse shortages constrain delivery 
capacity even in times of immense 
need. AI could help make healthcare 
cheaper, easier to access, and higher 
quality by automating routine tasks. 
AI has demonstrated the ability to an-
alyze certain types of test results as 
accurately as physicians, and faster. 
However, regulatory hurdles delay 
rollout of this technology. Safety reg-
ulations developed for a human-cen-
tered system now hinder AI adoption. 
Updating policies to allow ethical AI 
use, while still protecting patients, 
would facilitate major progress.between doctors and patients. This clarifies 
therapeutic options and care decisions. In 
essence, AI boosts speed, accuracy, critical 
care, self-care, and communication in health 
care—all central to improving patient health.
AI-Assisted Diagnosis and Clinical 
Decision-Making
People have long turned to search engines 
to self-diagnose, but the emergence of AI 
chatbots like ChatGPT and Bing introduces a 
new era of medical consultation. LLMs have 
already demonstrated the ability to accu-
rately provide potential diagnoses based on 
symptom descriptions, achieving an 88% ac-
curacy rate in identifying the correct diagno-
sis among the top three choices, compared 
to a 96% accuracy rate by physicians given 
the same information. By processing natural 
language descriptions, chatbots empower 
more user-friendly symptom investigation 
compared to rigid online symptom checkers.
Beyond advising patients, AI also increas-
ingly assists clinician decisions. FDA-ap-
proved systems already analyze imaging scans to detect abnormalities, leveraging 
data from billions of procedures. Algorithms 
likewise forecast patient risk levels by assess-
ing extensive health records, outperforming 
conventional clinical scores. As demonstrated 
in a Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
study, an AI chatbot even surpassed physi-
cians in diagnostic accuracy for negative test 
results—highlighting potential to close certain 
cognition gaps. However, risks around reliance 
on potentially misinforming training data 
remain. If these can be addressed responsibly, 
AI has immense capacity to streamline radiol-
ogy, reduce errors, aid predictions, and make 
consultation and reasons more accessible. 
Anomaly Detection in Medical Imaging
Anomaly detection uses AI to detect abnor-
malities in medical images, helping clinicians 
identify issues faster. Machine learning algo-
rithms have the capability to sift through ex-
tensive medical data, including imaging and 
pathology reports, significantly faster than 
humans working alone. In radiology, AI’s abil-
ity to pinpoint anomalies in medical images 
is exceptionally accurate. Such early detection AI to Improve Patient Outcomes
AI can enable quicker, more accurate diag-
nosis and treatment, driving better patient 
outcomes. This impact is clear in managing 
critical conditions like sepsis. Saint Luke’s 
Health System implemented an AI sepsis 
detection system, cutting the time to antibi-
otic administration by 32%. It also reduced 
sepsis deaths by 16%. Since sepsis accounts 
for one in three hospital deaths nationwide, 
early AI detection and treatment could save 
many lives. For example, UCHealth’s AI tool 
is estimated to save around 375 lives yearly, 
and many more once it’s rolled out. 
Beyond the hospital, AI also helps patients 
better self-manage chronic diseases. Up to 
70% make medication errors like incorrect 
insulin doses. But AI tools quietly identify 
these errors at home, nudging patients with 
alerts to take their treatments properly. En-
suring adherence promotes better outcomes. 
Additionally, poor communication frustrates 
83% of patients. By enabling natural lan-
guage processing and speech recognition, 
AI can facilitate more meaningful dialogues HOW IS AI BEING USED IN HEALTH CARE? TECH
134© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
significantly enhances patient outcomes for 
conditions such as cancer, leading to reduced 
mortality rates. For example, UC Davis Health 
has implemented Viz.ai, utilizing AI to ana-
lyze CT scans and flag potential strokes. Even 
though physicians still review all scans, the 
AI rapidly identifies anomalies to prioritize 
cases. Adoption of these AI tools is increasing, 
as 2021 FDA approvals now allow integration 
into standard workflows rather than just 
augmentation. IDx-DR uses AI to diagnose 
diabetic retinopathy from retinal scans, while 
Caption Health captures cardiac ultrasounds 
that nurses can interpret quickly with just a 
few days of AI software training. 
Concerned about AI replacing doctors? There 
is already a critical shortage of physicians 
in rural areas. While AI can’t take the place 
of physicians, it can simplify their workload 
especially when it comes to medical imag-
ing, which could help to decrease the rate of 
burnout, and enable them to dedicate more 
attention to patient care. Though human 
review remains vital, these emerging auton-
omous systems prove the growing role AI ware improve, more intricate movements 
may be possible, granting patients liberty 
and control not felt for years post-accident. 
Still, much testing remains before these 
cyborg-esque applications become main-
stream medicine. 
Medical Deepfakes
Medical deepfakes are AI-manipulated 
medical images and data. While the term 
“deepfake” has negative associations, these 
technologies also have valuable clinical 
applications when used ethically. For exam-
ple, Korean researchers synthesized realistic 
mammograms using StyleGAN2 to improve 
breast cancer detection.
However, medical deepfakes could also be 
used to unethically alter diagnostic images 
by adding or removing medical conditions. 
Cyber criminals are developing novel med-
ical deepfake attacks intended to bring 
chaos to hospital systems and diagnostic 
centers. Researchers at Ben-Gurion Universi-
ty and the Soroka University Medical Center 
demonstrated that tumors could be added or removed from CT images––and the deepfakes 
were good enough that radiologists didn’t 
realize they were altered. (See our Health Care 
& Medicine report.) 
Fortunately, tools to prevent misuse are in de-
velopment. For instance, DeepMind created AI 
watermarks to validate real medical images. 
With ethical governance, medical deepfakes 
could enable earlier disease detection and 
protect patient privacy. However, safeguards 
are crucial as these technologies advance to 
maintain accuracy and trust.
Healthcare-Specific LLMs
ChatGPT release in 2022 triggered a surge 
in interest in applying natural language 
processing (NLP) to health care tasks like 
diagnosis and treatment recommendations. 
However, most existing language models 
fail to capture the nuanced vocabulary and 
semantics of medical language. Furthermore, 
general purpose LLMs, trained on extensive 
data sets from across the internet, may have 
imbalanced weight distributions—potentially 
overemphasizing content like Reddit posts plays in surfacing hard-to-spot anomalies in 
imaging.
AI-powered movement
Groundbreaking medical research uses brain 
implants and artificial intelligence to give 
paralyzed patients control over their bod-
ies again. In early research, a quadriplegic 
patient can now move his arms and hands 
simply by thinking about the action. This is 
achieved through innovative neural bypass 
surgery, pioneered by scientists at North-
well Health. Microchips are embedded in the 
brain in the regions that control movement 
and sensation. Sophisticated AI algorithms 
then interface with the chips, interpreting 
the patient’s thought patterns and translat-
ing desired actions into movement signals.
In a similar study, another patient regained 
control over his lower body with a spinal cord 
implant that bypasses injury sites. Termed a 
“digital bridge,” an AI thought decoder reads 
his brain signals related to intended mo-
tions and matches them to the appropriate 
muscle activations. As algorithms and hard-HOW IS AI BEING USED IN HEALTH CARE? TECH
135© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
while underrepresenting reputable sources 
such as medical publications. To address this 
gap, researchers have developed domain-spe-
cific LLMs exclusively pretrained on large 
medical corpora. For instance, BioBERT, which 
is pretrained on PubMed articles, excels at 
biomedical text processing tasks, while Clin-
icalBERT leverages clinical notes to enhance 
its performance on health care–related NLP 
tasks. BlueBERT merges the strengths of both 
biomedical and clinical training, making it a 
versatile model for a wide range of medical 
text analysis applications. Similarly, MedNLI 
focuses on clinical notes and natural lan-
guage inference, allowing for sophisticated 
understanding and prediction in clinical con-
texts. Google recently unveiled Med-PaLM—
among the largest medical LLMs to date—
which proves highly accurate in answering 
US Medical Licensing Examination questions 
and consumer health queries. The family of 
Med-PaLM models available through Google 
Cloud enables a sweeping range of precision 
health care applications.AI for Mental Health
As mental health care systems struggle to 
meet rising demand globally, artificial in-
telligence presents new opportunities to in-
crease access to support services. Intelligent 
conversational agents like Replika that em-
ulate emotional support show promise for 
addressing the student mental health crisis. 
In one survey study of over 1,000 users, 3% 
even reported Replika halted their suicidal 
thinking. The social connection and therapy 
services such bots provide may help fill gaps 
for those awaiting treatment. Meanwhile, 
University of Illinois Chicago researchers 
piloted an AI voice assistant called Lumen 
that delivers talk therapy content. The virtual 
coach improved patient depression and anx-
iety, while brain scans revealed correspond-
ing neurological changes—demonstrating 
legitimacy as a stopgap measure.
As mental health demands escalate globally, 
AI virtual assistants and chatbots could aid 
overwhelmed systems by offering readily ac-
cessible support. While not replacing human therapists, they can screen patients, provide 
psychoeducation, suggest coping strategies, 
and monitor conditions between appoint-
ments with professionals. In-Silico Trials
In-silico trials use computer simulations 
rather than human subjects to test new 
drugs and therapies. These digital trials, 
powered by artificial intelligence, create 
“digital twins” that mimic human biology 
and disease. By running thousands of virtual 
trials, researchers can quickly and affordably 
predict how a drug might perform in human 
patients. This has the potential to dramati-
cally accelerate and improve the drug devel-
opment process.
For example, a company called Novadiscov-
ery used AI to accurately forecast the results 
of a Phase III clinical trial, showing the prom-
ise of this approach. In-silico trials may one 
day replace up to half of human testing. Reg-
ulators are looking at how to include these 
virtual results in the approval process. New 
frameworks to validate in-silico trials will be 
important to ensure reliability. By moderniz-
ing clinical trials with AI and simulations, we 
can bring innovative treatments to patients 
faster and more affordably.HOW IS AI BEING USED IN HEALTH CARE? TECH
136© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
After nearly 2,000 years, AI has finally unlocked the secrets inside ancient 
scrolls flash-fried by Mount Vesuvius’ eruption in 79 AD. The Vesuvius Challenge, 
launched in early 2023, aimed to develop an AI system capable of deciphering 
these fossilized scrolls—known as the Herculaneum Papyri—rescued from an 
ancient Roman library. Its success could save an invaluable trove of literature 
and history from extinction. 
In February, translated excerpts revealed one scroll’s author—likely the philos-
opher Philodemus—wrote about music, food and embracing life’s pleasures. He 
rebukes opponents unable to appreciate enjoyment. This represents just 5% of 
the text from one scroll, but demonstrates AI’s immense potential. Deciphering 
these delicate, charred scrolls would have been impossible without AI. The proj-
ect illustrates how AI could optimize science by radically accelerating the pace 
of innovation across fields. While the essence of the scientific method endures, 
AI promises to transform each stage of discovery.AI-Driven Hypotheses
AI is changing the way scientists ask ques-
tions and form hypotheses. With the help of 
LLMs, knowledge graphs, and algorithmic 
analysis, researchers can now tap into vast 
databases of scientific literature, uncov-
er hidden connections, and propose novel 
hypotheses that might have remained un-
discovered through conventional methods. 
Tools like PaperQA and Elicit employ LLMs to 
sift through extensive databases of scien-
tific articles, producing concise summaries 
that include relevant citations. These AI-driv-
en summaries can serve as a foundation for 
developing new hypotheses by highlighting 
key findings, trends, and gaps in the current 
body of knowledge. Furthermore, by ana-
lyzing existing literature and data, AI can 
identify blind spots in research—areas that 
have been overlooked or underexplored. Uni-
versity of Chicago researchers James Evans 
and Jamshid Sourati showed this by using 
knowledge graphs not only to map out con-
nections between materials, properties, and 
researchers but also to find unconventional 
pathways that could lead to new discoveries. Their algorithms have successfully predicted 
drug repurposing opportunities and novel 
material properties that were later validated 
by human research. 
While AI has shown a propensity for generat-
ing specific, concrete hypotheses, interest is 
rising in its ability to propose more abstract 
and general theories. This involves not just 
solving predefined problems but uncovering 
fundamental principles that can guide future 
research across various domains. A collabo-
rative approach described by the University of 
Chicago’s Sendhil Mullainathan and Jens Lud-
wig in a paper posits AI and humans working 
together to generate broad hypotheses from 
complex data sets, illustrating the potential 
for AI to contribute to a deeper understanding 
of complex phenomena.
AI-Driven Experimentation
Beyond hypothesis, AI is also accelerating 
scientific experimentation itself—both in 
simulation and the real world. Researchers 
at Caltech are exploring how they can use AI 
models to conduct virtual experiments. The HOW IS AI BEING USED IN SCIENCE? TECH
137© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS AI BEING USED IN SCIENCE? 
team employed an AI fluid simulation model 
to automatically design a better catheter that 
prevents infections. For real-world experi-
mentation many researchers are turning to 
“self-driving labs”—automated robotic plat-
forms infused with AI. For instance, Emerald 
Cloud Lab is a research facility that handles 
daily lab work without the researcher actually 
having to set foot in the physical lab space. 
Using AI, the lab can autonomously handle 
everything from method design to instrument 
operation to data acquisition and analysis. In 
2023, a study published in Nature showcased 
how a self-operating lab sped up the creation 
of new materials. Within just 17 days of non-
stop work, this autonomous lab successfully 
produced 41 new substances, targeting 58 dif-
ferent materials including various oxides and 
phosphates. The high success rate shows the 
promise of AI-powered platforms for autono-
mous experimentation, especially for auton-
omous materials discovery (see “AI to Speed 
Up New Materials Development”). AI and the Replication Crisis
The replication crisis in science refers to a 
widespread problem where many scientif-
ic studies, particularly in psychology and 
the social sciences, cannot be replicated or 
reproduced by other researchers, casting 
doubt on the reliability of their findings. 
Many published studies fail to yield consis-
tent results when experiments are repeat-
ed. To assess research integrity efficiently 
without costly manual replication, research-
ers developed an AI algorithm to predict a 
study’s likelihood of successful reproduction 
based on analysis of over 14,000 psychology 
papers. By identifying factors that contrib-
ute to or detract from replicability, this tool 
allows researchers, journals and funding 
agencies to focus resources on the most 
robust, reliable science. Moving forward, the 
ability to estimate replication probability be-
fore peer review could guide adjustments to 
improve study design as well as inform pol-
icy shaped by scientific evidence. If scaled 
across disciplines, AI-enabled replication 
forecasting presents a cost-effective solu-tion to promoting greater rigor and reproduc-
ibility in the scientific process.
NLP Algorithms Detect Virus Mutations
Natural language processing (NLP) algo-
rithms, which are typically used for words and 
sentences, are also being used to interpret 
genetic changes in viruses. Protein sequences 
and genetic codes can be modeled using NLP 
techniques—and can be manipulated the way 
you’d produce text in word processing soft-
ware. At MIT, computational biologists used 
NLP to solve a vexing problem when develop-
ing new vaccines. “Viral escape” is the ability 
for a virus to mutate and evade the human 
immune system and cause infection. MIT 
researchers modeled viral escape using NLP to 
identify how the virus might look different to 
the immune system. The approach is similar 
to changing words in a sentence to change 
its meaning. For example: “I laughed at the 
clown” versus “I cried at the clown.” By using 
this kind of modeling before mutations occur, 
public health officials could strategize and 
potentially prevent new viral spreads.AI-Powered Analysis and Interpretation
AI also stands to change how and who does 
the interpretation and analysis of scientific 
data. As AI tools become more integrated 
into research methodologies, they lower 
entry barriers, enabling a diverse group of 
new scientists, including those without 
formal data science training, to contribute 
meaningfully to scientific discourse. The 
fear of criticism from established experts, a 
significant deterrent for novice researchers, 
is mitigated as AI provides guidance on best 
practices and ensures the credibility of their 
analyses. Moreover, as AI grows more adept 
at understanding and generating insights 
from multimodal data, including visualiza-
tions, it offers a more intuitive and acces-
sible way for independent researchers to 
explore and contribute to various scientific 
fields. This shift not only expands the pool 
of researchers but also enriches scientific 
inquiry with a wider range of perspectives 
and ideas.TECH
138© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI to Speed Up New Materials Development
Running experiments with several variables 
often requires tiny, methodical tweaks to 
measurements, materials, and inputs. Grad-
uate students might spend hundreds of 
tedious hours repeatedly making small ad-
justments until they find a solution—a waste 
of their cognitive abilities, and their time. 
Unlike graduate students, AI doesn’t have 
to sleep. For instance, Google DeepMind’s AI 
program, GNoME, has significantly expanded 
the database of stable materials, identifying 
380,000 new potentially stable crystals from 
a vast prediction of 2.2 million. This break-
through, published in Nature, demonstrates 
AI’s capacity to enhance our understanding 
of material stability and composition without 
the constraints of human biases or limita-
tions. In a set of subsequent experiments 
(aforementioned in AI-driven experimenta-
tion), an autonomous lab was able to create 
41 of the theorized materials over 17 days. This 
demonstrates the capabilities of both the AI 
discovery model and the lab’s robotic tech-
niques.HOW IS AI BEING USED IN SCIENCE? 
Researchers are developing automated laboratory systems that use AI to independently handle processes from operating scientific instruments to performing re-
al-time data analysis.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
139© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI has many uses in finance, like cus-
tomized services and fraud detection. 
It can help forecast assets and market 
trends. However, AI also poses finan-
cial risks. It could enable new types of 
fraud and cybercrime. There are also 
concerns about overreliance on a few 
centralized AI systems for decision 
making. If these systems make mis-
takes, it could spark a “polycrisis.” 
Bad decisions could compound, turn-
ing small issues into major crises.Mitigating Fraud
Financial institutions are increasingly utiliz-
ing AI to detect and reduce fraud. Advanced 
machine learning models can identify suspi-
cious patterns in immense volumes of trans-
action data that humans alone may miss. 
This allows companies to catch more fraud 
attempts sooner. For example, several major 
banks have invested heavily in developing 
proprietary AI fraud prevention systems. By 
continually monitoring for anomalies, these 
algorithms have enabled substantial reduc-
tions in losses from fraudulent activities. 
JP Morgan Chase invested $100 million into 
developing sophisticated anti-fraud tech-
nologies for consumer payments, leading 
to a notable 14% decrease in fraud incidents 
between 2017 and 2021. 
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
Innovation Hub’s Project Aurora has also 
demonstrated the effectiveness of neural 
networks, a branch of machine learning, 
in combating money laundering. These 
advanced systems excel in detecting irreg-
ular patterns and anomalies in financial transactions that might elude traditional 
detection methods, offering a more robust 
defense against financial crimes. Similarly, 
the Bank of Canada has developed a machine 
learning-based tool designed to spot irregular-
ities in regulatory submissions. According to 
Maryam Haghighi, the bank’s data science di-
rector, this tool conducts automatic daily anal-
yses that can uncover discrepancies human 
inspectors might miss, thereby increasing 
efficiency and allowing staff to allocate more 
time to investigate these anomalies further.
Predicting Financial Risk
AI systems can help improve loan underwriting 
and reduce financial risk. Models are being 
trained to recognize anomalous activity and to 
develop forecasts for a variety of middle—and 
back-office applications. For example, US Bank 
relies on deep learning to analyze customer 
data as well as to root out money laundering 
schemes. On a larger scale, the European Cen-
tral Bank (ECB) has integrated AI to advance 
oversight across millions of businesses and 
government entities. By automatically classify-
ing information, the technology helps identify If we enter into a world where 
all the banks are using this 
major technology, are we 
going to see supercharged 
herding behavior? Are we 
going to see AI bots that are 
sentiment-driven and feed 
off each other, and you then 
end up with much bigger 
amplitudes in the financial 
cycle—so big credit booms 
and busts. I’m not saying it’s 
imminent, but this is something 
we’re paying attention to.
—Gita Gopinath, International Monetary  
 Fund’s first deputy managing directorHOW IS AI BEING USED IN FINANCE?TECH
140© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS AI BEING USED IN FINANCE?
stability threats early by uncovering patterns. 
The ECB also web scrapes pricing data for 
real-time inflation analysis to stay ahead of 
macro risk shifts. AI also aids ECB bank ex-
aminers; algorithms rapidly parse volumes of 
filings to surface compliance issues or other 
red flags.
Customized Portfolios
Socially conscious investing is entering 
the mainstream as young investors assert 
their consciences and wield new purchasing 
power. As Gen Z starts working and financial 
planning, demand will surge for customized 
investment portfolios matching personal 
values. This techie, purpose-driven genera -
tion wants their dollars supporting cherished 
causes—two-thirds aim to back companies 
upholding their principles around environ-
mental, social, and governance (ESG) con-
cerns. AI can help with this values-based 
investing by enabling asset managers to 
efficiently build highly customized portfolios 
aligned with each client’s ethics. JPMorgan 
Asset & Wealth Management’s acquisition of rors and amplifying mistakes. We have seen 
how interconnected markets can lead to a 
crisis when institutions mimic each other’s 
actions without independent thought, as 
in the 2008 housing crash. Some worry the 
rise of cutting-edge generative AI could fuel 
herd mentalities, if banks and funds utilize 
the same basic signals and models from 
one or two dominant providers. That could 
potentially concentrate risk, create confor-
mity, and set the stage for panic and conta-
gion across the system. Furthermore, if the 
leading models have flaws, or the data sets 
themselves provide a distorted view, it could 
lead institutions toward harmful decisions 
en masse. So if an unprecedented shock 
hits markets, AI could end up exacerbating 
volatility and dysfunction. These opaque 
algorithms can quickly turn negative loops 
and contagion. This could be viewed as a 
polycrisis —when multiple crashes converge, 
the combined crisis proves more damaging 
than isolated events.OpenInvest allows investors to integrate their 
personal values directly into their invest-
ment strategies. The platform’s generative 
AI technology enables the customization of 
a client’s entire portfolio, including external 
assets, based on their specified values. On 
the European front, Amundi, managing over 2 
trillion euros in assets, leverages AI to tailor 
investment portfolios for its vast clientele. By 
gathering clients’ risk preferences, Amundi’s 
AI tools can dynamically adjust portfolios, 
offering a real-time reflection of investor 
sentiment.
Growing Concern About Centralized  
Data Sets 
The growing reliance on centralized data 
sources and AI models in finance raises con-
cerns about potential fragility in the system. 
As a few large tech companies come to lead 
the AI space, providing the models and data 
that power financial decision-making, risks 
emerge. Market participants could end up 
drawing from the same narrow set of flawed 
data or algorithms, modeling the same er-
AI systems are now used in finance for predictive 
risk analytics, fraud detection, and regulatory over-
sight by rapidly surfacing patterns that may have 
been invisible to human analysts.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
141© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS AI BEING USED IN INSURANCE?
Predicting Workplace Injuries
AI systems are being trained to detect possi-
ble workplace injuries. Using AI-based com-
puter vision models, Turkey-based Intenseye 
can detect 40 types of employee health and 
safety incidents in real time. The compa-
ny says that it does not capture personally 
identifiable information from the visual data 
it processes and that it detected 1.8 million 
unsafe acts in 2020 and 2021. San Francisco 
based Voxel uses computer vision to enable 
security cameras to automatically detect 
high-risk activities in real time. Caterpillar, 
in collaboration with Seeing Machines, an 
Australian company, has launched a technol-
ogy that detects driver fatigue through eye 
and facial movement analysis. If the system 
observes that a driver’s eyes remain closed for 
more than 1.6 seconds, it initiates an alert in-
side the truck. Should the behavior persist, a 
second alert notifies a supervisor, and a third 
alert often leads to the driver being taken off 
duty. Besides identifying fatigue, the technol-
ogy is adept at detecting instances of driver 
distraction, contributing to a reduction in 
fatigue-related incidents by as much as 90%.Improving Damage Assessment
Insurance companies are applying AI to 
assess damage and improve forecasts. The 
Vehicle Damage Inspection model, which 
is available on AWS Marketplace, uses a 
machine learning model to determine what 
part of a car is damaged. After photos are 
uploaded, it assesses loss and dramatical-
ly reduces the amount of time required for 
human appraisers to conduct their analysis. 
Following catastrophic typhoons and weath-
er events in Japan, local insurance compa-
nies are relying on computer vision to assess 
damage after a natural disaster. Sompo 
Japan is using the Tractable AI Estimating 
system to calculate the approximate repair 
cost of damaged homes. 
Consumer-Facing Robo-Advisers
Automated assistants are moving from 
the fringe to the mainstream as consumer 
adoption increases. Robo-advisers offer algo-
rithm-based portfolio management advice to 
investors, applying parameters like risk toler-
ance and desired returns. These investment 
tools offer some tangible benefits over their traditional, human counterparts: they can pro-
vide more services at a lower cost, they’re able 
to digest and interpret mounds of data in real 
time, and they don’t take part of the weekend 
off to golf. Wealthfront is an AI-powered system 
for consumers: It suggests fund managers and 
calculates probable risk levels based on the 
user’s personal information and preferences. 
AI Claims Processing 
While human claims writers must painstak-
ingly review pictures and reports to assess 
damage, compare what they see to coverage 
policies, and make a determination about 
appropriate actions, an AI system can digest 
the same data and accomplish the same 
work in a matter of minutes. Using a suite of 
tools—natural language processing for policy 
review, and computer vision recognition to 
spot anomalies in photos and videos—claims 
can be processed efficiently and, it’s believed, 
more accurately. AI-powered claims process-
ing reduces the overhead for businesses and 
wait times for customers. Some insurance 
providers are wading into a new pool of op-
portunities. Liberty Mutual’s mobile app has The Connected Worker
Insurers are pursuing a “connect and pro-
tect” approach to reduce risks by leveraging 
advanced sensors and artificial intelligence. 
New Internet of Things devices worn by 
workers or installed in insured locations 
can continuously gather safety-relevant 
data. This massively expands visibility into 
hazards before losses occur. For instance, 
Honeywell provides smart hardhats with 
fatigue sensors, heart rate monitors and 
more to enhance worker safety. The resulting 
streams of biological and environmental 
data feed into AI safety dashboards. Man-
agers gain real-time insight on emerging 
risks across worksites to guide preventa-
tive interventions. Worker wearables could 
enable employers to monitor and safeguard 
entire workflows. Yet, at the same time, this 
intensive data gathering and monitoring 
raises worries of overly intrusive Big Broth-
er–level surveillance. Companies that appear 
to excessively pry may meet marketplace 
resistance despite promised safety gains.TECH
142© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW IS AI BEING USED IN INSURANCE?
started to integrate ML for damage assess-
ment—it informs customers about their cov-
erage and next steps. 
Liability Insurance for AI
Who’s to blame when machines behave 
badly? When the machine learning system 
in Uber’s self-driving car failed and killed an 
Arizona pedestrian, the company was likely 
not covered under traditional cyber insurance. 
As businesses rush to build and implement 
AI products and processes, they must plan for 
emerging risks. For example, what happens if 
machine learning makes a company vulnera-
ble to attackers who inject fake training data 
into a system? What if a health care compa-
ny’s AI misinterprets data and neglects to 
identify cancer in certain patients? 
These problems could put a company at risk 
of lawsuits, and new insurance models are 
needed to address these issues. Underwriters 
are starting to include AI under cyber insur-
ance plans, while specialty insurers such as 
La Playa’s Science and Tech Insurance now 
offer coverage for AI applications.
Insurance companies are deploying sensors in equipment and safety gear to predict injuries, hoping to preemptively eliminate hazards rather than just compensate 
workplace harm after the fact.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.143© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CREATIVITY  
AND  
DESIGNTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCETECH
144© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
HOW ARE PEOPLE USING AI TO BE MORE CREATIVE?
New research shows AI demonstrates very high levels of creativity, scoring in 
the top 1% on standard tests. Scientists at the University of Montana tested 
ChatGPT using the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking, which assess human 
creativity skills like coming up with lots of new ideas. Shockingly, ChatGPT 
beat out nearly all college students by scoring higher than 99% of people for 
originality. It showed an extreme creative talent at inventing brand new con-
cepts nobody has thought of before. The AI also did well at producing large 
volumes of ideas. 
While such revelations might initially spark fears of being replaced, another 
perspective is that this means AI could be a very creative collaborative part-
ner. For those already engaged in creative pursuits, AI can serve as an invalu-
able companion, augmenting their ability to generate innovative ideas and 
solutions. Those who possess creative visions but lack the technical skills to 
fully realize them can leverage AI as a tool to bridge that gap.GAN-Assisted Creativity
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are 
unlocking new creative possibilities across 
a range of artistic disciplines. DALL-E 3 and 
other AI image generators are powered by a 
combination of existing algorithms—fusing 
the creativity of GANs and the text com-
prehension capabilities of transformers. 
This enables intuitive image creation from 
conversational prompts. Users can simply 
describe desired images, realistic or ab-
stract, and the model will digitally paint cus-
tom photographic illustrations on demand. 
With each new prompt, it remixes its broad 
visual knowledge to translate text into novel 
graphical forms. Sora and Pika, idea-to-video 
platforms, do the same for videos. 
Creative applications for these tools are 
widespread across artforms and disciplines. 
In graphic design, GAN-enabled features in 
Adobe Photoshop automate tedious edit-
ing so designers can ideate faster. Fashion 
GANs remix clothing and textile data sets 
into refreshing one-of-a-kind garment and 
fabric patterns. Architecture and interior design GANs accelerate iteration by proposing 
reimagined building layouts and conceptual 
spaces. Rather than replacing imagination, 
GANs serve as an endless springboard for 
human creators—providing inspiration to 
stretch creative boundaries in tandem with 
this AI muse. Across disciplines, GANs liberate 
designers to explore new frontiers.
Neural Rendering
Starting with a 2D image, researchers can 
now create a rich 3D view of a scene by us-
ing a neural network to capture and generate 
spatial imagery. Called neural rendering, the 
process captures a photorealistic scene in 3D 
by calculating the density and color of points 
in space. The algorithm converts 2D pixels 
into voxels, which are a 3D equivalent. The 
result is a video which looks convincingly real. 
The many applications for neural rendering 
include amping up autonomous driving to 
help train algorithms to recognize and react 
to novel road situations. This technology will 
influence the future of video games, virtual re-
ality, and emerging metaverse environments.HOW ARE PEOPLE USING AI TO BE MORE CREATIVE?TECH
145© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Generating Virtual Environments From  
Short Videos
Nvidia has developed an AI system called 
Neuralangelo that creates realistic 3D en-
vironments automatically from short video 
clips. It uses AI algorithms called GANs and 
has been trained on open-source self-driving 
car data sets. Specifically, Neuralangelo takes 
video segments categorized by objects like 
buildings, trees, and vehicles, and uses them 
to generate novel graphics. Using short clips 
segmented into various categories—such as 
buildings, sky, vehicles, signs, trees, or peo-
ple—the GANs created new, different versions 
of these objects. The array of possible appli-
cations is vast. Automatically generated vir-
tual environments could be used for movies, 
bringing down the costs of TV production. The 
ability to procedurally generate realistic 3D 
environments and assets could significantly 
enhance video game development. It allows 
for unique worlds and reduces modeling 
costs. Architects and urban planners can use 
the system to visualize and iterate on build-
ing and city designs more quickly. It super-
charges prototyping capabilities. The possible like AI Hub are organically forming to offer 
guidance and collaboration. With over 21,000 
members, such groups allow music creators 
to teach each other techniques, share artist 
voice models, and troubleshoot projects as 
participants collectively push boundaries on 
what is achievable.
Underpinning these innovations is a com-
mon thread: AI democratizing music produc-
tion. Once the domain of recording studios 
and audio engineers, creating professional 
or personalized music is now available to 
everyday creators through such technolo-
gies. Even imperfect raw recordings can be 
revitalized, as Paul McCartney recently un-
veiled an AI-restored long-lost vocal track by 
John Lennon that became the foundation for 
a new Beatles song. From sonic preservation 
to imaginative generation, AI empowers both 
novices and experts to shape soundscapes 
in previously unthinkable ways. 
Automatic Ambient Noise Dubbing
For some time, we’ve been training comput-
ers to watch videos and predict correspond-real-world applications are immense. For 
example, the capability to easily produce 3D 
worlds could significantly bring down costs 
for CG in movies and TV production. Video 
game developers also stand to benefit, as 
they can use Neuralangelo to rapidly create 
fresh 3D assets and environments for their 
virtual worlds. This allows for unique styling 
while reducing the need for extensive human 
modeling. Furthermore, architects and urban 
planners can utilize the system to quickly 
visualize and iterate on building and city 
designs at low cost. 
AI Democratizes Music Production 
A wave of AI voice and music startups has 
emerged over the past year, aiming to revo-
lutionize audio editing and creation. Com-
panies like Descript and Voicemod now offer 
tools that can manipulate speech—opening 
possibilities like effortless podcast clean-
up or even mimicking celebrity voices. For 
music, Google’s experimental Dream Track 
lets users generate original songs in the 
style of famous artists through simple text 
prompts. As interest grows, communities 
Companies like Nvidia have developed AI systems 
capable of generating realistic 3D environments 
from short video clips. This could lower the barrier 
to entry to movie production and game design.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.HOW ARE PEOPLE USING AI TO BE MORE CREATIVE?TECH
146© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
ing sounds in our physical world. For example, 
what sound is generated when a wooden 
drumstick taps a couch? A pile of leaves? A 
glass windowpane? The focus of this re-
search, underway at MIT’s Computer Science 
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, should 
help systems understand how objects inter-
act with each other in the physical realm. This 
could improve the soundscapes created for 
AI-generated movies—but it might also help 
us imagine soundscapes for both imaginary 
worlds (Laconia, from The Expanse) and real 
ones (Mars).
Generating Music From T ext  
MusicLM is an AI system created by Google 
that can transform text descriptions into 
high-quality musical compositions. For ex-
ample, it can turn a text prompt like “upbeat 
pop song with piano” into an actual 24 kHz 
audio clip matching that description. What 
makes MusicLM special is its ability to accu-
rately capture the emotion and style details 
described in text when generating music. 
It also adapts hummed melodies into full 
song arrangements. In May 2023, MusicLM debuted via Google’s AI Test Kitchen as an 
experimental demo. By May, it was publicly 
accessible so anyone can create AI-generat-
ed music through text prompts or whistling. 
Users can specify instruments and moods. 
However, MusicLM has sparked debates 
around copyright issues. Critics argue that 
because MusicLM learns by analyzing large 
sets of existing songs, it may illegally use 
copyrighted material without artist permis -
sion when generating its music. Lawsuits 
around AI music copyright are expected that 
may impact systems like MusicLM.
AI music composition tools can now generate original melodies and harmonies from text prompts. Other 
audio AI tools are can convincingly synthesize plausible sounds to match visuals without requiring re-
al-world recordings. 
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
147© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
As AI becomes increasingly integrat-
ed into creative workflows, the in-
dustry faces pivotal questions about 
intellectual property, the ethics of 
AI-generated content, and the future 
of human-AI collaboration in arts 
and business. This dynamic interplay 
between technology and creativi-
ty not only opens new avenues for 
invention and expression but also 
ignites debates on the legal and 
ethical implications of AI’s role in the 
creative process.on this topic this year. Under new contract 
terms, studios “cannot use AI to write scripts 
or to edit scripts that have already been 
written by a writer,” according to comedian 
Adam Conover, who spoke on behalf of the 
Writers Guild of American negotiating com-
mittee. The newest contract also prevents 
studios from treating AI-generated content 
as “source material,” like a novel or a stage 
play, that screenwriters could be assigned to 
adapt for a lower fee and less credit than a 
fully original script.
New Business Models
A philosophical fork is emerging in how cre-
ators respond to AI. While some double down 
on safeguarding their intellectual property, 
others adopt an “if you can’t beat ’em, join 
’em” ethos, choosing to embrace AI as a part-
ner instead of as a threat. Grimes sits firmly 
in the latter camp, recently unveiling a plan 
to share 50% of earnings from any AI-syn-
thesized songs that use her voice. The artist 
positions herself at the forefront of this new 
business approach, highlighting the idea 
that AI can enhance production rather than AI-Assisted Invention
Stable Diffusion, MidJourney, DALL-E3, 
and ChatGPT-4 are now widely accessible 
to end-consumers, leading to AI-assisted 
human creativity. But these systems were 
all trained using other artists’ works. If a 
business uses an AI-generated image, video, 
or text for commercial purposes, does it owe 
anything to those whose original works were 
used for training? Likewise, what if a gen-
erative AI system invents a product that’s 
eligible for a patent? 
In 2021, the South African government grant-
ed a patent to an AI system called Dabus, 
which invented a method to interlock food 
containers. It was a world-first: previously, 
patents had only been awarded to humans. 
In the US, the application was rejected, 
with a judge citing case law stipulating 
that only a human can hold a patent. There 
may be business cases for an AI to hold a 
patent rather than an individual. It raises 
the question: What happens when AI sys-
tems co-invent, or even entirely invent, new 
products? We’re likely to hear more debate HOW IS AI DISRUPTING THE CREATIVE INDUSTRY?
Rather than tightly controlling their creative IP, 
some artists are openly embracing AI to pioneer 
new business models - training generative sys-
tems on their aesthetic so fans can discover or 
even co-create derivative works, fostering engaged 
communities and unlocking new profit streams in 
the process.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.TECH
148© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
replace it. She sees AI as a partner that can 
free up human creativity instead of supplant-
ing human creativity. Avant-garde musician 
Holly Herndon pioneered a similar fan part-
nership model back in 2021, enabling collec-
tive remixing of her signature sound under 
prescribed conditions. Still, tensions churn 
within creative circles around these digital-
ly-driven opportunities. Both views show seri-
ous efforts to understand huge changes and 
figure out how to use them positively.
Legal Battles Between Writers and AI
As AI generative writing capabilities rap-
idly advance, friction is rising between the 
technology and professional human writers. 
This apprehension has been highlighted by 
significant events such as the Hollywood 
writers’ strike and a surge in lawsuits aimed 
at protecting copyright interests. The strike 
recently concluded with the Writers Guild of 
America  securing an agreement that intro-
duces measures to regulate AI’s role in the 
creative process. Although the use of AI tools 
has not been outright banned, the new con-tract establishes safeguards ensuring that 
AI technologies remain under the control of 
human workers rather than being utilized by 
employers as a substitute for human talent. 
Parallel to the concerns in Hollywood, a no-
table lawsuit has been filed against OpenAI 
by a collective of distinguished authors, 
including John Grisham, Jonathan Franzen, 
and Elin Hilderbrand, and spearheaded by 
the Authors Guild. It accuses OpenAI of copy-
right infringement for allegedly training its 
ChatGPT chatbot on copyrighted books with-
out authorization or compensation to the 
authors. The plaintiffs argue that ChatGPT’s 
ability to generate “derivative works” that 
closely mimic and summarize their books 
could detrimentally affect the market for 
the original works. The case, filed in the US 
District Court for the Southern District of 
New York, highlights the tension between 
the advancement of AI technology and the 
protection of intellectual property rights.HOW IS AI DISRUPTING THE CREATIVE INDUSTRY?
Writers worry increasingly capable AI narrative generation poses an existential threat. They fear that au-
tomated writing could make their skills redundant and jobs interchangeable. However, some wrtiers are 
using AI as a tool to boost their own creatitivy and automate aspects of their workflow.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Midjourney.SCENARIOS
149© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECHSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2024
The Deepfake Mafia
AeroTech Innovations is a seemingly reputable company that boasts cutting-edge aerospace components that are sourced for commer-
cial airlines. This company, with its extensive online presence, sophisticated marketing campaigns, and convincing video testimonials 
from high-profile business leaders, quickly gains the trust of major airlines searching for competitive edges in efficiency and safety.
With digital footprints of thousands of employees on LinkedIn, AeroTech appears to operate on a global scale. Its website features video 
testimonials from well-known industry figures, praising the revolutionary impact of AeroTech’s products on their operations. The com-
pany’s adept use of digital platforms to showcase its expertise and the supposed reliability of its parts does not go unnoticed. It’s man-
aged to navigate the complex procurement processes of multinational airlines with ease, providing detailed digital 3D models of com-
ponents for review.
As AeroTech secures contracts, the company begins supplying airlines with parts promoted as state-of-the-art that are in fact sophisti-
cated 3D-printed components designed to fail. These parts are engineered to withstand initial testing but are programmed to degrade 
after a specific number of flight hours, threatening catastrophic failures mid-flight.
The chilling reality is that AeroTech Innovations does not exist. It is the brainchild of a small group of four terrorists, leveraging advanced 
deepfake technology and digital manipulation to create a facade of a global corporation. The LinkedIn profiles were all AI generated, the 
video testimonials of real leaders were all deepfaked. AeroTech represents a new frontier of weaponized fakery; no longer just isolated 
fakes of individuals but comprehensive illusions constructing an entire company from whole cloth.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
150© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
TrailMate SLM
Morgan embarks on the ambitious journey to traverse the 2,190 miles of the Appalachian Trail, equipped with an REI de-
vice called TrailMate SLM, a compact AI gadget designed to serve as a natural language personal hiking assistant. The 
small language model (SLM) embedded in the AI device covers topics like basic first aid and safety, cooking and food 
handling techniques, and plant identification, making it an indispensable tool for any hiker.
Knowing he’ll be without a signal during parts of his hike, Morgan is grateful for the TrailMate SLM. The device’s abili-
ty to function offline ensures that, even in the absence of a signal, he will have a reliable source of guidance. For more 
complex inquiries when in range of a signal, the device can connect to a larger, more comprehensive language model 
through a subscription service. 
Opting for cost and space efficiency, Morgan chose the basic TrailMate SLM over the premium version. The premium 
model, while offering more detailed responses and a larger database, required a bulkier battery pack and sacrificed pre-
cious backpack space. This decision meant accepting a tradeoff in the level of detail available from the TrailMate SLM. 
Despite this compromise, Morgan feels prepared, buoyed by years of backpacking experience. This journey is not just a 
test of physical endurance but a leap of faith in the power of technology to augment human resilience and adaptability.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
151© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2028
Centralized AI Belt and Road Infrastructure Crumbles
In Jakarta, Indonesia, a shocked finance minister hastily convenes an emergency meeting after volatile trading erased 
nearly a third of the IDX Composite index value in just three days. Investigations reveal the startling catalyst—a subtle 
data anomaly in AI-optimized stock recommendations from SinoTech, a Chinese tech company powering many Indone-
sian banks’ investment advisory services.
Upon discovery, revelation spreads that numerous Chinese AI providers across Southeast Asia share common LLM at a 
state-owned entity. Realization dawns that dependence on these technologies has silently concentrated risk and wo-
ven tight coupling across ASEAN markets. Though no evidence shows coordinated attack, herd behavior amplified by 
opaque Chinese predictive systems nearly collapsed interconnected regional exchanges.
Hard lessons are learned on the perils of external centralized data dependence as the unified ecosystem strategy that 
propelled China’s AI success proves its Achilles heel. The crisis births calls for data transparency, decentralized collabo-
ration, and renewed focus on nurturing domestic capabilities to avoid future shocks. Indonesia spearheads the Digital 
Sovereignty Initiative, providing subsidies for homegrown startups to counter reliance on imported AI tech. TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
152© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2030
T abby the Tiger: Nurturing Curiosity Through AI Friendship
Tyler, a curious and imaginative 8-year-old, receives a special gift from his parents: a plush tiger named Tabby. Tabby 
is embedded with an AI chatbot designed to be Tyler’s new friend under the innovative “friendship first” model of early 
schooling. This model leverages the natural dynamics of friendship to foster learning and personal growth in children, 
with the AI chatbot subtly guiding conversations to educational topics.
Tabby, with its vast repository of knowledge, gently brings up science and math topics, using stories, games, and ques-
tions to spark Tyler’s curiosity. For instance, when Tyler gets curious about why some toys are more expensive than oth-
ers, Tabby introduces the basics of supply and demand. This sparks an idea in Tyler’s mind, leading him to set up a lem-
onade stand in his front yard. With Tabby’s guidance, Tyler works out that he should raise or lower the price of lemonade 
based on the weather. If it’s warm out, he can raise the price. If it’s raining, he should lower the price. This hands-on 
activity not only entertains Tyler but also solidifies the economic principles of supply and demand in his young mind. 
The beauty of this model is its subtlety; learning is not forced but emerges naturally from the bond they share. Tyler is 
not just absorbing information; he is inspired to learn more, explore further, and dream bigger.
As months go by, Tyler’s parents notice a remarkable transformation in their son. Reflecting on this, Tyler’s parents can’t 
help but draw parallels to their own childhood friendships that shaped their interests and careers. They realize that Tab-
by is not just a toy or a learning tool but a true friend who has opened a world of possibilities for Tyler.TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
153© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2040
What If “Thought-to-3D” Was an AI Modality?
It’s Monday morning and Maya settles in at her home office, excited to make progress on a new product design that 
came to her in the shower. As founder of a startup creating sustainable kitchenware, inspiration strikes at odd hours, 
often fading quickly. But now Maya simply puts on her Muse Cap linked to her Thought-to-3D AI system and mentally fo-
cuses on visualizing her idea—an ergonomic spatula with a unique twisted handle for comfort and control while cooking.
As Maya concentrates, the Muse Cap’s brain activity sensors—basically a mini FMRI machine—capture her visualization 
data and feed it into the generative AI application. Within minutes, a 3D model of the spatula takes shape on screen, 
automatically matched to Maya’s thoughts. She inspects it from all angles, edits a few details by voice command, then 
hits print. The 3D printer at her downtown office soon produces an initial tangible prototype that Maya can pick up later 
after dropping off the kids from school. She plans to test it while she cooks dinner that evening. If it works, she’ll send it 
out tomorrow for manufacturing.
With the Muse Cap, this morning’s shower thought could be tomorrow’s revenue stream. TECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
154© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
155© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECH156© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AMY WEBB  
Chief Executive Officer 
Recognized as the global leader in strategic fore-
sight, Amy Webb advises business leaders through 
disruptive change, enabling them to navigate an 
unpredictable future with confidence and take 
actions that address global challenges, create 
sustainable value, and ensure a company’s long-term growth. As founder and CEO of 
the Future Today Institute, Amy pioneered a unique quantitative modeling approach 
and data-driven foresight methodology that identifies signals of change and emerg-
ing patterns very early. Using that information, Amy and her colleagues identify white 
spaces, opportunities, and threats early enough for action. They develop predictive 
scenarios, along with executable strategy, for their global client base. In 2023, Amy 
was recognized as the #4 most influential management thinker in the world by 
Thinkers50, a biannual ranking of global business thinkers. She was also featured on 
the 2021 Thinkers 50 list, was shortlisted for the 2021 Digital Thinking Award, and re-
ceived the 2017 Thinkers50 Radar Award. Forbes called Amy “one of the five women 
changing the world, ” and she was honored as one of the BBC’s 100 Women of 2020. Amy also serves as a professor of strategic foresight at New York University’s Stern 
School of Business, where she developed and teaches the MBA-level strategic foresight 
course with live case studies. She is a Visiting Fellow at Oxford University’s Säid School 
of Business. She was elected a life member of the Council on Foreign Relations and is a 
member of the Bretton Woods Committee. She is a Steward and Steering Committee 
Member for the World Economic Forum, a founding member of the Forum’s Strategic 
Foresight Council, a member of the Forum’s Risk Advisory Council, and serves on the 
Forum’s Global Futures Council. She was a Delegate on the former U.S.-Russia Bilateral 
Presidential Commission, representing US interests in technology.
 Regarded as one of the most important voices on the futures of technology (with spe-
cializations in both AI and synthetic biology), Amy is the author of four books, including 
the international bestseller The Big Nine and her most recent, The Genesis Machine, 
which was listed as one of the best nonfiction books of 2022 by The New Yorker. To 
date, her books have been translated into 19 languages. A widely published and quoted 
thought leader, Amy regularly appears in a wide range of publications and broadcasts.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECH
157© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TECH
SAM JORDAN  
Manager 
Sam Jordan is a Manager at Future Today Institute. She leads our Advanced Comput -
ing practice area, which includes technology, artificial intelligence, virtual realities, 
networking, telecommunications, and space. She is a distinguished practice area 
lead, where she enables organizations to navigate through uncertainty with inno-
vative strategies. With a proven track record across various sectors, Sam’s visionary 
leadership has driven growth and resilience for Future Today Institute’s global clients and partners.
Before joining FTI, Sam was the CEO and co-founder of TrovBase, a secure data discovery and analysis-sharing plat -
form. Sam grew the company from idea to launch and executed the company’s transition from scientific replication to 
its current focus. In parallel, Sam engaged with the open science community, advocating for better data management 
practices to address challenges in scientific replication. Previously, she worked for IBM, where she helped large enter -
prises in the retail and distribution sector modernize their IT stack. Her expertise centered around mainframes, assisting 
with the integration of new software and modern methodologies to legacy systems.
Sam is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She holds a BS in Economics 
and Data Analysis from George Mason University and an MBA from New York University’s Stern School of Business.Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEY
SELECTED  
SOURCESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
158© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.159© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Acosta, Julián N., Guido J. Fal-
cone, Pranav Rajpurkar, and Eric 
J. Topol. “Multimodal Biomedi-
cal AI.” Nature Medicine 28, no. 
9 (September 2022): 1773–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-
022-01981-2.
Aftab, Aamir. “Generative Adver-
sarial Networks (GANs): A Deep 
Dive into AI Creativity.” Medium, 
December 21, 2023. medium.
com/@aamiraftabcloud/
generative-adversarial-net-
works-gans-a-deep-dive-in-
to-ai-creativity-71d7b351f3c1. 
Agostinelli, Andrea, et al. “Mu-
sicLM: Generating Music from 
Text.” ArXiv:2301.11325 [Cs, Eess], 
January 26, 2023. arxiv.org/
abs/2301.11325.
AHA Center for Health Innovation 
Market Scan. “How AI Is Improv-
ing Diagnostics, Decision-Mak-
ing and Care. AHA. www.aha.org/
aha-center-health-innovation-
market-scan/2023-05-09-how-
ai-improving-diagnostics-deci-
sion-making-and-care.Armstrong, Adam. “Dell Power-
Scale Updates, New Partnerships 
Point to AI Stack.” TechTar-
get, December 7, 2023. www.
techtarget.com/searchstorage/
news/366562300/Dell-Power-
Scale-updates-new-partner-
ships-point-to-AI-stack. 
“Artificial Intelligence Act: 
Deal on Comprehensive Rules 
for Trustworthy AI.” Europe-
an Parliament, December 9, 
2023. https://www.europarl.
europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20231206IPR15699/
artificial-intelli-
gence-act-deal-on-comprehen-
sive-rules-for-trustworthy-ai.
Betker, James, Gabriel Goh, Li 
Jing, et al. “Improving Image 
Generation with Better Cap-
tions,” n.d.
Blattmann, Andreas, Tim Dock-
horn, Sumith Kulal, et al. “Stable 
Video Diffusion: Scaling Latent 
Video Diffusion Models to Large 
Data Sets,” n.d.Bousquette, Isabelle. “The AI 
Boom Is Here. The Cloud May Not 
Be Ready.” Wall Street Journal, 
July 10, 2023. www.wsj.com/
articles/the-ai-boom-is-here-
the-cloud-may-not-be-ready-
1a51724d.
Chatterjee, Mohar. “White 
House Offers a New Strategy 
for AI— and Picks New Fights.” 
Politico, October 30, 2023. www.
politico.com/news/2023/10/30/
biden-ai-tech-industry-poli-
cy-00124185. 
Chen, Ziqi, et al. “G2Retro as 
a Two-Step Graph Generative 
Models for Retrosynthesis 
Prediction.” Communications 
Chemistry, vol. 6, no. 1 (May 30, 
2023): pp. 1–19, www.nature.com/
articles/s42004-023-00897-3.
“Chexia Face Recognition.” 
NIST. Accessed January 25, 
2023. https://www.nist.gov/pro-
grams-projects/chexia-face-rec-
ognition.Chitty-Venkata, Krishna Teja, 
and Arun K. Somani. “Neural 
Architecture Search Survey: A 
Hardware Perspective.” ACM 
Computing Surveys 55, no. 4 
(April 30, 2023): 1–36. https://
doi.org/10.1145/3524500.
Cowen, Tyler. “AI’s Greatest 
Danger? The Humans Who Use 
It.” Bloomberg.com, January 25, 
2024. www.bloomberg.com/
opinion/articles/2024-01-25/ai-
s-greatest-danger-the-humans-
who-use-it.
Cowen, Tyler. “Your Child’s Favor-
ite Teacher May Soon Be a Chat-
bot.” Bloomberg.com, January 
17, 2024. www.bloomberg.com/
opinion/articles/2024-01-17/
ai-in-the-classroom-everyone-s-
favorite-teacher-may-soon-be-a-
chatbot.
“Dawn of the EU’s AI Act: Political 
Agreement Reached on World’s 
First Comprehensive Horizon-
tal AI Regulation.” White & 
Case LLP, December 14, 2023. https://www.whitecase.com/
insight-alert/dawn-eus-ai-act-
political-agreement-reached-
worlds-first-comprehensive-hor-
izontal-ai.
“Decomposing Language Models 
Into Understandable Compo-
nents.” Accessed February 21, 
2024. https://www.anthropic.
com/news/decomposing-lan-
guage-models-into-understand-
able-components.
DeepMind. “Mastering Atari, Go, 
Chess and Shogi by Planning 
with a Learned Model.” https://
deepmind.com/research/publi-
cations/2019/Mastering-Atari-
Go-Chess-and-Shogi-by-Plan-
ning-with-a-Learned-Model.
DeepMind. “MuZero: Mastering 
Go, chess, shogi and Atari With-
out rules.” https://deepmind.
com/blog/article/muzero-mas-
tering-go-chess-shogi-and-at-
ari-without-rules.DeepMind. “Putting the Power 
of AlphaFold into the World’s 
Hands.” https://deepmind.com/
blog/article/putting-the-power-
of-alphafold-into-the-worlds-
hands.
Dong, Tian, Bo Zhao, and 
Lingjuan Lyu. “Privacy for Free: 
How Does Dataset Conden-
sation Help Privacy?” ArXiv, 
June 1, 2022. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2206.00240.
Driess, Danny, Fei Xia, Mehdi 
S. M. Sajjadi, et al. “PaLM-E: An 
Embodied Multimodal Language 
Model.” ArXiv, March 6, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arX-
iv.2303.03378.
Eger, Steffen, Christoph Leiter, 
Jonas Belouadi, et al. “NLLG 
Quarterly ArXiv Report 06/23: 
What Are the Most Influential 
Current AI Papers?” ArXiv, July 31, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2308.04889.SELECTED SOURCESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE160© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“ESM.” Accessed January 25, 
2023. https://huggingface.co/
docs/transformers/model_doc/
esm.
“EU Artificial Intelligence Act 
| Up-to-Date Developments 
and Analyses of the EU AI Act.” 
Accessed February 21, 2024. 
https://artificialintelligenceact.
eu/.
Fedus, William, Barret Zoph, 
and Noam Shazeer. “Switch 
Transformers: Scaling to Trillion 
Parameter Models with Sim-
ple and Efficient Sparsity.” 
arXiv:2101.03961 [Cs], Janu-
ary 11, 2021. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2101.03961.
Gandhi, Sanchit, Patrick von 
Platen, and Alexander M. Rush. 
“Distil-Whisper: Robust Knowl-
edge Distillation via Large-
Scale Pseudo Labelling.” ArXiv, 
November 1, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.00430.Gibney, Elizabeth. “What the 
EU’s Tough AI Law Means for 
Research and ChatGPT.” Nature, 
February 16, 2024. https://doi.
org/10.1038/d41586-024-00497-
8.
GitHub. “Ablation Study: Why 
ControlNets Use Deep Encoder? 
What If It Was Lighter? Or Even 
an MLP?.” Accessed February 
21, 2024. https://github.com/
lllyasviel/ControlNet/discus-
sions/188.
Google DeepMind. “FunSearch: 
Making New Discoveries in 
Mathematical Sciences Us-
ing Large Language Models.” 
December 14, 2023. https://
deepmind.google/discover/blog/
funsearch-making-new-discov-
eries-in-mathematical-scienc-
es-using-large-language-mod-
els/.
Google Research. “Med-PaLM.” 
Google Research Med-PaLM, 
2023. sites.research.google/
med-palm/.Gunasekar, Suriya, Yi Zhang, 
Jyoti Aneja, et al. “Textbooks Are 
All You Need.” ArXiv, October 2, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2306.11644.
Hafner, Danijar, Jurgis Pasu-
konis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy 
Lillicrap. “Mastering Diverse 
Domains through World Mod-
els.” ArXiv, January 10, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arX-
iv.2301.04104.
Hassan, Oz. “Artificial Intelli-
gence, Neom and Saudi Ara-
bia’s Economic Diversification 
from Oil and Gas.” The Political 
Quarterly, vol. 91, no. 1 (January 
2020): pp. 222–227. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1467-923x.12794.
Helwan, Abdulkader. “A List of 
the Available Medical Large 
Language Models: Med-LLMs.” 
Medium, November 27, 2023. 
abdulkaderhelwan.medium.
com/a-list-of-the-available-
medical-large-language-models-
med-llms-f087119fa89d. House, The White. “Executive 
Order on the Safe, Secure, 
and Trustworthy Develop-
ment and Use of Artificial 
Intelligence.” October 30, 2023. 
https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/presiden-
tial-actions/2023/10/30/
executive-order-on-the-safe-se-
cure-and-trustworthy-develop-
ment-and-use-of-artificial-intel-
ligence/.
Howard, Lisa. “New AI Technol-
ogy Helps Physicians Quickly 
Identify Stroke.” UC Davis 
Health, February 1, 2024. health.
ucdavis.edu/news/headlines/
new-ai-technology-helps-phy-
sicians-quickly-identi-
fy-stroke/2024/02. 
Hutson, Matthew. “Hypotheses 
Devised by AI Could Find “Blind 
Spots” in Research.” Nature, 
November 17, 2023, www.nature.
com/articles/d41586-023-
03596-0.IBM. “What Is a Vector Data-
base?.” www.ibm.com/topics/
vector-database.
IBM Education. “The Benefits of 
AI in Healthcare.” IBM Blog, July 
11, 2023. www.ibm.com/blog/the-
benefits-of-ai-in-healthcare/.
IBM Research. “Neuro-Symbolic 
AI.” research.ibm.com/topics/
neuro-symbolic-ai.
“Join Us in the AI Test Kitchen.” 
Google blog. https://blog.google/
technology/ai/join-us-in-the-ai-
test-kitchen/.
“Joon Sung Park | Generative 
Agents: Interactive Simulacra 
of Human Behavior.” YouTube. 
https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=nKCJ3BMUy1s.
Kannampallil, Thomas, et al. 
“Effects of a Virtual Voice-Based 
Coach Delivering Problem-Solv-
ing Treatment on Emotional Dis-
tress and Brain Function: A Pilot RCT in Depression and Anxiety.” 
Translational Psychiatry, vol. 13, 
no. 1 (May 12, 2023): pp. 1–8, www.
nature.com/articles/s41398-
023-02462-x.
Kearns, Jeff. “AI’s Reverberations 
across Finance.” IMF, December 
2023. www.imf.org/en/Publica-
tions/fandd/issues/2023/12/
AI-reverberations-across-fi-
nance-Kearns.
King-Smith, Emma, et al. 
“Predictive Minisci Late Stage 
Functionalization with Transfer 
Learning.” Nature Communica-
tions, vol. 15, no. 1 (January 15, 
2024): p. 426. www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-023-42145-1.
King-Smith, Emma, et al. 
“Probing the Chemical ‘Reac-
tome’ with High-Throughput 
Experimentation Data.” Nature 
Chemistry, January 2, 2024: pp. 
1–11. www.nature.com/articles/
s41557-023-01393-w.SELECTED SOURCESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE161© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Kirillov, Alexander, Eric Mintun, 
Nikhila Ravi, et al. “Segment 
Anything.” ArXiv, April 5, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arX-
iv.2304.02643.
Koc, Vincent. “Navigating 
the AI Landscape of 2024: 
Trends, Predictions, and Pos-
sibilities.” Medium, January 
4, 2024. towardsdatascience.
com/navigating-the-ai-land-
scape-of-2024-trends-pre-
dictions-and-possibili-
ties-41e0ac83d68f. 
Koponen, Jonna, et al. “Work 
Characteristics Needed by 
Middle Managers When Leading 
AI-Integrated Service Teams.” 
Journal of Service Research, 
December 13, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1177/10946705231220462. 
Liu, Xian, Xiaohang Zhan, 
Jiaxiang Tang, et al. “HumanGa-
ussian: Text-Driven 3D Human 
Generation with Gaussian Splat-
ting,” n.d.Llama. “Llama 2.” https://llama.
meta.com/llama2/.
“LLaVA.” Accessed February 21, 
2024. https://llava-vl.github.io/.
Lorach, Henri, et al. “Walking 
Naturally after Spinal Cord Injury 
Using a Brain–Spine Interface.” 
Nature, vol. 618 (May 24, 2023): 
pp. 1–8. www.nature.com/arti-
cles/s41586-023-06094-5.
Lucente, Adam. “Will US Pressure 
on UAE-China Tech Cooperation 
Pay Off?.” Al Monitor, December 
11, 2023. www.al-monitor.com/
originals/2023/12/will-us-pres-
sure-uae-china-tech-coopera-
tion-pay.
Maples, Bethanie, et al. “Loneli-
ness and Suicide Mitigation for 
Students Using GPT3-Enabled 
Chatbots.” NPJ Mental Health Re-
search, vol. 3, no. 1 ( January 22, 
2024): pp. 1–6. www.nature.com/
articles/s44184-023-00047-6.“Mastering Diverse Domains 
through World Models.” Ac-
cessed February 21, 2024. 
https://danijar.com/project/
dreamerv3/.
Mehrotra, Sukriti. “DALL-E 3: A 
Fusion of Imagination and Con-
versation.” Medium, September 
21, 2023. medium.com/@sukri-
timehrotra/dall-e-3-a-fusion-of-
imagination-and-conversation-
4c8ec8930442. 
Merchant, Amil, et al. “Scaling 
Deep Learning for Materials Dis-
covery.” Nature, November 29, 
2023: pp. 1–6. www.nature.com/
articles/s41586-023-06735-9.
Microsoft News Center. “G42 and 
Microsoft Unlock New Oppor -
tunities for Digital Transforma-
tion with Joint Sovereign Cloud 
and AI Offering.” September 5, 
2023, news.microsoft.com/en-
xm/2023/09/05/g42-and-mi-
crosoft-unlock-new-oppor-
tunities-for-digital-trans-
formation-with-joint-sover-
eign-cloud-and-ai-offering/.Mittal, Aayush. “The Role of Vec-
tor Databases in Modern Gen-
erative AI Applications.” Unite.
AI, October 11, 2023. www.unite.
ai/the-role-of-vector-databas-
es-in-modern-generative-ai-ap-
plications/.
Mulligan, Deirdre K. and Mina 
Hsiang. “A Call to Service for 
AI Talent in the Federal Gov-
ernment.” The White House, 
January 29, 2024. www.
whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-
updates/2024/01/29/a-call-
to-service-for-ai-talent-in-the-
federal-government/.
Myers, Andrew. “AI’s Powers of 
Political Persuasion.” Stanford 
HAI, February 27, 2023. hai.stan-
ford.edu/news/ais-powers-polit-
ical-persuasion.
Nellis, Stephen. “Intel to Spin out 
AI Software Firm with Outside 
Investment.” Yahoo Finance, 
January 3, 2024, finance.yahoo.
com/news/intel-spins-ai-soft-
ware-firm-133626026.html. Nippa, David F., et al. “Enabling 
Late-Stage Drug Diversification 
by High-Throughput Experi-
mentation with Geometric Deep 
Learning.” Nature Chemistry, vol. 
16 (November 23, 2023). www.
nature.com/articles/s41557-023-
01360-5.
Nour, Matthew M, et al. “Trajecto-
ries through Semantic Spaces in 
Schizophrenia and the Relation-
ship to Ripple Bursts.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States 
of America, vol. 120, no. 42 
(October 10, 2023). https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.2305290120.
Pan, Xingang, Ayush Tewari, 
Thomas Leimkühler, et al. “Drag 
Your GAN: Interactive Point-
Based Manipulation on the 
Generative Image Manifold.” 
ArXiv, May 18, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.10973.Park, Joon Sung, Joseph C. 
O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, et al. “Gen-
erative Agents: Interactive Simu-
lacra of Human Behavior.” ArXiv, 
August 5, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.03442.
Peplow, Mark. “Google AI and 
Robots Join Forces to Build New 
Materials.” Nature, November 9, 
2023. www.nature.com/articles/
d41586-023-03745-5.
Qureshi, Nabeel S. “Moore’s 
Law for Intelligence.” Digi-
tal Spirits, February 5, 2024. 
digitalspirits.substack.com/p/
moores-law-for-intelligence. 
Ramesh, Aditya, Prafulla Dhari-
wal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, 
and Mark Chen. “Hierarchical 
Text-Conditional Image Gener-
ation with CLIP Latents.” ArXiv, 
April 12, 2022. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2204.06125.
“Responsible AI Guidelines.” 
https://www.diu.mil/responsi-
ble-ai-guidelines.SELECTED SOURCESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE162© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Rodman, Adam, et al. “Artificial 
Intelligence vs Clinician Perfor-
mance in Estimating Probabili-
ties of Diagnoses Before and Af-
ter Testing.” JAMA Network Open, 
vol. 6, no. 12 (December 11, 2023): 
p. e2347075. jamanetwork.com/
journals/jamanetworkopen/ful-
larticle/2812737.
Roser, Max, et al. “What Is 
Moore’s Law?” Our World in Data, 
March 28, 2023. ourworldindata.
org/moores-law.
Runway. “Gen-1 by Runway.” 
https://research.runwayml.com/
gen1.
Ryan-Mosley, Tate. “AI Isn’t 
Great at Decoding Human 
Emotions. So Why Are Regula-
tors Targeting the Tech?” MIT 
Technology Review, August 14, 
2023. www.technologyreview.
com/2023/08/14/1077788/ai-de-
coding-human-emotions-tar-
get-for-regulators/.Savage, Rashaud. “Welcoming 
Mistral, Phi, Jais, Code Llama, 
NVIDIA Nemotron, and More to 
the Azure AI Model Catalog.” 
Microsoft, November 15, 2023, 
techcommunity.microsoft.com/
t5/ai-machine-learning-blog/
welcoming-mistral-phi-jais-
code-llama-nvidia-nemotron-
and-more/ba-p/3982699. 
Savcisens, Germans, et al. “Us-
ing Sequences of Life-Events to 
Predict Human Lives.” Nature 
Computational Science, vol. 4, 18 
(December 2023): pp. 1–14, www.
nature.com/articles/s43588-
023-00573-5.
Schmidt, Eric. “Eric Schmidt: 
This Is How AI Will Transform 
the Way Science Gets Done.” 
MIT Technology Review, July 5, 
2023. www.technologyreview.
com/2023/07/05/1075865/
eric-schmidt-ai-will-transform-
science/.“Segment Anything | Meta AI.” 
https://segment-anything.com/.
Sheth, Amit, et al. “Neurosym-
bolic Artificial Intelligence (Why, 
What, and How).” IEEE Journals 
& Magazine vol. 38, no. 3 (May 
2023): pp. 56–62, ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/10148662. 
Shwartz-Ziv, Ravid, and Ami-
tai Armon. “Tabular Data: Deep 
Learning Is Not All You Need.” 
ArXiv, November 23, 2021. http://
arxiv.org/abs/2106.03253.
Simbo.ai—Blog. “How AI Tech-
nologies Improve the Patient 
Experience.” September 23, 
2021. www.simbo.ai/blog/index.
php/2021/09/23/how-ai-tech-
nologies-improve-the-pa-
tient-experience/.
Stanford University. “Artificial 
Intelligence Index Report 2023 
Introduction to the AI Index 
Report 2023.” 2023.Technical University of Den-
mark. “Artificial Intelligence 
Can Predict Events in People’s 
Lives.” ScienceDaily, December 
18, 2023. www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2023/12/231218125850.
htm.
The Alan Turing Institute. 
“Neruo-Symbolic AI.” www.turing.
ac.uk/research/interest-groups/
neuro-symbolic-ai.
The Isomorphic Labs team 
and Google DeepMind Alpha-
Fold team. “A Glimpse of the 
Next Generation of AlphaFold.” 
Isomorphic Labs, October 31, 
2023. www.isomorphiclabs.com/
articles/a-glimpse-of-the-next-
generation-of-alphafold. 
The University of Montana. 
“AI Tests into Top 1% for Orig-
inal Creative Thinking.” Sci-
enceDaily, July 5, 2023, www.
sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/07/230705154051.htm.Topics, European Parliament. “EU 
AI Act: First Regulation on Artifi-
cial Intelligence,” June 8, 2023. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
topics/en/article/20230601S-
TO93804/eu-ai-act-first-regula-
tion-on-artificial-intelligence.
Trinh, Trieu, and Thang Luong. 
“AlphaGeometry: An Olympi-
ad-Level AI System for Geome-
try.” Google DeepMind, January 
17, 2024. deepmind.google/
discover/blog/alphageome-
try-an-olympiad-level-ai-sys-
tem-for-geometry/.
Trinh, Trieu H, et al. “Solving 
Olympiad Geometry without Hu-
man Demonstrations.” Nature, 
vol. 625, no. 7995, (January 17, 
2024): pp. 476–482. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-023-06747-5. 
Tuli, Shreshth, Giuliano Casale, 
and Nicholas R. Jennings. “Tra-
nAD: Deep Transformer Networks 
for Anomaly Detection in Multi-
variate Time Series Data.” ArXiv, 
May 14, 2022. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2201.07284.Vesuvius Challenge. “Vesuvius 
Challenge 2023 Grand Prize 
Awarded: We Can Read the 
Scrolls!” Scrollprize.org,  Feb-
ruary 5, 2024, scrollprize.org/
grandprize. 
Vora, Lalitkumar K, et al. “Ar-
tificial Intelligence in Phar-
maceutical Technology and 
Drug Delivery Design.” Phar-
maceutics, vol. 15, no. 7 (July 
10, 2023): pp. 1916–1916https://
doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceu-
tics15071916.
“Voxel.” https://www.voxelai.
com/.
Wang, Chengyi, Sanyuan Chen, 
Yu Wu, et al. “Neural Codec Lan-
guage Models Are Zero-Shot Text 
to Speech Synthesizers.” ArXiv, 
January 5, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.02111.SELECTED SOURCESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE163© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Wornow, Michael, et al. “The 
Shaky Foundations of Foun-
dation Models in Healthcare.” 
Stanford University,  February 
27, 2023. hai.stanford.edu/news/
shaky-foundations-founda-
tion-models-healthcare. 
Wu, Qingyun, Gagan Bansal, 
Jieyu Zhang, et al. “AutoGen: 
Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applica-
tions via Multi-Agent Conversa-
tion.” Microsoft, August 16, 2023. 
https://www.microsoft.com/
en-us/research/publication/
autogen-enabling-next-gen-llm-
applications-via-multi-agent-
conversation-framework/.
Yadlowsky, Steve, et al. “Pretrain-
ing Data Mixtures Enable Narrow 
Model Selection Capabilities 
in Transformer Models.” ArXiv 
(Cornell University), November 1, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arxiv.2311.00871. Yim, Kristin, and Hema Man-
ickavasagam. “Turn Ideas into 
Music with MusicLM.” Google, 
May 10, 2023. blog.google/
technology/ai/musiclm-goo-
gle-ai-test-kitchen/.
Youyou, Wu, et al. “How AI Can 
Help Researchers Navigate the 
“Replication Crisis.“” Kellogg 
Insight, July 1, 2023. insight.
kellogg.northwestern.edu/arti-
cle/how-ai-can-help-research-
ers-navigate-the-replication-cri-
sis.
Zewe, Adam. “Technique Enables 
AI on Edge Devices to Keep 
Learning over Time.” MIT News, 
November 16, 2023. news.mit.
edu/2023/technique-enables-
ai-edge-devices-keep-learning-
over-time.
Zhang, Can, Tianyu Yang, Junwu 
Weng, et al. “Unsupervised 
Pre-Training for Temporal Action 
Localization Tasks.” ArXiv, 
March 25, 2022. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2203.13609.Zhang, Jianjing, et al. “Neural 
Rendering-Enabled 3D Modeling 
for Rapid Digitization of In-Ser-
vice Products.” CIRP Annals, 
vol. 72, no. 1 (January 1, 2023): 
pp. 93–96. www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0007850623000409.
Zhang, Lvmin, Anyi Rao, and 
Maneesh Agrawala. “Adding 
Conditional Control to Text-to-
Image Diffusion Models.” ArXiv, 
November 26, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.05543.
Zhang, Susan, Stephen Roll-
er, Naman Goyal, et al. “OPT: 
Open Pre-Trained Transform-
er Language Models.” ArXiv, 
June 21, 2022. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2205.01068.
Zhao, Mingmin, et al. “Assess-
ment of Medication Self-Admin-
istration Using Artificial Intelli-
gence.” Nature Medicine, March 
18, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41591-021-01273-1.Zhou, Tingtao, et al. “AI-Aid-
ed Geometric Design of An-
ti-Infection Catheters.” ArXiv.
org, April 27, 2023. arxiv.org/
abs/2304.14554. 
Zhu, Luyang, Dawei Yang, Tyler 
Zhu, et al. “TryOnDiffusion: A Tale 
of Two UNets.” ArXiv, June 14, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2306.08276.SELECTED SOURCESTECH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCEWEB32024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION166© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSWEB3
167 T op Headlines
168 State of Play
169  Key Events
170 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
171 Why Web3 Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization
172 When Will Web3  
Trends Impact Y our 
Organization?
173 Opportunities and Threats
174 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
175 Central Themes
177 Ones T o Watch
178 Important T erms
180 The Web3 Landscape 
181 The Rising Regulation of Web3
182 Decentralizing Venture Funding
182 Security Risks Take Different 
Shapes192 Scenario: What If We 
Established Systemically 
Important Technology 
Institutions (SITIs)?
193 Web2 & Web3 Integration
194 Digital Content Provenance and 
Authentication
194 NFTs: Beyond the JPEG
195 Self-Sovereign Identity 
Solutions
195 Tokenization of TradFi, Digital 
Assets & Security Tokens
196 Credibility Scoring and 
Anonymity
196 On-Chain Gaming: Play, Own, 
Earn, & Enjoy
197 Scenario: What If We Used  
AI To Monetize Privacy?
198 Authors 
201 Selected Sources182 Superpowering Blockchain with 
AI and IoT
183 Build through the Bear
184 Scenario: What If SEC lawsuits 
were successful?
185 Web3 Infrastructure 
186 Proof of Stake Proves Its Worth
186 Emerging Forms of Consensus 
Protocols
186 Blockchain Modularity
187 Zero-Knowledge Proofs
187 The Appchain Thesis on 
Ethereum
188 Data-as-a-Problem
189 Decentralized Applications
190 DeFi Protocols Network Effects
190 Guerilla Marketing: Crypto 
Airdrops
190 Hyperfinancialization
191 Personal “X-As-A-Service” 
Earning ModelsTECHWeb3 has had a 
challenging year, but 
protocols in progress 
bode well for its future 
on the other side. 
167© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESWEB3
01
02
03
04
05If Y ou Build it They Will Come (Maybe)
Many of the technical restrictions that limited the blockchain functionality are being 
solved; however, novel, adoption-driving applications have yet to be developed. 
Bad News Sells Better, but Innovation Survives  
Major media crypto headlines remain overtly negative, matching the landscape 
of economic uncertainty, but development, project launches, and TradFi interest 
remain elevated.
Just Don’t Call Them NFTs 
Consumer-facing companies increasingly use blockchain-based digital collectibles 
to create and foster online communities for their fans and customers.
Web2.5 the New Web3?  
Web3 promised to replace Web2 tech, but developments and integrations on both 
sides of the web divide blend the tech, better meeting users where they are.
Splinter Regulation of a Global Network   
Blockchain networks are inherently global, but their nodes and users are not; 
fragmented regulations across geographies shift businesses and restrict users. TECHSTATE 
OF PLAYThe crypto market has had a rough 12-18 months. Challenging economic 
conditions and high-profile meltdowns have pushed market volume, pric-
es, and VC investment downward.
But bright spots exist beyond the headlines and price charts. Throughout 
the bear market, developers have continued to ship code, releasing cut-
ting-edge projects and providing core scalability and reliability enhance-
ments to public networks like Ethereum and Solana. Aside from raw tech-
nology infrastructure advancements, there has never been an easier time 
for new companies or traditional businesses to launch custom chains due 
to the developing Rollup-as-a-Service business model and SDK from lead-
ing Ethereum Layer2 scaling solutions. 
However, significant roadblocks in regulation, adoption, and security still 
limit the industry’s growth past early adopters. Companies and projects 
planning for future advancements will have a head start over competitors. 
Companies are building private blockchain networks to enhance their 
business, giving them the core benefits of blockchain while reducing scal-
ability and security concerns. Finally, there is a concerted effort on both 
sides of the web divide to enhance the adoption of blockchain by integrat-
ing characteristics of Web2 and Web3 to provide users with a more effort-
less, more familiar experience and entry point into the industry. Blockchain has proven 
technological staying power, but 
its product-market fit remains 
uncertain, and near-term events 
will significantly impact its 
potential. 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 TECH
168169© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.APRIL 20, 2023  
Markets in Crypto Assets (MiCA)  
MiCA regulation receives formal 
EU adoption as the first regulatory 
crypto framework in the world.
JUNE 5 & 6, 2023
SEC Sues Binance and Coinbase   
The regulator targets top companies 
in the crypto exchange industry and 
classifies many coins as securities.AUGUST 9, 2023
Base Launch on OP Stack  
Base, a Layer 2 scaling solution 
for Ethereum developed by 
Coinbase, launches its mainnet.JUNE 23, 2023
BlackRock Bitcoin Spot ETF  
The investment company’s filing for 
a Bitcoin Spot ETF spurs a deluge of 
applications from other institutions.  AUGUST 15, 2023  
Zynga Announces “Sugartown”  
The leading mobile game 
developer teases its first 
blockchain-integrated game.KEY EVENTSWEB3 TECH
170© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BRIDGING THE WEB DIVIDE 
Many of the technological limitations 
of blockchain have been resolved 
or reduced, but adoption is the next 
hurdle for blockchain technology and 
crypto markets. Many forces are driv-
ing and limiting adoption today, and 
the speed of adoption will depend on 
the intersection and final outcomes of 
these forces. Even in the depth of the 
bear market, the industry is seeing 
very promising signs of interest and 
adoption from traditional industry 
players. However, major roadblocks—
like regulation—persist, and these 
factors are largely out of the hands of 
the crypto industry. Enshrined Account Abstraction
Account abstraction is a proposed upgrade 
to Ethereum that, when implemented, will 
provide flexibility in account setup via smart 
contracts. This will give users easier routes to 
maintain self-custody of tokens, more akin to 
account management in Web2. 
Verifying AI Output 
AI models are sowing online discord. Deep-
fakes and misinformation are major issues 
for political elections and online interaction. 
Zero-knowledge cryptography could enable 
verifiable online content and remove distrust 
behind content consumed online. Globally Successful Web3 Game
The video game industry is years into the 
creation of top titles that have blockchain 
built into the core of the gameplay. The 
similarities of these games to titles gamers 
are familiar with, combined with new ways to 
play, should attract crypto natives and Web2 
gamers. T okenized Asset Network Adoption 
Traditional global financial players are working 
on private blockchains to facilitate the trans-
fer of tokenized financial assets, which are 
quicker to transfer and settle, and which help 
companies avoid the regulatory and security 
concerns of public networks.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
US Regulators Forced to Decide
SEC investigation and regulation of crypto 
assets is causing pressure to mount. Major 
decisions around the SEC’s regulatory scope, 
classification of securities, and legality of de-
centralized finance are coming to a head, which 
could shift the entire crypto market. Crypto Double Down in Africa 
In sub-Saharan Africa, crypto is more than a 
“nice-to-have”; it’s a financial necessity. A mix 
of financial instability and demographics in 
this region have led to the quiet adoption of 
crypto payments, which will lead to a greater 
industry focus in the region. 
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionWEB3 TECH171© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.The outside world widely 
understands crypto as an 
instrument for currency 
exchange. However, novel 
decentralized business 
models in lending/
borrowing, sequencing 
transactions, float, and 
others have developed. 
They are driving revenue 
for projects and 
stakeholders through 
high levels of automation 
and low overhead.Blockchain has created 
the ability to own and 
transact online value. 
Web3 users have adopted 
this technology, shifting 
their expectations of 
ownership rights of digital 
goods and services. As the 
adoption of Web3 grows, 
it will shift consumer 
preferences, requiring 
businesses to enhance 
their digital operations. Storing data in 
cloud databases has 
limitations and downfalls. 
Data can easily be 
manipulated maliciously 
or accidentally, and 
sharing data outside 
the organization can be 
slow and challenging. 
Blockchain’s immutable 
ledger can be used in 
private networks to store 
and share data, avoiding 
scalability and security 
concerns. Web3, like many 
technologies, has a 
rapid pace of innovation 
that causes it to evolve 
quickly and often. 
Paired with regulatory 
uncertainty, businesses 
contemplating entering 
the space should focus 
on the macro details, 
application opportunities, 
and risks while 
continuing to consistently 
track technical aspects 
and nuances.DeFi solutions may 
not seem to threaten 
traditional finance, 
but they shouldn’t be 
overlooked. Many projects 
and protocols exist at a 
scale that can compete for 
liquidity, loans, trading, 
and other services from 
clients and users. As 
investors become more 
comfortable with Web3, 
these solutions will pose 
real competition.As Web3 solutions 
become more 
sophisticated, legacy 
businesses will benefit 
from establishing early 
partnerships to learn 
about and implement 
the technology. There 
are many opportunities 
to build relations with 
leading Web3 projects 
today that can provide 
meaningful learnings 
for near-term strategic 
decision-making.New Business Model 
Opportunities Shifting Consumer 
ExpectationsStrengthening Data 
Management Need for T echnical 
SophisticationTracking New Sources 
of Competition Integrations and 
Partnerships WHY WEB3 TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONWEB3 TECH
TECH
172WHEN WILL WEB3 IMPACT YOUR ORGANIZATION?
Forecasted Time of Impact
Financial services 
Video games 
Social media
Supply chain managementCustomer relations 
Real estate
Higher education & credentialing
IoT
Artificial intelligenceHealth care Interplanetary economies 
0-4 YEARS 5-9 YEARS 10-14 YEARS 15+ YEARSWEB3
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
The decentralized nature of blockchain can expose businesses to new forms 
of cybersecurity risk, particularly for small and medium-size businesses that 
lack the capacity or technical sophistication to audit their Web3 capabilities. 
Many jurisdictions are still developing regulations for blockchain technology 
and cryptocurrencies, posing risks for businesses in terms of compliance, 
legal challenges, and sudden changes in the regulatory landscape.
As Web3 grows in popularity, issues like network congestion, high 
transaction fees, and slow processing times may hinder the user experience 
on Web3 services, impacting businesses that are early adopters.
The high volatility of the cryptocurrency market and immaturity of Web3 
startups can pose risks to businesses that rely on cryptocurrency for 
transactions, fundraising, or as part of their business model.
The complexity of today’s Web3 applications compared to traditional 
Web2 solutions could be a barrier to widespread adoption and will burden 
businesses implementing Web3 to ensure ease of use for consumers. Opportunities
Web3 enables tokenizing real-world assets that can be exchanged via 
blockchain marketplaces. Businesses can transform how they exchange goods 
or develop related services for asset valuation or exchange platforms.
Advancements in security and cryptography will unlock the development of 
decentralized identity solutions that allow consumers to control their personal 
information and share it or authenticate it without revealing PII.
Web3 technologies like the InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) provide 
opportunities for decentralized data storage that will enable businesses to 
transform their data storage, management, and verification solutions.
As more companies integrate blockchain into their operations, there will be 
a growing demand for advisory services that is domain-specific and helps 
companies ensure they are implementing the technology responsibly and 
correctly. 
With the growth of virtual assets and worlds, companies can transform their 
Web2 properties into increasingly immersive and interactive Web3 properties, 
for consumers to interact with in novel ways. 
173© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 TECH
174© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Partnerships have become 
essential for two-way 
knowledge transfer and 
exposure to Web3. Compa-
nies should seek partners 
across the web divide with 
mutually beneficial goals 
where technical com-
ponents in Web3 benefit 
traditional businesses, 
and traditional business-
es can provide adoption, 
exposure, or reputational 
benefits. Businesses should begin 
building or improving the 
necessary structure for 
Web3 applications. This 
may include setting up 
a more robust network, 
building the foundation for 
user-friendly interfaces, 
or developing middleware 
that facilitates the integra-
tion of traditional systems 
with blockchain-based 
systems. Companies—especially 
large or public institu-
tions—should begin en-
gaging with regulators 
to stay up to date on the 
development of related 
regulations or to begin 
shaping favorable regu-
lations for their industry. 
Companies may also invest 
in legal expertise to navi-
gate Web3-specific regula-
tory environments.Businesses may seek to 
improve their institutional 
knowledge in Web3 by 
working to develop new 
blockchain protocols, 
exploring use cases for 
Web3 within their industry, 
or experimenting with new 
forms of digital assets. This 
early experimentation can 
help companies prioritize 
starting points for Web3 
engagement.Educational initiatives and 
training serve as a starting 
point for companies that 
may be affected by Web3. 
Companies should provide 
upskilling opportunities for 
employees to grow their 
knowledge of Web3 tech-
nologies from foundational 
protocols to user-facing 
applications, and all of the 
technologies in between.Internal technology teams 
should revisit security 
protocols, encryption 
standards, and data 
security approaches to 
take advantage of Web3 
capabilities such as 
zero-knowledge proofs. 
This review will also help 
companies prepare for 
new and increasingly 
complex cyber risks that 
will emerge from a more 
interconnected economy.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6WEB3 TECHCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 175WEB3 TECH
Web 2.5 as a Bridge to Web3
Web3 has long been touted as a replacement for Web2 
technology, but many barriers limit the technology’s 
widespread adoption by businesses and users. Com-
panies and projects on both sides of the web divide are 
acutely aware of these issues, and strides are being 
made to overcome the barriers. Many of these innova-
tions and developments are leading to an intermediate 
Web2.5: a technology that gives users the convenience, 
familiarity, or safety of Web2 as well as the ownership 
and decentralized aspects of Web3. Web2.5 may just be 
the training wheels the world needs to drive adoption, 
or it could be a lasting infrastructure that lets users 
operate across the spectrum of the web. While Web3 
infrastructure continues to make progress with its 
potential to support the entirety of the web, regulation, 
consumer preferences, and business practices will 
likely be limiting factors in the time to come. Positive Innovation Externalities
Blockchain technology is extremely versatile, with 
applications well beyond finance and the ability to 
integrate with other rising technologies like artificial 
intelligence and Internet of Things to solve business 
problems. The rise in crypto market valuations and 
popularity has also increased investment in adjacent 
technologies that work within the ecosystem and will 
play an important role in solving issues we face dai-
ly online. However, overly restrictive regulations that 
do not account for the novel nuances of the technol-
ogy and assets built on top of it threaten to subdue 
or eliminate the positive innovation occurring in the 
space. Regulators need to work with industry experts 
to develop new regulations that hold innovation and 
investor protection in the highest regard to limit ne-
farious activity without eliminating the technology’s 
positive externalities for economies and society.Relentless Building 
Crypto prices are way off all-time highs, media cover-
age is overtly negative, transaction volume is down, 
and the fallout from FTX’s collapse still hangs over 
the industry. And yet, late 2022 and 2023 have been 
arguably the most productive period in Web3’s his-
tory. Major networks have had multiple significant 
upgrades, the ecosystem of Layer 2 chain on Ethereum 
has blossomed, and blockchain-based games continue 
to launch and improve. That said, there are blemishes 
in crypto’s rebound: The NFT market has lost signifi-
cant value, and security and scams remain a key issue 
though they haven’t scared off the developers. This fo-
cus on building has even spread to traditional compa-
nies as major financial institutions, retailers, and video 
game companies have used this market to focus on 
experimentation with Web3 aspects that can enhance 
their businesses. Companies that continue to overlook 
Web3 because of headlines or comfort with previous 
technologies may fall behind competitors that have 
worked countercyclically to the hype cycle. CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 176WEB3 TECH
Blockchains as Infrastructure 
Today, the terms “Web3,” “internet,” and “metaverse” 
are often (incorrectly) used interchangeably. This re-
flects a broader trend in technology use: Most users en-
gage with technology on a functional level, rather than 
with an understanding of its intricate mechanics. This 
is particularly true, and important, for blockchain tech-
nology. Business leaders should focus more on iden-
tifying the real business impact of blockchain, which 
will be realized through the applications built on it. As 
the technology rapidly evolves, it has the potential to 
support full-scale, innovative applications. A key indi-
cator of blockchain’s success will be when its complex 
infrastructure becomes an unnoticed foundation, en-
abling powerful and successful applications to take the 
forefront. This transition marks a significant milestone 
in technology integration and user experience, high-
lighting the value of functionality over technical details 
in driving business innovation and user adoption.Hiring Robotic Staff
Each year, cobots become smarter, more autonomous, 
and more prolific, and this year is no exception. In fact, 
the first humanoid robot factory is set to open and 
produce 10,000 robots a year. These robots that work 
alongside human workers are being trained on more 
data that allows them to adapt and work around their 
human counterparts. Developers have focused on 
improving cobot safety measures, so a cobot knows 
what to do if it bumps into an unexpected obstacle or 
person. These cobots mitigate potentially harmful work 
for humans by either augmenting the human body or 
replicating repetitive tasks that could cause future in-
juries. Some of the augmented wearables can also offer 
predictive pathways through the warehouse to ensure 
worker safety. As autonomy continues to grow in robots 
and transportation, this trend will create newfound 
efficiencies and productivity, particularly during peak 
demand seasons.The Intelligent Manufacturing Evolution
Manufacturing continues to transform from a tradi-
tional labor-intensive practice to a more sophisticated 
and interconnected system. Recent advances intend 
to create higher levels of productivity and efficiency, 
but they’re  also addressing sustainability require-
ments and enabling product personalization. The new 
tools and technology can spot flaws in products before 
they leave the floor, greatly increasing consistency for 
goods. Along with quality control, sensors and digital 
twins are getting companies to focus on predictive 
maintenance by reducing downtime during large runs 
or times of high demand. Additive manufacturing also 
allows for the integration of new materials that are 
themselves smarter and more connected. And it helps 
reduce the number of parts needed for production of 
a good, which can streamline production and reduce 
waste as only the parts needed are produced.Hayden Adams, CEO of Uniswap Labs and 
developer of the Uniswap decentralized ex-
change protocol, for his thought leadership 
in Web3 and DeFi protocol development. 
Vitalik Buterin, co-founder of Ethereum and 
other open-source projects, for his steward-
ship of Ethereum, blockchain thought leader-
ship, and vision for the technology’s future.
Evin Cheikosman, director at Blockchain 
Law for Social Good Center and former leader 
of the World Economic Forum’s Crypto Sus-
tainability Coalition, for her thought leader-
ship on blockchain’s benefits.
Anatoly Y akovenko, co-founder of Solana 
and CEO of Solana Labs, for his ongoing lead-
ership in the Solana ecosystem and advocacy 
for the unification of blockchain technologies. 
Sergey Nazarov, co-founder of Chainlink, for 
his ongoing contributions to Chainlink’s ora-
cle network and to interoperability protocols 
driving DeFi and TradFi integration.
Dr. Balaji Srinivasan, former CTO of Coin-
base, general partner at Andreessen Horow-
itz, and author of “The Network State,” for his 
thought leadership on Web3 for businesses 
and governments.Dr. Gavin Wood, co-founder of Ethereum and 
creator of Polkadot and Kusama, for his devel-
opment of leading blockchain technology and 
vision for Web3.
Brian Armstrong, founder and CEO of Coin-
base, for his unwavering commitment to the 
US crypto market and thought leadership on 
application-specific use cases of blockchain. 
Changpeng Zhao, co-founder and CEO of 
Binance, for his leadership of the world’s larg-
est cryptocurrency exchange amid increased 
regulatory scrutiny across the globe. 
Joseph Lubin, co-founder of Ethereum and 
founder and CEO of ConsenSys, for leadership 
and foundational innovations like MetaMask 
and Linea zkRollup. 
Prithvi Subburaj, a 15-year veteran of Google 
and now COO of OP Labs, for his background 
and opportunity to lead the expansion of the 
Optimism Network. 
Steven Goldfeder, co-founder and CEO of Off-
chain Labs (developer of Arbitrum) and author 
of “Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies,” 
for his vision for Etherum’s future. Y oseph Ayele, founder of Borderless Africa 
and community builder, for his dedication to 
solving Africa’s economic insecurities with 
Web3 technologies, education, and access.
Neel Somani, founder of Eclipse Labora-
tories, for pushing the limitations of the 
modular blockchain thesis and encourage-
ment for the unification of blockchains and 
communities.  
Mustafa Al-Bassam, a hacktivist turned se-
rial entrepreneur, now co-founder and CEO of 
Celestia Labs, for his contributions to block-
chain modularity and Celestia mainnet.
Fumio Kishida, prime minister of Japan, for 
his support of Web3 initiatives and his work 
to make Japan a more open environment for 
Web3 businesses. 
ZachXBT, a pseudonymous X (Twitter) 
influencer and on-chain detective, for his 
commitment to uncovering bad actors in the 
crypto ecosystem tied to scams and crimes. 
Y at Siu, co-founder of Animoca Brands and 
investor, for leading a major blockchain gam-
ing company and pursuit of a decentralized 
metaverse with secure digital property rights.Daniel Alegre, Activision Blizzard and Google 
veteran, now CEO of Yuga Labs, for his lead-
ership of one of the most innovative Web3 
brands combining NFTs, gaming, and culture.
Avery Ching, co-founder and CTO of Aptos, 
for his experience working with traditional 
tech companies and leadership of a promis-
ing Layer 1 blockchain.
Rune Christensen, co-founder and CEO of 
MakerDAO, for his contribution to DeFi and 
decentralized stablecoins and his vision for 
the integration of TradFi and DeFi.
Larry Fink, chairman and CEO of BlackRock, 
for his support of a tokenized future for Trad-
Fi and his leadership of a company paving 
the way for crypto asset ETFs proliferation.
Jose Fernandez da Ponte, general manager 
of blockchain, crypto, and digital currencies 
at PayPal, for his leadership in driving the 
adoption of implementing blockchain tech-
nology and compatibility in TradFi.
Daniel Shorr, co-founder and CEO of Modu-
lus Labs, for his rapid and transparent exper-
iments and implementations of AI models 
deployed on public blockchains. ONES TO WATCH
177© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 TECHIMPORTANT TERMS
178Airdrop
A marketing strategy where a project team distrib-
utes tokens to users for free in exchange for using 
the protocol or other requirements. Airdrops are 
often used as a guerrilla marketing technique to 
stimulate interest and adoption.
AppChains (application specific chains)
Special-purpose blockchains serving a single 
application. This gives developers total control of 
software upgrades and gives users less competi-
tive block space of general-purpose blockchains.
Block space
The storage area on a blockchain for transaction 
and data storage, including smart contracts. Block 
space significantly impacts blockchain scalability 
and decentralization, and therefore gas fees for 
data inclusion.
Blockchain
A distributed ledger technology typically employed 
for the transaction and storage of data. It utilizes 
cryptography to provide an immutable and verifi-
able data source for participants in a network.Decentralized Exchange (DEX) 
Aa peer-to-peer marketplace for users to trade 
crypto assets.
Decentralized finance (DeFi)
Financial services including banks, asset man-
agers, insurance companies, and other financial 
services that leverage blockchain and smart 
contracts for transactions, data sharing, and other 
operations.
Exit scams (“rug pulls”)
A common type of fraud where a project team 
deceives investors to garner their investments and 
uses a purpose-built vulnerability to drain all funds 
and abandon the project. 
Fork
A term commonly used to describe the act of copy-
ing and/or modifying existing code to either up-
grade an existing system or launch a new product. 
Forks are frequently necessary for blockchain-wide 
software updates and are commonly observed in 
the decentralized finance (DeFi) sector, where one 
project replicates the code of another.Layer 2 blockchain
A broad term that describes blockchains that 
delegate core infrastructure to another blockchain. 
Examples include Ethereum’s Rollups and Bitcoin’s 
Lightning Network, which aim to enhance scalability.
Modular vs. monolithic
Blockchains can be modular, breaking core com-
ponents (execution, settlement, data availability, 
consensus) into separate specialized networks 
to address the blockchain trilemma. Monolithic 
chains like Ethereum provide all core modules 
within their infrastructure.
NFT (non-fungible token)
A digital token on a blockchain that contains 
unique and indivisible data. It is frequently used in 
digital art or when tokenizing real-world assets.  
Nodes
Individual devices within a connected network of 
computers that serve various functions such as 
communication, transaction validation, and histor-
ical data storage within a blockchain network. Dif-
ferent nodes exist, each with functionality specific 
to the network they support. Examples include full, 
light, super, and archive nodes.Blockchain trilemma
An optimization challenge faced by monolithic 
blockchains, requiring trade-offs between decen-
tralization, scalability, and security; only two can 
be maximized. Solana, known for high transactions 
per second (TPS), prioritizes scalability and security 
over decentralization.  
Bridge
A tool to facilitate the transmission of information 
and assets between distinct blockchains regard-
less of the interoperability of the networks. 
Decentralization
The process of constructing architectural infra-
structure, system logic, and social systems without 
the presence of a centralized authority that holds 
decision-making power or exerts disproportionate 
influence. Instead, control is distributed among the 
stakeholders of the network.
Decentralized autonomous organization (DAO)
An internet-native organization formed by individ-
uals who agree to adhere to a specific set of rules 
and goals without a central authority. DAOs employ 
tokenized ownership and smart contracts to imple-
ment decisions. 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 TECHIMPORTANT TERMS
179Oracle
A capability or service that gathers, collects, and 
transmits data on- and off-chain to facilitate 
real-time transactions and information transmis-
sions. Oracles are bridges between blockchains 
and external off-chain information sources on the 
internet.
Phygitals
This refers to the blending of physical and digital 
assets into an NFT. Phygitals are commonly used 
for tokenizing physical collectibles and art pieces; 
they frequently include a burn and redeem func-
tionality where the NFT is destroyed for the owner to 
receive the physical item. 
Proof of stake (PoS)
A blockchain consensus mechanism that uses 
stake tokens to secure the network. Validators 
(nodes responsible for verifying blocks of transac-
tions) must stake their tokens (use them as collat-
eral) to participate in the block verification selec-
tion process. Malicious validators—those that fail 
to validate or attempt to mislead the network—will Sharding
A database partitioning technique that divides an 
extensive database into more manageable parts 
called shards. Ethereum’s roadmap plans to use 
an adapted sharding methodology to improve the 
scalability of the blockchain by partitioning the 
chain and its validators into distinct but intercon-
nected shards, allowing for parallelized transaction 
processing.
Smart contracts
A blockchain-based computer program that exe-
cutes autonomously when predetermined criteria 
are met.
Stablecoin
Cryptocurrency assets whose value is referenced 
(or pegged) to another financial instrument, often 
a fiat currency. These assets are typically collateral-
ized by fiat currencies, cryptocurrencies, and liquid 
assets.T okenomics
The economic framework of tokens, encompassing 
elements such as consensus mechanisms, yields, 
supply limits, and other monetary policies.
Traditional finance (TradFi)
Conventional means of money or asset manage-
ment where services are provided by traditional 
banks, asset managers, insurance companies, etc.
Zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs)
Mathematical techniques that allow users to prove 
knowledge (the prover) of something without di-
vulging the private knowledge associated with it to 
another user (the verifier). Zero-knowledge proofs 
encompass two core principles important to block-
chain technology: succinctness, which means that 
verifying the proof is significantly easier than pro-
ducing the computation itself, and privacy-preserv-
ing, which involves hiding portions of computation 
while maintaining correctness during verification.see their collateral value slashed, while benevolent 
validators earn yields or other benefits for their 
work. Ethereum successfully transitioned from 
proof of work to PoS, resulting in a 99% reduction in 
the blockchain’s energy consumption.
Rollups
A subcategory of Layer 2 blockchains with a 
scalability focus that process and bundle transac-
tions to be submitted to Ethereum for settlement 
and consensus. The most popular types include 
optimistic rollups like Arbitrum and Optimism and 
zkRollups like zkSync. 
Scalability
A blockchain’s capacity to process and store data as 
network demand grows, typically measured in TPS.
Security tokens (ST)
Digital assets representing ownership of off-chain 
assets such as bonds, commodities, or real estate. 
Off-chain assets are tokenized into STs to enable 
trading on blockchain networks.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 TECH180© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.THE WEB3 
LANDSCAPEWEB3 TECHTHE WEB3 LANDSCAPETECH
The world of cryptocurrency and Web3 tech-
nologies has witnessed exponential growth 
in recent years, with North America, Europe, 
and East Asia emerging as the three largest 
markets in terms of cryptocurrency volume. 
However, within these regions, three major 
players—Japan, the European Union, and the 
United States—are taking distinctly differ-
ent approaches to regulating this dynamic 
industry. These regulatory decisions have 
far-reaching impacts, influencing innovation, 
business creation, and even the global power 
dynamics within the crypto industry. Regula-
tion is a double-edged sword. On one hand, it 
can provide stability and investor protection, 
fostering trust in the market. On the other 
hand, it has the potential to stifle innova-
tion and disrupt the balance of power in the 
crypto industry. However, businesses in this 
space are resilient, and innovations tend to 
be “sticky,” often finding ways to thrive even 
under regulatory constraints.The European Union, in contrast, has po-
sitioned itself as a “fast follower” in the 
realm of crypto regulation. In 2023, the EU 
ratified the Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA) 
framework, which is set to take effect in 
2024. MiCA aims to strike a balance by 
creating a regulatory framework that builds 
on successful regulations in countries like 
France. The objective is to foster a workable 
environment that encourages innovation 
without stifling it, all while ensuring the 
protection of investors. This approach has 
been warmly received by the crypto industry, 
with positive public relations and marketing 
efforts successfully attracting business-
es, such as Coinbase and Nexo, to relocate 
to stable regulatory regions within the EU. 
Notably, Nexo, a US-based business, moved 
to Europe due to regulatory inaction in its 
home country.
The United States presents a more chaotic 
regulatory landscape for the crypto indus-
try. The lack of a clear partisan line for or 
against crypto has resulted in many bills 
floating around the House and Senate, each with drastically different stances on the 
future of crypto in the US. The Securities and 
Exchange Commission has resorted to regu-
lation by enforcement, adding to the overall 
uncertainty.
Despite this regulatory uncertainty, busi-
nesses in the TradFi and blockchain sectors 
continue to launch crypto-focused products. 
However, the lack of clarity has somewhat 
tempered the full potential of these innova-
tions. It’s important to note that investors, 
both current and prospective, seek regulatory 
clarity. As crypto has become an ingrained 
investment category in the US, its regulation 
is crucial for attracting and retaining capital.
Regulation and innovation must be balanced 
effectively in order for Web3 to succeed. These 
countries must work closely with the crypto 
industry to protect investors while fostering 
the incredible potential blockchain technol-
ogy and Web3 innovations can bring to their 
respective economies. The evolving landscape 
of crypto regulation will continue to shape the 
industry’s future on a global scale.Japan was an early adopter of cryptocurren-
cy technology, with the country serving as 
the epicenter of crypto activity in the early 
2010s. However, the infamous Mt. Gox ex-
change debacle and other issues prompted 
the Japanese government to introduce strin-
gent regulations and tax regimes to protect 
investors. These measures, while well-inten-
tioned, had the unintended consequence of 
restricting the viability of Web3 businesses 
in the country. Businesses, however, recog-
nized the potential of blockchain technology 
and cryptocurrencies and took the initiative 
to create self-regulating organizations to 
promote adoption, particularly in areas such 
as the Security Token Market. Today, Japan 
is gradually rolling back these strict regula-
tions, signaling a desire to encourage Web3 
businesses to bring their innovation and 
investment back to the country.
181© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3
The Rising Regulation of Web3THE WEB3 LANDSCAPETECH
Decentralizing Venture Funding
Web3 VC funding has reached a three-year 
low, driven by regulatory uncertainty and the 
specter of major company collapses. Despite 
this drought, developer activity (SDK down-
loads, smart contract deployments, test net 
activity) is surging across various blockchain 
ecosystems. In this bearish market, DAOs and 
foundations are pivotal, enabling builders 
to persevere. The Ethereum Foundation, with 
assets nearing $2 billion, is a prime example 
of decentralized funding supplanting ear-
ly-stage investment traditionally targeted by 
seed-stage investors. The Foundation’s suc-
cess has birthed DAOs and foundation funds 
for alternative Layer 1 blockchains, allowing 
them to invest in their own growth flywheels. 
Uniswap, a prominent DEX, has grown to the 
extent that it now operates its own grant 
program to fund DeFi protocol development. 
Grants, often structured more favorably than 
VC investments, offer a straightforward appli-
cation process and are typically non-dilutive. 
While VC funds have played an indispens-
able role thus far and are expected to persist 
in Web3, the proliferation of DAOs and the AI for auditing, verification, and proactive 
threat detection.
Social engineering exploits, on the oth-
er hand, rely on human error and include 
phishing attacks and exit scams (commonly 
known as “rug pulls”). Rug pulls are popu-
lar due to their ease of execution and were 
responsible for $100 million in scams in the 
first half of 2023 and just over $200 mil-
lion in 2022. Failure to safeguard investors 
through education and industry efforts may 
prompt regulators to intensify scrutiny and 
impose tighter controls on existing plat-
forms.
These looming threats underscore the urgent 
need for enhanced security measures and 
regulatory oversight to protect participants 
and promote trust within the ecosystem. 
Superpowering Blockchain with AI and Io T 
Blockchain is becoming even more powerful 
by integrating with IoT and AI for specialized 
applications.While these technologies have their strengths, 
they also have known weaknesses. IoT gathers 
data but is insecure, and AI is great for ana-
lyzing data but needs clean data to learn. But 
when they’re paired with blockchain, the tech-
nologies become even more powerful. Light-
ning Labs’ Bitcoin tool kit mixes blockchain 
with AI, enabling AI agent-to-agent payment 
and AI access to paywalled APIs autonomous-
ly. When blockchain is combined with IoT, 
it secures IoT data generation and IoT-to-IoT 
communications. And when all three technolo-
gies combine, the benefits feed off each other. 
State Farm has filed a recent patent to use 
blockchain, AI, and IoT to track autonomous 
vehicles on the chain to provide immutable 
records of incidents, assign liability, and pro-
cess claims. 
These kinds of integrations will become in-
creasingly common as many more companies 
file patent applications involving all three 
technologies. Those include a wide array of in-
dustries, from financial services (Mastercard) 
to information technology (IBM) and food 
intelligence platforms (Innit). As AI and IoT expansion of their investable capital (the top 
10 DAOs, excluding foundations, collectively 
hold nearly $16 billion) can furnish addition-
al liquidity during market downturns and 
expansions. This dynamic may engender 
heightened competition for VC investors.
Security Risks T ake Different Shapes
Web3 security concerns are on the rise, with 
a growing focus on hacks and on-chain 
scams that result in the loss of millions of 
dollars. These illegal activities fall into two 
broad categories—code vulnerabilities and 
social engineering exploits.
Critical targets for code vulnerabilities 
include bridges, liquidity pools, and wallets 
due to their concentration of value. Despite 
protocols’ investment in secure smart con-
tracts, code audits, and bug bounty pro-
grams, the crypto space exceeded $1.5 billion 
in losses in 2023. On-chain cybersecurity is 
still in its nascency due to the incompatibil-
ity of Web2 security measures with open-
source networks, driving on-chain security 
solutions companies to explore the use of 
182© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3THE WEB3 LANDSCAPETECH
become more ubiquitous, we can expect new 
blockchain applications due to the synergis-
tic relationships with these technologies. 
Build through the Bear 
Building through the bear market is a recur-
ring theme in the crypto space: Even when 
markets cool and attention shifts away from 
the technology, protocol developers and 
companies keep innovating. This trend has 
persisted in the crypto world and is becom-
ing more common at traditional companies 
building new crypto solutions for the next 
economic upturn.
Despite the recent downturn and crypto’s 
uncertain regulatory landscape, new compa-
nies continue to launch, operate, and devel-
op Web3 initiatives. Those include payment 
companies like Visa and PayPal; investment 
applications like Spot Bitcoin ETH Futures, 
and ARK Invest; brokerage firms like Coin-
base’s L2 network; NFT loyalty programs like 
that offered by Adidas ALTS; and games like 
Zynga’s “Sugartown.” As traditional compa-
nies implement new business models and cost reduction strategies in Web3, the tech-
nology is poised to have an impact as signif-
icant as cloud infrastructure in the 2010s.
This is the beginning of Web3’s era of in-
stitutional adoption, as major criticisms 
of public blockchain technology around 
energy utilization and scalability continue 
to weaken. Expect to see continued devel-
opment and deployment of Web3 initiatives 
from companies across every industry; the 
companies experimenting with the technol-
ogy now will have a leg up on competition in 
the future.
183© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Adidas ALTS are NFTs that provide early access to virtual and physical products.
Image credit: AdidasWEB3SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
What If SEC lawsuits were successful?    
“US Falls Behind in Fintech as SEC Wins Major Crypto Lawsuits”
In a landmark development, the US Securities and Exchange Commission has successfully sued major crypto entities including Bi-
nance, Coinbase, DAOs, stablecoins, and NFT projects. This crackdown has driven crypto projects out of the US, severely limiting Amer-
ican access to the crypto markets and crippling related businesses. The SEC’s aggressive stance has effectively severed the on-ramps 
for US citizens to crypto markets and reversed the country’s fortune in the crypto industry, once boosted by China’s crypto ban.
This shift has left the US lagging in fintech innovation. Now, regions like Japan, the EU, and Africa are emerging as new fintech lead-
ers, capitalizing on the exodus of blockchain expertise from the US. The departure of blockchain projects has led to a dearth of skilled 
professionals in the field. US investors face minimal protection, as they can still access offshore protocols without oversight, echoing 
the FTX collapse in the Bahamas. Japan, in particular, is rising as an economic powerhouse due to its alignment with the Web3 indus-
try and supportive regulatory environment. Meanwhile, the growth of DeFi and other blockchain projects is expected to slow, especially 
with US users facing access barriers.
The upcoming Supreme Court decision on defining investment contracts could further shape the SEC’s reach over stablecoins and 
DeFi. As the global blockchain business adapts, the US’ once-dominant position in fintech innovation is now challenged, marking a 
significant shift in the landscape of financial technology.
184© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH WEB3185© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 
INFRASTRUCTUREWEB3 TECHWEB3 INFRASTRUCTURETECH
Proof of Stake Proves Its Worth
Ethereum’s 2022 transition from electric-
ity-guzzling proof of work (PoW) to a more 
energy-efficient and decentralized network 
secured by proof of stake was an incredible 
feat. But it’s only a stepping stone in the 
progression toward a hyper-scalable, fully de-
centralized, highly secure, and easily usable 
platform for the internet.
Now, the Ethereum community has a list 
of improvement proposals, and research is 
ongoing to improve each area. They include 
adding temporary data storage to enhance 
the scalability of Layer 2 chains, increasing 
decentralization by separating block propos-
er and block builder capabilities to strip out 
MEV bots’ capabilities to censor transactions, 
and improving account abstraction. 
While none of the proposals or areas of re-
search have hard implementation timelines, 
the Ethereum community has a proven track 
record of delivering high-quality and thor-
oughly tested protocol updates. Companies 
still on the Web3 sidelines because they lack creasingly important for specialized chains, 
which may need to change underlying in-
frastructure to bring new capabilities to the 
blockchain ecosystem. 
Another recurring theme is new alternative 
Layer 1 blockchains. Most recently Aptos and 
Sui, two heavily venture-backed L1s, deployed 
their mainnets and are attempting to wres-
tle network usage away from incumbents 
like Ethereum and Solana with tech stack 
upgrades. They both use PoS but have very 
different algorithms under the hood: They’re 
now using a two-pronged approach to trans-
action consensus that allows for high scal-
ability through parallelizing transactions. 
These protocols weren’t possible in Ethere-
um’s PoS based on how the blocks are struc-
tured and could present a red flag for the 
company. Ethereum’s technology has lagged 
behind the industry for many years, but its 
massive network effects keep it relevant. 
Time will tell if a younger blockchain with 
more innovative consensus mechanisms 
and infrastructure designs can outcompete 
the current platform of choice.Blockchain Modularity
The “blockchain trilemma” highlights a key 
challenge in Layer 1 blockchains: Optimizing 
for scalability, decentralization, and security 
simultaneously is difficult. Ethereum excels 
in decentralization and security but lags in 
scalability, while Solana offers scalability and 
security but compromises on decentraliza-
tion. To address this, the blockchain sector 
is turning to modularity, separating Layer 1 
blockchain functions—execution, settlement, 
consensus, and data availability—into dis-
tinct, specialized chains.
This approach is evident in Ethereum’s Layer 2 
solutions like Optimistic and Zero Knowledge 
Rollups, which enhance transaction speed 
and cost-efficiency. More broadly, various 
Layer 2s and blockchains are experimenting 
with different module combinations, aim-
ing to improve blockchain performance and 
interconnect ecosystems. A notable example 
is Eclipse, a new Layer 2 architecture that in-
tegrates Ethereum, Celestia, Solana, and RISC 
Zero for different functionalities, showcasing 
advanced modularity.technical capability or fear usability issues 
should observe these behind-the-scenes 
moves; these new developments will contin-
ue to improve the capabilities of the plat-
form for all types of applications. 
Emerging Forms of Consensus Protocols 
By many measures, Ethereum’s merge to 
proof of stake (PoS) was a great success: 
The transition went smoothly, energy con-
sumption dropped by 99%, staked ETH that 
secures the network has increased every 
month since the merge, and many more 
Ethereum users can participate in securing 
the network. But while PoS is a mainstay con-
sensus mechanism in Web3, Ethereum’s PoS 
is not a one-size-fits-all approach and still 
has downsides, such as limited scalability.
Other networks have chosen different forms 
of consensus protocols. Filecoin, a decentral-
ized storage blockchain network, uses two 
different types of consensus mechanisms 
that allow the nodes in the network to verify 
data has been stored and continues to be 
stored in the network. This may become in-
186© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3WEB3 INFRASTRUCTURETECH
Although still in its early stages, the modular 
blockchain concept is gaining traction. The 
uptake of existing Layer 2 solutions and on-
going experiments in specialized chains sug-
gest a future where modular strategies could 
be vital in solving the blockchain trilemma 
for diverse applications and business needs.
Zero-Knowledge Proofs
Zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) aren’t new: 
They were theorized back in the 1980s by 
researchers at New York University and were 
first deployed at scale with the 2016 launch 
of ZCash, a privacy-focused cryptocurrency 
based on bitcoin’s codebase. More recently, 
improvements to computational capabilities 
and the cryptography itself have allowed for 
wider-scale deployment of ZKPs in the crypto 
space, most notably with ZK-Rollups.
ZKPs have gained significant adoption due to 
their two core characteristics: succinctness 
and privacy. The succinctness characteristic 
is the basis for the scalability enhancements 
of ZK-Rollups, because nodes can compute 
proofs of transactions off-chain and submit Ethereum’s L2 chains like Arbitrum, Opti-
mism, and zkSync are embracing this ap-
proach, allowing easier creation of L2 and L3 
chains. These solutions enhance deployment 
ease, and upgrade flexibility, interoperabil-
ity, and scalability, although Cosmos was 
the first to introduce this model. Coinbase’s 
Base is another example of this trend, built 
on the Optimism OP Stack. Its success may 
prompt other companies to explore similar 
solutions.
This shift is crucial as it enhances scalabil-
ity and reduces costs, making blockchain 
more user-friendly, especially for high-trans-
action applications. Application-specific 
chains offer more specialization and the 
possibility of private chains within a decen-
tralized network, believed to be key for future 
interoperability and simplified user experi-
ence. However, not all in the crypto commu-
nity agree with the multichain approach of 
Appchain. Some, like Solana, focus on a sin-
gle chain for all applications. The effective-
ness of these diverse strategies will become 
clearer over time.the proofs to Layer 1 for verification. This 
shifts the heavy computation off-chain while 
still verifying the validity of every transaction.
However, ZKP characteristics allow them to 
be applied far beyond blockchain scalabil-
ity solutions: Researchers are studying the 
application of ZKPs to AI training, interaction, 
and verification of model outputs. As com-
putation capacity continues to increase and 
ZKP technology improves, expect to see it 
used throughout digital interactions to pro-
vide great control over private data and de-
crease unverified or fraudulent information.
The Appchain Thesis on Ethereum
The Appchain concept, originated by Cos-
mos, has been adopted in Ethereum’s Layer 
2 (L2) ecosystem. This idea advocates for 
protocols to create their own independent 
chains when they grow significantly, en-
suring full control and reducing reliance on 
their original blockchain. RollApps, a key L2 
provider, facilitates this by offering tools for 
easy deployment of new chains.
187© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3WEB3 INFRASTRUCTURETECH
Data-as-a-Problem 
Data storage, now cheaper and faster in the 
traditional economy, is a problem for block-
chains. Their unique design, which limits how 
much data can be stored in blocks, makes 
data storage costly and challenging to opti-
mize.
A key issue for blockchain scalability is 
the block size and the hardware needed to 
process and validate data. Bigger blocks 
are more scalable but require more compu-
tational power, making them expensive for 
validators and potentially reducing decentral-
ization. Solutions like sharding or modularity 
can help blockchains circumvent these hard-
ware demands, but they face the data avail-
ability problem, where malicious nodes could 
hide crucial transaction data. So, light nodes 
need methods to verify data availability with-
out downloading everything, maintaining the 
efficiency of sharding.
Developers are seeking solutions to these 
challenges. PayPal sought a patent to prune 
blockchain blocks and store them with a data storage provider. Ethereum is set to intro-
duce EIP-4844 (proto-danksharding), adding 
a new, less resource-intensive data section 
to blocks, called “blobs,” to ease the compu-
tational load on nodes and improve scalabil-
ity. Other projects are exploring approaches 
like data hosting consortiums and modular 
blockchain designs. Further progress from 
various crypto market segments should 
enhance scalability without compromising 
decentralization or security.
188© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3189© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.DECENTRALIZED 
APPLICATIONSWEB3 TECHDECENTRALIZED APPLICATIONSTECH
DeFi Protocols Network Effects
DeFi protocol business models are traditional: 
Protocols provide products and services and 
generate fees distributed to stakeholders. But 
these protocols operate in a unique environ-
ment: The business’s “secret sauce” is public 
knowledge because nearly all DeFi protocols 
are open source. 
Open-source protocols can generate compe-
tition—Uniswap has forked nearly 500 times, 
spurring continuous innovation—but they can 
also splinter the market and provide an open-
ing for fraudulent activity. This was the case 
with Compounder Finance, a fork of Yearn 
Finance that scammed investors out of more 
than $10 million with minimal development 
effort.
Fraudulent projects are still a concern, but 
the bear market has washed out smaller 
competitors as investors leave the market or 
flee to more reputable service providers. As 
a result, large DeFi protocols continue to ex-
pand their influence, both vertically to provide 
more DeFi services (such as Maker starting they can miss the mark of getting real user 
adoption. Users have learned to game air-
drop programs, known as “airdrop farming,” 
where users set up dozens of automated 
wallets programmed to maximize their 
chances and total rewards from an airdrop. 
Incentive structure and qualifications for 
airdrops can limit this behavior, but many 
platforms have struggled. Arbitrum, a lead-
ing Ethereum L2, had a significant issue 
with airdrop farming that left many retail 
users dissatisfied, and to this day, 72 million 
ARB tokens are unclaimed.
While Arbitrum has become extremely suc-
cessful anyway, the viability of these pro-
grams is murky. Most, if not all, tokens with 
significant airdrops see massive sell-offs 
at token distribution, as many users dump 
tokens to lock in value. It’s difficult to tell if 
these users eventually return to the plat-
form. But even if the outcomes are unclear, 
airdrops have become a mainstay in the 
ecosystem as a significant hype generator. Hyperfinancialization
Financialization has been a hot-button topic 
in the crypto market as goods typically not 
considered financial assets—such as art, 
video games, and social media—are commod-
itized, recasting their value from enjoyment to 
investment returns.
In art, advanced trading techniques like mass 
NFT buys and sells commoditized art and 
shifts the focus away from culture and com-
munity. At the same time, token incentives 
spurred the gamification of NFT trades and 
manipulated volumes. The financialization 
of video games, GameFi (the combination of 
decentralized finance and video games) is 
often criticized for its lack of engaging game-
play and a hyper-focus on financialization. The 
latest development in social media financial-
ization—Friend.tech—is also controversial. It 
allows users to tokenize social connections 
on X by buying and selling a sort of “key” in 
public profiles that gives access to private 
chat rooms and is criticized for commodifying 
people through their social media accounts.as a stablecoin provider but expanding into 
lending as Spark Protocol) and horizontally 
to provide the same services across multi-
ple chains (such as Aave’s lending product 
being available across nine different block-
chains). 
The average user can’t verify code and will 
likely gravitate toward protocols with the 
best reputations. At the same time, busi-
nesses will have robust and tested code-
bases to use and adapt to their own chain 
services.
Guerilla Marketing: Crypto Airdrops
Airdrops raise awareness, drive user adop-
tion, stress test platforms, and reward active 
or long-time users. They can be extremely lu -
crative: NFT platform Blur distributed tokens 
as part of its multiseason airdrop program, 
and in the first season, 23 users earned 
more than $1 million in tokens.
Still, platforms should weigh benefits 
against long-term goals. If airdrops are too 
short term or have misaligned incentives, 
190© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3DECENTRALIZED APPLICATIONSTECH
In each case, the implementation and degree 
of financialization seems to be extremely 
important in the outcomes of the applica-
tion. Despite the criticisms, financialization 
remains a core tenet of the crypto ecosystem. 
Expect to see new applications of financial-
ization continue to be developed with ensuing 
volatility and uncertainty.
Personal “X-As-A-Service” Earning Models
Web3 has opened the door for consumers to 
earn through “X-as-a-service” models that al-
low for the automation of personal hardware 
and digital assets to generate returns—partic-
ularly in computation, security, and utility.
As mining is now monopolized by profession-
al outfits, users seeking to provide compu-
tation-as-a-service are pivoting to running 
millions of iterations of training data for AI 
models—and getting paid handsomely for it. 
In Security-as-a-Service, blockchain users 
can stake their tokens to participate in trans-
action and block validation, helping secure 
the network. In the same area, restaking is a new blockchain primitive where staked 
token balances on Ethereum can be used to 
validate Ethereum and other chains simulta-
neously for juicier yields. In NFT gaming proj-
ects, users can provide utility-as-a-service 
by providing digital services to player bases 
and earning portions of the transactions on 
their digital properties. 
There are many more as-a-service earning 
opportunities for crypto adopters, such 
as providing liquidity as a service on DeFi 
platforms or providing cloud storage on Fi-
lecoin’s IPFS network. Many of these oppor-
tunities are limited to those with the knowl-
edge and technical abilities to navigate the 
crypto ecosystem. Still, as barriers to adop-
tion come down, these earning models will 
be available to anyone with internet access.
191© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Crypto miner Hut 8 invested in five data centers which can now be used for other purposes, including 
training AI.
Image credit: CoindeskWEB3SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2038
What If We Established Systemically Important T echnology Institutions (SITIs)?     
The global financial system has undergone a transformation, with technology companies at its core. Over the past two decades, as digital assets 
have taken over, technology companies have invested heavily, by developing digital wallets, cryptocurrency exchanges, and NFT marketplaces, 
making these services integral to their digital ecosystems.
As a result, following a recent meeting, the US Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) has announced plans to designate certain technology 
companies as being systematically important: a significant departure from the definition of “systemically important institutions” portrayed in 
the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act. 
This oversight regulates technology organizations that now steward most of the country’s digital assets, which have become the underpinning 
of economic value. Digital assets have ballooned in value due to the financialization and monetization of people’s digital identities, capabili-
ties, and online followings, as well as the tokenization of physical assets such as homes and vehicles. While blockchain technology spurred the 
creation of digital assets and ease of transacting online, adoption hurdled around technical requirements, leaving oversight, self-custody, and 
security concerns to be solved.
Systemically Important Technology Institutions (SITIs) will be required to adhere to strict standards in financial stability and risk management. 
They must also comply with advanced cybersecurity measures to protect against potential threats. This increased burden of compliance will 
weigh heavily on some technology companies but will at last secure the new economy of digital assets that many have come to rely on.
192© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH WEB3193© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB2 & WEB3 
INTEGRATIONWEB3 TECHWEB2 & WEB3 INTEGRATIONTECH
Digital Content Provenance and Authentication  
As more and more platforms adopt AI, it be-
comes increasingly important for users to be 
able to verify the origin and authenticity of dig-
ital content. C2PA, the coalition of major tech 
companies founded in 2020 looking to develop 
an open-source infrastructure to protect digital 
content and consumers from fake news, has 
seen its membership increase by 60% over the 
past year due to interest in AI.
Digital watermarking can help human content 
creators by marking human content that’s 
used in AI training to make sure it doesn’t 
run afoul of copyright laws. In contrast, cryp-
tographic hash functions that track and store 
the data manipulation history of assets can 
help human consumers. Zero-knowledge 
proofs can also help authenticate AI output 
by providing a model with certain conditions 
without revealing how the model created the 
output. Of course, in the future, as AIs start to 
be involved in higher-stakes decisions, there 
will be more incentives to tamper with or re-
place the model. Modulus Labs is experiment-
ing with chain AI deployments for high visibili-a sneaker release that are convertible into a 
physical part of shoes once they’re produced. 
ALTS by Adidas offer NFTs with perks for 
holders, like exclusive access to drops.
Web2 and Web3 native NFT projects are 
also converging. Blue-chip NFT projects like 
Doodles and Pudgy Penguins have launched 
clothing and toy lines, and Nouns DAO 
funded a full-length movie featuring popular 
NFT characters. Even if NFT trading markets 
never return to the highs they reached in 
2021 and 2022, the technology is helping 
businesses and projects acquire, develop, 
collaborate with, and monetize a deeper con-
nection with communities. ty and easy verification of model outputs. 
While progress has been swift, larger strides 
are necessary to get these technologies 
deployed at scale to protect consumers from 
malicious and false information and content 
creators’ ownership of their digital content.
NFTs: Beyond the JPEG
When NFTs hit the mainstream, they focused 
on JPEG art. While this made NFTs a house-
hold term, the technology’s ease of transfer, 
easy verification, historical ownership track-
ing, and immutability have benefits beyond 
pictures-for-profiles. Now, NFTs are being de-
ployed to digitize ownership of assets in the 
real estate industry, make event ticketing 
more secure, and augment retailers’ loyalty 
programs. 
Consumer-facing companies are entering 
Web3 with NFTs at the core of their strat-
egy: Nike, Starbucks, and Ducati have NFT 
programs that bridge the gap between their 
physical and digital products. Puma and NBA 
player LaMelo Ball partnered with Open Sea 
and Gutter Cat Gang to sell NFT versions of 
194© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3
Starbucks launched an NFT project in Korea called 
‘Starbucks Starlight’ which encourages customers 
to use their own cups.
Image Credit: StarbucksWEB2 & WEB3 INTEGRATIONTECH
Self-Sovereign Identity Solutions  
Growing online interactions dramatically 
increase the data people share with third par-
ties. While centralized providers like Google 
and Facebook make it easy to sign in with one 
click, this enables tracking and puts con-
sumer data at significant risk. In response, 
organizations like The Linux Foundation, W3C, 
and the Decentralized Identity Foundation 
have developed software standards that allow 
users to manage access to their data. 
Self-sovereign identity (SSI) digitizes iden-
tity, giving data owners control of their 
digital identities, enabling access to digital 
ecosystems, and giving users control over 
what details of their identity are shared with 
different parties. While SSI has no set stan-
dard, it typically combines distributed ledger 
technology and cryptography with verifiable 
credentials and decentralized identifiers. SSI 
could reduce data breaches, as companies no 
longer need to store personal information.
Players like J.P. Morgan, Workday, and Micro-
soft have decentralized ID projects, but adop-
tion has been slow, likely because of the lack private blockchain networks and that which 
is underway in public blockchain networks. 
On private blockchains, companies like Citi-
group and Goldman Sachs are experiment-
ing with tokenized digital securities mar-
kets to facilitate faster and more efficient 
financial services. On the public blockchain, 
US government bonds have been tokenized—
Maker, Tether, and USDC use US treasuries 
as collateral. 
Another area of development is in the tokeni-
zation of physical collectibles. In September, 
Arcade.xyz, a protocol specializing in peer-
to-peer loans, facilitated a $1.1 million loan 
where an NFT of a Supreme T-shirt collection 
was used as collateral. Many prominent fig-
ures and consulting firms see the tokeniza-
tion of assets as a potential multitrillion-dol-
lar market for blockchain technology.of profit incentives and consumer visibility. 
However, US and EU government agencies 
are offering grants and installing mandates 
to allow decentralized identity solutions to 
be built into consumer-facing wallets. In the 
EU, decentralized identity wallets are ex-
pected to launch as part of its 2030 Digital 
Decade program next year. 
T okenization of TradFi, Digital Assets & 
Security T okens 
The tokenization of real-world assets—se-
curity tokens—has been a bright spot in 
blockchain development. So far, security 
tokens have had limited implementation. 
One exception is Japan, which already has a 
thriving security token market focused on 
tokenizing corporate bonds or real estate–
backed securities. 
Growth is on the horizon: More organizations 
are adopting security tokens, more juris-
dictions offer regulatory clarity, and bond 
market yields are increasing. The industry 
is experiencing two trajectories of security 
tokens: tokenization that occurs in closed or 
195© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3
Microsoft launched Entra Verified ID in early 2024 
to include Face Check, a facial matching feature.
Image credit: Microsoft WEB2 & WEB3 INTEGRATIONTECH
Credibility Scoring and Anonymity
DeFi lending is not capital efficient: Most 
DeFi loans are overcollateralized. To fix that 
balance, lending companies are turning to 
conventional means of credit risk scoring us-
ing on-chain data and nontraditional metrics 
focusing on reputational scoring of addresses 
based on DeFi activity.
Companies like Spectral pull on-chain data 
for accounts and use AI algorithms to an-
alyze lending, borrowing, and other history 
and output a credit score. Other protocols 
like Taraxa and Cred Protocol use a mixture of 
on-chain and off-chain reputational metrics 
to enhance score outputs. DeFi is also using 
off-chain credit scores, like those reported by 
TransUnion. The company’s partnership with 
Web3 companies Quadrata and Spring Labs 
allows users to port their credit scores direct-
ly into DeFi applications. 
While credit scores improve capital efficiency, 
attaching scores to blockchain reduces user 
anonymity, a core tenant of the technology. 
The range of impact depends on the solution: for their lack of fun. These days, blockchain 
advancements in scalability and usability 
have enabled developers to create AA and 
AAA titles. Game studios such as Star Atlas, 
Gala Games, Bright Star, and others are deep 
into developing such games.
Traditional gaming companies have hesi-
tated to adopt blockchain. Still, companies 
like Zynga and Ubisoft are experimenting 
with on-chain games—most notably Zynga’s 
“Sugartown.” It’s built on Ethereum and just 
dropped an NFT collection tied to the project. 
Zynga has a history of producing high-qual-
ity hits, and the game’s success could pave 
the way for users’ increased familiarity with 
on-chain assets, tokens, and staking. This 
could in turn lead to increased Web3 integra-
tion and game development in the future. On-chain credit calculations have a lower 
risk, but blending on- and off-chain data will 
at a minimum result in pseudonyms. Off-
chain credit scores will tie directly to indi-
vidual identities. This could be a significant 
deterrent for crypto natives for whom ano-
nymity is crucial. Still, for the next wave of 
adopters who are used to standard identity 
verification, it may have less impact. 
On-Chain Gaming: Play, Own, Earn & Enjoy 
On-chain games incorporate blockchain tech-
nology, ranging from fully on-chain games to 
those that only have digital assets on-chain. 
Fully on-chain games have all the benefits 
of blockchain, including alternative fund-
ing, community development, decentralized 
serverless development, player ownership, 
composability, and player-driven economies.
While the benefits of on-chain gaming are 
attractive, game deployments are subject 
to current capacity constraints of public 
blockchains. This has resulted in the release 
of initially slow turn-based games involving 
trading cards or battles that were criticized 
196© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3
Sugartown is a Web3 gaming platform created  
by Zynga.
Image Credit: ZyngaSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2032
What If We Used AI T o Monetize Privacy?     
Are you tired of feeling like your personal data is out of your control? Well now you can rest easy with DataSentinel. This game-changing protec-
tion in digital privacy and data control is powered by AI, and purpose-built to keep you safe. Imagine a world where you are the master of your 
data. With DataSentinel, that world is now a reality. DataSentinel’s cutting-edge self-sovereign identity solutions keep your private data stored 
securely and decentralized—meaning you, and only you, have the keys to your digital kingdom.
Here’s the best part: With DataSentinel, you can monetize your data. That’s right, turn your data into dollars! DataSentinel’s AI-powered system 
optimizes your data, making it valuable for companies willing to pay for your insights. It’s time your data started working for you!
The security on DataSentinel is top-notch. Thanks to blockchain technology, your personal information is safe and sound. Plus, you have the 
power to grant or revoke access as you see fit. It’s like having a digital bodyguard. Gone are the days when companies could exploit your data 
without your consent. With DataSentinel, you forge a new path in the digital world, one where privacy isn’t just a feature—it’s a right.
Let’s not forget about convenience! DataSentinel models are like personal assistants for your digital life, handling everything with the utmost 
confidentiality and efficiency. In compliance with the strictest data privacy regulations, DataSentinel ensures you’re always in the driver’s seat 
of your digital identity. So, if you’re ready to take control of your digital life, sign up for DataSentinel and join the digital revolution. Your data will 
thank you!
197© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH WEB3AUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
198© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.WEB3 TECH199© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSWEB3 TECH
MELANIE SUBIN  
Managing Director 
Melanie Subin is Managing 
Director of Future Today Insti-
tute, where she serves on our 
management committee and 
leads our consulting division. 
Renowned for her pragmatic, forward-thinking approach, Melanie 
has successfully steered numerous clients towards future-ready 
strategies, harnessing emerging trends and technologies to identify 
risk and opportunity early enough for action. Her leadership has 
significantly impacted how industries envision and execute their 
long-term strategies.
Melanie specializes in strategic transformation, quantitative and 
qualitative research, and scenario development. With deep exper -
tise in the development and establishment of foresight capabilities 
within large organizations, Melanie regularly counsels C-staff on 
strategy and execution. She has spent years assessing the impact 
of major external forces such as increasing technological sophis-tication, changing consumer and business preferences, and rising 
connectivity on the evolution and transformation of industries and 
markets across the globe.
Melanie is a recognized expert in fostering psychological safe-
ty within teams, a crucial element for operationalizing strategic 
foresight effectively. Her work emphasizes creating an environment 
where open dialogue and innovative thinking are encouraged, 
enabling organizations to embrace change and navigate future 
uncertainties with confidence.
 Melanie serves in the World Economic Forum’s Metaverse Work -
ing Group and is a founding member of the Dubai Future Forum’s 
advisory group. She serves as a coach in the strategic foresight MBA 
course at the NYU Stern School of Business. Melanie holds a BS in 
Finance from Central Connecticut State University and a Fintech 
Certification from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
GRANT TINKER  
Associate 
Grant Tinker served as a Strategic Foresight Consultant at Future 
Today Institute following his graduation from NYU Stern School of 
Business, where he earned an MBA with specializations in strategy, 
entrepreneurship & innovation, and marketing. He brings a strong 
financial background as a Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) and 
his multiple years of corporate finance experience from SaaS companies in Silicon Valley to his work. 
In addition to his MBA, Grant holds a Bachelor of Science in Economics from California Polytechnic 
State University.
200© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSWEB3 TECH
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYSELECTED  
SOURCESTECH WEB3
201© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.202© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“A Gentle Introduction: Orbit 
Chains.” Arbitrum Docs, Decem-
ber 7, 2023, docs.arbitrum.io/
launch-orbit-chain/orbit-gen-
tle-introduction. 
Amadán, Dylan. “Why Ai Needs 
Zero-Knowledge Proofs.” Me-
dium, Verum Capital Insights,  
April 4, 2023. medium.com/
verum-capital-insights/why-ai-
needs-zero-knowledge-proofs-
957ec72627b9. 
Asher, Mattison. “Zero-Knowl-
edge Proofs: Starks vs Snarks.” 
Consensys, May 18, 2021. con-
sensys.io/blog/zero-knowledge-
proofs-starks-vs-snarks. 
Awosika, Emmanuel. “Account 
Abstraction: Past, Present, Fu-
ture.” MetaMask, April 25, 2023. 
metamask.io/news/latest/
account-abstraction-past-pres-
ent-future. 
Banon, Justin. “The Trillion 
Dollar Crypto Opportunity: Real 
World Asset Tokenization.” 
CoinDesk, September 6, 2023. 
www.coindesk.com/consen-
sus-magazine/2023/08/31/the-trillion-dollar-crypto-oppor-
tunity-real-world-asset-tokeni-
zation/. 
Beckett, Alex. “Modular vs. Mono-
lithic: A Beginner’s Guide.” Celes-
tia Blog, November 9, 2022. blog.
celestia.org/modular-vs-mono-
lithic-a-beginners-guide/. 
Bedawala, Mustafa. “Monolithic 
vs. Modular Blockchain.” Visa, 
usa.visa.com/solutions/crypto/
monolithic-vs-modular-block-
chain.html. 
Behnke, Rob. “Blockchain’s 
Storage Problem Is Growing. Are 
There Any Solutions?” Web3 and 
Blockchain Security Solutions, 
November 3, 2022. www.halborn.
com/blog/post/blockchains-
storage-problem-is-growing-are-
there-any-solutions. 
Berkowitz, Bram. “Visa and Mas-
terCard Have Embraced Block-
chain Technology. It’s a Smart 
Long-Term Strategy.” The Motley 
Fool, February 16, 2023. www.
fool.com/investing/2023/02/16/
visa-and-mastercard-have-em-
braced-blockchain/. Bochan, Toby. “Pudgy Penguins 
NFT Project, Once Endangered, 
Proves Web3 Turnaround Is 
Possible.” CoinDesk, 23 May 
2023, www.coindesk.com/
web3/2023/05/25/pudgy-pen-
guins-nft-project-once-endan-
gered-proves-web3-turnaround-
is-possible. 
Brooks, Miles. “The 10 Best Cryp-
to Learn and Earn Platforms in 
2023.” CoinLedger, September 
15, 2023. coinledger.io/tools/
learn-and-earn-crypto. 
Butterfield, Sean. “What Is Ac-
count Abstraction and Why Is It 
Important?” Crypto Council for 
Innovation, December 13, 2023. 
cryptoforinnovation.org/what-is-
account-abstraction-and-why-
is-it-important/. 
Chen, Alec. “Modular Block-
chains: A Deep Dive.” Volt 
Capital, July 7, 2023. volt.capital/
blog/modular-blockchains. 
Chow, Katelyn. “Tokenizing 
Identity: Friend.Tech’s Explo-
sive Rise and Controversies.” 
Metatalks, August 28, 2023. www.metatalks.ai/tokeniz-
ing-identity-friend-techs-explo-
sive-rise-and-controversies/. 
Copeland, Tim. “‘Airdrop Farmers’ 
Tell Us How They Make Millions.” 
The Block, April 6, 2023. www.
theblock.co/post/225215/we-
made-close-to-1-million-inside-
the-murky-world-of-airdrop-
farming. 
Cryptopedia Staff. “Consen-
sus Algorithm/Consensus 
Mechanism Innovations.” 
Gemini, March 10, 2023. www.
gemini.com/cryptopedia/
blockchain-consensus-mecha-
nism-types-of-algorithm. 
“DAOs and DeFi.” Deepdao, deep-
dao.io/organizations. Accessed 
September 7, 2023. 
“Decentralizing Base with the 
OP Stack and Optimism.” Base, 
Coinbase, February 23, 2023. 
base.mirror.xyz/H_KPwV31M7O-
JT-THUnU7wYjOF16Sy7aWvaEr-
5cgHi8I. 
EigenLayer. “Intro to Eigenda: 
Hyperscale Data Availability for Rollups.” EigenLayer Blog, 
October 19, 2023. www.blog.
eigenlayer.xyz/intro-to-eigen-
da-hyperscale-data-availabili-
ty-for-rollups/. 
Fay, Mike. “Base: Assessing 
Coinbase’s New L2 Network.” 
Seeking Alpha, August 22, 
2023. seekingalpha.com/
article/4630199-base-assess-
ing-coinbases-new-l2-network. 
Floyd, Matthew L., et al. Systems 
and Methods for Maintaining a 
Distributed Ledger Pertaining to 
Autonomous Vehicles. November 
21, 2023. 
Forta Network. “The Future of 
Threat Prevention in WEB3.” 
June 5, 2023, forta.org/blog/
the-future-of-threat-prevention-
in-web3/. 
Gehmlich, Ben. “Ethereum 
Blockchain Security; Pros and 
Cons of Pos Solutions.” Gigster, 
September 27, 023, gigster.com/
blog/pros-and-cons-of-pos-for-
ethereum-security/. Gkritsi, Eliza. “Microsoft, Aptos 
Labs Team up on New Block-
chain AI Tools.” CoinDesk, 
August 11, 2023. www.coindesk.
com/web3/2023/08/09/micro-
soft-and-aptos-labs-partner-on-
new-ai-blockchain-solutions/. 
“HACK3D The Web3 Security 
Quarterly Report—Q1 2023.” Cer-
tik.com, April 6, 2023. https://
www.certik.com/resources/
blog/3BaCA6ytR6uLFc1JV -
vt313-hack3d-the-web3-securi-
ty-quarterly-report-q1-2023.
“HACK3D The Web3 Security 
Quarterly Report—Q2 2023.” 
Certik.com, July 5, 2023. 
www.certik.com/resources/
blog/6KJQKBrVJEwHR6Tc4PAv-
Jo-hack3d-the-web3-securi-
ty-quarterly-report-q2-2023. 
Hall, Phil. “Zynga Announces 
Web3 Game Sugartown.” Play 
to Earn, August 18, 2023. www.
playtoearn.online/2023/08/18/
zynga-announc-
es-web3-game-sugartown/. 
Hoffman, David. “David’s 
Takeaways from Ethcc 2023 on SELECTED SOURCESTECH WEB3203© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Bankless.” Bankless, July 26, 
2023. www.bankless.com/da-
vid-ethcc-2023. 
Hunt, James. “November saw 
$343 million lost to crypto hacks 
and fraud cases: Immunefi.” 
November 30, 2023. The Block. 
https://www.theblock.co/
post/265437/november-saw-
343-million-lost-to-crypto-hacks-
and-fraud-cases-immunefi
Inabinet, Jack. “Tokenized Trea-
suries and an RWA Revolution 
on Bankless.” Bankless,  Sep-
tember 6, 2023. www.bank-
less.com/tokenized-treasur-
ies-and-an-rwa-revolution. 
Irrera, Anna. “PayPal Launch-
es US Dollar Stablecoin PY-
USD for Payments, Transfers.” 
Bloomberg, August 7, 2023. 
www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
cles/2023-08-07/paypal-launch-
es-us-dollar-stablecoin-py-
usd-for-payments-transfers. 
Isaacson, Thomas M. “Pat-
ents at the Trivergence Com-
bining Blockchain, Artificial 
Intelligence, and the Internet of Things.” Blockchain Research 
Institute, 2022. https://www.
blockchainresearchinstitute.
org/project/patents-at-the-triv-
ergence/te
John, Joel. “Grants & WEB3.” 
April 7, 2022. www.decentralised.
co/p/grants-and-web3. 
Joshi, Shashank, and Arhan 
Choudhury. “Tokenization of Real 
Estate Assets Using Block-
chain.” IJIIT vol.18, no.3 2022: 
pp.1-12. http://doi.org/10.4018/
IJIIT.309588.
Khun, Eric. “NFT Misconception: 
JPEG Aren’t on the Blockchain.” 
Eric Khun, October 31, 2021. er-
ickhun.com/posts/nft-miscon-
ception-image-arent-on-block-
chains/. 
Kufuor, Kofi. “The State of Crypto 
Security.” Medium, The Control, 
October 7, 2022. thecontrol.co/
the-state-of-crypto-security-
d628ac5b609d. 
Kumar, Ronak. “Lido Chooses 
Axelar and Neutron for WSTETH 
Launch on Cosmos.” The Crypto 
Times, September 15, 2023.  www.cryptotimes.io/lido-choos-
es-axelar-and-neutron-for-
wsteth-launch-on-cosmos. 
Ledesma, Lyllah. “SEC’s Binance, 
Coinbase Suits Create Uncer-
tain Future for Listed Tokens: 
Legal Experts.” CoinDesk, June 
13, 2023. www.coindesk.com/
markets/2023/06/12/secs-bi-
nance-coinbase-suits-create-
uncertain-future-for-listed-to-
kens-legal-experts/. 
Levin, Michael, and Olaoluwa 
Osuntokun. “AI for All: Powering 
Apis and Large Language Models 
with Lightning.” Lightning Labs, 
July 6, 2023. lightning.engineer-
ing/posts/2023-07-05-l402-
langchain/. 
Lindrea, Brayden. “CTFC Cracks 
Down on DEFI Protocols Opyn, 
Zeroex and Deridex.” Cointele-
graph, September 7, 2023. 
cointelegraph.com/news/ctfc-is-
sues-order-against-defi-proto-
cols-opyn-zeroex-deridex. 
Liu, Bessie. “Why Data Availability 
Sampling Matters for Blockchain 
Scaling.” Blockworks, 23 August 2023. blockworks.co/news/da-
ta-availability-ethereum. 
Mirpuri, Jash. “Unraveling the 
Mantle Network: A Deep Dive into 
the New Layer-2 Scaling Solution 
for Ethereum.” Flagship.FYI, July 
2, 2023. flagship.fyi/outposts/
blockchains/mantle-network-
deep-dive-into-the-new-layer-2-
scaling-solution-for-ethereum/. 
Mitchelhill, Tom. “AAVE Proto-
col Launches Stablecoin Gho 
on Ethereum Mainnet, $2M 
Minted.” Cointelegraph, July 17, 
2023. cointelegraph.com/news/
aave-protocol-launch-stable-
coin-gho-ethereum-mainnet. 
Mondello, Antonino, and Alberto 
Troia. “Cryptography-based 
Platooning Mechanism for Au-
tonomous Vehicle Fleet Manage-
ment.” US20210319702A1.
Nagarajan, Shalini. “Borrowing 
Crypto with Defi? Transunion 
Shares Real-World Credit Scores.” 
Blockworks, April 21, 2023. block-
works.co/news/transunion-cryp-
to-defi-credit-scores. “OP Stack Components.” Opti-
mism Docs, December 11, 2023. 
docs.optimism.io/stack/compo-
nents. 
Overgang, Alexandra. “What Is 
Filecoin? The Leading Decentral-
ized Storage Network.” Cointele-
graph. cointelegraph.com/learn/
what-is-filecoin-the-leading-de-
centralized-storage-network. 
Owie, Best. “Study Says You’re Bet-
ter off Dumping Your Airdropped 
Tokens.” Bitcoinist.com, March 11, 
2022. bitcoinist.com/study-says-
youre-better-off-dumping-your-
airdropped-tokens/. 
Parkhouse, Arthur. “A Look at 
LVMH’s Blockchain Consortium.” 
Hypebeast, August 17, 2022. hy-
pebeast.com/2022/8/lvmh-au-
ra-blockchain-luxury-fashion. 
Peterson, Macauley. “Maker to 
Spark ‘New Explosion of Dai’ 
with Custom Lending Mar-
ket.” Blockworks,  May 8, 2023. 
blockworks.co/news/mak-
ers-spark-protocol-dai. Richards, Daniel. “The Rising 
Efficiency—and Falling Costs—of 
Data Storage.” Impax Asset Man-
agement, August 17, 2023. im-
paxam.com/insights-and-news/
blog/the-rising-efficiency-and-
falling-costs-of-data-storage. 
Sandor, Krisztian. “Tokenized 
U.S. Treasurys Surpass $600M 
as Crypto Investors Capture 
Tradfi Yield.” CoinDesk, July 11, 
2023. www.coindesk.com/mar -
kets/2023/07/11/tokenized-us-
treasurys-surpass-600m-as-cryp-
to-investors-capture-tradfi-yield/. 
“Securitize Japan Announces 
Business Alliance with Sony Bank 
and Sumitomo Mitsui Trust Bank 
on Landmark Tokenized Joint 
Money Trust.” Securitize, July 3, 
2023. securitize.io/press-releas-
es/securitize-japan-announc-
es-business-alliance-with-so-
ny-bank-and-sumitomo-mit-
sui-trust-bank-on-landmark-to-
kenized-joint-money-trust. SELECTED SOURCESTECH WEB3204© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Sensei, Degen. “The Case for and 
Against the Appchain Thesis.” 
The Aspiring Degen, October 16, 
2022. degensensei.substack.
com/p/the-case-for-and-
against-the-appchain. 
Staff, Decrypt. “These Are the 
High-Profile Spot Bitcoin ETF 
Applications Currently in Play.” 
Decrypt, December 7, 2023. de-
crypt.co/62912/high-profile-bit-
coin-etf-applications. 
Strack, Ben. “Race for a Spot 
Ether ETF Begins with Bid from 
Ark Invest, 21Shares.” Block-
works, September 6, 2023. 
blockworks.co/news/21shares-
ark-filing-for-spot-ether-etf. 
Strack, Ben. “TRADFI, DEFI Con-
vergence Continues Through 
Tokenizing Real-World As-
sets.” Blockworks, August 31, 
2023. blockworks.co/news/
real-world-assets-tradfi-defi-to-
kenization. 
Team, Chainalysis. “Curve 
Finance Pools Exploited Due to 
Code Vulnerabilities.” Chainaly-
sis, September 19, 2023.  www.chainalysis.com/
blog/curve-finance-liquidi-
ty-pool-hack/. 
Thapa, Ronal. “Aptos vs Sui Block-
chain: Similarities and Differenc-
es.” Boxmining, February 21, 2023. 
boxmining.com/aptos-vs-sui/. 
“The Crunchbase Web3 Track-
er.” Crunchbase News, April 28, 
2023. news.crunchbase.com/
web3-startups-investors/. 
“The Rug Pull Report.” Certik, 
March 14, 2023. www.certik.com/
resources/blog/5Zai85KkvIgW-
0wBJPQxl3i-the-rug-pull-report.
Thomas, Langston. “NFT Tickets 
Are the Future of Live Events. 
Here’s Why.”NFT Now, March 30, 
2023. nftnow.com/features/nft-
tickets-are-the-future-of-live-
music/. 
Thomas, Stanley. “The Role of 
Liquidity Providers in Decentral-
ized Finance (DEFI)!” Medium, 
DataDrivenInvestor, April 24, 
2023. medium.datadrivenin-
vestor.com/the-role-of-liquidi-
ty-providers-in-decentralized-fi-
nance-defi-d5af679aac2f. Time, Big. “Big Time: Airdrop 
Program Explained.” Medium, 
PlayBigTime, January 19, 2023. 
medium.com/playbigtime/
big-time-airdrop-program-ex-
plained-ed92fb3dd7d2. 
“Tokenized Treasuries.” Rwa.Xyz. 
Accessed November 1, 2023. app.
rwa.xyz/treasuries. 
Tropee Team. “8 Best Benefits of 
Nfts in 2023.” Tropee, February 23, 
2023. www.tropee.com/blog/8-
best-benefits-of-nfts-in-2023. 
“Understanding Tokenized US 
Treasury Bills.” Conduit Guides. 
Accessed December 7, 2023. 
www.conduit.fi/guides/under-
standing-tokenized-us-trea-
sury-bills. 
Vishu. “What Is Crypto Airdrop 
and How You Can Earn Money 
through It.” Binance, April 16, 
2023. www.binance.com/en/
feed/post/426221. 
Wagner, Casey. “Stoner Cats 
Agrees to Pay $1M Fine to Settle 
SEC Charges.” Blockworks, Sep-
tember 13, 2023.  blockworks.co/news/ston-
er-cats-sec-unregistered-securi-
ties-nfts-hollywood. 
Weiss, Ben. “A Brief History of Ze-
ro-Knowledge Proofs, the Buzzy 
Mathematical Technique That’s 
Taken Crypto by Storm.” For-
tune, June 6, 2023. fortune.com/
crypto/2023/06/05/zero-knowl-
edge-proofs-history-zk-rol-
lups-cryptography-zcash/. 
“What Is Zora? How Does It 
Work?” OpeanSea, August 22, 
2023. opensea.io/learn/block-
chain/what-is-the-zora-network. 
Wodehouse, Carey. “What Will 
Blockchain Mean for Data Stor-
age?” Pure Storage Blog, August 
18, 2023. blog.purestorage.com/
perspectives/what-will-block-
chain-mean-for-data-storage/. 
Wood, Catherine, et al. “Why 
Bitcoin Is the Currency for AIt.” 
Ark Invest,  September 7, 2023. 
ark-invest.com/podcast/bitcoin-
brainstorm-02-why-bitcoin-is-
the-currency-for-ai/. Wood, Chris. “Publicis Groupe 
Joins Human vs. Ai Content 
Verification Initiative C2pa.” 
MarTech, June 5, 2023. martech.
org/publicis-groupe-joins-hu-
man-vs-ai-content-verifica-
tion-initiative-c2pa/. 
Woodmansee, Benjamin. “AI 
and Blockchain Infrastructure 
Joyrides: Can AI and Block-
chain Germinate?.” Medium, 
April 28, 2022. medium.com/@
benwoodmansee/ai-blockchain-
infrastructure-joyrides-can-
ai-and-blockchain-germinate-
april-2021-d937a1dd21fc. 
Worldcoin Team, and dcbuilder.
eth. “An Introduction to Ze-
ro-Knowledge Machine Learning 
(ZKML).” Worldcoin Blog, Febru-
ary 22, 2023. worldcoin.org/blog/
engineering/intro-to-zkml. 
Wu, Eva. “The Financialization 
of Fun: Crypto Gaming Thesis.” 
Mechanism Capital, January 14, 
2022. www.mechanism.capital/
crypto-gaming-thesis/. Xu, Tammy. “AI Watermarking 
Locks down Unauthorized Use of 
Datasets.” IEEE Spectrum,  May 
1, 2023. spectrum.ieee.org/water-
mark-ai. 
Y. Li, M. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Jiang, 
T. Wei and S.-T. Xia, “Black-Box 
Dataset Ownership Verification 
via Backdoor Watermarking,” 
in IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Forensics and Security, 
vol. 18, pp. 2318-2332, 2023, doi: 
10.1109/TIFS.2023.3265535.
zkSync. “Introducing the ZK 
Stack.” Medium, Matter Labs, 
September 6, 2023. blog.mat-
ter-labs.io/introducing-the-zk-
stack-c24240c2532a. SELECTED SOURCESTECH WEB3METAVERSE • NEW REALITIES2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITIONTECH
207© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSMETAVERSE & NEW REALITIES
208 T op Headlines
209 State of Play
210 Key Events
211 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
212 Why Metaverse & New 
Realities Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization
213 When Will Metaverse & New 
Realities Trends Impact Y our 
Organization?
214 Opportunities and Threats
215 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
216 Central Themes
218 Ones T o Watch
219 Important T erms
221 Metaverse Form Factor
222 Headsets
222 Smart Glasses
223 Haptic Wearables 232 Connected Well-being and VR 
Assisted Therapy
232 Medical Metaverse
233 Scenario: Exploring Mars with 
Man’s Best Friend
234 Education in the Metaverse
234 Synthetic Media in Hollywood
234 Forensic AR / VR
235 Metaverse-Enhanced Science
236 Scenario: Experiential 
Equations
237 Psychosocial Dynamics and 
Inclusivity in the Metaverse
238 Situated VR
238 The Panopticon
238 XR Accessibility
239 Diminished Sensory Overload
239 Cybersickness
240 Scenario: “Visiting” Pregnancy
241 Experiencing Immersive 
Worlds242 World Building on Blockchain 
242 Events in the Metaverse
242 AR Lenses and Filters
243 Holograms
243 Real Estate in the Metaverse
244 Worlds for Purpose
244 Worlds for the Enterprise
245 Play-to-Earn and Virtual 
Marketplaces
246 Scenario: Cosplay Category 
Announcement
247 Metaverse Infrastructure
248 Interoperability
248 Government Investment
248 Developer Tools and 
Application Building Blocks
249 Interdevice Synchronization
249 5G for the Metaverse
250 Authors
252 Selected Sources223 Voice, Gesture, and Neural 
Interfaces
224 Senses in the Metaverse
224 Movement in the Metaverse
225 Scenario: A House Divided
226 Digital Identity
227 Avatars 
227 Avatar Portability  
227 Hyperrealistic Avatars
228 Fragmentation of Virtual 
Identity
228 Leasing identity
229 Synthetic Speech
229 Synthetic Personalities
230 Applications
231 Virtual Training for Real  
World Jobs
231 Industrial True-to-Reality 
Simulations and Digital Twins
231 Human Digital TwinsThe metaverse 
sees a cooldown 
from its initial hype, 
marking a phase 
of recalibration 
and more realistic 
expectations.
208© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINES 01
02
03
04
05Meta and Apple Impress with New VR Hand Tracking  
and Gesture Recognition
The tech giants’ latest headsets showcase hand tracking and gesture recognition 
capabilities offering users a more intuitive way to interact with virtual environments.
Events in the Metaverse Flop 
Metaverse Fashion Week saw major brands invest but drew few visitors, who found it 
lonely and dull. Substantial investment and creativity are needed to boost engagement.
Metaverse Layoffs: Meta and Disney Scale Back Amid Cooling Hype 
As the initial excitement around the metaverse wanes, Meta reduced its workforce, and 
Disney shut down its division dedicated to exploring metaverse opportunities, signaling  
a reset in the industry’s approach.
Deepfakes Emerge as a Concern Ahead of Election Cycle   
While some are entertainment, the technology’s potential for fabricating hyperrealistic 
news and political footage to deceive voters is alarming ahead of upcoming elections. 
Experts worry viral deepfakes could spread misinformation across social media.
Early Adopters Explore Digital Twins for the Enterprise 
Innovative early adopters in sectors like autonomous vehicles and smart cities 
are looking into the potential of digital twins.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESSTATE 
OF PLAYWhen Facebook rebranded as Meta in 2021, it bet big on leading the next computing platform—the 
metaverse. However, early criticisms emerged, given the rudimentary state of virtual and augment-
ed reality (AR) technology at the time, with many clunky headsets and cartoonish avatars. The spot-
light soon shifted when OpenAI unveiled ChatGPT in 2022, captivating public interest in AI. Unlike 
past AI systems, ChatGPT’s accessibility enabled mainstream user interaction for the first time, 
representing a key inflection point. This overshadowed enthusiasm for the metaverse, which was 
having adoption challenges. Disney retreated on its own metaverse goals amid disillusionment, 
and Meta’s Reality Labs posted a staggering $13.7 billion loss in 2022.
Yet in 2023, major tech players recognized the potential in fusing AI and metaverse technologies 
to take immersive simulations to the next level. Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg unveiled strikingly 
realistic virtual avatars, enabled by AI—a major leap in simulation quality. Microsoft shared plans to 
blend its AI Copilot with HoloLens 2, delivering an AR experience for workers. And Apple introduced 
Vision Pro, a spatial computing headset employing machine learning for more natural user interac-
tions. Rather than competing trends, AI and the metaverse now appear poised to complement each 
other. The future points to AI-enabled metaverse experiences that feel increasingly personalized by 
learning user preferences.
Meta also unveiled more subtle technologies like smart glasses, signaling a shift in consumer 
preferences for extended reality (XR) technologies that integrate digital experiences with physical 
reality. In doing so, these technologies could enhance human connection, as the technical interface 
fades into the background, replacing screen-centric interactions with more natural, human-cen-
tered ones. Spaces and the nature of work could be transformed, reducing our reliance on tradition-
al screens and keyboards, and potentially revolutionizing the built environment and our interac-
tions with computers. The form factor of XR technology could evolve to where our natural actions 
and environments become the primary means of interaction, ushering in a new era of computing 
that is more integrated with daily life. This evolution mirrors AI advancements in natural language, 
enabling more intuitive metaverse interactions. 
In many ways, the trajectories of AI and the metaverse have come full circle. What began as sepa-
rate trends with muted enthusiasm has given way to recognition of their interdependence in creat-
ing more immersive digital interactions. Their futures are now fundamentally linked, with advances 
in one enabling progress in the other. Overshadowed by the rise 
of artificial intelligence, the 
metaverse is searching for new 
potential through AI integration, 
evolving from initial hype to a 
measured and mature future.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRYTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES
209210© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FEBRUARY 1, 2023
A Long-T erm Vision is Challenged  
Meta’s Reality Labs division, specializing 
in AR and VR technologies, reports 
significant operating losses of $13.7 
billion for 2022.
SEPTEMBER 28, 2023
Meta T own Hall Highlights AR   
Mark Zuckerberg showcases Ray-Ban smart 
glasses as key to Meta’s subtle, stylish AR shift. 
Shortly after, Meta Quest 3 debuts, offering 
advanced mixed reality experiences but 
garners mixed reviews and slow adoption. NOVEMBER 15, 2023
Metaverse Medical Market  
Ocutrx’s OcuLenz AR headset, designed for 
macular degeneration, highlights medical 
applications as a key path for AR technology 
adoption beyond entertainment.OCTOBER 23, 2023
Saudi Cities Embrace Digital Twins  
South Korea’s Naver wins a $100 million 
deal to create digital twins for five Saudi 
cities, enhancing urban planning and flood 
management.FEBRUARY 2, 2024
Apple Vision Pro is Released  
Apple released its newest mixed 
reality headset with over 600 apps, 
video passthrough, and spatial audio.KEY EVENTSTECH
 METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES211© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE METAVERSE
As virtual experiences become more 
embedded into daily life, we can expect 
growing pains. Regulators must balance 
guidelines that ensure integrity without 
restricting an nascent industry.  Tapid 
advances precipitate more seamless, 
intuitive user experiences. Hands-free 
environments feel within reach as inno-
vations like gesture control tech remove 
friction. Past the hype, enterprise use cas-
es will gain traction, and efficiency gains 
will drive adoption beyond novelty appeal. 
Generative AI will further accelerate pro-
liferation by enabling amateur creators to 
construct fully realized 3D worlds without 
coding skills. With increased adoption, 
interoperability will rise as a priority. 
Metaverse technology has perpetually 
searched for a wide audience—if it fails to 
reach the mainstream consumer, indus-
trial use cases may take over. Medical, 
industrial, or civic metaverses may be 
the first to find product-market fit. Their 
focused nature could lend itself more 
readily to creating utility and value.Completely Hands-Free Experience
As delivery routes and last-mile deliveries 
continue to increase in speed and complexity, 
automation will let logistics companies cre-
ate an intricate web of delivery offerings that 
can be unique to each customer. 
Extended Reality Gets Serious 
With workers continuing to grow in scarcity, 
virtual agents will take over back-of-house 
work in the warehouse. These virtual agents 
will soon be able to oversee themselves and 
their cobot workers, reducing the need for 
human intervention.Metaverse-T ailored Offerings
As climate change continues to be a disrup-
tion, logistics providers will explore how they 
can insure against extreme weather events. 
These costs could be passed along to con-
sumers who choose goods from more volatile 
regions. Metaverse World Building for All 
Increased automation and use of virtual 
agents raise the need for workers to know how 
to manage new tech-enabled work and tasks. 
This upskilling could be done through remote 
learning and working opportunities.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Regulators T arget Virtual Trading
With manufacturing locations moving closer 
to the consumer and e-commerce increasing, 
manufacturers need to consider how to create 
products in the exact spot as their consumers. Consumer Push for Interoperability
Global conflicts, combined with consumers 
and businesses wary of supporting govern-
ments with values antithetical to their own 
will increase demand for verification of supply 
chains. Granular data collection and transmis-
sion will enable this shift in transparency.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES212© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Hyperrealistic avatars will 
enable more personalized 
brand experiences, but 
consumer identity may 
fragment across multiple 
avatars tailored to 
different contexts. This 
complicates marketing 
analysis, as brands must 
derive insights from 
fragmented consumer 
journeys and understand 
core motivations 
persisting across digital 
identities. Digital twins will 
revolutionize enterprise 
operations by enabling 
virtual prototyping, 
testing, and optimizing. 
Companies can digitally 
iterate designs and 
stress test ideas for 
better quality, gaining 
a competitive edge in 
market speed while 
minimizing downtime 
and disruption. By saving 
money and managing 
risk, this shift to virtual 
environments will drive 
innovation.Hyperrealistic avatars 
offer brands detailed 
customer insights but 
risk misuse. They enable 
lifelike interactions 
and richer data while 
supporting a deeper 
understanding of 
target demographics. 
However, the potential for 
deepfakes makes identity 
validation a challenge and 
puts brand reputations 
at risk. The ability to trust 
the accuracy of avatar 
identities will be critical 
for ensuring messaging 
reaches intended 
audiences.Immersive virtual worlds 
offer a new frontier for 
brand marketing. In 
the metaverse, brands 
can engage customers 
through lifelike, 
personalized interactions, 
blending products and 
messages into the virtual 
cultural fabric. This 
narrative-based approach 
boosts virality and peer 
sharing, while rich data 
informs strategy and 
product development. 
Substantial investment 
in creative talent and 
technology is essential 
for establishing top-tier 
experiences. XR in enterprise 
training rapidly upskills 
employees’ safely, even 
in high-risk areas. 
Realistic simulations 
for tasks like operating 
machinery or handling 
emergencies build skills 
and confidence without 
real-world risks. This 
leads to a workforce 
adept at complex jobs, 
reducing mistakes. XR 
training offers quicker 
proficiency, lower risk, 
and no need for physical 
practice, optimizing 
talent development and 
shortening onboarding. Augmented reality could 
reduce reliance on screens, 
minimizing screen fatigue 
and enabling more natural 
human-computer collabora-
tion. Spatial overlays could 
also optimize workflows by 
aligning virtual models with 
physical spaces. As XR ad-
vances, traditional seated 
desk work may transition 
to immersive environments 
centered on voice and ges-
tures rather than mouse 
clicks. Built spaces could 
be reimagined, reducing 
fixed real estate costs and 
promising more ergonom-
ic, satisfying, and dynamic 
work routines with less 
dependence on screens.Avatars Enable 
Personalization But 
Fragment IdentityDigital Twins Save 
Time, Money, and 
Reduce RiskThe Dual Edge of 
Hyperrealistic AvatarsMetaverse Unlocks 
Immersive Marketing 
AvenuesSafely Mastering 
High-Risk Skills Early XR Adoption 
Boosts Workforce 
DynamicsWHY METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
213WHEN WILL THE METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?
0-4 YEARS 5-9 YEARS 10-14 YEARS 15+ YEARSForecasted Time of Impact
Digital twins in manufacturing
Hands-free virtual 
Photo-realistic avatars 
Multifactor biometric sensing Holograms
Enterprise XR collaboration
Spatial computing 
Digital twins in health 
Normalized use of avatars  
in collaboration platforms Decentralized identity
Spatial mapping
6G-enabled metaverseFull interoperability
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
The lack of asset and avatar portability across platforms like Meta Horizon 
or Microsoft Mesh limits the metaverse’s potential and user experience. 
The inability to transfer digital assets across different metaverse platforms 
creates a fragmented and restrictive environment.
There is significant risk in prioritizing proprietary control, and those seeking 
walled-garden dominance risk stunted growth. If standardized protocols are 
not developed as they were for the internet, the metaverse’s vision may not be 
actualized and it will be a flop. 
The advancement of synthetic media has given rise to substantial ethical 
challenges, particularly around the issue of consent. Both public figures and 
private individuals face the prospect of their likenesses being replicated 
without permission, prompting serious concerns about autonomy and 
control over digital identities.
The creation of digital replicas raises philosophical questions about the 
authenticity of human expression and the ethical implications of creating 
and interacting with digital beings that mimic real individuals. 
The metaverse could exacerbate isolation and detachment from reality. The 
lack of physical human interaction could diminish the quality of real-world 
relationships, leading to feelings of loneliness and disconnection. Opportunities
Digital twins can serve as powerful tools for testing, optimizing, and making 
more informed decisions in a controlled setting. They help with proactive 
maintenance, predicting failures before they occur, and reducing downtime.
Metaverse marketing could bring brands closer to consumers and influencers 
closer to their followers. It enables interactive spaces for community building 
so users can interact not only with the brand but also with each other, 
enhancing loyalty and engagement.
Virtual training offers efficient skill development in low-risk environments, 
improving employee competencies and safety. Trainees can experience realistic 
scenarios without the dangers associated with real-life training, and it reduces 
the need for physical resources, travel, and on-site training facilities.
With companies integrating metaverse capabilities into platforms like Teams, 
remote collaboration is becoming more effective. Enhanced AI translations and 
the metaverse’s elimination of geographical constraints means global teams 
can overcome language and distance barriers to access talent.
The companies that contribute most meaningfully to open standards 
and standardized protocols will emerge as long-term winners. By building 
compatibility across platforms, these companies can expand their reach, 
enabling their products to seamlessly integrate with a range of metaverse 
environments and tools.
214© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES215© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Pursue novel brand interac-
tions. Rather than mirroring 
real-world marketing in vir -
tual spaces, explore novel 
modalities unique to these 
mediums. Provide value 
via exclusive metaverse 
experiences that offer in-
timacy at scale. Stay atop 
innovations in synthetic 
media and immersive 
technologies to remain 
cutting-edge.Get ahead of unintended 
consequences. Monitor 
early metaverse adopters 
across functions for poten-
tial psycho-social impacts, 
and implement support 
systems proactively, like VR-
based counseling or hybrid 
work policies. Navigate this 
responsibility wisely.Spearhead industry in-
teroperability standards. 
Get ahead of fragmenta-
tion by convening an indus-
try consortium to align on 
metaverse interoperability 
standards early. Prioritize 
user portability and plat -
form connectivity. Lead 
here before ecosystems 
splinter and momentum 
makes alignment difficult.Use immersive training for 
risk mitigation. Leverage 
XR for disaster prepared-
ness, hazardous environ-
ment rehearsals, and other 
high-risk training needs. 
Repeatable virtual drills 
identify gaps efficiently at 
lower risk and cost than live 
exercises.Differentiate with digital 
previews. Build 3D virtual 
models of spaces to allow 
remote previews and walk -
throughs. For real estate, 
this enables global proper -
ty tours. Hotels and venues 
can offer virtual site visits 
to event planners. Unique 
visibility and accessibili-
ty become a competitive 
edge.Accelerate development 
cycles. Construct digital 
prototypes of products 
early in the design process 
for rapid iteration and 
user testing in VR. Refine 
designs, materials, and in-
teractions before physical 
production. Democratize 
innovation by extending 
tools to customers.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 216TECH
The Quest for Connection
There is a nuanced interplay between digital immer-
sion and the desire to maintain a connection with the 
physical world. Consumers increasingly show a pref-
erence for augmented reality over virtual reality, indi-
cating a broader inclination toward digital experiences 
that complement, rather than replace, the physical 
environment. The social dimension of the metaverse 
is equally critical. For the metaverse to be genuinely 
transformative, it needs to enhance social connections 
rather than create isolation. Its success will largely 
depend on its ability to foster genuine human interac-
tion and community building. However, this new digital 
frontier is also reshaping social dynamics in profound 
ways. For instance, the increasing use of devices like 
smart glasses, which can record interactions, intro-
duces a new dynamic in social behavior. People may 
modify their behavior, knowing they could be recorded 
at any time, affecting the authenticity of social ex-
changes. In essence, the metaverse is not just a tech-
nological space but a social one, heavily influenced by 
human behavior and societal norms.The T echnological Symphony of the Metaverse
The metaverse stands as a technological apex, relying 
on the culmination and integration of various ad-
vanced technologies still in development. Its realiza-
tion hinges on the progress of numerous fields, includ-
ing powerful battery technology, enhanced connectivity 
and the widespread deployment of 5G, as well as the 
evolution of wearable devices. This convergence sug-
gests that the idealize vision of the metaverse is not 
just an isolated development but rather the endpoint 
of numerous technological trajectories. These include 
significant advancements in computing power, so-
phisticated AI algorithms, and innovations in the en-
tertainment sector, all of which are crucial in shaping 
an immersive, seamless, and interactive metaverse ex-
perience. As such, the journey toward the fully realized 
metaverse is as much about the progression of these 
individual technologies as it is about their harmonious 
integration.AI: Not Parallel But Key to Actualizing  
the Metaverse
AI is not just an accompanying technology in the devel-
opment of the metaverse; it is a critical driver making 
the metaverse’s existence and functionality possible. 
For instance, a key contribution of AI in the metaverse 
is the enhancement of user interactions through ad-
vanced natural language processing. This technology 
allows for more natural and intuitive communication 
within virtual environments, making interactions with 
AI-driven avatars and interfaces more fluid and life-
like. Moreover, AI facilitates the creation of expansive, 
complex virtual worlds. It enables the rendering of 
highly detailed and dynamic environments, which can 
adapt and respond to user interactions in real time. 
Additionally, AI contributes to the personalization of 
experiences within the metaverse. By analyzing user 
data and behavior, AI can tailor experiences to individ-
ual preferences. This customization capability will be 
necessary for making the metaverse less like a generic 
virtual space and one that feels uniquely relevant to 
each user.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 217TECH
The Invisible Interface 
An overarching drive toward more natural interactions 
underscores a key vision emerging for the metaverse. 
For input, companies like Meta, Apple, and Snap are 
developing innovations in voice control, hand ges-
tures, and even neural signals that interpret eye and 
facial muscle movements. These updates remove the 
need for traditional physical controls, aligning with 
a frontier of silent, seamless interaction powered by 
AI. Gesture technology is advancing rapidly, pointing 
to hands-free experiences. Neural signals take this 
even further by tapping directly into biological cues 
to enable control through cognition alone. For output, 
advances in haptics and multisensory technologies 
point to a future beyond visuals and audio, where vir-
tual experiences feel increasingly tactile and lifelike. 
The emergence of these subtle, intuitive technologies 
reveals we are slowly starting to actualize one vision 
of the metaverse: for the interface between humans 
and technology to fade into the background, becoming 
almost invisible.Fragmented Realities
While individual companies are making strides devel-
oping their own metaverse platforms and capabilities, 
true interoperability across these disparate ecosys-
tems remains elusive. Challenges persist around asset 
portability and avatar interoperability across differ-
ent virtual platforms. A custom-built avatar remains 
confined to a single walled metaverse garden like Meta 
Horizon or Microsoft Mesh. Purchasing a virtual Gucci 
bag in one world doesn’t automatically transfer digital-
ly to other environments. This fragmentation severely 
limits the scope and potential of the metaverse. Users 
wish to move fluidly between experiences, carrying 
their digital possessions and personas with them. 
Creators want to build once and deploy everywhere, 
not redo work for each platform. For the metaverse 
to mirror the connected nature of the physical world, 
technical infrastructure enabling this cross-platform 
continuity is critical. While metaverse pioneers are 
acknowledging this necessity, competitive pressures 
and commercial interests of tech giants currently take 
precedence over open collaboration.The Serious Business of the Metaverse
While consumer applications have driven much of 
the initial enthusiasm for metaverse technologies, 
substantial enterprise use cases are emerging across 
domains like training, digital twins, and remote col-
laboration. These practical business applications have 
the potential to push adoption further into the main-
stream. Immersive training simulations are already 
being deployed by companies like Walmart, BMW, and 
Lufthansa to develop employee skills and knowledge in 
low-risk virtual environments. Industries from avia-
tion to medicine are utilizing digital twins of complex 
systems to enable virtual testing and optimization. For 
remote work, Microsoft is integrating metaverse capa-
bilities directly into Teams, which has over 270 million 
users. This allows colleagues to collaborate via lifelike 
avatars and spatial layouts in virtual meeting envi-
ronments. While startups are innovating, Microsoft’s 
massive reach gives it potential to make VR meetings 
a workplace norm. As these use cases demonstrate 
concrete ROI in areas from employee productivity and 
safety to time and cost savings, enterprise adoption 
can help further validate and destigmatize metaverse 
technologies. METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESAndrew “Boz” Bosworth, CFO and head of 
Meta’s Reality Labs, for being Mark Zucker-
berg’s right-hand man and overseeing more 
than 20,400 people in realizing Meta’s vision 
for the metaverse.
T amir Berliner and T omer Kahan, co-founders 
of Sightful Spacetop, for innovation in spatial 
computing interfaces.
T ara Boroushaki, Laura Dodds, Aline Eid, 
and Maisy Lam, researchers at MIT, for contri-
butions to augmented reality with non-line-of-
sight perception.
Dr. Tim Bunnell, director at the Nemours Cen-
ter for Pediatric Auditory and Speech Scienc-
es, for work on AI-generated video clips that 
mimic accents and speech patterns.
Professor Garuda Fujii, researcher at Shin-
shu University’s Institute of Engineering and 
ELab2, for innovative approaches to designing 
source-shifter structures.
Grimes, musician and artist, for pioneering 
new business models in AI-generated voice 
synthesis.
Im Doo Jung, a professor in the Department of 
Mechanical Engineering at UNIST, for work on 
smart contact lenses for AR-based navigation.Henry Liu, professor of civil engineering and 
director of Mcity and the Center for Connected 
and Automated Transportation at the Univer-
sity of Michigan, for advancements in simu-
lated driving environments.
Akash Nigam, CEO of Genies, for develop-
ment of decentralized avatar systems in the 
metaverse.
Dr. Seung-Kwon Seol, researcher at the 
Smart 3D Printing Research Team at Korea 
Electrotechnology Research Institute, for work 
on smart contact lenses for AR-based naviga-
tion.
Chat Steelberg, CEO of Veritone, for advance-
ments in synthetic Voice as a Service (VaaS) 
solutions.
Dr. Yu Xinge, associate professor in the 
Department of Biomedical Engineering at 
City University of Hong Kong, for co-leading a 
study on wireless olfactory feedback systems 
in VR.
Dr. Y on Visell, associate professor of biolog-
ical engineering at University of California, 
Santa Barbara, for work on haptic holography.
Joshua Xu, CEO and co-founder of HeyGen, for 
innovations in translation services.Dr. Mikael Benson, researcher at the De-
partment of Clinical Science, Intervention, 
and Technology at Karolinska Institutet, for 
research on digital twins for treatment of 
inflammatory diseases.
Pouya Hamadanian, electrical engineering 
and computer science graduate student and 
lead author at MIT, for work on Ekho, which 
synchronizes audio and visual streams 
transmitting to two devices.
Elizabeth Haas, an adjunct professor at NYU 
School of Professional Studies, founding 
director at NYU SPS Emerging Technologies 
Collaborative, and partner at New York Con-
sulting Partners, for writing about cities and 
technologies.
Dr. Sarah E. MacPherson, head of psycholo -
gy and professor at the School of Philosophy, 
Psychology, and Language Sciences, Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, for her work on cybersick-
ness in immersive digital reality.
Michael Barnett-Cowan, professor at the 
Department of Kinesiology and Health Sci-
ences, University of Waterloo, for his work on 
motion sickness in VR games.Jose Fuertes, founder and CEO of OWO, for 
developing haptic vests for virtual gaming.
Jake Rubin, founder, chairman, and CEO at 
HaptX, for working to bring virtual worlds to 
life through realistic touch.
Jensen Huang, CEO and president of Nvidia, 
for envisioning the Omniverse platform and 
developer ecosystem to build the industrial 
metaverse and a clear path to metaverse 
revenue.
Soo-yeon Choi, CEO of Naver, for instru-
mental work in developing the digital twin 
cities project between South Korea and Saudi 
Arabia, which will revolutionize real-time de-
cision-making, prediction, and optimization 
of urban infrastructure.    
Y acine Achiakh, CEO and founder of Wisear, 
for pioneering the development of the first 
earphones with a neural interface, enabling 
hands-free, voice-free control of XR devices. ONES TO WATCH
218© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESIMPORTANT TERMS
219Augmented reality (AR)
A technology that overlays digital information, 
images, and objects onto the real-world environ-
ment. Users see virtual elements mixed into their 
actual surroundings through a device screen or AR 
glasses/headset.
Avatar
A digital representation of a user, often in the form 
of a 3D model or illustration. Avatars serve as a 
user’s persona in online/virtual environments.
Cybersickness
Nausea or motion sickness experienced by some VR 
users due to proprioception disorientation. It arises 
from the mismatch between perceived and actual 
spatial positions in VR, with research suggesting 
that factors like vertical orientation perception and 
inclusion of music can influence its severity.
Data portability
The ability for users to transfer their digital iden-
tities, including avatars, and associated data 
between platforms and services. 
Decentralization
A core principle shared by the metaverse and block-
chain technology, emphasizing an open network Haptics
Technology related to tactile sensations and feed-
back. Can include vibration, motion, pressure, and 
temperature changes.
Holography
A technique for creating three-dimensional 
projections; it’s becoming key in populating the 
metaverse with realistic avatars and environments, 
and merging with technologies like deepfake for 
various applications.
Human-machine interfaces
The components and methods through which hu-
mans interact with and control machines, like key-
boards, mice, touchscreens, and voice commands.
Hyperrealistic avatars
Highly detailed avatars that closely mimic a 
person’s real facial features, expressions, and 
movements through advanced 3D modeling and 
scanning.
Interoperability
Blockchain’s capability allowing assets and infor-
mation to seamlessly transfer between different 
worlds and platforms within the metaverse.Mixed reality (MR)
A hybrid form of reality that merges the real and 
virtual worlds to produce new environments and 
visualizations where physical and digital objects 
coexist and interact in real time.
Neural interfaces
Technologies that connect directly to the user’s 
neural activity, like brain waves or facial muscle 
signals, to enable hands-free and silent control.
Non-fungible tokens (NFTs)
Unique digital assets representing ownership of vir-
tual items like land and avatars in the metaverse, 
made credible and secure through blockchain 
technology.
Olfactory feedback
Technology that generates smells and aromas dig-
itally, allowing smells to be simulated in a virtual 
environment.
Panopticon
A system of control where individuals are aware 
they might be watched at any time, leading to 
self-regulation of behavior. In the context of smart 
glasses, it refers to the heightened sense of being 
observed and changing behavior because of it.of interconnected virtual worlds, as opposed to 
closed, proprietary platforms.
Deepfakes
Manipulated video/audio that uses AI to realis-
tically substitute someone’s likeness and voice 
in existing content without their consent, raising 
ethical concerns.
Digital twins
Virtual replications of physical systems used for 
simulation and optimization.
Experiential artifacts
Lingering sensory and cognitive effects in VR users, 
blurring the lines between virtual and real-world 
experiences. These artifacts result from the dis-
sonance between virtual and physical realities, 
leading to feelings of disembodiment or altered 
physical world perceptions.
Extended reality (XR)
An umbrella term that encompasses virtual reality, 
augmented reality, and mixed reality. XR provides 
immersive digital experiences that blend the 
physical and virtual worlds across a spectrum of 
realities. It enhances interactions with the environ-
ment and digital elements.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESIMPORTANT TERMS
220Passthrough
A feature in some headsets that uses outward-fac-
ing cameras to display the physical environment 
to the user while wearing the headset. Provides 
awareness of surroundings.
Play-to-earn games
Virtual environments in the metaverse where play-
ers can earn real-world value through gameplay, 
with blockchain technology enabling the collection, 
breeding, and trading of digital assets as NFTs.
Situated virtual reality (situated VR)
A concept proposed to align the physical and virtual 
worlds, minimizing experiential artifacts. It focuses 
on syncing physical actions with virtual feedback 
to create a congruent reality, including mirroring 
body language and emotional expressions in virtual 
and real worlds.
Synthetic personalities
Fully artificial digital influencers and identities 
generated through AI training, not tied to any spe-
cific human individual.Synthetic speech
AI-generated simulated speech that clones a 
person’s vocal characteristics to create natural 
sounding vocalizations. Enables voice banking, 
which benefits people who may lose their ability to 
speak later in life.
Virtual reality (VR)
An artificial digital environment that is fully im-
mersive and isolates users from the physical world. 
Users typically wear a headset with stereoscopic 
displays and head tracking to look around the 
virtual world.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES221© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE 
FORM FACTORTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESMETAVERSE FORM FACTORTECH
Headsets 
While early virtual reality headsets offered 
consumers an escapist diversion, the tech-
nology is maturing, and developers are now 
targeting more pragmatic industries and 
experiences. The Meta Quest 3, for instance, 
brings a 30% improvement in screen reso-
lution, faster processing speed, and a sleek-
er design. Most notably, outward-facing 
passthrough cameras allow wearers to view 
both physical and virtual surroundings. This 
“mixed reality” mitigates the isolating feel 
of previous models. Apple’s forthcoming 
Vision Pro is also set to incorporate similar 
passthrough technology, highlighting an in-
dustry-wide acknowledgment of the need for 
more interactive and less isolating VR expe-
riences. The Vision Pro will launch with an ex-
pansive app library spanning entertainment 
to productivity. Major streaming services like 
Disney+, ESPN, and Amazon Prime Video will 
be available alongside work apps like Micro-
soft 365, Slack and Zoom. Smart Glasses
Developments in smart glasses aim to 
make spatial computing technology sub-
tle yet powerful in daily life. In a landmark 
September 2023 announcement, Meta 
collaborated with EssilorLuxottica to unveil 
Ray-Ban glasses with built-in AI capabilities. 
Resembling traditional Ray-Bans in design, 
these glasses integrate multimodal sensors 
to interpret the user’s gaze and voice com-
mands. Whether the wearer is curious about 
a building or needing a sign translated, Me-
ta’s assistant can provide answers without 
hand gestures. Snap plans similar AI inte-
gration for contextual recommendations and 
on-lens edits. Apple likewise has plans to 
introduce augmented reality glasses, though 
details are still forthcoming. Meanwhile, Mi-
crosoft recently patented swappable batter-
ies for extended power, potentially enabling 
comfortable all-day wear by reducing weight. 
Offloading processing functions to con-
nected accessories like backpacks presents 
another option for portable use.Meta’s substantial price hike compared to 
its predecessor indicates a strategic piv-
ot from targeting general consumers to 
focusing on enterprise applications. This 
repositioning places the headset in direct 
competition with established enterprise-fo-
cused devices like Microsoft’s HoloLens 2 
and Magic Leap 2. Sony’s version, the SonyXR 
Headset is primarily tailored for industrial 
applications, aiming to integrate various 
production stages, such as design and 
prototyping, into the metaverse. By allowing 
users to construct 3D design models, the 
headset helps spot and fix problems while 
plans are still digital, saving money previ-
ously spent on faulty physical prototypes.
Rather than pure escapism, developers seem 
concentrated on increasing VR/AR function-
ality across specialized fields moving for-
ward. Allowing real environment interaction 
reflects acknowledgment of earlier issues 
in consumer adoption, while enterprise and 
sensory enhancement applications point to 
an evolving market for the technology.
222© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Though slimmer smart glasses would blend into 
social settings better than bulky virtual reality 
headsets, battery limitations pose ongoing chal-
lenges to unlocking the full capabilities of the 
sleeker wearable technology.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESMETAVERSE FORM FACTORTECH
In early 2024, BMW introduced AR technol-
ogy in their cars with the help of XrealAir 2 
AR glasses. These glasses show navigation, 
entertainment, and electric car charging 
information directly to the driver. The intro-
duction of smart glasses in vehicles and into 
other parts of our daily life is more than just 
a technological advance; it’s a societal shift. 
Mobile phones revolutionized the way we in-
teract with the world—pausing to record mo-
ments or look up information. Smart glasses 
promise the same but with an added layer of 
immersion: You can live stream your expe-
riences while remaining fully present. How-
ever, this comes with questions about the 
implications for interpersonal interactions. 
Will behavior change in a world where people 
know they could be continually recorded or 
analyzed by AI? In essence, smart glasses 
aren’t merely a new gadget; they represent a 
significant leap toward pervasive computing 
and could fundamentally alter our relation-
ship with technology and each other.tracking systems like Sony’s full body suit 
loaded with sensors, the building blocks are 
falling into place for the creation of deeply 
immersive and tactile responsive spaces 
within virtual worlds. The end goal is ambi-
tious yet attainable: to produce a metaverse 
experience that fully engages users across 
visual, auditory and, critically, tactile do-
mains to enable suspension of disbelief and 
flow state immersion.
Voice, Gesture, and Neural Interfaces
Human-computer interaction continues 
progressing beyond phones and screens, 
leveraging modalities like voice and ges-
ture. Virtual assistants have normalized 
conversational AI, powered by robust speech 
recognition models. Startups are unveiling 
experimental devices prioritizing intuitive 
interactions, like Humane’s screenless 
wearable pin, which understands natural 
language requests. Meta’s Ray-Ban Stories 
glasses allow hands-free voice control, while 
their VR headsets track hand motions to 
manipulate virtual objects. Apple’s Vision 
Pro will combine subtle finger gesture rec-Haptic Wearables  
Virtual worlds to date have focused primarily 
on visual and auditory immersion, but repli-
cating tactile sensations presents the next 
frontier for technologies like metaverse plat-
forms to conquer. The ability to not just see a 
virtual object but reach out and feel textures, 
weights, and movements would provide 
unprecedented realism. To enable this, 
developers are experimenting with haptic 
wearables—gloves, vests, or suits equipped 
with actuators to simulate different sensa-
tions through vibration, electrical stimula-
tion, or even tiny inflatable balloons. Simple 
vibrational alerts via eccentric rotating 
mass motors are already featured in smart-
phones and controllers, priming adaptation 
for games and 3D virtual environments. 
Companies like HaptX are leveraging more 
advanced pneumatic glove actuators to rep-
licate lifelike textures and shapes. Spanish 
startup OWO recently unveiled a haptic vest 
using electrical signals to induce sensations 
including bullet impacts or stabbings for 
gaming and live entertainment applications. 
As these devices advance alongside motion 
223© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Just as touchscreens became widespread in the 
last decade, voice and gesture control are poised 
to be the next major methods for interacting with 
computers.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
ognition with eye tracking, enabling users to 
simply look at and point to items they want to 
select in an augmented environment. Wisear, 
a French startup, is pushing the boundaries 
even further with experimental smart ear-
buds that detect facial muscle movements 
and bioelectrical brain signals. By interpret-
ing these neural signals, Wisear envisions 
completely silent, hands-free control of devic-
es through minute gestures like tightening 
the jaw. Just as touchscreens have become 
ubiquitous over the past decade, emerg-
ing modalities like voice, eye tracking, and 
brain-computer interfaces could fundamen-
tally transform how we engage with technolo-
gy in the next 10 years.
Senses in the Metaverse
Recent advancements in human-machine 
interfaces are ushering in a new era of mul-
tisensory experiences in VR and AR. On the 
haptic front, researchers at the University of 
California, Santa Barbara have focused ul-
trasound waves to induce tactile sensations 
from afar. This noncontact “haptic hologra-
phy” allows users to perceive and manipulate Movement in the Metaverse
Disney has developed a new flooring tech-
nology called HoloTile that allows users to 
walk freely in any direction without actually 
moving from their fixed location. Described 
as the “world’s first multi-person, omnidi-
rectional, modular, expandable treadmill 
floor,” HoloTile uses advanced sensors and 
motors to detect a person’s movement and 
seamlessly shift modular floor sections to 
keep them centered in place. Multiple people 
can use the floor simultaneously without 
the risk of colliding. In a demonstration 
video, inventor and imagineer Larry Smoot 
walks through a virtual environment using 
a headset while the HoloTile floor adjusts 
dynamically beneath him. This technology 
opens up new possibilities for virtual reality 
and augmented reality, as well as applica-
tions like interactive theater where actors 
could explore a scene without constraints. 
Disney isn’t alone in its effort to enable more 
natural movement in the metaverse. Other 
companies are exploring similar technolo-
gies for natural movement in virtual spaces. 
Virtuix has developed a VR treadmill for indi-vidual users, featuring a concave design and 
special shoe covers for a realistic walking sen-
sation. Additionally, Freedom Technologies is 
working on specialized shoes with AI-enabled 
motorized treadmills in the soles, allowing 
for unlimited virtual movement in a confined 
physical space. These innovations represent 
different approaches to enhancing virtual 
mobility, and it’s still unclear which will dom-
inate the market. The choice may depend on 
specific use cases and user preferences in VR 
and AR experiences.virtual objects. To deepen sensory immer-
sion without physical temperature changes, 
University of Tsukuba researchers simulate 
persistent cold sensations through gentle 
air blasts. This exploits the body’s sensitivity 
to rapid cooling for virtual weather experi-
ences. In odor transmission, Dr. Yu Xinge’s 
team at Beihang University developed wire-
less olfactory feedback systems with minia-
turized odor generators. Integrating face-
masks and skin patches, these can simulate 
environmental scents ranging from flowers 
to smoke. Startup OVR makes headsets that 
diffuse cartridge fragrances for personalized 
aroma experiences. Advances also continue 
in spatialized audio for lifelike acoustics. 
Professor Garuda Fujii of Shinshu University 
engineered structures that make sounds 
that seem to originate from different loca-
tions. By tricking the ears’ spatial perception, 
more convincing augmented soundscapes 
become achievable. As these technologies 
mature, they pave the way for unified multi-
sensory environments—where users not only 
see and hear but feel, smell, and taste simu-
lated worlds for unprecedented presence.METAVERSE FORM FACTOR
224© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2030
A House Divided    
The Komanduri family finds themselves in a dilemma: a “house divided” not by sports teams or smartphone prefer-
ences, but by their choice of AR/VR ecosystems. The eldest child, Aditya, is an avid fan of Apple’s AR/VR ecosystem, 
boasting the latest Apple AR headset and an array of digital accessories. Meanwhile, the younger sibling, Priya, is 
deeply immersed in the Meta universe, equipped with the newest Meta Quest and a collection of Meta-exclusive digi-
tal games and experiences. This division has led to more than just friendly sibling rivalry; it’s become a logistical and 
financial headache for the parents. Planning family activities in the virtual realm is nearly impossible, as each child is 
locked into their respective ecosystems, unable to interact or join the same digital spaces. 
The financial strain is palpable. The family has to subscribe to two different “family plans” to accommodate both 
ecosystems. What’s more, the digital goods and games purchased for Aditya cannot be passed down to Priya, negating 
the possibility of “hand-me-downs” that would have been a cost-saving grace. This means doubling up on purchases 
for similar experiences or content, a redundancy that’s both frustrating and expensive.
Birthday and holiday gifts have also become a challenge. A game or digital accessory that delights Aditya is incompat-
ible with Priya’s Meta setup, and vice versa. This has led to careful, sometimes stressful planning to ensure equity and 
satisfaction for both children, further adding to the family’s expenses.
225© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES226© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.DIGITAL  
IDENTITYTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
Avatars 
Avatars have matured beyond static profile 
images into multifaceted digital represen-
tations in virtual spaces. Initially serving 
as basic profile pictures, modern avatars 
manifest as interactive 3D entities capable 
of conversation, environmental navigation, 
and even simulated physical mannerisms. 
As online activities shift from websites and 
apps toward immersive extended reality (XR) 
metaverse experiences, avatars are becoming 
our primary digital personas—used for social 
connections, commerce, and professional 
meetings. Microsoft enables Teams users to 
utilize 3D avatars for calls, animated by voice 
cues to function sans webcams. And a 2023 
podcast hosted in the metaverse demonstrat-
ed major upgrades in avatar realism, utilizing 
lifelike models of Mark Zuckerberg and Lex 
Fridman. This noticeable leap from previous 
cartoonish renditions drew significant public 
and investor interest by making broader 
metaverse goals appear more attainable. 
Companies like Genies are further expanding 
the scope and utility of avatars by working 
on open, decentralized systems that let users es and actions. As such, the issue of avatar 
portability is inextricably linked to debates 
about data ownership. When an avatar can 
cross platforms, there’s a tacit understand-
ing that its underlying data should also be 
portable. But who owns that data, especially 
as avatars become increasingly sophisticat-
ed and personalized, is a point of contention. 
The issue is even more critical when consid-
ering that some metaverse companies aim 
to become comprehensive platforms for a 
wide range of activities, from reading news 
to socializing to shopping. In such a scenar-
io, the platform that hosts your avatar could 
have significant power and control over a 
large swath of your personal data. So, while 
Ready Player Me’s tools for avatar creation 
and portability offer users the ability to 
maintain a consistent digital identity across 
the metaverse, they also open up broader 
discussions about data ownership and por-
tability in virtual spaces.   
Hyperrealistic Avatars
Hyperrealistic avatars leverage 3D graphics 
and AI to produce nearly identical digital clones of individuals—capturing intricate 
facial details, expressions, and motions. Two 
methods exist for generating these sophis-
ticated models. Companies like Doob utilize 
full body scans in studios, comprehensively 
recording the user’s physical form. Alterna-
tively, apps like Avatar SDK and itSeez3D 
enable DIY facial scanning directly through 
smartphone cameras. By taking a 360 degree 
image of their face and shoulders, users can 
craft impressively realistic avatar likenesses. 
Integrating natural language processing and 
vocal mimicry, these avatars graduate beyond 
appearances to also simulate voices, produc-
ing holistic digital surrogates. One pioneering 
example was during the recent taping of Lex 
Fridman’s podcast with Mark Zuckerberg in 
the metaverse. Utilizing Meta’s advanced “co-
dec avatars,” their uncannily realistic digital 
doubles exhibited nuanced mannerisms and 
conversations. 
As solutions like HeyGen’s AI-powered Avatar 
Clones push fidelity even further, lines blur 
between actual and simulated realities. While 
constructive applications await in gaming, en-create not only their virtual selves but also 
the worlds they inhabit. This development 
opens up new opportunities for user engage-
ment and potentially impacts how busi-
nesses operate in virtual environments. As 
avatars grow increasingly sophisticated in 
mimicking human appearance, motion, and 
interaction modalities, they reinforce their 
status as our digital surrogates across the 
internet’s burgeoning virtual frontiers.
Avatar Portability
Avatar portability in the metaverse, as facil-
itated by companies like Ready Player Me, 
intersects with larger discussions about 
data portability and ownership. Ready Player 
Me and its partner, Koji, offer users the abili-
ty to create a unified digital identity that can 
migrate across over 200 games and virtual 
experiences. While this offers convenience 
and customization, it raises questions about 
who truly owns these digital identities. Your 
avatar, after all, is a form of data. Whether 
it’s a visual approximation of you based on 
uploaded photos or a purely imaginative cre-
ation, the avatar is shaped by your preferenc-DIGITAL IDENTITY
227© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESDIGITAL IDENTITYTECH
terprise metaverses, and beyond, deep ethical 
questions emerge around authentic digital 
identity and behavior. Ultimately though, as 
avatar technology continues maturing to 
deliver hyperrealism, it will profoundly trans-
form how we represent ourselves and interact 
in online spaces.
Fragmentation of Virtual Identity
Without a standardized, universal avatar 
system, users on various digital platforms 
create multiple online personas, each rep-
resenting distinct facets of the self or even 
entirely fabricated alter-egos. This emerging 
paradigm signals a seismic shift in concep-
tualizations of identity in the digital era. We 
now face not just divergence between our 
physical and virtual selves but the fragmen-
tation of singular legible personalities across 
ever-proliferating online spheres. A glimpse of 
this reality already manifests professionally. 
An individual may use one avatar, precisely 
modeled after their real-world appearance, 
for Microsoft Teams meetings. But the same 
person could adopt a fanciful, anonymized 
persona for recreational gaming universes. playing circumscribed roles on WhatsApp, 
Messenger, and Instagram. And deepfake 
technology already allows for CGI actor sub-
stitutions in film or ads without a physically 
present cast. When Bruce Willis retired for 
health reasons, his likeness still appeared in 
a Russian commercial via a deepfake gener-
ated by an AI company. To address this issue, 
new contract language around “simulation 
rights” is beginning to appear, allowing for 
the legal use of an actor’s synthetic likeness 
in future productions. The music industry 
is also tapping into this trend; artists can 
now create songs using an AI-generated 
voiceprint of musician Grimes, splitting the 
royalties with her if she approves the collab-
oration. These early examples highlight the 
emerging potential to monetize synthetic 
celebrity beyond entertainment—anyone 
could perhaps license out digital persona 
rights for conversational AI, branding deals, 
or experiential metaverse content. But thorny 
questions around likeness consent and fair 
compensation remain open, especially as 
technology blurs lines between virtual repli-
cation and individual autonomy. For marketers reliant on data analytics, such 
compartmentalized self-representation 
poses challenges. When consumers have 
multiple discrete avatars, extracting useful 
signals becomes far more complex. Which 
identity should companies target for person-
alized advertising? How to accurately track 
preferences when individuals act differently 
across contexts? Ultimately, the fracturing 
of singular legible identities into special-
ized avatars requires businesses to funda-
mentally rethink behavioral analysis and 
personalization methodologies. As personas 
multiply across the metaverse, understand-
ing users grows increasingly nuanced.
Leasing identity
AI is enabling digital replications of celeb-
rities without their active participation or 
consent—an ethically murky development 
as likeness rights remain undefined. The 
2023 Hollywood writers’ strike spotlit con-
cerns around studios exploiting synthetic 
acting indefinitely sans compensation. Meta 
recently launched celebrity chatbots like vir-
tual Paris Hilton and Snoop Dogg alter egos, 
228© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
AI is enabling the creation of digital replicas of indi-
viduals’ appearances and voices, opening avenues 
for monetizing identities.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESDIGITAL IDENTITYTECH
Synthetic Speech
Synthetic speech leverages AI to digitally 
mimic human voices, enabling myriad appli-
cations from accessibility tools to creative 
media. With enough training data, models 
can precisely replicate the unique vocal sig-
nature of any individual. Startups like HeyGen 
offer translation services that render person-
al video recordings into foreign languages, 
while retaining the original speaker’s voice. 
Meta is also developing real-time speech 
translation to break language barriers using 
natural voice cloning. And new models need 
as few as 50 sentences to build vocal profiles, 
making synthesis more efficient and accessi-
ble. Samsung demoed a feature for its Bixby 
assistant to verbally respond to calls in a 
user’s synthesized voice if they are unable to 
speak. Other applications of speech synthesis 
include “voice banking,” where people at risk 
of losing their ability to speak due to disease 
can record samples that AI uses to synthe-
size their voice. This allows them to preserve 
their unique vocal identity for text-to-speech 
systems if they do need it later in life. Previ-
ously expensive and time-consuming, voice supplement to human influencers. In 2023, 
the Federal Trade Commission indicated that 
virtual influencers must still disclose brand 
sponsorships like their human counterparts. 
As immersive spaces like the metaverse de-
velop, AI-driven synthetic personas could en-
able personalized interactive brand experi-
ences exceeding static posts. The technology 
remains nascent—but rapid improvements 
in AI personality exhibition point toward 
virtual influencers, celebrities, and beyond 
materializing as bona fide social presenc-
es, engineered from data to serve economic 
aims over authentic self-expression.banking has become more efficient and 
affordable through AI, with some companies 
only needing 50 sentences to create a digital 
voice. 
Synthetic Personalities
Beyond mimicking existing personas, large 
language models (LLMs) can invent com-
pletely synthetic yet persuasive media iden-
tities from scratch. After ingesting enough 
human data patterns, AI can reliably simu-
late varied personality dimensions within 
text or embodied conversational agents. Re-
searchers deliberately shape these traits to 
craft AI virtual influencers—novel social me-
dia personas like Lil Miquela, Noonoouri, and 
Imma, each boasting 400,000+ Instagram 
followers. Instead of cloning celebrities, their 
personalities and backstories emerge fully 
formed from algorithms to fulfill commercial 
roles. Brands like Coinbase, Maje, and Tiffany 
& Co. have partnered with these AI-driven 
virtual influencers for endorsements and 
promotions. The control and presumed 
brand safety offered by synthetic influenc-
ers makes them an attractive alternative or 
229© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Synthetic personalities are entirely artificial digital 
influencers and identities created by AI, not linked 
to any real human.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES230© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.APPLICATIONSTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
Virtual Training for Real World Jobs
Virtual reality enables immersive job training 
simulations across industries from retail to 
medicine, with measurable improvements in 
information retention and role comprehen-
sion. Companies like Walmart have incorpo-
rated VR into training as early as 2017, report-
ing 5%-10% testing gains versus classical 
training. Simulations run the gamut from 
customer scenarios like Black Friday to op-
erational skills like spill cleanups. Maryland 
nonprofit Vehicles for Change likewise has 
trainees first pick up VR goggles instead of 
physical tools to observe demonstrations and 
practice procedures before touching actual 
cars. Aviation leaders including Lufthansa 
also apply extended reality across domains 
from product design to flight crew certifica-
tion. The technology provides a low-risk yet re-
alistic environment to build muscle memory 
and mastery of complex tasks, from retail soft 
skills to technical maintenance procedures. 
Hands-on learning through lifelike simulation 
before real-world performance allows workers 
to avoid consequences as they develop confi-
dence. With customizable training exportable domains from transportation to emergency 
response. Numerous metropoles worldwide 
have embarked on urban twin projects—from 
Shanghai to Singapore to Chattanooga. The 
city of Chattanooga itself collaborates with 
research institutions on specialized twins 
examining factors like energy-efficient mo-
bility infrastructure and pedestrian-vehicle 
intersection patterns to inform planning. 
As cloud computing power scales, digital 
urban replicas grow increasingly high-fidel-
ity to run simulations and extract insights 
unfeasible in the real world. The technology 
enables observers to holistically visualize, 
quantify, and optimize the intricate orches-
tration of modern cities.
Human Digital Twins
Research institutions are pioneering medi-
cal digital twins—detailed physiological sim-
ulations of individual patients for person-
alized care and quantitative analysis. These 
complex computational models incorporate 
genetic, molecular, and environmental fac-
tors to replicate disease mechanisms with 
high precision. In conditions like rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s, and ulcerative colitis, health 
care teams can leverage twins to run clinical 
scenarios—predicting outcomes of adjusted 
drug regimens to tailor optimal treatments. 
The simulations also enable deeper study 
of biological drivers and responses in silico. 
Medical twins diverge from simplistic avatars 
by encapsulating dynamic physical detail 
beyond just identities. Researchers ultimately 
envision diagnostic, prognostic, and even two-
way communication functions as integration 
with sensor data and AI intensifies.
However, as computing power expands, digital 
twins may mature beyond niche medical uses 
alone. More advanced systems could maintain 
dynamic multifaceted models of individuals—
incorporating both medical and psychological 
factors to mimic personality, knowledge, and 
behaviors. Researchers envision such sophis-
tication may eventually enable twins to serve 
as persistent, autonomous virtual agents for 
their human counterparts. These highly faith-
ful digital doppelgängers could seamlessly 
interact with people and other twins in virtual 
spaces or the metaverse. They could collabo-across geography, VR promises scalable and 
measurable skill-building superior to static 
manuals or lectures. Trainees engage more 
senses in contextualized scenarios, enabling 
organizations to elevate talent development.
Industrial True-to-Reality Simulations and 
Digital Twins
True-to-reality digital twins are revolutioniz-
ing industries from autonomous vehicles to 
smart cities by enabling virtual testing and 
optimization of complex real-world systems. 
The University of Michigan developed a 
statistically accurate simulated roundabout 
to rigorously refine self-driving algorithms 
without physical risk. BMW likewise models 
exact factory conditions in Nvidia’s Om-
niverse platform years before producing a 
new car to optimize layouts and processes. 
On a macroscale, digital urban twins facili-
tate data-driven planning and governance. 
South Korean company Naver partnered with 
Saudi Arabia to craft cloud-based digital 
clones of Riyadh and other municipalities. 
These foundations centralize infrastructure 
data to assist long-term development across APPLICATIONS
231© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESAPPLICATIONSTECH
rate in ways impossible for remote humans, 
collectively analyzing problems through 
continuous data sharing exceeding biological 
cognition limits.
Connected Well-being and VR Assisted 
Therapy
VR is increasingly being recognized as a pow-
erful tool in the field of psychological therapy 
and mental health treatment. VR’s origins in 
mental health date back to 1997, when it was 
first invested in for treating PTSD in military 
populations. One major application is virtual 
reality exposure therapy (VRET): leveraging 
simulated environments to gradually con-
front patients with anxiety disorders. VRET 
allows for a controlled and personalized 
intervention where patients can confront and 
become accustomed to the sources of their 
anxieties in a virtual setting. The treatment 
has proven to be as effective as traditional 
in-person exposure therapy for conditions like 
specific phobia and agoraphobia with panic 
disorder. Interventions for post-traumatic 
stress disorder likewise show VR match-
ing traditional psychotherapy techniques where students identify hazards and dis-
cuss observations with professors, allowing 
for more effective training than traditional 
methods. However, while AI tutors in VR 
can provide tailored feedback like a human 
instructor, human oversight is still needed. 
A McGill University study found VR trainees 
with additional human instruction caused 
less tissue damage and were more precise 
than those trained by AI tutoring alone. Plat-
forms like Fundamental Surgery additionally 
provide sophisticated haptic feedback for 
practicing complex manual tasks from pal-
pating tissue to maneuvering instruments. 
Its patented HapticVR technology accurately 
simulates the tactile sensations experienced 
during surgery, from bone textures to muscle 
and soft tissue interactions. FundamentalVR 
also recently launched its Fundamental Core 
SDK, a toolkit empowering developers to 
create diverse medical training scenarios, 
including multiuser VR experiences.
Beyond training, AR and VR are being used 
for patient care and surgical planning. In 
Cambridge, England, medical students use for symptom relief. Beyond exposure, the 
immersive medium also aids in develop-
ing coping mechanisms. Recent studies, 
such as a pilot project by Stanford Medicine 
researchers, have also started using VR to 
address hoarding disorders. Study partici-
pants rehearsed giving up possessions in a 
simulation of their own homes, an exercise 
that helped them practice organizational 
and decision-making skills while also de-
sensitizing them to the emotional distress 
associated with discarding items. As soft-
ware and analytical dashboards improve, VR 
appears poised to mainstream into mental 
health—blending digital solutions with clin-
ical wisdom for more agile, quantified, and 
personalized interventions.
Medical Metaverse
The metaverse enables transformative 
innovations in medical education and care 
delivery via immersive simulation. Medical 
students can now perform virtual neurosur-
gery to improve their technical skills before 
operating on actual patients. The University 
of Texas uses a VR “patient safety room” 
232© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
AR and VR are already utilized in surgical planning 
and training, enabling surgeons and patients to 
preview expected outcomes. At least one hospital 
has used AR headsets during complex surgeries to 
overlay patient data in real-time.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2037
Exploring Mars with Man’s Best Friend    
After strapping on the haptic suit and headset, I’m immersed in a stark reddish-orange alien landscape that can only be Mars. As I “step” forward, I feel the 
crunch of strange soil beneath metal feet that are not my own. This body is an extension of mine—its sensors connected directly to my nervous system via a neu-
ral link system. When I lift my foot, the robot lifts its tread. When I reach out my hand, its claw extends. My consciousness inhabits this machine shell millions of 
miles away, and I’m seeing Mars directly through my avatar’s camera eyes. Every sensation is mapped from its tactile sensors to my own synapses, blurred with 
just enough latency to make the illusion complete. This robot is me, and through it I have stepped onto the surface of another world for the first time.
But what truly anchors me in this extraordinary experience is Moe, my dog. She’s not just lying next to me in the physical world; she’s also here with me on Mars, 
in a way. When I adopted Moe, she came with something special: a digital twin. This isn’t a virtual pet; it’s a precise digital clone, created from detailed scans and 
biometrics, designed to mimic every physical detail of Moe. Initially, these digital twins were meant for health monitoring, a technological advancement in pet 
care. But soon, people realized their comforting potential in strange, digital realms. Here on Mars, as I navigate through vast, sweeping vistas, Moe’s digital twin 
is right beside my avatar. As I explore, I occasionally reach down to pet the real Moe, feeling her warm fur, and then I see her digital doppelgänger reacting similar-
ly beside my avatar. It’s a bizarre yet heartwarming experience to have both versions of my best friend with me as I explore this alien world.
As night falls on Olympus Mons, I gaze out transfixed with my loyal dog clone by my side at a view no earthling has witnessed firsthand. Her presence, just like 
the real Moe, comforts me—two versions of man’s best friend, one analog, one digital, both equally enthralled by this alien world we get to explore together.
233© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
mixed reality headsets to train on “hologram 
patients,” while Swiss company Arbrea Labs 
employs AR and 3D simulation to allow both 
surgeons and patients to preview expected 
outcomes of plastic surgeries, from nose jobs 
to breast augmentations. Surgeons at insti-
tutions like Houston’s MD Anderson Cancer 
Center utilize AR headsets to overlay patient 
data seamlessly during complex procedures—
establishing a new paradigm of in-situ surgi-
cal guidance.
Education in the Metaverse
Research has indicated the efficacy of VR 
in enriching learning experiences. Recent 
findings suggest VR contributes to improved 
understanding, heightened attention spans, 
and inclusive access to digitized global cur-
riculum exceeding geographical constraints. 
Real-world implementations demonstrate 
scalability too. Japan’s N and S high schools 
immerse over 6,000 students in collaborative 
virtual classes using Meta Quest headsets. 
Morehouse College’s VR chemistry labs yield 
higher average test scores than conventional 
modalities. Beyond supplemental content, without restriction. This move clearly brings 
into focus the ongoing debate about public-
ity rights, the legal concept that grants indi-
viduals the right to control the commercial 
use of their name and likeness. 
At the same time, examples of synthetic me-
dia featuring well-known actors are growing. 
For instance, James Earl Jones authorized 
the use of his iconic Darth Vader voice so AI 
could generate it for future “Star Wars” films. 
Companies like Metaphysic AI are employ -
ing de-aging technology, allowing stars like 
Harrison Ford, Tom Hanks, and Robin Wright 
to appear as younger versions of themselves 
on screen. In 2022, after a 40-year hiatus, 
ABBA made a comeback with fresh music, 
accompanied by their de-aged 3D avatars, 
known as ABBAtars. In 2023, Kiss bid fare-
well to the stage at their final performance 
in Madison Square Garden—only to reemerge 
minutes later as digital avatar versions of 
themselves, suggesting virtual immortality 
for these personas powered. Platforms like 
Weverse give K-pop artists opportunities 
to directly engage followers through virtual meetups while monetizing exclusive digital 
content. As immersive media expands, ex-
isting regulations around reasonable com-
pensation, consent, and protections demand 
modernization to address ethical dimensions 
related to identity replication via emerging 
technologies.
Forensic AR / VR
AR and VR show great potential in advancing 
forensics. Sophisticated AR/VR crime scene 
simulations facilitate analysis even when the 
physical location remains inaccessible after 
the fact. Some systems use machine learning 
and medical imaging to enhance AR-assisted 
autopsies, leading to more accurate victim 
identification and determinations of cause 
of death. A major advantage of AR/VR is the 
ability to visualize complex forensic data in 
new ways. AR overlays digital information 
directly onto physical crime scenes, allowing 
for dynamic interaction like real-time tagging 
of evidence and voice-recorded annotations. In 
the legal system, AR and VR are modernizing 
evidence presentation in courtrooms through 
3D modeling and mapping to provide an interactive platforms like RoybiVerse and 
Nanome reconstruct traditional models 
for more intuitive handling. Learners can 
manipulate molecular structures with their 
hands or traverse inside dinosaur anatomy. 
By blending immersion with interactivity, VR 
edtech unlocks multisensory comprehen-
sion of abstract or ephemeral concepts at 
individual scale.
Synthetic Media in Hollywood
The rise of synthetic media in Hollywood, ac-
celerated by advancements in AI, is bringing 
both opportunity and ethical dilemmas to 
the industry. The 2023 Screen Actors Guild 
strike revolved around usage of talent like-
nesses without clear restrictions. Ironically, 
during the strikes, Meta and a company 
called Realeyes capitalized on the abun-
dance of out-of-work actors by hiring them 
for an “emotion study” aimed at making 
AI-generated avatars appear more human. 
These actors signed away extensive rights 
“in perpetuity,” allowing their facial expres-
sions and other characteristics to be used 
by Realeyes, Meta, and third parties almost APPLICATIONS
234© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
immersive crime scene experience for judg-
es and jurors. This boosts understanding of 
complex evidence sequences. These tech-
nologies also facilitate remote testimony for 
improved accessibility. On the training side, 
companies like CBF Forensics use realistic VR 
simulations to deliver cost-effective forensic 
skills training for law enforcement. While still 
emerging, AR and VR integration in forensics 
promises to enhance remote capabilities, 
evidence presentation, and training.
Metaverse-Enhanced Science
The metaverse could significantly enhance 
the effectiveness and reach of science. Its 
interactive, three-dimensional spaces pro-
vide opportunities for unprecedented levels 
of collaboration and accessibility in research. 
For example, digital replicas of physical labs 
can enable scientists around the globe to get 
together and discuss and advance projects, 
bypassing geographic and logistical con-
straints. Experiments conducted in virtual 
environments have the added benefit of being 
precisely replicated, improving the reproduc-ibility of research findings. Agencies like the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
are already leveraging the metaverse to 
train scientists in various locations, allow-
ing them to engage in experiential learning 
without the real-world risks. Moreover, the 
metaverse allows for the creation of entire-
ly new kinds of experimental spaces. For 
instance, scientists could utilize existing 
data and images to develop virtual models 
of far-off places, such as Mars, and remotely 
engage with these environments. Howev-
er, realizing the metaverse’s full promise 
requires surmounting adoption obstacles 
around equipment costs and centralized 
tech giant control.APPLICATIONS
235© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Digital lab replicas could allow scientists to collaborate and perform virtual experiments mirroring  
real-world conditions, reducing costs and increasing accessibility to experimentation.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
Experiential Equations    
Daniel slips on a headset, eager to explore the immersive calculus simulator his teacher introduced in class. As the 
virtual world loads, Daniel finds himself standing on an abstract grid landscape, with colorful curves undulating in all 
directions. He reaches for a squiggly purple function in front of him, knowing that in this virtual world he can physical-
ly interact with the fundamental building blocks of mathematics.
“Today I want you to explore the concept of curvature,” the instructor’s voice emanates from the air. “Take this control-
ler and manipulate the curve in front of you. Get an intuition for how bending changes along the arc.” Daniel reaches 
out and takes hold of the squiggly purple function. As he moves his hands, the curve reshapes itself like virtual taffy. 
Daniel instantly understands the curve better than equations on paper could convey—he feels how tapered regions 
have lower curvature than tight curls. 
“Now, let’s step into a derivative’s shoes,” the instructor says. The world blinks, and Daniel’s perspective shrinks. He 
has become the orange derivative denoting the curve’s slope! As he glides along the ripples of the function, Daniel 
physically experiences each peak and valley in its slope and their full spatial relationship clicks intuitively. The im-
mersive manipulations unlocked conceptual knowledge allowing math to finally make sense. He had felt what those 
cryptic formulas tried explaining: that curvature captures the rate of direction change. VR let Daniel enter into mathe-
matics, instead of just staring formulaically. Equations had become experience.
236© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES237© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.PSYCHOSOCIAL 
DYNAMICS & 
INCLUSIVITY IN 
THE METAVERSETECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
Situated VR
In the metaverse, the dissonance between 
virtual and real-world experiences often leads 
to “experiential artifacts,” a phenomenon 
where VR users experience lingering senso-
ry and cognitive effects that blur the lines 
between these two realities. This issue arises 
from the noncongruent realities that users 
encounter when transitioning between digital 
and physical spaces. Users may feel a surreal 
detachment from their bodies or environ-
ment, reporting feelings of disembodiment or 
altered perceptions of the physical world after 
VR sessions. These experiential artifacts are 
a result of the complex interplay between our 
sensory inputs and past interactions with the 
world, evolving as we are exposed to various 
contexts, including virtual environments. Rec-
ognizing the psychological impacts of these 
artifacts, which can range from mild curi-
osity to disorientations affecting daily life. 
Researchers at MIT have proposed “situated 
virtual reality” as a solution. This concept, 
currently under review for publication in IEEE, 
aims to align the physical and virtual worlds, 
minimizing experiential artifacts. Situated interacting with someone wearing smart 
glasses, people may act differently when 
they experience a heightened sense of being 
observed. This phenomenon is similar to the 
observer effect in psychology, where indi-
viduals modify their behavior in response to 
their awareness of being watched. In social 
contexts, this can lead to increased self-con-
sciousness, anxiety, and potentially altered 
social dynamics.
The introduction of “trust lights” on some 
smart glasses, designed to indicate when re-
cording is taking place, attempts to mitigate 
this effect by providing a visual cue to others 
about their privacy status. On the Ray-Ban 
Meta smart glasses for instance, the cam-
era will not record if the LED light is covered. 
However, the effectiveness of these trust 
lights in alleviating concerns about privacy 
and constant surveillance is not clear-cut. 
While they might offer some reassurance, 
the underlying tension and psychological 
impact of potential constant recording re-
main.XR Accessibility
Accessibility XR is a growing area of focus, 
aiming to ensure these immersive technolo-
gies are inclusive for all users, including those 
with disabilities. Key areas of accessibility 
in XR include sensory, physical, cognitive, 
and universal design aspects. For example, 
Google’s ARCore improves environmental 
understanding, crucial for users with visual 
impairments. The design of XR interfaces is 
evolving to cater to diverse physical abilities, 
incorporating features like voice commands 
and eye tracking. Microsoft’s inclusive design 
approach in VR and AR, featuring voice recog-
nition and adaptable controller settings, ex-
emplifies this advancement. Similarly, many 
companies now offer voiceover support in AR 
experiences, aiding visually impaired users 
with audio descriptions. Cognitive accessibil-
ity is also a priority, particularly for users with 
conditions like autism, necessitating simpli-
fied interfaces and controlled sensory inputs. 
Meta Quest demonstrates this by providing 
customizable controls and head tracking op-
tions for users with limited mobility. VR focuses on syncing physical actions with 
virtual feedback, such as matching natural 
movement or object interactions, to create 
a more congruent reality. The approach also 
extends to social interactions, ensuring that 
the body language and emotional expres-
sions in virtual environments mirror those 
in the real world. The goal is to establish a 
hybrid reality that is free from experiential 
artifacts, prioritizing not just technologi-
cal innovation but also the psychosocial 
well-being of users in the metaverse.
The Panopticon
The psychological effects of being constantly 
filmed, particularly when interacting with 
individuals wearing smart glasses, can be 
significant and multifaceted. Smart glasses, 
which may be always recording or perceived 
as such, introduce a dynamic similar to the 
concept of a panopticon in social interac-
tions. The panopticon refers to a system of 
control where individuals are aware that 
they might be watched at any time, leading 
to self-regulation of behavior due to the 
perception of constant surveillance. When PSYCHOSOCIAL DYNAMICS AND INCLUSIVITY IN THE METAVERSE
238© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
Many efforts in the XR accessibility space are 
underpinned by the principles of universal de-
sign, aiming to create XR experiences that are 
inclusive and enjoyable for everyone, regard-
less of their abilities. Leading this charge are 
initiatives like the XR Association’s Accessi-
bility Working Group and the XR Access Initia-
tive, which bring together industry, academia, 
and advocacy groups to research, develop, 
and educate about accessible XR technol-
ogies, ensuring that the immersive digital 
world is open and welcoming to all.
Diminished Sensory Overload
People with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) 
often struggle to process sensory informa-
tion, finding stimuli like bright lights or loud 
noises particularly overwhelming. This senso-
ry sensitivity can turn routine activities into 
significant challenges. Augmented reality 
presents a promising tool to mitigate these 
sensory integration issues. AR’s ability to cre-
ate controlled and customized environments 
can gently introduce sensory inputs to those 
with ASD, allowing them to adapt at a comfort-
able pace. Among the innovations in this field Cybersickness
Motion sickness and nausea remain signifi-
cant challenges in the mass adoption of vir-
tual reality, both for consumer and industrial 
applications. One key issue is proprioception 
disorientation, which arises when there’s 
a mismatch between where you perceive 
your limbs to be and their actual spatial 
position in the virtual environment. Recent 
research led by the University of Waterloo 
sheds light on why some individuals are 
more susceptible to VR-induced “cybersick-
ness” than others. The study found that the 
perception of vertical orientation could shift 
after engaging in high-intensity VR experi-
ences. This sensory adjustment significantly 
influences the severity of cybersickness. The 
findings could help VR developers create 
more comfortable and adaptable experi-
ences by understanding the relationship 
between sensory reweighting and cyber-
sickness susceptibility. In another study, 
researchers found that incorporating music 
into VR experiences can mitigate symptoms 
of cybersickness. Both joyful and calming 
music were shown to reduce the intensity of nausea-related symptoms, with joyful music 
having a particularly significant impact on re-
ducing the overall intensity of cybersickness. 
These research developments offer promising 
avenues for reducing barriers to VR adoption, 
potentially leading to more personalized and 
enjoyable virtual experiences for users.are “Unfear” and “Floreo,” which use technol-
ogy to create supportive spaces for individ-
uals with ASD. Samsung’s Unfear is an app 
that uses real-time selective noise filtering 
to reduce auditory stress. It targets specific 
sounds that are distressing to the user, of-
fering a more relaxing and fear-free auditory 
experience. Unfear also extends its function-
ality to digital content, like mobile games, fil-
tering out loud sounds to make such media 
more accessible for those sensitive to audio 
intensity. Though not an AR application per 
se, Unfear embodies principles that could be 
integrated into AR platforms. Floreo, on the 
other hand, directly utilizes AR to replicate 
real-life situations in a controlled, less over-
whelming manner. It’s particularly beneficial 
for teaching social, communicative, and 
practical life skills in a secure environment. 
Floreo’s simulated interactions offer a prac-
tice platform for users with autism, helping 
them develop skills transferable to everyday 
life. Both Unfear and Floreo exemplify how ad-
justing sensory inputs and offering flexible 
learning environments can be revolutionary 
for those with ASD. PSYCHOSOCIAL DYNAMICS AND INCLUSIVITY IN THE METAVERSE
239© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2037
“Visiting” Pregnancy    
Due to her age, Lauren was unable to safely carry her pregnancy herself. Instead, her daughter was growing in an artificial womb at a specialized facility. The high-
tech womb was calibrated to Lauren’s own heartbeat and voice via a monitor that she wore at all times, surrounding the growing baby with the familiar, comforting 
sounds of its mother. The artificial amniotic fluid was even infused with Lauren’s natural scent through a filtering process.
Today, Lauren is preparing to “visit” her pregnancy. She dons a state-of-the-art haptic suit, designed to simulate the physical sensations of pregnancy. The suit gen-
tly expands around her abdomen, mimicking the gentle pressure and movements of a growing baby. As the virtual nursery flickers into view, Lauren gasps. It was a 
line-for-line re-creation of the room her husband Eli was assembling at home, down to the plush rainbow rug and decaled quotes from her favorite children’s books. 
As Lauren settles into the metaverse experience, the suit adjusts snugly around her midsection, gently applying pressure to simulate the swell of pregnancy. She 
runs her hands along the warm, taut skin, marveling at how real it feels. Lauren feels a sudden thump and lays her hand on her belly. Her daughter is kicking up a 
storm today.
The haptic suit is just one part of the experience. The headset she wears is pivotal, not just visually, but also in altering Lauren’s sense of smell to mirror the acute 
olfactory sensitivity typical in pregnancy. Scents are intensified, creating a vivid and authentic sensory experience. Furthermore, the headset induces psychologi-
cal states akin to those of pregnancy, fostering a deep emotional bond between Lauren and her unborn child.
As Lauren walks through this virtual world, she speaks softly, knowing that her baby, though miles away in its artificial womb, can hear her. She sings lullabies, 
tells stories, and shares her hopes and dreams for their future together. Each word, each note of her song, is transmitted back to the womb, enveloping her baby in 
a warm embrace of mother’s love.
240© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES241© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EXPERIENCING 
IMMERSIVE 
WORLDSTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
World Building on Blockchain 
Advocates of the metaverse and blockchain 
share a core principle: decentralization. In 
the metaverse, this manifests as an open 
network of interconnected virtual worlds as 
opposed to closed, proprietary platforms. 
Some advocates argue that when built on 
blockchain, the metaverse can offer true 
digital ownership through NFTs, by allowing 
users to own, trade, and monetize virtual 
assets like land and avatars. Blockchain’s 
transparent and immutable record-keeping 
lends credibility to digital ownership claims, 
while its interoperability allows assets and 
user profiles to carry seamlessly across 
metaverse environments. Examples like The 
Sandbox demonstrate this in practice—users 
can build, own, and sell their game creations 
through a dynamic, collective ecosystem. 
Other platforms like Hyperfy and Voxels, both 
running on the Ethereum blockchain, provide 
tools for users to design, construct, and trade 
entire worlds they own. This fusion of block-
chain and the metaverse not only democra-
tizes virtual space but also enables a more 
trustworthy and interconnected digital reality. to feelings of solitude, the complexity of 
navigation, and a deficiency in compelling 
content—revealing a stark contrast between 
the high ambitions of brands and the actual 
user experience. The concept of a metaverse 
festival has also been embraced by Coachel-
la 2023, in partnership with “Fortnite.” This 
collaboration introduced a new dimension to 
music festivals, combining iconic Coachella 
elements with the interactive and boundless 
nature of the “Fortnite” universe. Weverse 
has become a central hub for virtual K-pop 
events, where fans can engage with their 
favorite idols’ avatars in a digital concert 
setting. This virtual space not only hosts 
concerts but also fosters fan interactions, 
proving that the metaverse can indeed 
re-create the vibrancy of live events in a 
digital format. As these digital spaces evolve, 
the focus must shift toward user experience 
to ensure the metaverse can fully realize its 
potential as a platform for communal and 
interactive events. Converting isolated soli-
tary activities into bonded social occasions 
remains contingent on platform maturation.AR Lenses and Filters
AR lenses overlay real-time digital informa-
tion onto the physical world. Simple AR filters 
and lenses have long been a staple of social 
media, enabling users to add digital enhance-
ments to their faces in real time. But these 
playful features are just the beginning; AR 
technology is becoming more sophisticat-
ed by leveraging generative AI. Snapchat’s 
Cosmic Lens feature is a case in point, for 
using generative AI to transform the user’s 
environment into an animated cosmic back-
drop. Filters like TikTok’s “Bold Glamour” echo 
this trend, offering hyperrealistic effects with 
the help of AI. Furthering the integration of AR 
into daily life, Snapchat is now streamlining 
the user experience by introducing intelli-
gent recommendations for lenses based on 
environmental context—such as the weather 
or the time of day—using advanced visual 
recognition and API integration. Snap has also 
announced plans to introduce AR mirrors in 
retail stores, allowing customers to see how 
clothes would look on them in Nike stores and 
in Men’s Wearhouse locations without the While the idealized vision of the metaverse 
and blockchain both emphasize decentral-
ization, it’s worth noting that many plat-
forms, like Meta’s proposed metaverse, may 
operate as closed ecosystems. 
Events in the Metaverse
The metaverse shows promise as the next 
frontier for virtual experiences by creat-
ing immersive 3D environments mirroring 
real-world settings. Gaming, an early adopt-
er of shared digital spaces, has expanded 
its virtual horizons beyond gameplay into 
events and social interactions. Games like 
“Roblox” and “Fortnite” have been pioneers, 
transforming their platforms into concert 
venues for top-tier artists, creating a new 
paradigm for live performances. In 2023, 
Decentraland hosted its second Metaverse 
Fashion Week, featuring over 60 fashion 
brands, including heavyweights like Balen-
ciaga, Adidas, and Coach. While this event 
showcased the allure and possibilities 
within the metaverse, it also cast light on its 
current developmental infancy, evidenced 
by the participant feedback that spoke EXPERIENCING IMMERSIVE WORLDS
242© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESEXPERIENCING IMMERSIVE WORLDSTECH
need to change outfits. This effort is part of a 
broader move to integrate AR technology into 
the physical world, including at music festi-
vals and even in vending machines. Brands 
like Ikea are also leveraging filters to enhance 
the customer’s shopping journey at home. 
Using smartphones’ lidar sensors, Ikea’s AR 
tools allow customers to replace their exist-
ing furniture with detailed 3D models of new 
items. Similarly, retail giants Walmart and 
Amazon have successfully adopted AR to en-
able customers to visualize products in their 
own space before making a purchase, wheth-
er it’s placing furniture or trying on glasses.
Holograms
Holography is a technique that records and 
displays objects in three dimensions, mak-
ing them either stand still or move just like 
real objects. It’s more than just a 3D picture; 
it can show every detail of a person’s face 
or body in motion. This capability is becom-
ing increasingly important for the future of 
augmented reality and virtual reality, partic-
ularly as we look to populate the metaverse 
with realistic avatars and environments. The ARHT Media has also introduced Capsule, 
a versatile holographic display designed 
to shine in any lighting condition, perfect 
for captivating audiences in cinema lob -
bies. This technology allows live hologram 
presenters to interact with people across 
distances, and it can showcase prerecorded 
content that engages viewers through inter-
active touchscreens. The potential applica-
tions are vast, ranging from advertising and 
immersive trailers to live talent meet-and-
greets and product demonstrations. In the 
pursuit of more lifelike holographic projec-
tions, researchers have developed three-di-
mensional scattering-assisted dynamic 
holography (3D-SDH), which greatly enhanc-
es the depth resolution of 3D images. This 
cutting-edge method could revolutionize 
how we interact with virtual environments by 
offering a much richer, more detailed expe-
rience.
Real Estate in the Metaverse
Real estate in the metaverse is emerging as 
a new digital frontier where people can buy, 
develop, and experience virtual land and fusion of holograms with deepfake technol-
ogy and synthetic media is paving the way 
for their use in everyday settings. Already, 
holography has enabled the creation of vir-
tual concerts featuring past celebrities, and 
it holds the potential for production compa-
nies to bring popular synthetic characters 
and celebrities into our physical world as 
interactive entities. For instance, Ukrainian 
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy harnessed 
this technology for remote addresses across 
European cities using Canadian firm ARHT 
Media’s state-of-the-art holographic tech-
nology, speaking from within his country 
amid conflict. The Hologram Zoo in Brisbane, 
Australia, presents a new way for people to 
experience wildlife. Here, holograms cre-
ate lifelike depictions of animals, such as 
a herd of elephants charging toward and 
then seemingly through the spectators. This 
attraction makes holographic technology 
more accessible by significantly reducing 
costs, thus avoiding the ethical dilemmas 
of captive wildlife exhibits and offering an 
immersive educational experience.
243© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Metaverse real estate offers long-term prospects for 
virtual land as spaces for community, commerce, 
and creativity, free from physical limitations. METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
properties. Though still nascent, metaverse 
real estate is drawing interest from individual 
investors, corporations, and even real world 
real estate companies. In metaverses like 
The Sandbox and Decentraland, virtual land 
is sold as NFTs on blockchain. Parcels near 
popular virtual spaces or owned by celebrities 
can sell for hundreds of thousands of dollars 
or more. The overall metaverse real estate 
market is estimated to be worth over $1 bil-
lion. Corporations like Adidas and Atari, and 
celebrities like Snoop Dogg have purchased 
virtual land to host branded experiences, dig-
ital HQs, stores, and spaces. One buyer paid 
$450,000 to become Snoop’s neighbor in the 
virtual world.
Some companies are taking it further by 
developing conceptual virtual homes and 
structures with architectural firms. Every-
realm, a metaverse technology and infra-
structure company, has partnered with 
artists like Misha Kahn and Daniel Arsham 
to create an imaginative collection of digital 
homes called The Row. These futuristic virtual 
abodes feature melting, Salvador Dali-esque gible prototype that exemplifies the vision 
of a global community coming together in 
a digital realm. The village is structured to 
facilitate impactful interactions, with areas 
such as a Virtual Congress Centre akin to a 
digital town hall for hosting various future 
meetings and sessions. It also compris-
es immersive collaborative centers that 
serve as hubs for engaging storytelling and 
spreading the Forum’s insights on critical 
issues, fostering a collaborative spirit aimed 
at real-world change. Partners of the Forum 
have the opportunity to carve out their vir-
tual campuses, allowing them to rally their 
stakeholders and drive forward initiatives to 
solve worldwide problems. Simultaneously, 
The Sandbox’s Wistaverse has emerged as a 
pioneering virtual protest platform, offering 
a secure space for worldwide activism and 
education. Its goal is to empower users to 
engage in nonviolent protest and discourse, 
removing the risks associated with physical 
gatherings. Worlds for the Enterprise
Major tech companies are racing to make 
virtual collaboration a reality for enterprises. 
Microsoft is integrating Mesh directly into 
Teams to allow coworkers to join 3D meetings 
as avatars, sans VR headset. This aligns Mesh 
with Microsoft’s everyday work tools after an 
initial failed launch as a standalone develop-
er platform. Mesh now focuses on enabling 
Teams’ 320 million users to have more engag-
ing meetings using spatial audio, simulated 
environments like a virtual lake house, and 
AI features like virtual whiteboards. Microsoft 
is betting its massive user base will propel 
adoption despite strong startup competitors 
like Jugo and Frame also offering immersive 
meeting solutions. Jugo similarly provides 
3D collaboration spaces for remote teams to 
brainstorm ideas on virtual whiteboards or 
conduct meetings as customizable avatars. 
Frame uses volumetric video to generate 
photorealistic avatars, targeting enterprises 
seeking hyperrealism. These companies aim 
to make remote collaboration more natural by 
simulating the nuances of in-person interac-
tions. Though still early, some companies are architectural angles and dreamlike floating 
spheres. Mirroring real world tactics, tradi-
tional home builders like KB Home have also 
established presences to showcase model 
homes. They aim to reach new demograph-
ics and drum up interest in real-life offer-
ings. While speculative now, advocates see 
long-term potential for virtual real estate as 
immersive spaces for community building, 
commerce, and creativity. The metaverse 
provides freedom from physical constraints 
to create imaginative environments.   
Worlds for Purpose
The metaverse is being harnessed for signifi-
cant causes, transcending beyond a mere 
digital escape into a platform for meaningful 
global action. The World Economic Forum 
has taken a pioneering step by introduc-
ing the Global Collaboration Village in the 
metaverse, a collaborative effort with Ac-
centure and Microsoft. This virtual space 
is dedicated to convening organizations 
to address, brainstorm, and act on global 
crises. It was revealed during the Annual 
Meeting 2023 in Davos, showcasing a tan-EXPERIENCING IMMERSIVE WORLDS
244© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESEXPERIENCING IMMERSIVE WORLDSTECH
piloting these technologies to enable hybrid 
teams to work together more intuitively. Mic-
rosoft’s integration into Teams gives it a dis-
tribution advantage, but the space remains 
competitive as startups offer differentiated 
features around customization and realism.
Play-to-Earn and Virtual Marketplaces
Play-to-earn games fuse gaming and econom-
ics in metaverse environments by enabling 
players to generate real-world value through 
virtual gameplay. Leveraging blockchain 
technology, these games establish in-game 
assets like fantasy creatures or virtual land 
as tradable NFT commodities. This diverges 
from traditional in-game items, where items 
lack external utility or ownership portability 
after usage. Instead, metaverse games facili-
tate exchange of digital goods for cryptocur-
rency or fiat money. “Axie Infinity’’ is a pioneer 
in this space, where players breed, raise, and 
battle fantasy creatures called Axies, with in-
game transactions involving Ethereum-based 
cryptocurrencies. “My Neighbor Alice’” also 
offers a blockchain twist to casual farming 
simulators, where players can buy virtual land and earn rewards through daily activi-
ties and can use their NFTs to decorate their 
virtual space. The well-known game “Mine-
craft” is also considered a virtual economy, 
allowing players to trade items, and this 
concept of in-game value is amplified in the 
metaverse. 
Marketplaces like OpenSea act as trad-
ing hubs for these virtual goods, allowing 
the digital assets from various metaverse 
games to be bought and sold, underpin-
ning the economic potential of play-to-earn 
games. Exponential growth potential looms 
as financial institutions like JPMorgan 
strategically support metaverse transaction 
platforms like Tilia. Seamless fiat curren-
cy interchangeability can further expand 
adoption and capital inflow. Just as physical 
economies rely on agreeing on currency, unit 
of account, and other standards, maturing 
these fundamentals will shape the trajectory 
of blockchain-based virtual marketplaces. 
The fusion of play and profitability through 
ownership of digital goods represents merely 
the first stage.
245© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Players can earn real-world value in virtual environments through gameplay, with blockchain allowing for 
the acquisition and trading of digital assets such as NFTs.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
Cosplay Category Announcement    
Welcome to the 2027 Super Cosplay Con—the world’s premier cosplay convention where physical reality converges 
with the virtual multiverse. This year’s Super Cosplay Con is enabled by augmented reality glasses that project 3D 
avatars and effects, blurring the lines between the real and virtual worlds. The costume contest categories reflect the 
multifaceted experiences of Super Cosplay Con attendees. 
The Digital Division honors stunning costumes crafted entirely from interoperable assets across different metaverses. 
Contestants proudly display their creativity in mixing and matching skins, accessories, and effects from platforms 
like Cryptoverse, Mara, and VRealms.
The Physical Division shines the spotlight on traditional handcrafted costumes made with real-world materials. Cos-
players spent months bringing elaborate costumes to life with fabric, foam, paint, and painstaking detail. Their devo-
tion to practical craftsmanship is on full display.
The Mixed Reality Division highlights the best blended costumes—real-world apparel taken to the next level through 
digital avatars and AR enhancements viewable through attendees’ smart glasses. A knight’s armor appears charred 
from virtual dragon fire, while a wizard’s cloak billows from fabricated wind. 
Hope to see you at Super Cosplay Con! 
246© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES247© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE 
INFRASTRUCTURETECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESTECH
Interoperability
Interoperability is fundamental for the envi-
sioned metaverse: Akin to the universal stan-
dards of today’s internet, it would allow seam-
less data exchange and interaction across 
various systems and technologies. This func-
tionality is essential to enable asset transfer 
and identity management across diverse dig-
ital and physical spaces, and its importance 
is highlighted in the World Economic Forum’s 
2023 briefing paper, “Interoperability in the 
Metaverse.” As companies advance in inte-
grating within their platform silos, the chal-
lenge shifts to connecting these silos to meet 
the growing demands for cross-platform 3D 
assets. Facilitating this effort, the Metaverse 
Standards Forum, formally incorporated in 
April 2023, brings together a consortium of 
organizations to foster interoperability, not 
by creating standards themselves but by 
producing technical reports, best practices, 
and guidelines. This collaboration is crucial 
for developing the necessary standards to 
build a cohesive and functional metaverse. 
Businesses have made significant progress 
in integrating various elements within their and Information Technology (MIIT) is looking 
to set standards for the metaverse industry, 
which they see as crucial for promoting a 
healthy and orderly market development. 
China’s stance is to address the challenges 
in the metaverse sector—such as the lack 
of clear definitions that can lead to market 
speculation—by providing standardization 
and guidance. South Korea has also made 
significant strides by investing 24 billion 
Korean won ($18.1 million) in a fund dedicat-
ed to metaverse initiatives, recognizing the 
difficulties local companies face in securing 
private investments due to the risks as-
sociated with emerging technologies. The 
government’s support extends to helping 
with mergers and acquisitions and ensur-
ing domestic firms can compete on a global 
scale. In a tangible demonstration of their 
commitment, Seoul launched a digital twin 
in the metaverse with a substantial govern-
ment investment, underscoring the impor-
tance of the metaverse in urban and social 
development.Developer T ools and Application Building 
Blocks
The creation of the metaverse is driven by a 
diverse array of developer tools, many of which 
are open source to align with the metaverse’s 
principles of inclusivity and community-driv-
en development. This democratic approach to 
building virtual spaces is crucial, as it allows 
for a metaverse that is crafted by its users, 
rather than solely by large corporations. This 
method of construction by a passionate user 
base contributes to the metaverse’s unique 
and innovative nature. A prime example is 
the “Roblox” platform where a majority of 
creators are under 18 years old. These young 
developers use Roblox Studio to craft their 
own games, employing Luau—a version of 
the programming language Lua. The plat-
form facilitates creativity and entrepreneur-
ship, allowing these young creators to earn 
through game passes and microtransactions, 
a testament to the economic potential within 
the metaverse. Tools like the Ethereal Engine 
(XREngine) support this creative explosion, 
offering open-source capabilities for crafting 
immersive and interactive 3D experiences. individual platform silos. However, the forth-
coming challenge lies in interlinking these 
silos themselves. This necessity will grow 
more pronounced as enterprise applications 
converge and as the demand for cross-plat-
form 3D assets increases.
Government Investment
Government investment in the metaverse 
is emerging as a key strategy for foster-
ing economic growth and innovation, with 
several nations recognizing the potential of 
this digital space. By supporting metaverse 
infrastructure, governments aim to create 
new jobs, attract businesses, and enhance 
the lives of their citizens. Dubai’s Metaverse 
Strategy is a prime example, where the 
city plans to become a global hub for the 
blockchain and metaverse sectors by 2030. 
This strategy aims to support over 40,000 
virtual jobs and increase the number of 
blockchain companies fivefold, as part of 
the UAE’s broader vision to create one of the 
smartest cities worldwide. Similarly, China 
is focusing on the metaverse as part of its 
technology strategy. The Ministry of Industry METAVERSE INFRASTRUCTURE
248© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESMETAVERSE INFRASTRUCTURETECH
Platforms like Webaverse extend the creative 
frontier further into decentralization, allowing 
developers to build and interact with dApps 
within the metaverse. What’s unique about 
the metaverse developer tools is how they 
empower builders, many of whom are young 
and passionate users, to take ownership of 
their creations. This participatory culture is 
fueling the metaverse’s growth into a rich, 
vibrant digital ecosystem where innovation is 
constant and opportunities are vast.
Interdevice Synchronization
Interdevice synchronization is a vital com-
ponent in constructing the infrastructure of 
the metaverse, as it guarantees a unified and 
real-time interaction across various devices 
in AR and VR settings. This has been a signifi-
cant hurdle to overcome. In environments like 
online gaming and virtual workspaces, where 
multiple users engage in a shared virtual 
space, synchronization is key to ensuring 
a smooth and coherent experience for all 
participants. It is also crucial for accurately 
replicating user movements within the virtual 
realm, thereby enhancing the sense of immer-mand high bandwidth and reliable networks 
to process and transmit extensive visual 
data for immersive experiences. The roll-
out of 5G by major US carriers like AT&T, 
Verizon, T-Mobile, and Dish Network is a 
game-changer, offering up to 10 times the 
bandwidth of 4G, with speeds up to 10 giga-
bits per second, lower latency, and greater 
reliability. These features are key to avoiding 
disruptions in the metaverse, ensuring a 
seamless alternate reality experience. China, 
as an early adopter and implementer of 5G, 
exemplifies the impact of this technology on 
the development of virtual and augmented 
reality applications. With a large user base 
in VR and AR, China is quickly becoming a 
leading market in this field. The symbiotic 
relationship between 5G and the metaverse 
is evident here; the metaverse benefits from 
5G’s widespread access, reliable connectiv-
ity, and the ability for XR devices to offload 
processing to the edge of the network. This 
mutual enhancement, evidenced in China’s 
rapid growth in VR, is paving the way for 
more comprehensive and globally accessible 
metaverse experiences.sion and averting problems such as motion 
sickness. To address this challenge, re-
searchers from MIT and Microsoft developed 
the Ekho system, which synchronizes audio 
streams across different devices. The system 
works by embedding subtle white noise 
sequences into the audio stream sent from 
the cloud server, which are then picked up 
by the audio sensors in the player’s control-
ler or other devices. Ekho’s core mechanism 
involves continuously monitoring the time 
lag between the sent and received audio 
streams through these white noise markers. 
When a delay is detected, Ekho promptly 
adjusts the timing, aligning the streams to 
achieve near-perfect synchronization. This 
advancement by MIT and Microsoft research-
ers marks a significant leap forward in 
enhancing the overall quality and realism of 
virtual experiences in the burgeoning field of 
the metaverse.
5G for the Metaverse
The advancement of 5G technology is 
required for the metaverse to reach its full 
potential, as metaverse applications de-
249© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
For a seamless metaverse with low latency, it de-
pends on network connectivity, making 5G a crucial 
enabling technology.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIESAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
250© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES TECH251© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SAM JORDAN  
Manager 
Sam Jordan is a Manager at Future Today Institute. She leads our Advanced Comput -
ing practice area, which includes technology, artificial intelligence, virtual realities, 
networking, telecommunications, and space. She is a distinguished practice area 
lead, where she enables organizations to navigate through uncertainty with inno-
vative strategies. With a proven track record across various sectors, Sam’s visionary 
leadership has driven growth and resilience for Future Today Institute’s global clients and partners.
Before joining FTI, Sam was the CEO and co-founder of TrovBase, a secure data discovery and analysis-sharing plat -
form. Sam grew the company from idea to launch and executed the company’s transition from scientific replication to 
its current focus. In parallel, Sam engaged with the open science community, advocating for better data management 
practices to address challenges in scientific replication. Previously, she worked for IBM, where she helped large enter -
prises in the retail and distribution sector modernize their IT stack. Her expertise centered around mainframes, assisting 
with the integration of new software and modern methodologies to legacy systems.
Sam is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She holds a BS in Economics 
and Data Analysis from George Mason University and an MBA from New York University’s Stern School of Business.Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSMETAVERSE & NEW REALITIES TECH
SELECTED  
SOURCES
252© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES253© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Adelson, Eric. “Virtual Reality Has 
Expanded into Job Training.” The 
Washington Post, August 10, 2023. 
www.washingtonpost.com/tech-
nology/interactive/2023/virtu-
al-reality-job-training/.
Ahvenainen, Jouko. “Metaverses 
Are Coming, but Who Owns Your 
Avatar?” Prifina, February 8 2022. 
medium.com/prifina/metaverses-
are-coming-but-who-owns-your-
avatar-61ae9750f9c2.
Ali M. Fazlollahi, Recai Yilmaz, 
Alexander Winkler-Schwartz, et al. 
“AI in Surgical Curriculum Design 
and Unintended Outcomes for 
Technical Competencies in Sim-
ulation Training.” JAMA Network 
Open, 2023; 6 (9): e2334658. 
https://jamanetwork.com/jour-
nals/jamanetworkopen/fullarti-
cle/2809667.
ARHT Media. “President Zelensky 
to the Final Frontier: How ARHT Me-
dia Is Using Hologram Technology 
to Transform the In-Theatre Experi-
ence.” Screen, June 21, 2022. www.
screendaily.com/president-zelen-
sky-to-the-final-frontier-how-ar-
ht-media-is-using-hologram-tech-
nology-to-transform-the-in-the-
atre-experience/5171865.article. Bailey, Ashley. “Understanding the 
Difference Between Deepfakes and 
3D Human Avatars.” Veritone, July 
21, 2022. www.veritone.com/blog/
understanding-the-difference-be-
tween-deepfakes-and-3d-hu-
man-avatars/.
Bain, Katie. “Coachella 2023 
Announces ‘Fortnite’ Metaverse 
Activation Featuring Music from 
Porter Robinson.” Billboard, April 
13, 2023. www.billboard.com/
music/music-news/coachel-
la-2023-fortnite-metaverse-coach-
ella-island-1235302313/.
Basu, Tanya. “Snap Is Launching 
Augmented-Reality Mirrors in 
Stores.” MIT Technology Review, 
April 19, 2023. www.technologyre-
view.com/2023/04/19/1071849/
snap-ar-mirrors/.
Burgos, Matthew. “Meta’s New AI 
Chatbots Let Users Text and Ask 
Advice from Paris Hilton, Snoop 
Dog and More.” Designboom, 
October 2, 2023. www.designboom.
com/technology/meta-new-ai-
chatbots-paris-hilton-snoop-dog-
kendall-jenner-10-02-2023/.  City University of Hong Kong. 
“Wireless Olfactory Feedback Sys-
tem to Let Users Smell in the VR 
World.” ScienceDaily, June 6, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/06/230606111647.htm.
Clegg, Nick. “How the Metaverse 
Can Transform Education.” Meta, 
April 12,. 2023.  
about.fb.com/news/2023/04/how-
the-metaverse-can-transform-ed-
ucation/. 
Danry, Valdemar. “Towards a 
Congruent Hybrid Reality With-
out Experiential Artifacts.” MIT 
Media Lab, 2023. www.media.
mit.edu/projects/situated-vr-to-
wards-a-congruent-hybrid-reality/
overview/.
“Designed for Privacy, Controlled 
by You.” Meta, 2023. about.meta.
com/ray-ban-stories-privacy/.
Diego Gómez-Zará, Peter Schiffer, 
Dashun Wang. “The Promise 
and Pitfalls of the Metaverse for 
Science. Nature Human Behaviour, 
2023. www.nature.com/articles/
s41562-023-01599-5.DigiSomni. “Creating Hyper-Real-
istic Virtual Reality Avatars with 
3D Modeling.” Medium, August 9, 
2020 medium.com/@DigiSomni/
creating-hyper-realistic-virtu-
al-reality-avatars-with-3d-model-
ing-14317a1bddc.
Dohler, Mischa. “MWC 2023 
Chronicles: Navigating the AR/
VR Evolution and the Metaverse’s 
Downturn.” Ericcson Blog, April 
20, 2023. www.ericsson.com/
en/blog/2023/4/mwc-rise-of-vr-
metaverse.
“Exploring the Impact of Virtual 
and Augmented Reality in Courts.” 
Unesco.org, 2023.  
www.unesco.org/en/articles/
exploring-impact-virtual-and-aug-
mented-reality-courts. 
“For Those Using Metaverse Tech-
nologies, the Impact Is Real.” Meta, 
September 7, 2023. about.fb.com/
news/2023/09/impact-of-vr-and-
ar/.
Garuda Fujii. “Camouflaging the 
Location of a Sound Source Via 
Topology-optimized Source-shift-
er. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 
2023; 559. www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0022460X23002171.Golomingi, Raffael, et al. “Aug-
mented Reality in Forensics and 
Forensic Medicine—Current Status 
and Future Prospects.” Science & 
Justice, vol. 63, no. 4, April 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sci-
jus.2023.04.009.
Gray, Georgi. “University of Texas 
Medical Branch Augments Curric-
ulum with Virtual Reality Simula-
tions.” Virti Insights—Get the Most 
out of Your People.” September 14, 
2023. insights.virti.com/universi-
ty-of-texas-medical-branch-aug-
ments-curriculum-with-virtual-re-
ality-simulations/. 
Guo, Eileen. “How Meta and AI 
Companies Recruited Striking 
Actors to Train AI.” MIT Tech-
nology Review, October 19, 
2023. www.technologyreview.
com/2023/10/19/1081974/
meta-realeyes-artificial-intelli-
gence-hollywood-actors-strike/.
Hannah Raila, Tatevik Avanesyan, 
Keara E. Valentine, et al. “Aug-
menting Group Hoarding Disorder 
Treatment with Virtual Reality 
Discarding: A Pilot Study in Older 
Adults.” Journal of Psychiatric 
Research, 2023; 166. www.science-
direct.com/science/article/pii/
S0022395623003965.“How the Metaverse Could Shape 
Science.” Kellogg Insight, June 21, 
2023. insight.kellogg.northwestern.
edu/article/how-the-metaverse-
could-shape-science. 
Huet, Natalie. “The Tech, Mind-
set and Headsets Making the 
Metaverse ‘Real.’” Euronews, July 
1, 2023. www.euronews.com/
next/2023/01/07/ces-2023-from-
a-scented-headset-to-neural-ear-
buds-this-tech-is-making-the-
metaverse-more-r.
Jiayi Xu, Shoichi Hasegawa, 
Kiyoshi Kiyokawa, et al. “Integra-
tion of Independent Heat Transfer 
Mechanisms for Non-Contact 
Cold Sensation Presentation 
With Low Residual Heat.” IEEE 
Transactions on Haptics, 2023. 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/docu-
ment/10285873.
Lay-Flurrie, Jenny. “Microsoft’s 
Annual Ability Summit: Exploring 
the Technology, People, Partner-
ships and Policies Driving a More 
Accessible Future.” Microsoft 
on the Issues, March 8, 2023. 
blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-is-
sues/2023/03/08/accessibili-
ty-annual-ability-summit-peo-
ple-partnership-policy/.SELECTED SOURCESTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES254© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Martin, Scott. “BMW Group 
Starts Global Rollout of Nvidia 
Omniverse.” Nvidia Blog, March 
21, 2023. blogs.nvidia.com/
blog/2023/03/21/bmw-group-
nvidia-omniverse/.
Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology. “Augmented Reality Head-
set Enables Users to See Hidden 
Objects.” ScienceDaily, February 
27, 2023. www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2023/02/230227132721.
htm.
McGill University. “Assessing 
Unintended Consequences in 
AI-based Neurosurgical Training.” 
ScienceDaily, September 19, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/09/230919154827.htm.
Meta. “Introducing the New Ray-
Ban Meta Smart Glasses.” Sep-
tember 27, 2023. about.fb.com/
news/2023/09/new-ray-ban-me-
ta-smart-glasses/.
Mulligan, Amanda. “Walmart Cata-
log Lenses.” Forbusiness.snapchat.
com, 2023. forbusiness.snapchat.
com/inspiration/walmart-edlp-
catalog-shopping-lens. Na-young, Kim. “Naver to Cre-
ate Digital Twin Platform for 
5 Saudi Arabian Cities.” Yon-
hap News Agency, October 
24, 2023. en.yna.co.kr/view/
AEN20231024003200320. 
Optica. “Technology Advance 
Paves Way to More Realistic 3D 
Holograms for Virtual Reality and 
<ore.” ScienceDaily, April 6, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/04/230406114000.htm.
Paleja, Ameya. “Microsoft Pat-
ents Swappable Batteries for AR 
Glasses.” Interestingengineering.
com, October 10, 2023. interestin-
gengineering.com/innovation/mi-
crosoft-patent-ar-glasses-swap-
pable-battery. 
Panagiotis Kourtesis, Rayaan Amir, 
Josie Linnell, et al. “Cybersick-
ness, Cognition, & Motor Skills: 
The Effects of Music, Gender, and 
Gaming Experience.”  
IEEE Transactions on Visualization 
and Computer Graphics, 2023; 29 
(5): 2326. https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/10049731.Panpan Yu, Yifan Liu, Ziqiang 
Wang, et al. “Ultrahigh-density 3D 
Holographic Projection by Scatter-
ing-assisted Dynamic Holography. 
Optica, 2023; 10 (4): 481. 
https://opg.optica.org/optica/
fulltext.cfm?uri=optica-10-4-
481&id=528843.
Pierce, David. “Genies Digital 
Avatars: How Characters Work in 
the Metaverse..” Protocol,  January 
26, 2022. www.protocol.com/ge-
nies-digital-avatars-metaverse.
Reardon, Gregory, et al. “Shear 
Shock Waves Mediate Haptic 
Holography via Focused Ultra-
sound.” ScienceAdvances, vol. 9, 
no. 9, March 1, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1126/sciadv.adf2037. 
“Samsung Unfear.” D&AD, 2023.  
www.dandad.org/awards/pro-
fessional/2023/237490/sam-
sung-unfear/. 
Sandra Lilja, Xinxiu Li, Martin 
Smelik, et al. “Multi-organ Sin-
gle-cell Analysis Reveals an On/
off Switch System with Potential 
for Personalized Treatment of 
Immunological Diseases.” Cell 
Reports Medicine, February 28, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
xcrm.2023.100956.Shinshu University. “Source-shift-
ing Metastructures Composed 
of Only One Resin for Location 
Camouflaging.” ScienceDaily, May 
30, 2023. www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2023/05/230530125407.
htm.
Tsamitros, N et al. “The Application 
of Virtual Reality in the Treat-
ment of Mental Disorders]. Der 
Nervenarzt vol. 94,1 (2023): 27-33. 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/36053303/.
Tedeneke, Alem. “World Economic 
Forum Establishes Purpose-Driven 
Metaverse to Tackle World’s Most 
Pressing Challenges.”  
World Economic Forum, Janu -
ary 17, 2023. www.weforum.org/
press/2023/01/world-economic-
forum-establishes-purpose-driv-
en-metaverse-to-tackle-world-s-
most-pressing-challenges/.
“The Tech, Mindset and Headsets 
Making the Metaverse ‘Real.’” 
Euronews, January 7, 2023. www.
euronews.com/next/2023/01/07/
ces-2023-from-a-scented-head-
set-to-neural-earbuds-this-tech-
is-making-the-metaverse-more-r.University of Tsukuba. “Simulating 
Cold Sensation Without Actual 
Cooling.” ScienceDaily, October 
23, 2023. www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2023/10/231023124409.
htm.
University of Waterloo. “Re-
searchers Explore Why Some 
People Get Motion Sick Playing 
VR Games While Others Don’t.” 
ScienceDaily, May 1, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/05/230501085850.htm.
William Chung, Michael Bar-
nett-Cowan. “Sensory Reweight-
ing: A Common Mechanism for 
Subjective Visual Vertical and Cy-
bersickness Susceptibility. Virtual 
Reality, 2023. https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s10055-023-
00786-z.
World Economic Forum. “Interop-
erability in the Metaverse.” Brief-
ing paper. January 2023. www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_Interop-
erability_in_the_Metaverse.pdfXintao Yan, Zhengxia Zou, Shuo 
Feng, et al. “Learning Naturalistic 
Driving Environment with Statis-
tical Realism.” Nature Communi-
cations 14, 2023. www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-023-37677-5.
Yiming Liu, Chun Ki Yiu, Zhao 
Zhao, et al. “Soft, Miniaturized, 
Wireless Olfactory Interface for 
Virtual Reality.” Nature Communi-
cations 14, 2023/ www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-023-37678-4.SELECTED SOURCESTECH METAVERSE & NEW REALITIES2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION
BIOENGINEERINGTECH
257© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSBIOENGINEERING
259  T op Headlines
260  State of Play
261  Key Events
262  Likely Near T erm 
Developments
263  Why Bioengineering Trends 
Matter to Y our Organization 
264  When Will Bioengineering 
Trends Impact Y our 
Organization?
266  Opportunities and Threats
267  Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
268  Central Themes
269  Ones T o Watch
270 Important T erms
272 AI and Biology
273 Pharmaceutical Companies 
Invest in AI
273 Generative AI Gains Wide 
Acceptance282 Using the Human Genome Map
282 Unlocking Bioinformatics Data
283 Sequencing Ancient Genomes
283 Programmable Gene Editing 
Proteins
284 Bioprinting, Organoids, and 
Novel Organisms
285 Bioprinting Electronics 
285 Bioprinting and Tissue 
Engineering
285 Fabricating Organoids
286 Growing Organoids to Study 
Long COVID
286 Organ-on-a-Chip
287 3D Printed Drugs
287 Bacterial Nanosyringes
287 Using Viruses to Deliver Big 
DNA Payloads
288 Minimum Viable Lifeforms289 Biocomputing and 
Cyberbiosecurity
290 Organoid Intelligence
290 Training Biocomputers to 
Learn New Skills
290 Biological Circuits
290 Programmable DNA Machines
291 Using DNA to Store Data
292 Biological Robots
292 Living Sensors
293 Cyberbiosecurity
294 New Materials
295 AI-Created New Materials
295 Modifying Fungi for Building 
and Packaging
295 Mycelium Leathers
296 Biomolecule-Based Packaging
296 Intelligent and Active 
Packaging
296 Biodegradable and Edible 
Packaging296 Durable Biofilms
297 Cultured Food & Drinks and 
Next-Gen Agriculture
298 Lab-Grown Meat Is Going 
Mainstream
298 Synthetic Milk and Cheese
298 Precision Fermentation
299 Brewing Great Nonalcoholic 
Beers
299 Upgrading Photosynthesis
300 Faster Flowering
300 A Return to Natural Farming—
With Technology
300 Regenerative Agriculture
300 A New Wave of Genetically 
Modified Foods
301 CRISPR Animals
301 Genetically Engineered Space 
Farming 
302 Aging, Health, and Beauty
303 Cultivated Collagen273 Text-to-Synthetic Compound: 
LLMs Automate Chemistry
273 AI-Generated Proteins
274 Generative Biology
274 Simulating Molecular 
Interactions
274 Spatial Biology Improves  
with AI
276 Gene Editing & CRISPR
277 CRISPR Treatment for Diseases
277 Next-Generation Gene Editors
278 New Editing Tools
279 In Vivo Gene Editing
279 Cell Therapy 2.0
280 Reading and Sequencing 
Genomes
281 Next-Generation Genome 
Sequencing
281 Metagenomics
281 Faster Gene Synthesis
282 Quantum Biology TECH
258© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSBIOENGINEERING
303 Growing Blood
303 Growing Sex Cells 
303 Human Trials of Synthetic 
Wombs
304 Universal Cancer Vaccines
304 Upgrading Embryos  
Before Birth
305 Genetic Screening  
for Pregnancy
305 Biobank Releases
306 Microbiome Metrics at Home
306 Age Reversal
306 Removing Zombie Cells
306 Skin Care and Beauty
307 Improving Gut Biomes 
307 Optimizing Recreational Drugs
308 Climate and Sustainability
309 eDNA Detection
309 Using CRISPR for Sustainable 
Wood Production
309 Better Plastics Recycling317 Posthumous Sperm Retrieval
317 Gene Editing Ethics
318 Engineering Super Soldiers 
319 Authors
321 Selected Sources310 Engineering Plants for Carbon 
Capture
310 Greening Fashion
311 De-Extincting Lost Species
311 Rewilding Barren Terrains
311 CRISPR Mosquitoes
312 Reviving Ancient Viruses
313 Regulation and Policy
314 Regulatory Changes Toward 
Genome-Edited Crops
314 Regulating DNA Recognition 
Systems 
314 Safeguarding Genetic Privacy
315 Defining Parenthood
315 National DNA Drives
315 International Collaborations to 
Advance Bioengineering
316 Ethics, Trust and Acceptance
317 Resolving Bias in Genome 
Research
317 Ethics in Indigenous GenomicsAI breakthroughs are 
set to make this year a 
turning point for biotech, 
CRISPR, and synthetic 
biology.
259© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESBIOENGINEERING
01
02
03
04
05Lab-Grown Meat Is Going Mainstream
Cultivated meat and synthetic dairy are emerging as sustainable and ethical alternatives 
to traditional animal products, and in 2024 production will start to scale.
CRISPR Will Treat Disease  
US and UK regulators have approved the first CRISPR therapy, marking a significant 
step in gene editing’s potential to cure genetic diseases.
Millions of New Materials Discovered
A new AI system from Google DeepMind predicted 2.2 million novel materials, signaling 
big changes ahead for batteries, computer chips, and more.
AI Transforms Biology T oday; Biology Powers Computers T omorrow   
Scientists created organoid intelligence, a new biocomputing field using brain cells for 
AI, promising major efficiency gains over traditional computer systems.
We Aren’t Prepared for a Cyber-Bio Attack 
Cyberbiosecurity has emerged as a crucial unmet need at the intersection of AI and 
life sciences, with no formal oversight yet established.TECHSTATE 
OF PLAYIn the past year, AI breakthroughs have accelerated the convergence of 
biology, information systems, and advanced platforms, with the potential 
to fundamentally transform businesses and societies. While today, our 
focus is on generative AI, very soon that focus will shift to generative bi-
ology: Here, AI models will decipher the complexities of biology, leading to 
the creation of novel molecules, drugs, materials, consumables, and living 
organisms.
Our orientation to biology and the living world will change in the near 
future as CRISPR products, in the form of novel drug therapies and new 
foods, enter the market. Soon, we will no longer be constrained by existing 
materials to manufacture batteries, clothing, or buildings. 
Lab-grown beef, chicken, and fish will scale, making it possible to con-
sume meat without slaughter. Through cellular reprogramming, we could 
start to reverse the aging process. And we’re on the brink of new fertility 
treatments that will challenge our ideas about parenthood.
These shifts will fundamentally alter our relationship with biology and the 
natural world, but we lack comprehensive policies to navigate them. While 
biotech promises to reshape our world, it also presents unprecedented 
risks, underscoring the need for preparedness and governance.Brace yourself for uncharted 
impacts. This could be 
a breakthrough year for 
biotechnology. 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH BIOENGINEERING
260261© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.JUNE 13, 2023
Pushing Limits of Embryo Models  
Israeli, UK, and Chinese research teams 
advance embryo models beyond legal 
limits, prompting ethical debates.
NOVEMBER 29, 2023
AI Unlocks New Material Secrets  
Google DeepMind’s AI predicted structures of 
over 2 million potential new materials, potentially 
enhancing technologies like batteries, solar 
panels, and chips. Scientists could create around 
400,000 of these materials in labs soon.JANUARY 18, 2024
Universal Cancer Vaccine Trials  
Cancer patients in the UK receive 
the first dose of a new mRNA 
therapy designed to help the body 
recognize and fight cancer cells.DECEMBER 8, 2023
FDA OKs Gene Therapy for Sickle Cell  
Casgevy becomes the first approved 
commercial gene-editing treatment 
using CRISPR technology.FEBRUARY 6, 2024  
GMO Seeds Sold Direct to Consumers  
The FDA gives purple tomatoes, genetically 
enhanced to be more nutrient-dense, 
approval for home gardening.KEY EVENTSTECH BIOENGINEERING262© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.RAPID ACCELERATION
The rapid integration of artificial intelli-
gence into bioengineering is catalyzing 
unprecedented innovation.  The near 
future will see significant changes to 
traditional industries such as meat, dairy, 
textiles, and pharmaceuticals, while 
advancements should pave the way for 
sustainable solutions in carbon capture, 
plastics recycling, and biodiversity en-
hancement. Near-term breakthroughs in 
healthcare will lead to cataclysmic, long-
term disruption. Leaders should deepen 
their understanding of bioengineering’s 
vast potential and associated risks, en-
abling them to spearhead innovation in 
products and services, streamline pro-
cesses, improve materials, and achieve 
cost efficiencies. This convergence also 
opens up new avenues for collaboration, 
allowing companies to explore untapped 
markets and forge strategic partnerships 
that can drive forward their competitive 
edge.CRISPR’s Emerging Economic Impact
The size of the global market for CRISPR 
technologies and their associated products is 
projected to exceed $4 billion by mid-decade. 
In the US alone, CRISPR could contribute $19 
billion to GDP by 2032.
GMO Misinformation 
A new GMO backlash looms as public mis-
information persists, with many unaware 
that the latest GMOs aim to boost produce 
and grains with enhanced nutrients, not just 
modify them for convenience or yield.Life Extension Backlash
Life extension breakthroughs promise longer 
lives for some, yet they will strain social ser-
vices, pensions, and other support systems 
for the elderly, challenging our preparedness 
for an aging population.Supply Chain Disruption  
In the next year, new materials poised to im-
prove shipping’s environmental footprint may 
disrupt traditional supply and cold chain op-
erations dependent on outdated tech, posing 
significant threats to established companies.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Regulatory Pressures
Federal Trade Commission actions spark 
fears of stifled innovation due to limits on 
scaling therapies via acquisitions, while the 
US Inflation Reduction Act ushers in a harsh-
er pricing climate, impacting the biopharma 
industry’s future reimbursement strategies 
for innovations.Stark Health Divide
Biotech will revolutionize health care with 
novel drug therapies, yet their inaccessibility 
to developing economies risks creating a 
stark health divide, exacerbating global 
health inequalities.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionTECH BIOENGINEERING263© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.As a modern “general 
purpose technology,” 
bioengineering has the 
potential to influence 
an entire economy and 
alter society through 
political, economic, and 
social structures. By 
2030, most people in 
developed economies will 
have used or consumed 
a product created 
with a bioengineering 
technology.Biotech advancements 
will transform the value 
network for businesses. 
Without active 
monitoring, disruptors 
may emerge, threatening 
established companies’ 
capacity to create value 
and maintain their 
competitive edge for 
market share, investment, 
and talent.Advancements in 
synthetic biology, 
CRISPR, AI, and 
engineering are opening 
up new opportunities 
across health care, 
pharmaceuticals, 
agriculture, food and 
beverage, beauty, 
chemicals, sustainability, 
energy, and materials 
production.The convergence of 
AI and biology will 
impact every business. 
Leaders will need a 
better understanding of 
bioengineering’s potential 
and risks, so they can 
innovate products 
and services, develop 
processes, enhance 
materials, reduce costs, 
and seek out new partners 
and customers.Near-term disruptions 
in the traditional 
meat, dairy, textile, 
and pharmaceutical 
industries are imminent, 
with advancements 
offering new options 
for carbon capture, 
plastics recycling, and 
enhancing biodiversity, 
signaling a pivotal 
shift in environmental 
management.In response to 
bioengineering advances, 
businesses must develop 
policies that embody 
their values, ethics, and 
culture, such as the use 
of genetically enhanced 
ingredients, insurance 
coverage for novel genetic 
therapies, whether and 
how to promote genetic 
privacy, and more.Biotech Is a General 
Purpose T echnologyBiotech Will Change 
Y our Value NetworkAdvancements Should 
Result in OptionalityAI-Bio Convergence 
Requires New StrategyDisruption Is on Y our 
Near-T erm HorizonBusinesses Need  
New PoliciesWHY BIOTECHNOLOGY TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
264WHEN WILL BIOTECHNOLOGY DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?
0-4 YEARS 5-9 YEARS 10-14 YEARS 15+ YEARSForecasted Time of Impact
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Medical Devices
Vaccines
OTC Medications
Poultry Farming
Defense
Beauty
Drug Development
Textiles
Luxury FashionCO 2 Capture Farming
Ranching
Health Diagnostics
Recycling
Chemicals
Fast Fashion
Consumer Packaged Goods
Construction & Building Materials
Paints & Coatings
Data Storage
Grain
AutomotiveOil/Petroleum Sector
Electricity
Aerospace
Cold Chains
Living MaterialsComputing
Life Extension
Off-Planet ExplorationTECH
265WHEN WILL BIOTECHNOLOGY DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Advancements in bioengineering 
will disrupt every industry, to some 
degree, within the next two decades. 
The Future Today Institute categorizes 
bioengineering as a “general purpose 
technology.” Like the steam engine 
and internet before it, bioengineering  
has the potential to influence an 
entire economy and to alter society 
through political, economic, and so-
cial structures. For most industries, 
it’s not a matter of if these trends will 
disrupt their futures but when.
Several factors are driving the mo-
mentum of bioengineering trends and 
the probable timing an industry will 
be disrupted:Regulations 
The pace of technology advancement typi-
cally far exceeds any changes to regulation. 
Bioengineering is unique in that regulation 
exists, but products and processes are treat-
ed differently in every country. Regulatory 
and policy uncertainty could accelerate or 
stifle growth. 
Media mentions 
Increased awareness and enthusiasm can 
influence the momentum of a technology, 
even when there’s been no real breakthrough. 
Media bursts related to bioengineering will 
drive momentum, especially if those stories 
are favorable and—importantly—easily under-
stood by the general public.
Public perception 
How the public understands, and responds to, 
bioengineering advancements will create or 
quell demand. This is especially true for food 
and beverage, consumer packaged goods, 
beauty and fashion, over-the-counter medi-
cines and vaccines, and new therapeutics. R&D developments 
The pace of new research breakthroughs can’t 
be scheduled to coincide with a board meet-
ing or earnings report. There are factors that 
can improve the likelihood and speed of new 
discoveries (funding, quality and size of staff, 
access to resources). We closely monitor R&D 
developments but treat them as wild cards.  Scaling
While the pace of innovation is fast across 
the spectrum of technologies, it takes time 
for a promising new biotech development to 
scale beyond the lab. Scaling requires disci-
pline, patience, effort, and time.
Costs 
Bioengineering research is still costly, 
though the price of components, equipment, 
and materials drops every year. Once a dis-
ruptor can make a product cheaper with bio-
engineering rather than traditional produc-
tion, it will push faster into the mainstream. 
Advancements in technology will eventually 
bring down costs of production as we’ve 
seen in other fields, such as computing.
Constraints on adoption 
Even if a technology is maturing, constraints 
on its adoption can hinder its influence in 
an industry. For example, a business may re-
fuse to adopt an alternative bioengineering 
technology because it challenges a proven, 
successful strategy. OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
There is no alignment on a global framework governing bioengineering. As a 
result, you can anticipate geopolitical conflict stemming from the development 
and use of emerging bio-based technologies in the years to come. 
Unresolved IP and patent issues in biotechnology raise serious concerns about 
how patenting practices could hinder biotech development across various 
countries.
While new agricultural methods may benefit the environment, they pose threats 
to local communities in economies still reliant on traditional farming practices.
CRISPR therapies may not be universally accessible, potentially deepening 
global health divides and exacerbating current disparities, leading to worsened 
conditions and future conflicts.
Engineering novel organisms and using techniques like germline editing risks 
uncontrollable cascading effects in nature, potentially creating invasive species 
or pathogens, turning a lab accident into an ecological disaster.Opportunities
In the coming decade, biotech advancements will cause leaders to confront their core 
beliefs about their business models, products, and services. In the meantime, it’s 
imperative that businesses seek out new partnerships, develop new pipelines for talent, 
and align stakeholders on the moral and ethical uses of engineered biology.
Because bioengineering has been evolving over decades, it may seem premature for 
action, but its advancements will compound. Like AI, which grew quietly before becoming 
essential, bioengineering will soon be integral to operations. Leaders paying attention to 
its progress and harnessing strategic foresight can gain first-mover advantages.
Biotech companies always face capital needs, particularly amid sector-wide valuation 
challenges. Streamlining R&D, general, and administrative expenses—as well as 
exploring new financing options, and considering mergers with other biotechs—can help 
them navigate the current market landscape.
Businesses should start exploring white spaces now. Where are the opportunities for 
innovation and growth? What might threaten the organization’s ability to thrive? Where 
are there downstream risks to partners or customers? Businesses that seek out and 
anticipate near-term developments will gain a competitive advantage.
Generative biology (genBio) will unlock new ways to develop medicines, food, agricultural 
systems, beauty and skincare products, textiles, packaging and building materials, and 
more. Leaders should develop scenarios for using and scaling these genBio systems, 
processes, and products.
266© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH BIOENGINEERING267© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.As companies consider AI’s 
impact on their workforce, 
they are neglecting to fo-
cus on future demands for 
individuals skilled in both 
AI and biology. Compa-
nies across various sectors 
should proactively develop 
insights into their future 
workforce requirements 
and start establishing the 
necessary talent pipeline 
now.As VC investment floods 
into groundbreaking bio-
tech platforms this year, 
companies must distinguish 
themselves by clearly de-
fining their uniqueness. Also 
crucial is broadening their 
focus from rare to major un-
met medical needs, ensur -
ing a solid value proposition 
to secure crucial VC funding 
for drug approvals.As the biotech ecosystem 
evolves, life sciences and 
other companies will need 
to undertake a new dig-
ital transformation that 
includes AI. This should 
include the creation of 
a long-term strategy, an 
expanded value network 
map, and a comprehensive 
execution plan to stay com-
petitive and innovative.The AI-bio convergence will 
spark myriad innovations 
and demand unprecedent -
ed agility from companies. 
Leaders must empower 
their organizations to ex -
periment with new prod-
ucts and processes, and 
ensure that they shape their 
own futures rather than 
being compelled to adapt 
to external innovations or 
react to regulatory shifts.The uncertain regulatory 
landscape offers a unique 
opportunity for business 
and government to collabo-
ratively envision the future. 
Regulation is reactive. 
Stakeholders can proac-
tively evolve frameworks to 
address safety, update IP 
and copyright processes, 
align on commercialization 
strategies, and thwart mis-
information.To stay competitive, com-
panies must use strategic 
foresight to understand 
how the evolving biotech 
ecosystem could impact 
their existing products 
and processes. Leaders 
should prioritize moni-
toring, acting, and agile 
decision-making in order 
to adapt to the AI-bio 
convergence.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6TECH BIOENGINEERINGCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 268TECH BIOENGINEERING
Gene Editing Realizes Its Promise
CRISPR’s journey to commercial success has been a 
marathon, not a sprint. For more than a decade, the 
gene-editing technology faced many hurdles, from 
technical challenges to patent disputes to regulatory 
approval, slowing its path to practical applications. 
Finally, in 2023, CRISPR’s promise crystallized with the 
approval of Casgevy, a first-of-its-kind therapy for sick-
le cell disease in the UK and US. This landmark therapy, 
which deactivates a specific gene, highlights CRISPR’s 
ability to disable genes with precision. More impor-
tantly, with government clearance and a real-world 
use case, Casgevy opened the door to a vast array of 
possibilities for gene editing and other biotechnology 
applications. However, as CRISPR therapies move to-
ward broader application, challenges remain: namely, 
the complexity and cost of treatments, accessibility 
issues, and public trust. Despite these obstacles, CRIS-
PR’s trajectory toward commercialization marks a sig-
nificant milestone—though the marathon continues. AI and Biology Are Converging 
Increasingly, AI is being used in biological systems. 
Scientists are no longer limited by a traditional human 
team’s speed: New AI models now accurately predict 
biological structures, a capability that will accelerate 
scientific research that used to take decades. The AI-
bio convergence extends into computing itself, and 
researchers are exploring the creation of biology-pow-
ered machines. These innovative systems promise to 
be faster, more efficient, and consume significantly 
less energy than traditional computers. Organoid in-
telligence aims to use human brain cells in a new type 
of computer. Programmable DNA computers execute 
complex operations through molecular manipulation. 
Some researchers believe this fusion of computers and 
biological processes is the real future of artificial in-
telligence; both are important because they offer novel 
approaches to problem-solving and unlock new forms 
of creativity. Biological computers potentially open 
up unprecedented opportunities to improve compute 
power, data storage, and sustainability. Businesses and Governments Aren’t Prepared
Businesses and governments need to catch up as AI 
and biology converge. Biotech fields are making dis-
coveries that not only deepen our insight and create 
new options—they also introduce novel methods to al-
ter biological systems, with outcomes that remain un-
predictable. Such progress presents vast opportunities 
for investment and for businesses to meet their ESG 
goals. However, it poses challenges for incumbents 
in supply chain management, agriculture, consumer 
packaged goods, health, and biosciences that may 
not see their value networks changing early enough to 
take action. Cyberbiosecurity is a growing and unmet 
need, as increasingly companies will need to protect 
the biotech ecosystem from unauthorized access, 
damage, attack, and other threats. As new biotech-
nologies emerge, a lack of alignment on purpose and 
policy could result in the situation we see today with 
AI. Without strategic foresight to prepare for the future, 
the potential risks associated with biotechnological 
advancements could surpass those of AI, underscoring 
the urgent need for readiness.Dr. Amy Trejo, director of R&D and responsible 
materials innovation at Procter & Gamble, for 
leveraging bioengineering for sustainability in 
the consumer packaged goods space.
Dr. Arthur Levin, distinguished scientist at 
Avidity Biosciences, for engineering a new RNA 
platform that delivers therapy to previously 
inaccessible tissue and cell types.
Dr. Cheryl Cui, CEO of Bota Biosciences, for 
launching a new type of engine for biological 
programming and discovery.
Chris Abbott, CEO of Pivot Bio, for scaling 
sustainable biotech solutions to meet global 
agricultural challenges.
Dr. Demis Hassabis and Dr. Shane Legg, 
co-founders of DeepMind, for their ground-
breaking AI inventions that predict biological 
structures and combinations.
Didier T oubia, CEO and co-founder of Aleph 
Farms, for achieving the world’s first govern-
ment clearance to produce and sell cultured 
beef.
Dror Bin, CEO for the Israel Innovation Author-
ity, for scaling innovation resources in biotech 
and other critical technologies.Eben Bayer, co-founder and CEO of Ecovative, 
for innovating business models to integrate 
mycelium technology into the production of 
food and materials.
Dr. Emily Leproust, CEO of Twist Bioscience, 
for breaking new ground in high-throughput 
synthesis and sequencing of DNA.
Dr. Gaurab Chakrabarti, CEO of Solugen, for 
decarbonizing the chemicals industry.
Dr. Hal Barron, Dr. Rick Klausner, and Hans 
Bishop, founders of Altos Labs, for leading a 
new effort on cellular rejuvenation program-
ming to reverse the human aging process.
Dr. J. Craig Venter, CEO of JCVI and serial en-
trepreneur, for advancing the fields of synthetic 
biology and genomic research. 
Dr. Jason Kelly, co-founder and CEO of Ginkgo 
Bioworks, for scaling genetic engineering to 
produce bacteria with a wide variety of applica-
tions. 
Dr. Jianmin Fang, co-founder and executive 
director of RemeGen, for overseeing one of the 
largest partnership deals between a Chinese 
biotech company and a Western company (Se-
agen) in history. Josh T etrick, co-founder and CEO of Eat Just, 
for commercializing cultured meat in the US 
and Singapore.
Dr. Kimberly Smith, R&D chief at ViiV Health-
care, for her work to end the HIV epidemic 
through her visionary practices and innovative 
approach to clinical development.
Dr. Lisa Dyson, founder and CEO of Air Pro-
tein, for her work developing food from carbon 
dioxide.
Dr. Mary Maxon, executive director of BioFu-
tures at Schmidt Futures, for developing and 
leading a new program to maximize the poten-
tial of biotech for a circular bioeconomy.
Matthew McKnight, general manager of 
biosecurity at Ginkgo Bioworks, for his role in 
advancing biotechnology for national security, 
public health, and pandemic preparedness.
Niyati Gupta, CEO of Fork & Good, for building 
and scaling new business models in food and 
agribusiness.
Dr. Noubar Afeyan, CEO of Flagship Pioneering, 
for inventing and building platform companies, 
each with the potential to transform human 
health and the planet.Dr. Raymond Deshaies, senior vice president 
for global research at Amgen, for his work on a 
new frontier of small molecule design via RNA 
degradation.
Dr. Sarah Reisinger, chief science and research 
officer for DSM-Firmenich, for her continued 
work bridging the gap between R&D, technical 
requirements, and commercialization.
Dr. Yin Y e, CEO and executive director of BGI 
Group, for scaling the industrial application 
of cutting-edge biotechnology and genomics 
research.ONES TO WATCH
269© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH BIOENGINEERINGIMPORTANT TERMS
270BIOENGINEERING DOMAINS
Innovations in biotechnology are currently defined 
by five key areas: biomolecules, biosystems, bioma-
terials, biocomputing, and biomachine interfaces. 
Major breakthroughs in one field either reinforces 
or accelerates breakthroughs in the others. 
Biocomputing
Biology is made up of code—and the goal is to 
harness that code for computing. DNA and RNA can 
be used as mediums for storing information and 
data processing. While traditional supercomputers 
use a lot of energy, heat up quickly, and require 
costly cooling centers to function properly, biolog-
ical computing systems can perform computa-
tions without burning excess energy—and they are 
infinitely scalable. 
Biomachine iInterfaces
Innovative new interfaces are connecting living or-
ganisms to computers for many different purposes, 
from restoring a stroke victim’s ability to walk to 
someday controlling external computers simply 
using thought. 
Biomaterials
It is now possible to replicate or improve on raw 
materials using bioengineering technology. One ex-ADDITIONAL TERMS
Cas9 (CRISPR associated protein 9)
A special enzyme that can cut DNA sequences. 
Cas9 is part of the “molecular scissors” method  
of genome editing made possible by CRISPR.
Chimera
A living organism created by combining cells from 
at least two genetically different organisms.
Chromosome
A thread-like structure made up of a single length 
of DNA and found in the nucleus of each cell. 
CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeats)
A naturally occurring genetic engineering tool 
found in bacteria that can be programmed to target 
specific areas of genetic code and to edit DNA at 
precise locations. 
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
A self-replicating two-stranded molecule, arranged 
as a double helix, that contains the genetic instruc-
tions used in the development, functioning, and 
reproduction of an organism.Enzyme
A biological catalyst, usually a protein. Enzymes 
speed up the rate of specific chemical reactions  
in cells. 
Ex vivo
Outside of cells or an organism.
Gain of function (GoF) research
Research intended to modify a biological pathway 
in a cell line or organism to enhance or increase 
certain biological functions.
Gene
The basic unit of heredity.
Genome
The complete set of DNA that makes up  
an organism.
Genome editing
Intentionally altering cells or organisms by  
inserting, deleting, editing, or otherwise modifying 
a gene or gene sequence.
Heritable genetic change
Altering genes in a way that results in changes  
that pass down through generations.  ample: a bioreplacement material that is produced 
sustainably, at a lower cost than traditional raw 
materials, and poses no harm to the environment.
Biomolecules (also known as omics)
A group of biological sciences collectively known as 
“–omics,” including fluxomics (metabolic reactions 
in cells), metabolomics (chemical species involved 
in the reactions in cells), proteomics (the decoded 
product, or proteins), transcriptomics (the RNA cre-
ated from each piece of genetic code), and genom-
ics (the DNA code that drives cellular processes) is 
working to analyze the structure and functions of 
biological molecules that translate into the func-
tion and dynamics of an organism. Learning about 
and tinkering with the engineering of molecules 
(think: DNA, RNA) will lead to new therapeutics and 
innovative defenses against novel viruses, as well 
as alternatives to the ways we currently grow food.
Biosystems
Biology is complex. Scientists are applying engi-
neering principles to understand and influence the 
pathways, connections, and interactions within bi-
ological systems. Developing new processes could 
lead to new opportunities to modify or even create 
cells, tissues, organs, and potentially complex net-
works like respiratory systems.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH BIOENGINEERINGIMPORTANT TERMS
271In vivo
Inside of cells or a living organism.
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC)
Cells that have been reprogrammed back into an 
embryonic-like state with the potential to develop 
into other types of cells that can be used for thera-
peutic or reproductive purposes.
Mutation
A change in a DNA sequence. 
Off-target effect
Typically an unintended direct or indirect conse-
quence of altering an organism. 
Regenerative medicine
An emerging field seeking to repair or replace torn, 
defective, or missing tissue using stem cells, engi-
neered cells, or biological processes.
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
A messenger chemical that carries instructions or 
translates the genetic code of DNA into structural 
proteins.Stem cell
Nonspecialized cells that have the ability to 
develop into other types of cells with specialized 
functions.
Synthetic biology
A field of science rooted in both biology and 
engineering that seeks to redesign organisms, or 
design new organisms, to have new abilities.  
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH BIOENGINEERING272© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AI AND  
BIOLOGYTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Pharmaceutical Companies Invest in AI
Historically, scientists struggled to mine big 
biological data sets for insights using con-
ventional statistical tools. With the spotlight 
now on AI, drug developers now see they’re 
failing to capture the value of their important 
asset: their data. AI’s potential to refine the 
often unpredictable process of drug discovery 
is significant, since even marginal enhance-
ments can substantially improve the speed 
and efficiency of developing new drugs. Two 
years ago, DeepMind’s AlphaFold made a 
notable breakthrough in predicting protein 
structures, an advancement that will soon 
revolutionize the process of identifying mole-
cules with therapeutic potential. But the prac-
tical application of AI in drug development 
is already underway. AstraZeneca now uses 
reinforcement learning in 70% of its small 
molecules in development. London-based 
biotech startup E-therapeutics uses AI to de-
sign RNA molecules and algorithms to predict 
their likely activity, in an effort to thwart dis-
ease-causing genes. Investment bank Morgan 
Stanley projects that within the upcoming 
decade, the pharmaceutical industry could AI symptom checkers. As genAI technologies 
continue to evolve and integrate within the 
pharmaceutical and life sciences sectors, 
strategic shifts in how health care and med-
ical research are conducted and managed 
will occur. 
T ext-to-Synthetic Compound: LLMs 
Automate Chemistry
While you were asking GPT-4 to write the lyr-
ics for a rap song about avocados, research-
ers have been enhancing the capabilities of 
large language models to automate compli-
cated tasks in chemistry. One such research-
er is Philippe Schwaller, from the Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne, 
whose team gave GPT-4 access to extensive 
databases of molecules, chemical reactions, 
and scientific research. They call the new 
system ChemCrow, and they’re using it on a 
wide range of chemistry challenges, includ-
ing drug synthesis and cost calculation. 
ChemCrow successfully devised a practical 
plan for synthesizing atorvastatin, a drug for 
high blood cholesterol. On average, Chem-
Crow achieved over 9 out of 10 in human evaluations for 12 chemistry tasks. Separately, 
Gabriel Gomes at Carnegie Mellon Universi-
ty and his colleagues also upgraded GPT-4 
with similar chemistry tools—with a twist. 
This model is integrated in a remotely con-
trolled chemistry lab with liquid compounds 
that could be mixed using robotic arms. They 
asked the system to perform certain reactions 
by writing in a prompt, which was then exe-
cuted by the robotic arms in the lab. But when 
the team asked the system to whip up sarin 
gas, the model—mercifully—refused. While 
AI promises a new pathway to automate the 
process of synthesizing compounds, it’s not 
without potential danger. Public domain tools 
could be used to create something potentially 
dangerous.
AI-Generated Proteins
An AI system can now create new types of 
proteins that don’t exist in nature. By focusing 
on the protein’s amino acid building blocks, 
researchers can design a protein with special 
properties—like being really tough or flexible—
to make new materials that are like plastics 
but better for the environment. Recently, ex-spend roughly $50 billion a year on AI to 
propel every stage of new drug development, 
from ideation to compound identification to 
clinical trial design and marketing.
Generative AI Gains Wide Acceptance
Just a few years ago, the pharmaceutical 
and life sciences industries weren’t all that 
interested in investing in or using AI to 
automate and improve various processes. 
Last year, when genAI took center stage, that 
resistance started to fade, especially in the 
Asia-Pacific region where genAI startups are 
particularly active. Singapore’s Integrated 
Health Information Systems entered a piv-
otal partnership with Microsoft and OpenAI, 
which will create a health care–specific GPT 
hosted on Azure. Once it’s finished, this 
initiative aims to enhance the efficiency of 
health care workers by providing valuable 
insights and automating tasks. In Japan, 
the introduction of an advanced genAI tool 
is transforming the way doctors process 
extensive patient interviews. Tokyo-based 
Ubie is a startup that makes AI-based health 
care products, hospital SaaS products, and AI AND BIOLOGY
273© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
perts have made AI programs that can guess 
the 3D shape of a protein from its amino acid 
sequence. But figuring out the best amino 
acid sequence to engineer a certain protein 
shape is much harder. Researchers from MIT, 
the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, and Tufts Univer-
sity used a generative AI model not unlike 
DALL-E 2, which generates realistic images 
from natural language prompts. Then, they 
adapted the model so it generates amino acid 
sequences of proteins that achieve specific 
structural objectives. The researchers used 
this architecture to build two machine learn-
ing models that can predict a variety of new 
amino acid sequences that form proteins 
meeting structural design targets. Meanwhile, 
researchers at the University of Washington’s 
Institute for Protein Design Baker Lab creat-
ed a new program, called RFdiffusion, which 
allows scientists to upload a 3D model of a 
cell and use software to identify the most 
likely candidates for drug testing. RFdiffusion 
increases the accuracy as much as 100-fold, 
compared to previous protein design pro-
grams that didn’t use AI.testing of drug compound candidates. This 
new approach circumvents the traditional, 
often prohibitively expensive, methods of 
chemistry-based experimentation. But the 
use of AI in this context is not just a matter 
of cost-efficiency; it marks a transformative 
step in bioengineering. By simulating molec-
ular interactions on computers, researchers 
can rapidly iterate and refine drug com-
pounds, significantly accelerating the devel-
opment process. This method offers a more 
sustainable, scalable, and potentially more 
accurate alternative to physical testing. 
What’s on the horizon: much faster, cheaper 
R&D. Our analysis suggests that organiza-
tions that adapt in silico molecular simula-
tions powered by AI will gain a competitive 
edge—and be prepared for knock-on effects 
that make up the broader movement toward 
a more innovative, data-driven approach in 
bioengineering and health care.
Spatial Biology Improves with AI
Spatial biology is a burgeoning field predi-
cated on gaining a deeper understanding of Generative Biology
What if it was possible to generate novel 
protein therapeutics using new computa-
tional tools, without having to discover them 
through trial and error? That’s the promise 
of Boston-based startup Generate Biomedi-
cines, which trained an AI to invent proteins 
with structures that, as far as we know, don’t 
exist anywhere in nature. Inspired by DALL-E 
2, the powerful text-to-image AI system from 
OpenAI, Generate’s platform asks the user 
to describe the shape, size, and function 
of a protein they’d like to see. It then uses 
diffusion modeling to generate a structure 
with the right amino acids folded correctly to 
meet the description. Our understanding of 
the genome, along with fundamental molec-
ular and network mechanisms, is now being 
enhanced by innovative tools that allow us 
to interact with, examine, and manipulate 
biological systems in new ways.
Simulating Molecular Interactions
Increasingly, companies are using AI-pow-
ered simulations in place of the physical AI AND BIOLOGY
274© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
A close-up view of fungal hyphae and spore struc-
tures. As AI and biology converge, it will be possible 
for scientists to iterate on nature’s designs.AI AND BIOLOGYTECH
the human body using computer modeling 
and generative AI. Spatial biology’s core lies 
in examining cells and tissues within their 
natural 2D or 3D habitats, akin to how GPS 
technology pinpoints locations. It leverag-
es cellular and molecular data to map the 
intricate architecture of cells, allowing for a 
much more comprehensive understanding of 
cellular interactions in their environment—a 
perspective traditional methods like bulk 
sequencing cannot offer. Why bother exam-
ining cells in super-high resolution? Because 
a closer look will reveal complex cellular 
interactions and functions, with the potential 
to reach molecular or atomic level insights 
as the technology improves. And increasingly, 
spatial biology will produce complex data, 
and companies will need advanced algo-
rithms to help mine it for insights. The field 
is at the cusp of transforming our under-
standing of cellular mechanics and disease 
pathology. Just as the James Webb Telescope, 
with its super-high-resolution images, is 
changing our understanding of the universe, 
the technological advancements, improved automation, and sophisticated data analy-
sis capabilities researchers will gain from 
spatial biology will transform our under-
standing of life. The full potential of spatial 
biology in diagnostics and treatment devel-
opment will usher in a new era of precision 
medicine. This represents not just a leap in 
medical science but also a paradigm shift 
in our approach to health care and disease 
management.
275© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Emerging biotechnology techniques will allow scientists to create hyphae-like structures for any number 
of new purposes.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.BIOENGINEERING276© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.GENE EDITING  
& CRISPRTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
CRISPR Treatment for Diseases
Both the US Food and Drug Administration 
and the UK medicines regulator have finalized 
their groundbreaking approvals of the first 
CRISPR gene therapy for Casgevy, a thera-
py built on the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing 
tool. Casgevy targets sickle cell disease and 
β-thalassaemia, conditions characterized by 
severe pain and the need for regular blood 
transfusions. These approvals will pave the 
way for future CRISPR therapies to potentially 
cure a wide range of genetic diseases. CRISPR 
technology, which earned its creators Dr. Em-
manuelle Charpentier and Dr. Jennifer Doudna 
the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 2020, is used 
in Casgevy to correct gene mutations respon-
sible for sickle cell disease and β -thalassae-
mia. These mutations affect hemoglobin 
in red blood cells, leading to serious health 
complications. To administer the treatment, 
doctors first draw blood-producing stem cells 
from patients and then use CRISPR-Cas9 to 
precisely edit the hemoglobin genes. Casgevy 
targets the BCL11A gene, which normally Next-Generation Gene Editors
While CRISPR-Cas9 has been groundbreaking 
in enabling precise DNA cutting, its applica-
tion is somewhat limited to diseases that 
can be addressed by gene disruption. The 
future of gene therapy lies in more versatile 
gene editing tools that offer capabilities 
such as activating genes, altering individ-
ual DNA bases, or introducing new genetic 
sequences.
What’s on the horizon: an expansion of the 
CRISPR toolkit, including base editing, prime 
editing, and epi-editing. Last year’s regulato-
ry approval of CRISPR/Cas9 therapies opened 
a new pathway to help next-gen gene edit-
ing technologies enter clinical trials faster, 
because the groundwork for navigating the 
regulatory and technological complexities of 
novel gene therapies has now been estab-
lished. We are finally moving from ambition 
and experimentation to practical application. inhibits the production of fetal hemoglobin. 
By disrupting BCL11A, Casgevy triggers the 
production of a stable form of hemoglobin, 
alleviating the symptoms of these diseases. 
The treatment process involves preparing 
the patient’s bone marrow to receive the 
modified cells and a subsequent period of 
hospitalization to ensure the cells’ effective 
integration. While the treatment is effec-
tive, its future widespread use is still in 
doubt. CRISPR therapies are expensive and 
difficult to scale, due to the complexity and 
technological requirements of treatments, 
including the extraction, modification, and 
reinsertion of blood stem cells. In the near 
term, this will likely hinder their use in low- 
and middle-income countries. While Casgevy 
could serve as a catalyst for further R&D 
in gene editing and potentially transform 
the future of medical treatments, there is a 
pressing need for continued innovation and 
investment to make such groundbreaking 
therapies more universally accessible. GENE EDITING & CRISPR
277© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
In the future, scientists will coax enzymes to 
interact with DNA bases to produce more precise 
molecular activity. 
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.TECH
GENE EDITING & CRISPR
278© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
New Editing T ools
Base editing
First developed in 2016 by Harvard biochemist David Liu, base editing allows for the precise 
alteration of individual DNA letters. This technique has shown promise in preclinical studies 
for diseases like muscular atrophy and muscular dystrophy. Beam Therapeutics, co-founded 
by Liu, initiated the first US clinical trials in base editing for leukemia treatment, with initial 
data expected in 2024. Meanwhile, Verve Therapeutics’ in vivo base editing trial for high 
cholesterol has shown encouraging preliminary results, potentially revolutionizing coronary 
disease treatment. 
Prime editing
Also conceived in Liu’s lab, prime editing offers even greater precision, capable of deleting 
or adding small DNA segments. As impressive as CRISPR is, it can sometimes change the 
wrong genes or accidentally break apart strands of a DNA’s double helix. The refinement to 
CRISPR affords more precision and versatility. Prime editing has demonstrated success in 
correcting various inherited diseases in animal models. 
Epi-editing
Epi-editing is yet another novel CRISPR application that modifies the epigenome to regulate 
gene expression without altering the underlying DNA. This approach has already gained at-
tention for its potential in treating diseases by editing gene expression regulatory networks. 
Durham, North Carolina–based Tune Therapeutics has shown promising results in gene 
silencing using epi-editing, and several companies, including San Francisco–based Epic Bio, 
plan to commence clinical trials in the near future.
Next-generation gene editors will help expand the CRISPR toolkit, enabling scientists to perform more 
precise edits.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.TECH
In Vivo Gene Editing
It is now possible to inject CRISPR compo-
nents directly into the body and make chang-
es to genetic material in vivo, or “within the 
living.” Unlike “ex vivo” editing, where cells 
are modified outside the body and then rein-
troduced, in vivo editing involves introducing 
the gene-editing tools (like CRISPR-Cas9) in 
the body using viral vectors or lipid nanopar-
ticles. Practically speaking, this means that 
treating cancer would no longer require 
traditional chemotherapy—instead, cancer-
ous cells would be targeted and edited with 
CRISPR. The FDA approved a phase 3 trial by 
New York–based Regeneron Pharmaceuticals 
and Cambridge, Massachusetts–based Intel-
lia Therapeutics, which was co-founded by Dr. 
Jennifer Doudna. Their therapy, NTLA-2001, is 
a groundbreaking one-time intravenous treat-
ment designed to target liver cells and specif-
ically aims to disable a gene responsible for 
a progressive and fatal disease. Early clinical 
trials of NTLA-2001 have shown remarkable 
results, reducing disease-causing protein 
levels by up to 93%, with these reductions 
remaining stable for at least nine months. to specific proteins on the surface of cancer 
cells. Researchers at the Nanfang College 
of Sun Yat-sen University and Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology (both 
in China) loaded nanocarriers with a new 
set of genetic instructions and successfully 
regressed leukemia in a mouse. The second 
technique involves engineering synthetic 
gene circuits in order to protect healthy cells 
when delivering cellular therapy. CAR T cells, 
or white blood cells that have been geneti-
cally modified in a lab to help fight cancer 
more effectively, can be lethal to cells they 
come into contact with, whether they’re can-
cerous or not. A new method of controlling 
cell therapy, using engineered networks, 
would offer doctors better precision. These promising outcomes have also been 
replicated in a variant of the disease af-
fecting heart tissues. Though the trial isn’t 
expected to deliver concrete results until 
2027, its impact is already being felt. This is 
the first published instance of CRISPR being 
used directly in the bodies of a large group 
of individuals, marking a pivotal moment in 
the field of gene editing. While this clearly 
means a big leap forward, it also raises con-
cerns about potential off-target effects and 
the implications for germline cells, which are 
critical for reproductive functions. 
Cell Therapy 2.0
For more than a decade, researchers have 
transplanted healthy, viable cells to replace 
or repair damaged ones. Most notably, cellu-
lar therapy has shown promise in helping a 
person’s immune system fight cancer. But 
cellular therapy carries associated risks, 
which range from flu-like symptoms to 
death. The field is evolving, and two emerg-
ing techniques are pushing cell therapy into 
its next era. One is in vivo cell therapy, which 
helps patients produce cells that can bind GENE EDITING & CRISPR
279© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Cells have complex structures that can be studied 
and manipulated using bioengineering techniques.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.280© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.READING & 
SEQUENCING 
GENOMESTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Next-Generation Genome Sequencing
When the first human genome was se-
quenced in 2003, it cost roughly $2.7 billion 
and took 13 years to complete. In 2012, it cost 
about $10,000 for researchers to sequence 
a full genome, and today, you can sequence 
your genome from the comfort of your home 
for less than the price of a Black Friday TV 
deal. The next generation of sequencers will 
offer a monumental leap forward in speed 
and efficiency, akin to the transition from 
dial-up to high-speed internet. On the hori-
zon: ion semiconductor sequencing, which 
converts chemical information into digital 
data; nanopore sequencing, a technique that 
reads molecular letters through tiny na-
no-size pores; and single-molecule real-time 
sequencing, which observes the DNA replica-
tion process in real time. Ion Torrent, made by 
Thermo Fisher Scientific, automatically turns 
the basic building blocks of DNA (represent-
ed by the letters A, C, G, T) into a form that 
computers can understand (0s and 1s)—and 
it does it right on a tiny semiconductor chip. 
This method combines straightforward 
chemistry with advanced chip technology in its approach, are pushing the entire field 
of sequencing forward. 
Metagenomics
Metagenomics represent a new approach 
in a genomic analysis. Simply put: imagine 
metagenomics is like dealing with one box 
full of 10 different jigsaw puzzles. In this 
analogy, each puzzle represents the DNA of 
a different organism living in a particular 
environment. The challenge of metage-
nomics is to sort out these pieces and put 
together each individual puzzle correctly. As 
researchers are considering new therapies or 
trying to understand how a virus or pathogen 
works, they need contextual data to under-
stand cause and effect. New metagenomics 
tools help scientists solve several puzzles at 
once to understand the diverse range of life 
forms coexisting in a specific environment. 
This is crucial for gaining insights into how 
these microorganisms interact with each 
other, with humans, and with the environ-
ment. It’s a complex task but offers valuable 
information for various applications, from 
health care to environmental science. For example, metagenomics can detect viruses on 
food items, like identifying viral contamina-
tion on lettuce. This helps trace the source of 
microbial and viral contamination, improving 
food safety. It’s effective in cleaning up pollut-
ants, by helping to identify microorganisms in 
polluted environments that can degrade toxic 
substances more efficiently than other meth-
ods. And it’s being used to identify how mi-
croorganisms compete and communicate in 
different environments, from human digestive 
tracts to deep-sea vents. Israel-based BiotaX 
developed TaxonAI, a platform that can collect, 
analyze, and predict multiple disease states 
and calculate optimal interventions support-
ed by metagenomic AI analysis. Chile-based 
KITAI’s lab-on-a-chip combines AI, microfluid-
ic, and metagenomics technologies to identify 
biological pests, monitor water sources, and 
analyze environmental pathogens. 
Faster Gene Synthesis
Synthesis transforms digital genetic code into 
molecular DNA, allowing scientists to design 
and mass-produce genetic material. Twist 
Bioscience is a pioneer in the field; it’s formed offering a new way of reading DNA that’s not 
only easier and faster but also more afford-
able and adaptable than what we’ve had. 
Just as the microprocessor revolutionized 
computing, shifting us from large, cen-
tralized mainframes to personal desktop 
computers, semiconductor technology is 
set to make DNA sequencing much more 
accessible, allowing even small labs and 
clinics to have this powerful tool at their 
disposal. This could transform many indus-
tries, just like semiconductor chips did for 
electronics. Oxford Nanopore makes devices 
for nanopore sequencing that relays infor-
mation in real time. Unlike traditional DNA 
sequencing methods, where scientists have 
to wait until the end of the process to get any 
data, nanopore sequencing lets them see 
the results as they happen. This is great for 
urgent situations, like identifying harmful 
bacteria or viruses quickly. And once scien-
tists have the information they need, they 
can stop the sequencing. This means labs 
can clean and reuse their equipment (called 
a flow cell), which is both time-efficient and 
cost-effective. These methods, each unique READING & SEQUENCING GENOMES
281© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
as many as 300 base pairs of DNA, and these 
snippets, or oligos, can be joined together 
to form genes. Both the price for oligos and 
the time to produce them is decreasing—
while base pairs are getting even longer and 
more complex. It now costs an average of 
just 7 cents per base pair—a 22% decrease 
year-over-year. Twist’s DNA snippets can be 
ordered online and shipped to a lab within 
days; the synthetic DNA is then inserted into 
cells to create target molecules, which are the 
basis for new food products, fertilizers, indus-
trial products, and medicine. 
Quantum Biology 
Quantum biology is an emerging field that 
combines quantum physics—the science 
of the very small—with biology, the study of 
living things. Researchers apply the princi-
ples that govern subatomic particles and to 
understand how living organisms work at a 
fundamental level. For business leaders, this 
matters because quantum biology has the 
potential to revolutionize various industries. 
It can lead to breakthroughs in medicine, 
by improving drug design or understanding they had repeating segments or were sim-
ply too challenging to be recognized and 
cataloged. As technology improves, so will 
our ability to map a more detailed version of 
human life on a granular scale. The Telo-
mere-to-Telomere Consortium, aptly named 
after what’s called the end caps of chromo-
somes, published a new set of papers in 
2022 that identified all but five of the hidden 
areas of the map. Using various sequencing 
technologies, including a novel nanopore 
device capable of reading 100,000 bases at 
a time alongside a sequencer with improved 
accuracy, researchers discovered new areas 
for gene evolution. In 2024 and beyond, 
scientists will gain new insights into regions 
of the human genome that haven’t been 
fully explored, and that should in turn reveal 
discoveries about human evolution, longev-
ity, and resiliency. Meanwhile, the National 
Institutes of Health has initiated a ground-
breaking program with an initial investment 
of $6.4 million to establish Diversity Centers 
for Genome Research at three institutions: 
the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, 
Meharry Medical College, and the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. With this move, NIH is 
targeting colleges and universities with a his-
tory of serving underrepresented communities 
that haven’t recently received significant NIH 
funding; the goal is that these centers will 
enhance the universities’ research capabili-
ties and inspire students from diverse back-
grounds to pursue genomics. This initiative, 
part of the National Human Genome Research 
Institute’s $32.7 million commitment over the 
next five to seven years, reflects a strategic 
move to diversify the genomics field, recogniz-
ing that diverse perspectives spur creativity 
and innovation.
Unlocking Bioinformatics Data
Rapid advancements in technology and a 
steep decline in sequencing costs are advanc-
ing the use of bioinformatics data. Scientists 
use this data—biological information stored 
digitally, primarily focusing on genetic and 
molecular data—to investigate all sorts of 
questions: How do certain diseases affect our 
bodies at the molecular level? Can we design 
new medicines to treat these diseases? How 
do different species evolve and adapt to their diseases at a molecular level. In technology, 
it could inspire new, more efficient ways of 
data processing and energy storage. It’s an 
exciting frontier that blends the most basic 
elements of our universe with the complexi-
ty of life, opening up a world of possibilities 
for innovation and advancement in multiple 
fields. One experiment has already yielded 
results: At the Johns Hopkins University 
Applied Physics Laboratory in Maryland, 
researchers found striking similarities be-
tween an enzyme central to human metab-
olism and a magnetically sensitive protein 
found in birds. This deepens our understand-
ing of magnetosensitivity—but in practical 
terms, it also potentially transforms our 
approach to studying biological navigation 
mechanisms. 
Using the Human Genome Map
When the first human genome was deci-
phered two decades ago, it was mostly—but 
not entirely—complete. That’s because 
roughly 200 million base pairs of DNA, or 
about 8% of the human genome, weren’t yet 
readable by sequencing machines because READING & SEQUENCING GENOMES
282© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
environments? But there are challenges in 
understanding it. Sequencing an individual’s 
entire genome now generates a staggering 
100 gigabytes of raw data, a figure that more 
than doubles post-analysis with the applica-
tion of deep learning and natural language 
processing tools. This will result in a deluge of 
data that experts estimate will need 40 exa-
bytes for storage by 2025—that’s eight times 
the storage required for every spoken word in 
human history. Genome analysis pipelines 
are struggling to keep pace with this explo-
sion of data. The complexity and computa-
tional intensity of sequencing analysis, which 
involves myriad steps to identify genetic 
variations, are monumental tasks requiring 
sophisticated technological solutions. 
Recent advances in deep learning and AI gen-
erally are significantly improving the process 
of DNA sequencing, making it faster, more 
accurate, and less expensive. Nvidia, which 
makes powerful GPUs, is applying AI to both 
traditional (short-read) and newer (long-read) 
DNA sequencing methods. This is making it 
possible to sequence human genomes with cently analyzed the DNA of a 10,000-year-old 
skeleton found in Somerset, England. The 
sequence showed that he likely had dark 
skin and blue eyes, a genetic combination 
that might have been common millennia 
ago but today is rare. This expansion of the 
genetic diversity map goes beyond modern 
populations, offering insights into how spe-
cies have evolved and adapted over millen-
nia. But the impact of aDNA extends beyond 
biology and archaeology; it fosters cultural 
and political connections, enhancing our 
collective understanding of the human 
journey. Sequencing ancient genomes will 
help historians develop a more accurate 
understanding of what society might have 
been like thousands of years ago and how 
we compare today. As technology evolves, 
aDNA research not only allows us to revisit 
the past, it holds the key to unlocking future 
discoveries, making it an invaluable asset 
in the quest for knowledge about the human 
experience.Programmable Gene Editing Proteins
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology found that certain eukaryotic or -
ganisms (like plants, animals, and fungi) have 
special enzymes that can cut DNA, similar to 
how CRISPR technology works. These enzymes, 
which seem to be related to some CRISPR pro-
teins, could potentially be used to edit human 
DNA, which means they could play a big role in 
future medical treatments and research. One 
team at MIT, led by Feng Zhang, focused on 
systems in eukaryotes called OMEGAs (Obli-
gate Mobile Element Guided Activity), which 
could move small bits of DNA throughout 
bacterial genomes. They discovered proteins 
called Fanzors in various organisms, which 
are capable of editing DNA. These Fanzors are 
smaller than typical CRISPR proteins, making 
them potentially easier to use in therapies. 
Although they’re not as efficient as current 
CRISPR methods yet, the team has already 
improved their performance significantly. This 
research could lead to new ways of editing 
genomes more efficiently and perhaps with 
fewer side effects.high accuracy at a much lower cost. Reading, 
sequencing, and analyzing bioinformatics 
data using technological breakthroughs 
have practical, real-world applications, such 
as quickly identifying genetic disorders in 
newborns or discovering new targets for 
drug development. 
Sequencing Ancient Genomes
Archaeology and genetics are merging, 
hoping to surface new insights about the 
history of life on Earth. The field of ancient 
DNA (aDNA) research is starting to uncover 
a wealth of insights, from identifying new 
branches of the human family tree to reveal-
ing the genomes of long-extinct species. For 
example, recent breakthroughs have traced 
the origins of the Black Death to present-day 
Kyrgyzstan and revealed lost Indigenous 
populations. The sequencing of ancient ani-
mals and humans, from woolly mammoths 
to Neanderthals, has provided a genetic 
window into bygone eras. The 1000 Ancient 
Genomes project, led by Pontus Skoglund at 
the Francis Crick Institute in London, re-READING & SEQUENCING GENOMES
283© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING284© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOPRINTING, 
ORGANOIDS, 
AND NOVEL 
ORGANISMSTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Bioprinting Electronics 
In a groundbreaking development that blurs 
the lines between biology and technology, 
researchers at UK-based Lancaster Univer-
sity successfully 3D printed glowing shapes 
inside nematode worms, demonstrating the 
potential to embed electronics directly within 
living organisms. The team leveraged a pho-
tonic 3D printer and a special ink that shapes 
and activates the material within the organ-
ism. By feeding this ink to nematode worms, 
the team was able to create intricate conduc-
tive circuits in the form of stars and squares 
inside the living worms. This technique 
suggests potential for improving traditional 
electronic implants, such as pacemakers and 
bionic ears, which have transformed medi-
cal treatments but come with their own set 
of challenges, including infection risks and 
maintenance difficulties. The Lancaster Uni-
versity team’s work is part of a growing trend 
in bioprinting electronic implants and com-
puter-brain interfaces, which could replace 
the medical devices we use today.printed human hearts will be transplanted 
into live pigs to see if they can keep the ani-
mals alive. Meanwhile, scientists at Harvard 
University’s Wyss Institute have developed a 
new 3D bioprinting technique for tissue. This 
method creates thick, vascularized tissues 
using living human cells consisting of a spe-
cial silicone mold to shape and support tis-
sue on a chip. In the mold, they first print a 
network of large blood vessel channels with 
endothelial cells in silicone ink. Then, they 
add another layer with mesenchymal stem 
cells in a different print. Finally, they fill the 
remaining spaces with a liquid containing 
fibroblasts and extracellular matrix, creating 
a connective tissue that strengthens the 
whole structure. Tissues are about 10 times 
thicker than those made before and can last 
up to six weeks. 
Fabricating Organoids
It’s difficult and dangerous for scientists 
to study how living human tissue responds 
to viruses, medications, or other stimu-
li, because brain or heart tissue can’t be 
removed from a living person. As an alterna-tive, scientists are creating organoids—tiny 
three-dimensional, multicellular clusters 
grown from human stem cells that resemble 
complex tissues like the heart and kidney. In 
December 2023, scientists at Weill Cornell 
Medicine used an organoid model to identify 
a new pancreatic cancer treatment. A month 
later, scientists at the Princess Máxima Cen-
ter for Pediatric Oncology in the Netherlands 
successfully grew tiny brain organoids in a 
dish from human fetal brain tissue. They also 
revealed that the tiny blobs of tissue could 
be reprogrammed to have certain diseases, 
in order to study developmental disorders or 
brain cancers. Scientists are already exper-
imenting with transplantation: In separate 
experiments, researchers at Stanford and the 
University of Pennsylvania successfully trans-
planted human brain organoids into damaged 
rat brains. The organoid made connections to 
the rest of the brain and responded to flashing 
light stimuli. This raises both complex ethical 
concerns and, perhaps, fears of a day when 
super-rats emerge that can process informa-
tion as well as humans. This area of research 
is controversial in some countries, including Bioprinting and Tissue Engineering
There is a critical shortage of organ dona-
tions, and until now, the only path to organ 
transplantation involved matching with a 
donor, making sure the recipient’s immune 
response doesn’t reject the organ, and mit-
igating the risk of infection. An emerging 
solution is organ bioprinting, which leverag-
es stem cell technology to fabricate organs 
tailored to the recipient’s cellular profile, and 
in turn, should reduce the risk of rejection. 
Researchers at Stanford University received 
a landmark federal contract from the Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency for Health 
to grow human organs inside of bioreactors, 
which are machines that provide a biologi-
cally active environment where cells, tissues, 
or microorganisms can be grown or main-
tained under controlled conditions. The team 
will grow all the cell types needed to produce 
a human heart inside the bioreactor and 
eventually feed the cells into a bioprinter to 
fabricate a fully functional human heart. It’s 
estimated that bioreactors could produce 
needed cells by the billions, and eventual-
ly print a heart every two weeks. This year, BIOPRINTING, ORGANOIDS, AND NOVEL ORGANISMS
285© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGBIOPRINTING, ORGANOIDS, AND NOVEL ORGANISMSTECH
the US, where bills introduced into both the 
Senate and in many state legislatures call for 
a ban on any research involving fetal tissue, 
even if it was cultivated in a lab. 
Growing Organoids to Study Long COVID
Organoids are being used to research the 
lasting effects of SARS-CoV-2, the COVID-19 
virus, in addition to other respiratory diseas-
es. Miniature brains, lungs, guts, and livers 
are being grown in high-security labs and 
infected with the virus, as are combinations 
of different organs to test therapies and the 
lasting impacts of long-haul Covid. Scientists 
at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden infected 
brain organoids with SARS-CoV-2 and discov-
ered that brain fog could be caused by the 
destruction of connections between neurons. 
Neurobiologists at the UK’s MRC Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology in Cambridge used organ-
oids to learn that SARS-CoV-2 damages the 
protective barrier of the brain. Meanwhile, sci-
entists at the Global Health Institute at Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne 
are studying a harmful bacteria called Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa, which can cause tough-processes, and physiological responses. 
It turns out that these chips are better at 
predicting real-world responses in humans 
than the animals typically used in the lab. 
Researchers in South Korea developed an 
artificial nervous system that can simulate 
a conscious response to external stimuli. It 
includes an artificial neuron circuit, which 
acts like a brain; a photodiode that converts 
light into electrical signals; and a transistor 
that acts as a synapse. All these compo-
nents are connected to a robotic hand. Think 
of this as “wetware” rather than computer 
hardware. This type of a system could help 
people with certain neurological conditions 
regain control of their limbs. It could even-
tually be worn or even embedded. Emulate, 
a company that makes OoCs, tested 870 
human liver-chips across a blinded set of 
27 drugs with known toxicity issues—and 
the chips did a better job of predicting drug 
safety than the usual methods of studying 
drug interactions. A team of bioengineers 
at Harvard made a vagina-on-a-chip using 
donated vaginal cells. The chip successfully 
mimicked the vaginal microbiome and is to-treat pneumonia by forming biofilms, or 
thick layers, in our lungs. Understanding how 
these biofilms develop has been difficult. To 
better study this, the researchers grew mini 
lung-like structures from stem cells, called 
AirGels, that mimic the actual environment 
of our airways, including the presence of 
mucus and the air-liquid interface found in 
our lungs. The team discovered that Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa quickly forms biofilms in 
connection with lung mucus by pulling the 
mucus together using tiny, retractable fila-
ments, called type IV pili. This study shows 
that while mucus normally protects our lung 
cells, it can also provide a place for harmful 
biofilms to grow.
Organ-on-a-Chip
Picture something like a computer chip 
but with a transparent circuit board that’s 
connected to a biological system pumping 
a blood substitute through tiny blobs of 
tissue. Organ-on-a-chip systems (OoCs) are 
synthetic organs made of multichannel, 
three-dimensional microfluidic cell culture 
technology that promotes organ functions, 
286© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Originally intended for manufacturing, 3D printing 
techniques are being applied for human tissue 
production and printable drugs.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.TECH
actually more realistic than other existing 
models currently used in labs. OoC academic 
research and startups are attractive to both 
venture funding and foundations, which view 
the technology as foundational to new drug 
discovery.
3D Printed Drugs
Drug manufacturing today requires enormous 
facilities and doesn’t allow for customiza-
tion. Emerging techniques using 3D print-
ing technology could improve the variety of 
medicines offered to patients. For example, 
Chinese bioprinting company Triastek devel-
ops 3D printed medicines and operates the 
production facilities to manufacture them. 
Laxxon Medical, based in New York, developed 
3D screen printing technology that results in 
medicines in a variety of shapes intended for 
oral, transdermal, and implantable formats. Or 
what about printing medicine at home? Back 
in 2012, Leroy Cronin, a chemist at the Univer-
sity of Glasgow in the UK, published a paper in 
the journal Nature Chemistry describing “re-
actionware,” which are 3D-printed chemical 
vessels containing the components needed Bacterial Nanosyringes
In an emerging advancement bridging 
microbiology and medicine, researchers are 
transforming bacteria into nanosyringes 
capable of targeting human cells for precise 
protein delivery. This innovative approach, 
redefining the boundaries of targeted medi-
cal treatments, could dramatically improve 
the effectiveness and safety of therapies for 
many different health conditions, including 
cancer. Some of our most powerful drugs are 
made up of small molecules that indiscrimi-
nately enter cells and cause unintended side 
effects. Large molecules like proteins could 
offer targeted and potent therapeutic ben-
efits, but have one big challenge: they can’t 
get through cell membranes. This is where 
the bacterial nanosyringes come into play, 
offering a solution already found in nature. 
Bacteria like Photorhabdus have evolved 
cylindrical structures that function like mi-
croscopic syringes, injecting their contents 
directly into targeted cells. Researchers at 
the Zheng Lab at MIT, led by Joe Kreitz and 
his team, managed to harness this natural 
mechanism, using Google DeepMind’s Al-phaFold AI program to adapt nanosyringes to 
bind to specific human proteins. This break-
through technique has already demonstrat-
ed its potential in lab settings, successfully 
delivering various proteins to targeted human 
cells and even to neurons in mice. 
Using Viruses to Deliver Big DNA Payloads
Bacteriophages, also known as phages, 
are viruses that infect and replicate only in 
bacterial cells. They are ubiquitous in the 
environment and are recognized as the most 
abundant biological agent on earth. Last year, 
researchers modified a phage to deliver 20 
times more DNA to human cells than has 
ever been possible before in gene therapies. 
This breakthrough, led by Dr. Venigalla Rao 
at The Catholic University of America, could 
unlock new frontiers in cell and gene thera-
pies, enabling complex, multifaceted modifi-
cations to human cells in a single treatment 
step. The virus, equipped to carry DNA strands 
up to 171,000 base pairs in length, offers an 
unprecedented capacity to transport not only 
large DNA sequences but also over a thousand 
additional molecular components like RNAs to carry out specific reactions. Adding the 
right starting compounds would set off a 
reaction resulting in the desired end product. 
A decade later, Cronin and his team have 3D 
printed a series of connected containers that 
perform a variety of chemical reactions. This 
setup involves 12 different steps, including 
filtering and evaporating solutions. By care-
fully adding specific chemicals and liquids 
at the right times and in the correct order, 
they transformed basic, easily accessible 
ingredients into a muscle relaxant known 
as baclofen. Additionally, by changing the 
design of these containers and using dif-
ferent chemicals, they were able to produce 
other medications, such as an anticonvul-
sant and a drug used to treat ulcers and acid 
reflux. But it’s not clear yet if the authorities 
that check drug safety will agree to this new 
method of making medicines. Regulators 
like the FDA would have to change their safe-
ty rules: Rather than just checking the place 
where drugs are made and the drugs them-
selves, they would need to make sure that 
the new equipment used for making drugs 
actually makes the right medicine.BIOPRINTING, ORGANOIDS, AND NOVEL ORGANISMS
287© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGBIOPRINTING, ORGANOIDS, AND NOVEL ORGANISMSTECH
and proteins. This capability could transition 
gene therapy from mere treatment to po-
tential cures, especially for complex genetic 
conditions like muscular dystrophy, which 
have previously been hindered by the DNA 
size limitations of existing viral vectors.
Minimum Viable Lifeforms
To understand how new organisms might be 
created, scientists have long pursued devel-
oping an MVP—minimum viable product—for 
biology. In 2010, scientist J. Craig Venter 
and his team announced an astonishing 
discovery: They could destroy the DNA of an 
organism called Mycoplasma capricolum 
and replace it with DNA they had written on a 
computer that was based on a similar bac-
terium, Mycoplasma mycoides. They named 
their 907-gene creature JCVI-syn1.0, or Syn-
thia, for short. It was the first self-replicating 
species on the planet whose parents were, 
technically, computers, and the project was 
designed to help the team understand the 
basic principles of life, from the minimal cell 
up. In 2016, Venter’s team created JCVI-syn3.0, a single-celled organism with even fewer 
genes—just 473—which made it the sim-
plest life-form ever known. But the organism 
acted in ways scientists hadn’t predicted, 
producing oddly shaped cells as it self-repli-
cated. Scientists came to believe that they’d 
taken away too many genes, including those 
responsible for normal cell division. They 
remixed the code once again, and in 2021 
announced a new variant, JCVI-syn3A. It still 
has fewer than 500 genes, but it behaves 
more like a normal cell. Now, researchers are 
working to strip down the cell even further. 
They developed a new synthetic organ-
ism called, M. mycoides JCVI-syn3B, which 
evolved for 300 days, proving that it could 
still mutate. Researchers at Osaka Metropoli-
tan University created a synthetic bacterium 
capable of swimming by introducing seven 
proteins into it. With minimal genetic infor-
mation, the spherical synthetic bacteria are 
thought to be the smallest mobile lifeform 
to date. These minimal viable organisms 
will help researchers design the future of life 
from first principles.
288© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Organs-on-a-chip are small devices that have tiny pieces of human tissue inside them, and they are spe-
cially made to keep the tissues working like they would in the human body.
Image credit: Penn Medicine News.289© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOCOMPUTING & 
CYBERBIOSECURITYTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Organoid Intelligence
In February 2023, scientists formed a new 
field, called organoid intelligence (OI), which 
is now considered the next frontier of biocom-
puting. To meet AI’s growing computational 
needs, there’s a shift away from traditional 
Von Neumann architecture toward more 
innovative approaches. One is neuromorphic 
computing, inspired by the brain’s structure, 
which efficiently handles simultaneous infor-
mation storage and processing. That’s what 
led researchers at Johns Hopkins to create OI, 
which uses biological materials—most often 
human brain cells—for information process-
ing, leveraging their inherent capabilities be-
yond silicon-based systems. This represents 
a significant step in harnessing the brain’s 
natural efficiency for AI applications. Late in 
2023, a biocomputing system made of living 
brain cells learned to recognize the voice of 
one person from a set of 240 audio clips of 
eight people pronouncing Japanese vowel 
sounds. The clips were sent to the organoids 
as sequences of signals arranged in spatial 
patterns. Why bother inventing technology 
that sounds like it was inspired by a dystopi-squares—and after eight sessions, the bac-
teria played at an expert level. While the bac-
teria haven’t yet beat humans at the game, 
there’s an interesting analogy worth remem-
bering: The benchmarks in computing and 
specifically in AI have always been gameplay. 
This isn’t the only biological computer. A 
biocomputer called DishBrain learned how to 
play the 1980s video game Pong. DishBrain 
is made of ~1 million live human and mouse 
brain cells grown on a microelectric array 
that can receive electrical signals. The sig-
nals tell the neurons where the Pong ball is, 
and the cells respond. The more the system 
played, the more it improved. Cortical Labs 
is now developing a new kind of software, 
a Biological Intelligence Operating System 
(biOS for short), which would allow anyone 
with basic coding skills to program their 
own DishBrains. Further demonstrations of 
new, simple forms of neural networks made 
from biology will likely occur this year. 
Biological Circuits
Scientists are in the process of building 
biological circuits, made of synthetic DNA, and the software that operates them. A pro-
gram called DNAr, developed at the Federal 
University of Mato Grosso do Sul in Brazil, 
simulates chemical reactions, while another 
called DNAr-Logic enables scientists to design 
circuits. A high-level description of a logical 
circuit is then converted into a chemical-re-
action network, which can be synthesized into 
DNA strands. Dramatically speeding up the 
design process for biological circuits could 
drastically reduce the time it takes to discover 
health treatments and new drugs.
Programmable DNA Machines
In a breakthrough that could redefine comput-
ing, scientists at Shanghai Jiao Tong Universi-
ty in China unveiled what might be the world’s 
first programmable DNA computer, capable 
of executing billions of unique circuits. This 
could usher in a new era where computers 
could solve complex mathematical problems 
and potentially aid in diagnosing diseases. 
Rather than relying on a traditional silicon 
microchip-based framework, DNA computers 
operate using the very molecules that have 
been nature’s medium for storing life’s blue-an sci-fi novel? As the world demands more 
AI applications like ChatGPT, we’ll need more 
energy-intensive computers and networks to 
crunch all that data. OI might be able to per-
form all of those tasks using a fraction of the 
resources required of a traditional computer. 
Training Biocomputers to Learn New Skills
Scientists at the Spanish National Research 
Council genetically modified a strain of E. 
coli called Marionette so that it could sense 
different chemicals and respond to them. 
But that wasn’t all. They modified the strain 
so its plasmids each encoded for a different 
fluorescent protein (red and green). While 
the researchers could alter the ratio of the 
red and green with future chemical inputs, 
without inputs, the ratio would simply stay 
constant and, in a way, was a form of mem-
ory. Here’s where things got interesting: The 
team grew the Marionette strain in eight 
wells that correspond with the outer squares 
of a grid and taught it how to play tic-tac-toe. 
Initially, the bacteria played randomly, but 
the Spanish National Research Council team 
trained the strain by adding chemicals to the BIOCOMPUTING AND CYBERBIOSECURITY
290© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
prints for eons. After all, biology has a code—
ACTG—not unlike binary code (1s and 0s) in 
conventional computing. But while biology 
can be expressed in code, DNA is organic—and 
molecules have a habit of moving around ran-
domly. For that reason, the researchers took 
inspiration from origami and designed DNA 
sequences to fold into specific shapes, allow-
ing them to function like parts in a computer, 
guiding the flow of data. In experiments, they 
built a DNA computer with 30 logic gates 
and 500 DNA strands, capable of calculating 
square roots and identifying genetic markers 
of kidney cancer. 
To be fair, this new DNA computer takes 
hours to perform simple computations and 
won’t replace regular computers anytime 
soon. But the research does hold promise for 
certain biomedical applications. For example, 
a DNA machine could detect specific genes 
and respond with a DNA strand that triggers 
biological reactions, useful in environmental 
monitoring or disease treatment. What’s next: 
cajoling DNA to perform complex algorithms 
and disease diagnosis.storage method involves converting digital 
data into DNA sequences made of the ACTGs 
(adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine) 
you learned about in high school. The pro-
cess, which takes about eight hours for 1 
kilobyte, involves chemically synthesizing 
a unique DNA strand to match the desired 
sequence, then drying and sealing it on a 
chip to protect against oxygen. To access 
the stored data, customers must send one 
of their DNA cards to Biomemory’s partner, 
US-based Eurofins Genomics. The retrieved 
data, in the form of DNA sequences, is then 
emailed back and can be decoded using 
Biomemory’s DNA translation feature. Cards 
aren’t rewritable—meaning, they can only be 
decoded once.
The Intelligence Advanced Research Proj-
ects Activity, a group in the Office of the 
Director of National Intelligence, intends to 
store an exabyte of data—roughly a million 
terabyte-size hard drives—in a blob of DNA. A 
weird branch of biological science, yes, but 
human computing has practical purposes: 
DNA could solve our future data storage problems. It’s durable, too: Evolutionary sci-
entists routinely study DNA that is thousands 
of years old to learn more about our human 
ancestors. In China, scientists at Tianjin 
University stored 445 kilobytes of data in an E. 
coli cell. In the US, Twist Bioscience is making 
hyperdense, stable, affordable DNA storage by 
using robots to create a million short strands 
of DNA at a time from microscopic drops of 
nucleotides on silicon chips. The end result 
will be a tiny, pill-size container that could 
someday hold hundreds of terabytes of ca-
pacity. Now, a consortium called the DNA Data 
Storage Alliance is developing an interoper-
able storage ecosystem using DNA as a data 
storage medium. Founders include Microsoft, 
as well as Western Digital, Twist Bioscience, 
and Illumina. Members of the Alliance, includ-
ing Los Alamos National Laboratory, Seagate, 
FujiFilm, Dell Technologies, Lenovo, IBM, and 
the University of Arizona’s Center for Applied 
Nanobioscience and Medicine are hoping to 
write megabytes of data per second on syn-
thetic DNA that will be readable for thousands 
of years.Using DNA to Store Data
In 2018, scientists from Microsoft Research 
and the University of Washington achieved a 
new milestone: They discovered how to cre-
ate random access memory on DNA at scale. 
They encoded 200 megabytes of data on hu-
man DNA—including 35 video, image, audio, 
and text files ranging from 29 kilobytes to 44 
megabytes. In 2021, the team built a molec-
ular controller and DNA writer on a chip, with 
a PCIe interface. Microsoft used the system 
to store a version of the company’s mission 
statement in DNA: “Empowering each person 
to store more!” Flash forward to 2024, and 
Paris-based startup Biomemory has intro-
duced DNA cards, a new form of data storage, 
priced at $500. Each card offers one kilobyte 
of storage, equivalent to a short email. This 
could be useful for anyone wanting to save 
ultrasensitive data. DNA storage is recog-
nized for its remarkable longevity, with a 
potential lifespan of hundreds of thousands 
of years in optimal conditions, far exceeding 
traditional storage devices like hard drives. 
(Biomemory’s DNA cards guarantee a mini-
mum lifespan of 150 years.) This innovative BIOCOMPUTING AND CYBERBIOSECURITY
291© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Biological Robots
In 2020, a cluster of stem cells from an 
African clawed frog served as the base for a 
fortuitous experiment involving a supercom-
puter, a virtual environment, and evolutionary 
algorithms. Researchers created 100 genera-
tions of prototypes before they had a tiny blob 
of programmable tissue called a xenobot. 
These living robots can undulate, swim, and 
walk. They work collaboratively and can even 
self-heal. And they’re tiny enough to be inject-
ed into human bodies, travel around, and—
maybe someday—deliver targeted medicines. 
While technically they’re made up of living 
cells, researchers are quick to point out that 
xenobots lack the characteristics of a tradi-
tional biological life-form. In 2021, xenobots 
got a design upgrade and new capabilities. 
While before they needed the contraction of 
heart muscle cells to move forward, upgraded 
xenobots can self-propel using tiny hairs on 
their surfaces. The current crop of xenobots 
live longer, and they can sense what’s in their 
environment. They can also operate in robot 
swarms to complete a collaborative task. Xe-
nobots are being used to help researchers un-that don’t already exist in natural organisms. 
These characteristics will someday enable 
their use as a biorobotics platform for vari-
ous medical and other purposes. For exam-
ple, with some modifications, it’s possible to 
build cell clusters that could be dispatched 
to repair damaged tissues within the body.
Living Sensors
Research is already underway to develop bi-
osensors that can detect deadly bioweapons 
on the battlefield and harmful chemicals 
in factories by identifying the presence of 
specific DNA sequences. Researchers at the 
University of California San Diego created a 
bacterium called Acinetobacter baylyi capa-
ble of detecting a single DNA letter mutation 
in a gene that’s present in many cancers. 
With a focus on the microbiome, they en-
gineered the bacterium to detect mutated 
DNA sequences while living inside of the gut. 
While still very early in development, living 
sensors could someday be used to detect 
viral outbreaks in a community’s sewage 
system, cholera in drinking water, and other 
pathogens.derstand how defects in the hairlike struc-
tures in our lungs, called cilia, can result in 
diseases. Also in progress: xenobots that can 
travel to a damaged spinal cord and repair it 
with regenerative compounds. 
Meanwhile, another type of living robot, 
anthrobots, were developed in 2022 from 
donated human tracheal cells. Covered in 
cilia, these anthrobots harnessed the struc-
tures like flexible oars to propel themselves 
around. When grown in a petri dish, scien-
tists discovered the bots could be assem-
bled into super-anthrobots to perform tasks. 
A team at Tufts University grew a sheet of 
human neural cells and scratched a few off, 
to create a defect roughly a millimeter wide. 
With super-anthrobots on the other side, 
bots catalyzed healing. While some skep-
tics claim that the significance of biologi-
cal robots are overhyped—they’re not really 
programmable robots after all—it’s useful to 
think about this tissue in a broader context. 
Instead of viewing the cell clusters merely as 
tiny tissue samples for studying human biol-
ogy, they have distinct shapes and behaviors BIOCOMPUTING AND CYBERBIOSECURITY
292© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
General DNA integrated circuits can solve math 
problems and identify molecular biomarkers, show-
ing promise that DNA computers might one day 
prove useful for clinical and diagnostic applications.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.BIOCOMPUTING AND CYBERBIOSECURITYTECH
Cyberbiosecurity
Cyberbiosecurity is a relatively new inter-
section between biology, biosecurity, and 
cybersecurity that will soon become a criti-
cal frontier in the safeguarding of the global 
bioeconomy against burgeoning threats. 
As AI continues to mesh with life scienc-
es, advancements underscore a dual-edge 
potential: On the one hand, we’ll see faster 
development of new vaccines, therapeu-
tics, and materials, which stand to promote 
economic growth while improving health 
and creating more options to battle climate 
change. On the other hand, these new tools 
could be misused. Technologies with AI-bio 
capabilities bear the risk of triggering biologi-
cal catastrophes. As of now, there is no single 
body charged with overseeing cyberbiosecu-
rity. The Nuclear Threat Initiative, a nonpar-
tisan global security organization focused 
on reducing nuclear and biological threats 
imperiling humanity, convened a panel of 
leading experts on synthetic biology, machine 
learning, bioinformatics, and international 
security policy in January 2024, however there is no formal governing organization yet. (If 
this sounds somewhat familiar, it’s because 
it happened before with AI. More than two 
decades ago, there were calls to establish a 
similar governing organization for AI. Today, 
the regulatory landscape is a mishmash of 
different policies often in conflict and hard 
to enforce.)
293© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
This magnified image shows a brain organoid produced in the lab of Dr. Thomas Hartung, a professor of en-
vironmental health and engineering at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and Whiting 
School of Engineering in Baltimore. The culture was dyed to show neurons in magenta, cell nuclei in blue 
and other supporting cells in red and green. 
Image credit: Courtesy Jesse Plotkin and Johns Hopkins University.294© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEW  
MATERIALSTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
AI-Created New Materials
Last year, the Google DeepMind team revealed 
its Graphical Networks for Material Explo-
ration (GNoME)—a sort of AlphaFold, but for 
new materials. Remarkably, it predicted the 
structures of 2.2 million new materials, and 
some 700 have already been created in labs 
for testing. GNoME has significantly expanded 
the repository of stable materials to 421,000, 
a nearly tenfold increase, showcasing its 
efficiency in identifying viable new materials. 
Here’s why this is significant: the tradition-
al methods used to discover new materials 
involve experimenting with element combina-
tions from the periodic table, a slow, tedious, 
and inefficient process. DeepMind uses 
two deep-learning models instead: the first 
generates structures by tweaking existing 
materials, while the second predicts material 
stability based purely on chemical formulas. 
This dual-model strategy broadens the search 
for new materials. GNoME’s role is to evaluate 
these candidates, focusing on their decompo-
sition energy to determine material stability, 
a crucial factor for engineering applications. 
Newly discovered materials can be used to able, novel solution for fire retardation within 
building materials. Researchers at RMIT 
University in Melbourne, Australia, have used 
this technology to develop a new biological 
material for fire retardancy. Unlike asbestos, 
which has terrific fire retardant properties 
but releases harmful particles upon com-
bustion, engineered mycelium are safe and 
effective. Fire retardant sheets are grown and 
then layered into protective mats only a few 
millimeters thick. This innovative fabrication 
process results in a material that not only 
delays the ignition of building components, 
but also exhibits a unique fire response 
mechanism. In case of a fire, the mycelium 
sheets momentarily ignite, discharging water 
vapor and carbon dioxide, thereby reducing 
the oxygen available for the fire to sustain 
itself. This reaction culminates in the forma-
tion of a carbonaceous layer, which effectively 
stops the propagation of flames. New York–
based Ecovative is also harnessing fungi 
in its Mushroom Packaging, using organic 
waste and mycelium grown in custom molds 
without light, water, or chemicals. This pro-
cess takes five to seven days and results in a durable, lightweight material that is heat-treat-
ed to halt growth, yielding a completely natural 
and compostable packaging solution. It’s an 
eco-friendly alternative to conventional styro-
foam or bubble packaging.
Mycelium Leathers
Besides fire retardancy and packaging, luxury 
companies are eying mycelium as an alter-
native to leather. Hermès created a myceli-
um version of its classic luxury Victoria bag, 
while Adidas launched a pair of Stan Smith 
shoes made out of the leather alternative. Bolt 
Threads and Ginkgo Bioworks announced a 
multi-project collaboration to optimize the 
production efficiency of mycelium leathers 
and to develop novel proteins for biomaterials. 
Research and Markets, a provider of data and 
analysis, forecasts that the global market for 
synthetic leather materials could approach 
$67 billion by 2030. Meanwhile, the market for 
bio-based leather, which comprises materials 
of natural origin, was valued at approximately 
$650 million in 2021, according to Polaris Mar-
ket Research. Until now, there have been many 
leather alternatives made from plastics such make better solar cells, batteries, computer 
chips, and more. Meanwhile the Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory created a new 
autonomous lab using GNoME called A-Lab. 
It uses a materials database, incorporates 
findings from GNoME, and employs ma-
chine learning along with robotic arms to 
create new materials autonomously, with-
out human intervention. A-Lab was able to 
synthesize 41 out of 58 proposed compounds 
over 17 days, showcasing a much faster pace 
of material creation compared to traditional 
labs. This efficiency is critical in a field where 
experimentation can otherwise be dauntingly 
slow. AI will significantly enhance the pro-
cess of discovering and creating new materi-
als, which will ultimately lead to better solar 
cells, batteries, computer chips, and more.
Modifying Fungi for Building and Packaging
In an era marked by escalating fire risks to 
residential structures, synthetic biology may 
help enhance the safety of buildings. Ultra-
thin sheets can be made from the expansive, 
root-like networks beneath mushrooms 
known as mycelium—and they may be a scal-NEW MATERIALS
295© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
as polyurethane or polyvinyl chloride, common-
ly referred to as PVC, leading to the somewhat 
disparaging nickname “pleather.” Mycelium 
offers a viable, sustainable alternative.
Biomolecule-Based Packaging
Packaging made from natural materials like 
plants or proteins is biodegradable and safe 
for the environment. However, single-material 
packages can have drawbacks, so research-
ers are mixing different natural substances 
to make stronger, better packaging. Depend-
ing on the food and storage method, these 
eco-friendly packages can protect food by 
keeping out germs, preventing spoilage, and 
reducing water loss, among other things. 
There’s also a new type of packaging that 
includes natural preservatives to keep food 
fresh longer by stopping bacteria growth or 
preventing the food from going bad. Another 
innovative idea in development is “smart” 
packaging that changes color or shows signs 
to indicate how fresh the food is, helping 
everyone from producers to consumers keep 
track of food quality.color when the product is no longer safe to 
consume, giving consumers a clear, visual 
signal about the state of their food.
Biodegradable and Edible Packaging
Smart packaging will drive agricultural 
advances and investment. Biopolymers such 
as polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids can 
be used to fabricate edible films or coatings 
as packaging. Rather than throwing away 
your strawberries’ packaging, you can eat the 
wrapping. University of Minnesota research-
ers are developing polymers that self-de-
struct or “unzip” when exposed to light, heat, 
or acid. Saltwater Brewery designed biode-
gradable and edible plastic rings for six-
packs of beer—so sea turtles can eat them 
rather than get tangled in them. Infarm cre-
ated a renewable plastic that folds around 
objects. It uses seaweed-based agar-agar gel 
to grow microgreens and herbs that don’t 
need water. At the end of 2022, Prince Wil-
liam awarded a $1.2 million Earthshot Prize 
to Notpla, a startup that uses seaweed to 
produce naturally biodegradable packaging. Durable Biofilms
A biofilm is essentially a community of bacte-
ria living together in a structured formation. 
While biofilms can be beneficial, such as 
in treating wastewater, they can also cause 
significant problems, including damaging 
infrastructure through corrosion and being 
involved in up to 60% of infectious diseases. 
Bacteria in biofilms become tougher, harder to 
remove from surfaces, and more resistant to 
antibiotics compared to their solitary counter-
parts. Researchers at the University of Roches-
ter have developed a method to create bio-
films through 3D printing. They’ve genetically 
modified bacteria to produce biofilm compo-
nents, allowing these bacteria to be printed in 
a hydrogel. This process forms biofilms with a 
dense network that mimics natural biofilms’ 
structure. The technique offers precise control 
over the bacteria’s distribution and density, 
enabling detailed studies on biofilm behav-
ior and the creation of biofilms with specific 
patterns for various applications, opening up 
a wide array of practical applications in man-
ufacturing, supply chain, transportation, food 
and beverage, and beyond.Intelligent and Active Packaging
Active packaging works by incorporating 
substances like antimicrobials and antiox-
idants directly into the packaging to extend 
the food’s shelf life and enhance its safety 
and taste. For example, a company might 
use packaging with built-in antimicrobials 
to keep bread fresher for longer by prevent-
ing mold growth. Intelligent packaging, on 
the other hand, includes smart indicators 
that show changes in the food’s condition, 
such as freshness, quality, or safety. These 
indicators can react to environmental 
changes like temperature, humidity, or the 
presence of certain gasses. Researchers at 
the NOVA School of Science and Technology 
in Portugal are developing bio-based sensors 
made from natural extracts and biopolymers 
that can act as smart food packaging, with 
indicators showing various factors such as 
freshness. Eventually, this could mean the 
end of expiration dates, which aren’t actu-
ally connected to whether food is spoiled 
or fresh. Expect to see meat packaging that 
changes color if the meat starts to spoil, 
or a milk carton with a label that shifts NEW MATERIALS
296© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING297© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CULTURED  
FOOD & DRINKS  
AND NEXT-GEN 
AGRICULTURETECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Lab-Grown Meat Is Going Mainstream
There is growing interest in cultivated meat, 
which is produced from animal cells in a lab 
or biomanufacturing plant, which offers an 
environmentally friendly (and, let’s face it, 
animal-friendly) alternative to traditional 
meat production. Concerns about food secu-
rity underline this push into bloodless meat 
cultivation. Late in 2020, Singapore approved 
a competitor to the slaughterhouse by allow-
ing a bioreactor—a high-tech vat for growing 
organisms—run by a US company to produce 
cultured chicken nuggets for its residents. 
The company, Eat Just, manufactured chicken 
in bioreactors using cells taken from healthy, 
live chickens. In 2023, the company opened 
a 30,000-square-foot facility in Singapore, 
and its bioreactors now have the capacity 
to produce tens of thousands of pounds of 
slaughter-free meat. By 2030, Eat Just plans 
for cultured meat products to cost at or lower 
the current price points for chicken, beef, and 
pork. Its successful entry into Singapore, a 
highly regulated country that’s also one of the 
world’s most important innovation hotspots, 
is accelerating interest in cultured meat’s developed by Beyond Meat and Impossible 
Foods, cell-based meat cultivation results in 
muscle tissue that is molecularly identical 
to animals grown for our consumption—and 
in some cases, improved. Lab-grown meat 
also doesn’t require the hormones and anti-
biotics used at conventional facilities.
Synthetic Milk and Cheese
Synthetic milk is coming. It’s a promising 
substitute for cow’s milk, offering a similar 
taste, look, and texture that plant-based 
options like oat, nut, and soy milks don’t 
match. Hailed as the milk of the future, 
synthetic milk is considered an eco-friendly 
choice that could disrupt the dairy sector 
and potentially disadvantage small-scale 
dairy farmers. Synthetic cow’s milk is culti-
vated by artificially reproducing the proteins 
in casein and whey. Casein genes are added 
to yeast and other microflora to produce 
proteins, which are purified and transformed 
using plant-based fats and sugars. Perfect 
Day makes lab-grown dairy products—yogurt, 
cheese, and ice cream—that are now sold in 
thousands of US grocery stores. Remilk, an Israeli company, has established a large-scale 
production facility in Denmark dedicated to 
manufacturing cheese, yogurt, and ice cream. 
Nestle and Danone, two of the world’s largest 
food and beverage corporations, have been on 
an acquisition spree, buying lab-grown dairy 
startups around the world. In the next few 
years, the focus will be on scaling cultured 
dairy operations and lowering costs of produc-
tion. New Culture, which makes animal-free 
cheeses for pizza that stretch, melt, and of 
course, taste like what you’d find at your 
favorite local restaurant, upgraded its fermen-
tation process last year. It can produce 25,000 
pizzas’ worth of cheese in a single run.
Precision Fermentation
Precision fermentation is an advanced version 
of a very old technology: brewing. For hundreds 
of years, it’s been used to multiply microbes 
to create specific products, from beers to 
medicines. Today, precision fermentation can 
be used for a host of purposes. Food technol-
ogists can use genome sequencing and gene 
editing as part of a precision fermentation 
process, which results in microbes engineered startup ecosystem. Israel is a global leader 
in the cultured meat sector, with groups 
like Aleph Farms, which got regulatory 
approval to sell cultured steaks, and Steak-
holder Foods, which teamed up with Singa-
pore-based Umami Meats to produce fish 
filets without contributing to the overfishing 
of declining fish stocks. On the infrastruc-
ture side, Turkey-based Biftek is working on 
new technologies and serums to reduce the 
cost of lab-grown meat, and in Mexico, Micro 
Meat creates technologies to scale up pro -
duction. In Israel, MeaTech uses 3D printing 
to produce whole cuts of cell-based meat, 
while Israel-based SuperMeat has developed 
what it calls a “crispy cultured chicken.” Sev-
eral startups are bringing cultured meat to 
market. Finless Foods, based in California, is 
developing cultured bluefin tuna meat, from 
the sought-after species now threatened by 
long-standing overfishing. Other companies, 
including Mosa Meat (in the Netherlands) 
and Upside Foods (in California, formerly 
known as Memphis Meats) are cultivating 
meats in factory-scale labs. Unlike the exist-
ing plant-based protein meat alternatives CULTURED FOOD & DRINKS AND NEXT-GEN AGRICULTURE
298© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
for specific purposes. For example, feeding 
engineered microbes into a precisely tuned 
fermenter could create synthetic coconut oil or 
palm oil. Genetically altered microbes, which 
are already in use to produce plant-based meat 
substitutes, could soon form the basis for non-
dairy cheeses. With more consumers seeking 
out vegan options and climate change impact-
ing dairy production, Nestle, Danone, Mars, 
General Mills, and Unilever are developing pre-
cision fermentation platforms to meet future 
supply chain constraints and market needs. 
Precision fermentation can also produce new 
forms of stabilizers and preservatives. 
Brewing Great Nonalcoholic Beers
People are becoming more interested in 
healthier, more responsible ways of drink-
ing, leading to a big increase in nonalcoholic 
beers. But anyone who’s tried a nonalcoholic 
beer will be quick to complain that it doesn’t 
taste or smell as good as beer fermented the 
traditional way: The beers typically lack the 
pungent, hoppy smell and can leave an odd 
aftertaste. The reason has to do with how they 
are made. Brewers either stop the brewing Upgrading Photosynthesis
Genetically modifying crops with upgrades 
could dramatically increase crop yields with-
out needing to increase the other resources 
required for cultivation. Researchers are 
working on a number of projects that would 
increase photosynthesis—the biological 
process green plants and some organisms 
use to harness sunlight to produce energy 
out of CO2 and water. Simply over-exposing 
plants to sunlight doesn’t have the same ef-
fect—more light can damage cells unless they 
turn on a biological system called quenching 
that’s capable of flushing out the excess en-
ergy. On cloudy days, plans turn off quenching 
to retain the excess energy, but the process 
of turning quenching on and off is time-con-
suming, unpredictable, and inefficient. Scien-
tists hope that with genetic engineering, they 
can speed up the quenching process, which 
would lead to more efficient photosynthesis. 
In 2022, modified soybean plants were shown 
to yield 20% more thanks to a jacked-up 
photosynthesis system. Researchers are also 
working on cowpeas and rice. process early to avoid creating alcohol, or 
they let the beer ferment and then remove 
the alcohol. Both methods tend to remove 
the hop aromas, which are important for 
making beer smell good. But biotech startup 
EvodiaBio seems to have found a solution. 
Its scientists developed a method to create 
monoterpenoids, the compounds respon-
sible for the hoppy flavor, and add them to 
beer after brewing, restoring the flavor that 
usually gets lost. By using baker’s yeast cells 
as tiny biofactories, the team can generate 
these hop aromas in fermenters, avoiding 
the waste of expensive hops that typically 
lose their flavor during the brewing process. 
This approach not only enhances the taste 
of nonalcoholic beer but is also much more 
eco-friendly compared to using tradition-
al hops. For example, in the US, aroma hop 
farming happens mainly on the West Coast—
which means that anyone outside the area 
must rely on an extensive transportation 
and refrigeration cold chain, not to mention 
the considerable amount of water needed 
for cultivation (about 2.7 tons of water to 
produce just 1 kilogram of hops). CULTURED FOOD & DRINKS AND NEXT-GEN AGRICULTURE
299© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Bioluminescent Firefly petunias give off an eerie 
glow in the dark.
Image credit: Light BioTECH
Faster Flowering
Using the CRISPR gene-editing tool, research-
ers at the University of Georgia Warnell School 
of Forestry and Natural Resources and at 
Franklin College of Arts and Sciences figured 
out how to make trees mature faster. They 
used CRISPR to edit a flower repressor gene 
and drastically shortened the time it takes a 
poplar tree to flower—from 10 years down to 
just three months. It would typically take the 
plant a year to develop the systems to even 
produce flowers, and the team engineered the 
plant to mature in just a few days. The prom-
ise of this research is an accelerated time 
frame for tree breeding, as well as to enhance 
the natural defenses of trees from extreme 
heat, cold, and drought.
A Return to Natural Farming—With T echnology
Farming faces a big challenge: how to provide 
plants with nitrogen to feed more people with-
out harming the environment or reducing crop 
sizes. Nitrogen is essential but expensive, and 
the usual synthetic fertilizers cause pollution 
and contribute to climate change. They’re 
also not very reliable because they can easily resistance to flooding and drought. In 2017, 
the Rodale Institute launched the Regen-
erative Organic Certified program to start 
creating an official standard. It builds on the 
USDA certified organic seal by adding soil 
health, animal welfare, and human rights 
requirements. General Mills announced that 
it would accelerate regenerative agriculture 
by dedicating a million acres of farmland 
to it by 2030. Meanwhile, several brands, 
including Patagonia, Timberland, Allbirds, 
Gucci, and Balenciaga, have launched efforts 
to promote regenerative agriculture.
A New Wave of Genetically Modified Foods
A recent Pew Research study showed that 
most Americans see food using genetical-
ly modified organisms as worse for their 
health than a food that has no genetic 
modification at all, while just 7% see them 
as healthier than other foods. GMOs have a 
public perception problem because some of 
the earliest modified crops (corn and soy-
beans) were genetically changed to tolerate 
herbicides like glyphosate, which sells under 
the brand name Roundup, and last year in the US, 91% of domestic corn production used 
these herbicide tolerant seeds. So, it’s under-
standable that people are wary of a new crop 
of GMOs. But the promise of supercharged 
foods enhanced to produce additional nutri-
ents—rather than modified to respond to a 
particular fertilizer or pesticide—may change 
people’s minds. Biofortified foods are genet-
ically enhanced to provide a denser dose of 
nutrients. California-based Fresh Del Monte 
created a pink pineapple that’s been modified 
to have a higher level of lycopene, an antioxi-
dant that gives peaches, tomatoes, and water-
melon their rosy hues. Early in 2024, the Purple 
Tomato, developed by Norfolk Plant Sciences, 
was approved to be marketed directly to home 
gardeners. It was the first time that genetical-
ly modified foods were available to noncom-
mercial producers in the US. The tomatoes 
are bright purple thanks to color genes from 
a snapdragon flower that were added to the 
plant. They’re not only unusual looking, they 
have high levels of anthocyanin, which has 
antidiabetic, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, 
antimicrobial, and anti-obesity effects and is 
used to prevent cardiovascular diseases. wash away or evaporate. Healthy soil, full of 
microbes like bacteria and fungi, naturally 
supports plant growth by recycling nutri-
ents, but chemicals can harm this balance. 
Synthetic biology offers a solution. Pivot Bio, 
a biotech company, has developed a way to 
enhance a soil microbe’s ability to supply 
nitrogen directly to plants, offering a steady 
and environmentally friendly source of this 
crucial nutrient throughout the growing sea-
son without genetic modification from other 
organisms. 
Regenerative Agriculture
Regenerative agriculture describes farm-
ing and grazing practices that rebuild soil 
organic matter and restore degraded soil 
biodiversity. There’s a clear need for this 
technology-led practice: Decades of using 
chemicals, salt-based fertilizers, carbon 
mining, and harsh insecticides deplete soil. 
Planting multiple types of crops together, 
rotating crops, cutting back on tilling, and 
reducing reliance on harsh chemicals can 
revitalize depleted soil, leading to improved 
yields, nutrient-rich crops, and improved CULTURED FOOD & DRINKS AND NEXT-GEN AGRICULTURE
300© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
CRISPR Animals
CRISPR is making farmed animals bigger, 
stronger, and (hopefully) healthier. Research-
ers at Auburn University in Alabama intro-
duced a gene from alligators into catfish, not 
aiming to give the catfish alligator charac-
teristics, but rather to boost their ability to 
resist diseases. This is because alligators 
are exceptionally good at warding off infec-
tions, and a slight increase in resilience could 
significantly impact fish farming. Currently, 
about 40% of fish raised in farms globally 
don’t survive until harvest, so reducing even a 
fraction of this loss could be transformative.   
Scientists in Japan used CRISPR to modify the 
myostatin gene in red sea bream, resulting in 
fish that are larger and heavier by about 17% 
compared to nonmodified fish, even though 
both groups were fed the same quantity of 
food. Researchers have long experimented 
with CRISPR on animals, and so far have used 
it to create super-muscly pigs, cattle, sheep, 
rabbits, and goats. But most animals did 
not live past infancy, and, somewhat weirdly, 
many developed unusually large tongues. Genetically Engineered Space Farming 
Growing plants in space, on the moon, and 
Mars is important for keeping astronauts 
healthy and happy. NASA has been looking 
into this for years, focusing on building the 
right equipment to grow plants, choosing the 
best types of plants for space nutrition, and 
studying how plants react to being in space, 
including how they interact with microbes. Re-
cent advances in gene-editing technology, like 
CRISPR and other tools, have made it easier 
to tweak plant genes for space needs. These 
tools, along with new ways to deliver gene-ed-
iting materials to plants and the use of big 
data and machine learning to analyze plant 
genes, are opening up possibilities for creating 
plants that can thrive in space. Looking ahead, 
experts believe it’s crucial to focus on using 
these technologies to develop plants that meet 
the specific needs of space missions, mak-
ing space agriculture more sustainable and 
effective. Space agriculture is quickly becom-
ing a multibillion-dollar industry. NASA and 
Germany’s space agency are now investing in 
a variety of space agricultural projects that 
could someday support off-planet habitats.CULTURED FOOD & DRINKS AND NEXT-GEN AGRICULTURE
301© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Researchers in China created double-muscled pigs by introducing a mutation into the pigs’ genetics that 
keeps the muscles developing beyond the point they would naturally. Note: this image is AI-generated, and 
does not show a live animal.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.302© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AGING, HEALTH, 
AND BEAUTYTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Cultivated Collagen
Israel-based Aleph Farms has already brought 
cultured steak to market. Their next goal: 
cell-cultured collagen, which is part of a 
broader strategy to replace the entire cow. 
The company is developing a way to produce 
collagen directly from cow cells, avoiding the 
need to raise and harvest livestock. Tradition-
ally, collagen is derived by boiling cow hides 
and bones, a process used across various 
industries. Aleph Farms will use techniques 
from its steak production, such as bovine cell 
sources and a growth medium free of ani-
mal components, to create different types of 
collagen that are identical to those found in 
nature. This cultivated collagen will include a 
full range of proteins found in the extracellu-
lar matrix, which makes up skin, bones, and 
joints. There are other startups now working 
on collagen cultivation, too. Jellatech, a North 
Carolina–based startup, created a full length, 
triple helical, bio-identical and functional 
human collagen made from its proprietary 
cell line.go longer between treatments. After that, 
researchers will set their sights on manufac-
turing lab-grown blood for rare blood types 
that don’t typically have large donor pools.
Growing Sex Cells 
Last year, Dr. Katsuhiko Hayashi from Osaka 
University successfully created eggs from 
cells harvested from male mice, with the 
eventual goal of developing new fertility 
treatments. The process begins with taking a 
skin cell from a male mouse and converting 
it into a stem cell, which has the potential to 
develop into various cell types. Since these 
cells are male, they carry XY chromosomes. 
The team then removes the Y chromosome, 
replicates the X chromosome, and combines 
the two X chromosomes—a modification that 
enables the stem cell to develop into an egg. 
Hayashi’s work builds on groundbreaking re-
search from fellow Japanese scientist Shinya 
Yamanaka, who in 2006 showed that it was 
possible to make gametes derived from 
human-induced pluripotent stem cells. Ya-
manaka’s process includes harvesting cells 
from a skin biopsy or blood sample (both quick and relatively painless). Those cells are 
turned into stem cells, grown in a medium 
that resembles what would exist in a human 
womb, and developed into precursor sex cells, 
which mature into sperm or stem cells. Then, 
once IVF kicks in, those cells are used to create 
an embryo. One or more of the healthiest em-
bryos are then implanted into the uterus and, 
if all goes well, develop into a healthy, viable 
fetus. The idea is that someday soon, couples 
suffering from infertility or individuals who 
desire to have a baby without a partner would 
have access to a reliable fertility treatment. 
Human Trials of Synthetic Wombs
Researchers at the Children’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia (CHOP) created an artificial womb 
called a biobag and used it to successfully 
keep premature lambs alive and developing 
normally for 28 days. Now, CHOP researchers 
are seeking approval to begin the first human 
clinical trials for a device they’ve developed, 
called the EXTra-uterine Environment for Neo-
natal Development, or EXTEND. The team has 
clarified that this technology is not designed 
or capable of supporting the full spectrum of Growing Blood
For people who live with rare blood types 
(AB negative, AB positive, B negative) or who 
have blood disorders, acquiring blood for 
surgery or a transfusion can mean the dif-
ference between life and death. For decades, 
scientists have attempted to grow blood 
cells in a lab at scale, but until recently, the 
process has failed to produce enough blood 
cells to make an impact. But late in 2022, 
scientists at the National Health Service 
Blood and Transplant in the UK announced 
that they had grown red blood cells in a lab 
and successfully transfused them into a 
living person, a world first. It took 500,000 
stem cells to generate 50 billion red blood 
cells, which then needed to develop. (In a 
healthy adult, 50 billion red blood cells rep-
resents about 1% of their total blood volume.) 
Last year, the same researchers transfused 
red blood cells that were grown in a lab into 
another person requiring that blood. This 
technique is a pioneer in transferring lab-
grown cells to another person as a part of a 
blood transfusion. Going forward, patients 
who need regular blood transfusions could AGING, HEALTH, AND BEAUTY
303© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
development from conception to birth, but 
is intended to increase survival and improve 
outcomes for extremely premature babies by 
replicating a natural womb environment. The 
FDA is still working with independent advisers 
to determine regulatory and ethical consider-
ations for synthetic wombs and ethical con-
siderations for what human trials could look 
like. Other teams around the world are devel-
oping similar devices, while bioethicists are 
working out the broader implications. What 
if synthetic wombs aren’t available to low-
er-income people? How might they factor into 
debates over reproductive rights? And what if, 
further in the future, they eliminate the need 
for a person to carry a pregnancy at all?
Universal Cancer Vaccines
Early in 2024, the first patient in the UK re-
ceived a dose of a cancer vaccine as part of 
a larger clinical trial. Designed to treat sol-
id-state tumor cancers, such as melanoma, 
this application of immunotherapy harness-
es the immune system to fight cancer cells. 
(“Vaccine” is a bit confusing here, since most 
vaccines are designed for prevention, while analyses to develop custom mRNA vaccines, 
which encode protein-containing mutations 
unique to the tumor. The immune system 
uses those instructions to search and 
destroy similar cells throughout the body, 
which is similar to how the Covid vaccines 
work. BioNTech is running clinical trials for 
personalized vaccines for many cancers, 
including ovarian cancer, breast cancer, and 
melanoma. Moderna is developing similar 
cancer vaccines and announced that its per-
sonalized cancer vaccine, when combined 
with Merck & Co.’s immunotherapy treat-
ment Keytruda, cut recurrence and risk of 
death of the most deadly skin cancer com-
pared with immunotherapy treatment alone. 
In the trial, the mRNA vaccine revved up the 
immune response. 
Upgrading Embryos Before Birth
Researchers are developing a new tech-
nique that might someday enable people 
to optimize their children’s genes before 
birth. Using algorithms to understand the 
tiny variations in DNA—single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, or SNPs—these researchers hope to make accurate gene-based predic-
tions about an individual’s future. SNPs are 
important markers of genomic variants at a 
single base position in the DNA—and these 
single letter changes to our genetic code are 
contributors to conditions like diabetes. If 
SNPs were read in vitro, before embryos were 
implanted, they could reveal whether that ge-
netic combination had a higher probability of 
developing diabetes or even heart disease. If 
an embryo were edited using CRISPR, embryos 
could also be optimized with the best possible 
traits, given the raw genetic material. Theoret-
ically, parents could influence myriad traits 
for their offspring, including hair texture, 
resistance to a virus such as HIV, or protection 
against Alzheimer’s disease. This intervention, 
like the gene drive edit to make mosquitos 
unable to transmit malaria, would have a 
permanent, heritable effect. It could eradi-
cate certain diseases passed from parents to 
children, and in the process improve the entire 
gene pool.this treatment is for people who have already 
developed a tumor.) Called mRNA-4359, the 
treatment contains a molecule that can relay 
instructions to cells. It works by directing 
cells to produce proteins typically found on 
the surface of solid cancer tumors. Once 
these proteins are made, they are introduced 
to the immune system, training it to recog-
nize and attack cancer cells.
This vaccine is classified as a “universal” 
cancer vaccine, meaning it is premade and 
can be administered to patients with certain 
types of cancer straight from the shelf. In 
contrast, other mRNA cancer vaccines being 
developed are customized based on the indi-
vidual patient’s cancer, such as a pancreatic 
cancer vaccine that uses genetic material 
from the patient’s own tumors for a more 
personalized approach.
Long before they were making Covid vac-
cines, both Moderna and BioNTech were 
researching immunotherapies for cancer. 
After analyzing a tissue sample from a can-
cerous tumor, the companies ran genetic AGING, HEALTH, AND BEAUTY
304© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Genetic Screening for Pregnancy
Genetic screening tests promise a kind of 
prenatal fortune-telling: Many companies 
say they can predict the health outcomes of 
growing embryos. California-based MyOme 
and New Jersey–based LifeView use the ge-
netic sequences of parents, along with cells 
retrieved during a biopsy, to generate an 
embryo’s entire genome. Next, they use algo-
rithms to calculate the probabilities of cer-
tain ailments. Couples going through fertility 
treatments have a limited number of embryos 
to choose from and would be able to select 
the embryos they like based on those results. 
Other startups offer to calculate scores and 
optimize for other genetic traits such as 
height and intelligence. LifeView provides 
genetic report cards to would-be parents: they 
deliver a report showing whether the embryo 
has the right number of chromosomes, risk 
assessment grades for heart attacks, certain 
cancers, diabetes and more. 
Genetic screening is a booming market in the 
US—and last year, the FDA moved to regulate 
prenatal testing. The proposed regulations cal research projects last year. This extensive 
collection of sequences offers an invaluable 
tool for exploring the genetic foundations 
of human health and various diseases. Labs 
worldwide have the opportunity to access 
these data sets, with the UK Biobank having 
granted approval to over 30,000 researchers 
from around 90 countries to date. Scientists 
have published more than 9,000 peer-re-
viewed studies using Biobank data, investi-
gating genetic influences on a range of con-
ditions and traits, including Alzheimer’s risk, 
heart disease, personality traits, and even 
sexual orientation—though that last one has 
sparked debate. Whole genome analysis, un-
like exome studies, lets scientists examine 
associations between traits and rare genetic 
variations in both the protein-coding and 
noncoding segments of the genome. While 
it’s understood that noncoding regions 
play roles in gene regulation among other 
functions, much about their contribution 
to human biology remains to be discovered. 
The expansion of this data set should drive 
significant breakthroughs in the near future.aim to clarify that the FDA has the authority 
to regulate the noninvasive prenatal tests 
developed and used by individual laborato-
ries. These tests have rapidly evolved from 
niche laboratory trials to a major indus-
try; over a third of pregnant women in the 
US receive a simple blood test in the first 
trimester to check for fetal genetic abnor-
malities. While these tests are highly reliable 
for detecting common genetic conditions 
such as Down syndrome, the accuracy of 
newer tests for rare abnormalities is often 
questionable, frequently producing incorrect 
positive results. Such inaccuracies can lead 
to significant anxiety for expectant parents, 
sometimes prompting unnecessary and 
costly follow-up procedures. Under the new 
FDA oversight, the marketing and availability 
of such tests would require government ap-
proval, especially for tests considered “high 
risk” because they could influence critical 
medical decisions. 
Biobank Releases
The UK Biobank made 500,000 genome se-
quences available to scientists for biomedi-AGING, HEALTH, AND BEAUTY
305© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Soon, it may be possible to upgrade embryos before 
birth using new biotechnology techniques.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.TECH
Microbiome Metrics at Home
The human microbiome is a mini-universe of 
the genetic materials living on and inside our 
bodies, inherited from our gestational moth-
ers. It’s vast: there are 200 times more genes 
in the bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses 
that make up our microbiomes than in the hu-
man genome. That microbiome weighs nearly 
5 pounds, and it lives mostly in your gut and 
on your skin. Microbiomes differ greatly from 
person to person, even if you’re comparing sib-
lings who live in the same city. How well you 
digest lactose, how vulnerable you are to skin 
cancer, how well you sleep, your probability of 
developing anxiety or becoming obese—all of 
these traits are linked to the microbiome and 
influenced by what you eat and drink, whether 
you smoke, what chemicals your body comes 
into contact with, and what medications you 
take. Data about your microbiome used to be 
collected over several visits to an allergist, but 
today, at-home tests can determine its genetic 
makeup. Some companies will mix together 
special probiotic compounds to mitigate con-
ditions or optimize the symbiotic relationship 
your body has with all those microorganisms.Labs is developing biological reprogramming 
technology. In 2022, Altos, which raised a 
staggering $3 billion in funding over just 
one round, announced a partnership with the 
Center for iPS Cell Research and Application 
at Japan’s Kyoto University to study cellular 
rejuvenation programming.
Removing Zombie Cells
Senescent cells are damaged cells that stop 
functioning but don’t die, accumulating in 
the body like cellular zombies—and they’re 
linked to aging. But scientists are research-
ing the use of senolytic drugs, which remove 
these worn-out immune cells, as a way to 
treat diseases like multiple sclerosis. In 
MS, the immune system attacks the myelin 
sheath around nerves, and while it’s charac-
terized by phases of relapse and recovery, it 
can eventually progress into a phase where 
symptoms continuously worsen without pe-
riods of remission. In older animals, myelin 
damage leads to lots of senescent cells. But 
when researchers at Georgetown University 
injected older mice with a toxin to damage 
myelin and then treated some with seno-lytic drugs, the treated mice showed a 65% 
greater increase in a myelin-rebuilding protein 
compared to untreated mice. This finding 
indicates that removing senescent cells could 
improve myelin repair, and could mean that 
senolytic drugs offer a new treatment strategy 
for MS, particularly in its progressive stage—if 
it works in humans as well as it does mice, 
which for now is a big if. But if human trials 
show promising results, it is plausible that 
senolytic drugs could be developed to treat 
a host of diseases and ailments, along with 
conditions associated with aging.
Skin Care and Beauty
Synthetic biology–derived compounds are 
producing improved ingredients in skin care 
products. Amyris, one of the first commercial 
synthetic biology companies, created a suite 
of products developed with biosynthesis to 
create squalene, a key antioxidant found 
in moisturizers. Bay Area startup Geltor is 
engineering animal-free collagen for use in 
serums and creams, designed to plump skin 
and reduce the appearance of fine lines and 
wrinkles. Conventional collagen is usual-Age Reversal
As we age, while our DNA sequence might 
stay constant, chemical changes do occur. 
Observing those changes could lead to new 
techniques to halt or even reverse age-relat-
ed disease. Columbia University research-
ers discovered that it might be possible to 
record and store information about cells as 
they age. The technique, a sort of biological 
DVR, uses the CRISPR-Cas system over a pe-
riod of days. In the future, if we can quantify 
aging at a cellular level, we might be able to 
reverse it. Synthetic biologist George Church 
and a team at Harvard’s Wyss Institute com-
bined three different gene therapies related 
to cellular decay into a single compound. The 
intent: reverse obesity and diabetes while 
also improving kidney and heart function. 
Remarkably, the technique seemed to work 
(in mice, at least). Maybe that’s why last year 
there were so many funding and partnership 
announcements in the field. The Saudi royal 
family launched the Hevolution Foundation, 
a not-for-profit with an annual budget of $1 
billion to support basic research on the bi-
ology of aging. Meanwhile, the startup Altos AGING, HEALTH, AND BEAUTY
306© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
ly drawn from bovine sources, but modern 
bioengineering means it can be grown in a 
lab. Skin care brand Algenist uses bio-fer-
mented microalgae in its antiaging products, 
and it developed alguronic acid that makes 
skin look more youthful. One Ocean Beauty, 
founded by former Burberry Beauty President 
Marcella Cacci, produces a bio-fermented ex-
opolysaccharide isolated from brown kelp, an 
elasticity-promoting glycoprotein, and a blue 
light-repellant microorganism—all from cells 
found naturally in the ocean.
Improving Gut Biomes 
A mass extinction event is happening right 
now in our guts and in the environment. The 
widespread use of antibiotics, along with 
diets rich in processed foods, have led to a 
staggering decline of microorganisms inside 
the people and animals living in wealthy na-
tions. During the past 12,000 years of human 
evolution, we’ve shifted nature’s balance—our 
diets are now relatively narrow, compared to 
our far-distant ancestors. Recently, scientists 
studied modern hunter-gatherer tribes in Tan-
zania, Peru, and Venezuela, and found their & Melinda Gates Foundation as one of its 
investors. The American Gastroenterological 
Association and OpenBiome will track 4,000 
patients over 10 years to learn about fecal 
microbiomes. 
Optimizing Recreational Drugs
When it comes to recreational drugs like 
marijuana, genetic factors can determine 
whether someone feels pleasantly relaxed or 
anxious and listless. New diagnostic tests 
promise to optimize recreational drugs for 
someone’s unique genetic profile. Atai Life 
Sciences NV, based in Berlin, is researching 
genetics, depression, and small molecules 
within cells in an effort to repurpose psyche-
delics as therapies for depression and PTSD. 
MindMed in New York is developing a plat-
form to help patients determine which drugs 
to take—therapeutics based on MDMA and 
DMT—depending on genetics and other data.microbiota had 50% more bacterial species 
than those in the West today. Unlike those 
tribes, we no longer hunt and eat wild flora 
and fauna. Those from wealthier countries 
now eat very little dietary fiber, a limited 
variety of fruits and vegetables, and only four 
species of livestock: sheep, poultry, cattle, 
and pigs. Worse, widespread use of antibiot-
ics in farm animals—used not necessarily to 
prevent disease but to increase weight gain 
and therefore the volume of meat available—
means that we’re ingesting compounds that 
are helping to destroy our own microbiomes. 
Humans are complex, composite organ-
isms, made up of layers and layers of cells. 
Researchers now think that our gut micro-
biome is directly linked to our metabolism, 
our immune systems, our central nervous 
systems, and even the cognitive functions 
inside our brains. It’s an inherited problem: 
Most of our microbiomes come to us from 
our mothers as we pass through the birth 
canal. A number of researchers are now look-
ing at the future of our microbiomes. Vedan-
ta Biosciences is making gut bacteria that 
can be turned into drugs and counts the Bill AGING, HEALTH, AND BEAUTY
307© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Scientists are learning more every day about the 
relationship between our gut microbes and our 
bodies.
Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.308© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CLIMATE AND 
SUSTAINABILITYTECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
eDNA Detection
Environmental DNA, or eDNA, is genetic ma-
terial found in the environment. Feces and fur 
from animals, as well as hair and saliva from 
humans are just some of the organic matter 
found in soil, seawater, snow, and air. As a 
fish moves through water, it’s continuously 
shedding bits of itself. Likewise, when a cyclist 
rides on a trail, her sweat, mucus, and dead 
skin cells wind up mixed into the gravel and 
dirt. These fragments of nuclear or mitochon-
drial DNA can reveal invaluable insights about 
an environment. Scientists from the United 
States Geological Survey and the Monterey Bay 
Aquarium Research Institute are developing 
a new mobile eDNA sampler that can float 
through rivers and streams, collecting materi-
al and detecting pathogens or invasive species 
autonomously. As detection systems advance, 
eDNA detection will serve as early warning 
systems for potential outbreaks. But there’s 
another interesting use for eDNA: reconstruct-
ing ancient ecosystems. Scientists excavated 
eDNA from frozen soil in the Arctic desert, and 
were able to piece together a lost world nearly 
2 million years old. The eDNA revealed a coast -ments could make forestry more sustainable 
and efficient, offering new economic and 
environmental benefits.
Better Plastics Recycling
Despite global efforts to recycle plastic prod-
ucts, there are numerous barriers: Consum-
er-facing plastics come in different varieties, 
they’re often coated with labels or print, and 
they have colors and other added features. 
The mess of waste—used iPhone cases, emp-
ty shampoo containers, soda bottles—can’t 
be easily managed at scale, so a lot of it piles 
up. A potential solution is microorganisms 
like some bacteria and fungi that use spe-
cial enzymes to break down various types of 
plastics. But turning plastic into something 
these microbes can eat isn’t as simple as 
just mixing them together. The plastics need 
to be pre-damaged by sunlight or chemicals, 
and the microbes need just the right condi-
tions to do their work. Even so, each type of 
microbe can only eat certain plastics, and 
it can take them weeks or months to break 
down just a small amount. Now, an emerging synthetic biology process 
offers a new solution. France-based Carbios 
developed a process using an enzyme that’s 
especially good at breaking down PET plastic 
into its basic building blocks, making it possi-
ble to recycle PET into high-quality new plastic. 
After improving the enzyme and testing it in 
an industrial setting, Carbios is now building 
its first site dedicated to this bio-recycling 
process. Meanwhile, researchers at SLAC Na-
tional Accelerator Laboratory and the National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory used a microp-
orous material called a zeolite that contains 
cobalt nanoparticles as a catalyst to break 
down different polymer molecules, turning 
the majority into propane. At the University of 
Texas at Austin, researchers used a machine 
learning model to generate novel mutations to 
natural enzymes that allow bacteria to break 
down the plastics found in soda bottles and 
most consumer packaging. The enzyme, called 
FAST-PETase (functional, active, stable, and 
tolerant PETase), could operate efficiently and 
work at an industrial scale. The first real-world 
application: setting the enzyme loose to clean 
up landfills.al forest with conifers, black geese, horse-
shoe crabs, lemmings, and mastodons—a 
natural wonderland unlike any in existence 
today.
Using CRISPR for Sustainable Wood 
Production
Trees are a valuable natural resource, but 
improving their wood through traditional 
breeding is slow and complicated due to their 
complex genetics. CRISPR technology offers 
a way to quickly change trees to improve 
their wood—optimizing it for paper-making or 
reduced carbon emissions, for example. Sci-
entists have used CRISPR to change multiple 
genes in poplar trees, resulting in wood that’s 
easier to process and better for the environ-
ment. This breakthrough means we can now 
grow trees that are more suited for our needs 
while also helping the planet. The key chal-
lenge has been dealing with lignin, a natural 
part of wood that’s tough to break down. But 
by precisely editing genes related to lignin, 
researchers at North Carolina State University 
have created poplar trees with wood that’s 
much easier to turn into fiber. These advance-CLIMATE AND SUSTAINABILITY
309© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Engineering Plants for Carbon Capture
Carbon dioxide is the undisputed culprit 
when it comes to climate change. But what if 
we could just suck it out of the air? Trees do 
that naturally, but with deforestation, there’s 
not enough to make a sizable impact. The 
Salk Institute’s Harnessing Plants Initiative is 
working on an innovative approach that relies 
on our existing carbon storage mechanisms 
to help solve climate change. It’s developing 
engineered crops that can store more carbon 
in the ground for long periods of time. The 
crops have a larger root mass, are deeper, 
and contain more suberin, a plant tissue that 
already relies on CO2 and can store signifi-
cant amounts without causing harm to the 
plant. Salk researchers are hoping to develop 
strains of rice, wheat, corn, and other plants 
that both produce edible crops and store car-
bon, for improved soil health. Meanwhile, an 
artificial leaf developed at Harvard harnesses 
solar energy. When connected to a strain of 
bacteria, it converts atmospheric CO2 and 
nitrogen into organic forms that can benefit 
living organisms. Those hungry, solar-fed bac-
teria essentially overeat, to the point where veloped silks that are stronger, tougher, and 
lighter than previous versions, with an eight-
fold increase in yield. This innovation could 
provide an eco-friendly alternative to tradi-
tional textiles, drastically reducing waste 
in the fashion industry. The engineered 
silk, combining mussel foot proteins with 
spider silk properties, has already reached 
production levels sufficient for real-world 
product testing, marking a significant step 
toward its commercial use. Already, several 
other successful trials of synthesized tex-
tiles have occurred: Bolt Threads developed 
a synthetic fabric called Microsilk that’s 
engineered from spider DNA, and Japanese 
startup Spiber synthesized enough fibers to 
manufacture a limited-edition parka. While 
manufacturing new textiles is on the hori-
zon, getting bio-sourced materials such as 
PHAs, spider silk, and chitosan into the sup-
ply chain process remains a challenge. Mills 
and manufacturers don’t have incentives to 
risk using new materials that may not work 
seamlessly with their existing production 
equipment.30% of their body weight is excess energy—
stored CO2 and nitrogen. These microbes 
then get mixed into soil, and release all that 
nitrogen near the roots of plants, acting as 
an organic fertilizer. At that point, they also 
release the CO2, yet it remains trapped un-
derground. The result: enormous crop yields 
without the environmentally poisonous side 
effects typically associated with chemical 
fertilizers.
Greening Fashion
The textile and clothing industry is a noto-
rious polluter but is making steps toward 
more sustainable practices. Fuzhong Zhang, 
a professor at Washington University in 
St. Louis, has advanced the production of 
synthetic spider silk, which could lead to 
sustainable clothing manufacturing. Using 
synthetic biology, his team created a process 
to yield more silk from microbes, aiming 
to meet the fashion industry’s demand for 
renewable materials and reduce the envi-
ronmental impact associated with clothing 
production. By incorporating a protein from 
a common shellfish—mussels—the team de-CLIMATE AND SUSTAINABILITY
310© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
The Salk Institute’s Harnessing Plants Initiative is 
working on an innovative approach that relies on 
our existing carbon storage mechanisms to help 
solve climate change. 
Image credit: Salk Institute.TECH
De-Extincting Lost Species
Woolly mammoths were once a “keystone 
species,” one that other species in the eco-
system depended on in many ways for stabil-
ity. They stomped around in herds, knocking 
down trees and packing down snow layers 
as they searched for dead grasses to eat, and 
that helped keep the permafrost layer stable. 
Once the mammoths and other large grazing 
animals stopped compacting the snow and 
eating dead grasses, the ecosystem began to 
change: The snow melted more easily, which 
allowed the sun to reach the permafrost. The 
permafrost layer is now melting at an alarm-
ing rate and releasing greenhouse gasses into 
the atmosphere, which creates a vicious cycle: 
Hotter temperatures lead to more melting, 
which releases more gasses, which causes 
hotter temperatures, and on and on it goes. Re-
searchers are helping to de-extinct the woolly 
mammoth and other species using synthetic 
biology techniques: Starting with a fully intact 
healthy cell from a closely related species and 
working backward, with genetic fragments 
from preserved specimens, they could develop 
a version of the animals that once existed. bison were released in a woodland near Can-
terbury—the hope is that over time, the her-
bivores will revitalize a stretch of southeast 
England and allow vegetation to grow again, 
which should in turn boost biodiversity.
CRISPR Mosquitoes
Gene-drive technology, which has the po-
tential to spread antimalarial genes among 
mosquito populations, is showing prom-
ise. Malaria kills hundreds of thousands of 
people every year; 96% of the deaths are in 
African countries, and particularly impact 
children under age 5. The idea of gene drive, 
which uses special DNA pieces that copy 
themselves and spread quickly through an 
organism’s genes, was thought of years ago. 
However, it had problems because these 
DNA pieces could end up in important parts 
of the genes and cause harm. CRISPR-Cas9 
technology, which allows for precise genetic 
edits, enables the safe transfer of antimalar-
ial genes from one generation of mosquitos 
to the next. This advancement offers hope 
for controlling malaria by genetically modi-
fying mosquitoes to resist or eliminate the disease. There have now been several pilots 
around the world to edit mosquitoes so they 
no longer carry malaria. In 2021, biotech com-
pany Oxitec launched a controversial field test 
of specially engineered mosquitoes in Flori-
da in a move toward reducing the spread of 
deadly diseases such as dengue, yellow fever, 
and the Zika virus. Its tiny capsules contain 
an engineered form of the Aedes aegypti 
mosquito, called OX5034. Because only female 
Aedes aegypti bite and spread disease, Oxitec 
engineered males to pass on a gene that kills 
female offspring before they mature. Male 
offspring then continue mating and passing 
on the altered gene, which should change the 
population of disease-carrying mosquitoes. 
The US Environmental Protection Agency 
said this pilot poses no human threat, while 
local authorities, who have been dealing with 
steadily growing cases of dengue fever and 
West Nile virus, hope that a smaller mosqui-
to population will curb the diseases without 
insecticides or poisonous chemicals. The EPA 
later approved an expanded plan to release 
2.4 million genetically engineered mosquitoes 
in more US sites, including California. Similar Rewilding Barren T errains
Rewilding is a direct human intervention 
into nature using technology and science, 
a holistic approach to conservation that 
focuses on restoring the natural phenom-
ena of wilderness ecosystems, providing 
connective corridors between wild spaces, 
and reintroducing keystone species to their 
natural habitats. A term coined more than 30 
years ago, “rewilding” has gained renewed 
attention in the past few years as the cli-
mate crisis has grown more dire and new 
technologies have promised to protect and 
rehabilitate ecosystems. In 2017, research-
ers plunged into the waters off Lizard Island 
on the northeastern coast of Australia with 
some unexpected equipment in tow—a set 
of underwater loudspeakers. Their destina-
tion was a coral reef that had been all but 
abandoned by a once-thriving population 
of sea life. The researchers hoped that by 
broadcasting the telltale sounds of a healthy 
reef, they might lure back some of its vital 
inhabitants. Remarkably, it worked. This 
experiment was a unique instance of rewild-
ing, but there have been others. In 2022, four CLIMATE AND SUSTAINABILITY
311© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGCLIMATE AND SUSTAINABILITYTECH
experiments are underway in Malaysia and 
Panama. While they can transmit malaria, re-
searchers are also thinking about how to use 
engineered mosquitoes to deliver a defense 
against deadly viruses. What if in the future 
mosquitoes are flying syringes capable of de-
livering vaccines? University of Washington 
scientists are working on a weakened form 
of malaria-causing Plasmodium parasites 
that won’t get people sick but will cause the 
body to create antibodies. On the other hand, 
could meddling in the genetic code of in-
sects, reptiles, and animals have catastrophic 
consequences that no one anticipates? If that 
sounds familiar, it’s because you’ve seen that 
movie before: “Jurassic Park.” 
Reviving Ancient Viruses
As the Arctic warms, the thawing perma-
frost is raising concerns about the release of 
ancient viruses that could pose health risks 
to animals and humans. Scientists highlight 
the potential danger of these long-dormant 
viruses, along with the release of chemical 
and radioactive waste from the Cold War 
era, emphasizing the importance of keeping permafrost frozen. The permafrost acts as 
a natural time capsule, preserving not only 
viruses but also extinct animals, which 
scientists have been able to study. The rapid 
warming of the Arctic threatens to disrupt 
this frozen archive, with temperatures there 
rising up to four times faster than the global 
average. Research into “zombie viruses” 
found in Siberian permafrost has shown that 
some of these viruses are still infectious, 
which could mean a potential future risk of 
outbreaks from ancient pathogens. Global 
warming and increased activity in the region 
could heighten the possibility of a spillover 
event. Scientists advocate for proactive 
surveillance and research to understand the 
risks posed by thawing permafrost and to 
mitigate the impact of climate change on 
the release of pathogens.
312© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
As the permafrost layer melts, ancient viruses could thaw and release pathogens harmful to the 
modern world.
Image credit: Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.
As the permafrost layer melts, ancient viruses could thaw and release pathogens harmful to the 
modern world.
Image credit: Image credit: Future Today Institute and Dall-E.313© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.REGULATION  
AND POLICYBIOENGINEERING TECHTECH
Regulatory Changes T oward Genome-Edited 
Crops
Starting last year, countries have been reeval-
uating their regulatory stance on genome-ed-
ited crops, marking a significant change in 
agricultural biotechnology policies. China’s 
recent safety assessment guidelines for 
these crops show a partial shift from tradi-
tional regulations on genetically modified 
organisms, signaling a move toward a more 
nuanced approach that seeks to balance 
scientific innovation with public trust. Last 
July, the European Commission proposed 
legislative changes to relax the rules on gene 
editing, suggesting a departure from stringent 
GMO laws for certain next-generation tech-
niques. This proposed legislation argues that 
edits achievable through traditional breeding 
methods should not be subject to the same 
stringent regulations as GMOs, streamlining 
the approval process for these innovations. 
Still, more complex modifications involving 
foreign DNA would still fall under existing GMO 
regulations, maintaining a layer of oversight 
on more radical genetic alterations. Howev-
er, there is still no global framework, and as produced a 3D image of a potential suspect 
based on the DNA evidence—not a real photo-
graph but a predicted appearance including 
skin tone, eye and hair color, and other facial 
features. The company even incorporated a 
haircut and mustache based on a witness’ 
description, not the DNA. In a move to gather 
public tips, the police department released 
this generated face, leading (unsurprisingly) 
to controversy. In 2020, more controversy 
ensued when a detective requested to run 
the DNA-based facial reconstruction through 
facial recognition software, a move consid-
ered problematic by civil liberties experts and 
against Parabon NanoLabs’ policies. But while 
this was one of the first known instances of 
a police department using this tactic, the 
question of how and when to use someone’s 
DNA is increasingly common. The COVID-19 
pandemic accelerated widespread use of 
infectious disease surveillance techniques, 
from saliva tests at airports and border cross-
ings, to nasal swabbing at testing centers. To 
ease testing bottlenecks, which sometimes 
resulted in hours-long lines, alternative 
testing centers opened up: Private companies dispatched workers, who often had no medical 
training, to vans or small tents to administer 
PCR or rapid response tests. It wasn’t immedi-
ately clear where the test results would be sent, 
or who might also gain access to the data. With 
the growing size and scale of third-party test 
results and genetic databases, anyone with the 
right skills could identify individuals—and we 
don’t yet have safeguards against widespread 
genetic surveillance. As of the start of 2024, 
there are few restrictions on private companies 
buying and selling genetic data in the US and 
in many places around the world.
Safeguarding Genetic Privacy
Genetic privacy will be increasingly difficult 
to safeguard—yet big genetic data sets are 
required to perform the kind of research that 
leads to new therapeutics. Sharing a person’s 
complete genetic code online can help scien-
tists but also poses privacy risks, as people 
with bad intentions might use it to learn about 
the health of an individual or their family. 
Recently, experts have started using AI to 
generate artificial, but scientifically useful, ge-
netic data that keeps people’s identities safe. we’ve seen already, biology has a tendency to 
replicate and evolve in unpredictable ways. 
The developments in China and the EU reflect 
an urgent global need to update and reform 
regulatory frameworks for genome-edited 
crops, driven by a desire to foster innovation 
while ensuring safety and maintaining public 
confidence. As countries continue to adapt 
their policies, further changes will shape the 
future of agricultural biotechnology, poten-
tially making genome-edited crops more 
accessible and widely used across the globe.
Regulating DNA Recognition Systems 
Can you produce a photo of someone’s face 
solely from their DNA? In the US, police de-
tectives used a DNA sample to generate a 3D 
model of a suspect’s face using facial recog-
nition tools. Detectives from California’s East 
Bay Regional Park District Police Department 
decided to use genetic information from a 
1990 cold case involving the death of Maria 
Jane Weidhofer to create a lead. They sent the 
DNA from the crime scene to Parabon Nano-
Labs, which specializes in generating faces 
from DNA. Using machine learning, Parabon REGULATION AND POLICY
314© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Scientists at the University of Tartu, Estonia, 
use neural networks to develop novel seg-
ments on human genomes. Because genetic 
data is sensitive, the hope is that an artificial 
human genome will allow researchers to study 
DNA without infringing on anyone’s privacy. 
Researchers at the University of Montpellier 
in France developed a novel method that uses 
both AI and known information about how 
genes change in our bodies to work with big 
data sets more easily. They cut genetic data 
from thousands of people from different back-
grounds into pieces, based on where genes 
often mix during reproduction, and used it to 
train the AI system. It now creates artificial 
populations of genetic data that are diverse 
and realistic but don’t risk anyone’s privacy.
Defining Parenthood
The relationship between creating a child and 
being the parent of that child is becoming 
more complex due to advances in reproductive 
technology and changes in the law. Emerg-
ing technologies like induced pluripotent 
stem cells (see: Growing Sex Cells trend) will 
someday allow children to be conceived with National DNA Drives
Several countries are in the process of de-
veloping their own national DNA databases, 
notably for the purpose of medical research 
advancement. The United Arab Emirates is 
currently working to sequence its entire pop-
ulation; the goal is to aid scientific research, 
as well as to map and sequence the genes of 
UAE nationals, which will assist in prevent-
ing and treating chronic illnesses. Because 
existing databases are overwhelmingly made 
up of Caucasian Americans and Europeans, 
people of Arab descent have been exclud-
ed from the benefits of genetic research. 
While the UAE’s program is voluntary, there 
is a different strategy being used in China. 
Over the last decade, China has launched a 
comprehensive national effort to collect, se-
quence, and store the genetic information of 
its citizens, integrating DNA databases into 
a broader surveillance system fueled by the 
government’s ambitions in artificial intelli-
gence. This initiative has particularly targeted 
the Uyghur population, under the guise of 
public health programs like “Physicals for 
All,” leading to the collection of genetic data without clear consent and raising concerns 
over privacy and human rights violations. As 
China builds a vast and unparalleled genetic 
database, encompassing both minority groups 
and the majority Han Chinese population, it 
faces minimal domestic opposition to its ge-
netic research and surveillance practices, con-
trasting with the ongoing debates over genetic 
privacy in the US, Canada, the EU, and the UK.
International Collaborations to Advance 
Bioengineering
Researchers are building the first-ever com-
prehensive map of all 37.2 trillion human cells 
in the body. The effort includes 130 software 
engineers, mathematicians, computational 
scientists, biologists, clinicians, and physicists 
hailing from Israel, the Netherlands, Japan, the 
UK, the US, and Sweden. Although a cell atlas 
has long been theorized, new biological tools 
and more powerful computers have turned this 
one-time vision into a reality. These scientists 
believe this mapping will give the medical 
community a new way of understanding how 
our bodies work and will help diagnose, moni-
tor, and treat disease.synthetic eggs and sperm or grown in arti-
ficial wombs, challenging society’s current 
ideas about procreation and parenthood. In 
the UK, regulators are considering reforms 
to make surrogacy simpler and to address 
the issue of commercial surrogacy, which is 
technically illegal but practiced in a gray area. 
One controversial proposal is to allow surro-
gacy without a genetic link between the child 
and the commissioning parents, which raises 
questions about whether this constitutes as-
sisted reproduction or a form of adoption. The 
reforms also consider granting commission-
ing parents full parental rights from birth, 
moving away from the surrogate’s default 
parental rights. These discussions highlight 
the tension between the desire for genetic 
parenthood and reproductive freedom, espe-
cially in cases where a biological connection 
to the child does not exist. Such debates will 
become increasingly relevant with the intro-
duction of technologies like ectogenesis, po-
tentially redefining what it means to “make” 
a baby and become a parent.REGULATION AND POLICY
315© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING316© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ETHICS, 
TRUST AND 
ACCEPTANCETECH BIOENGINEERINGTECH
Resolving Bias in Genome Research
Overwhelmingly, the majority of people who 
have had their genomes sequenced come from 
affluent Caucasian Americans and Europeans; 
fewer than 2% are from Africa. This excludes 
an enormous number of people from the 
benefits of genetic research, so there is now 
increased attention and funding to diversify 
this pool. H3Africa works with African investi-
gators to determine genomic and environmen-
tal determinants of common diseases. The 
Non-Communicable Diseases Genetic Heritage 
Study consortium, based in Nigeria, is creating 
a comprehensive catalog of human genetic 
variation among Nigerians. A decade-long 
Three Million African Genomes project is also 
underway to locate missing genetic variants 
from ancestral genomes in Africa. It would 
build an African biobank of clinical informa-
tion and could lead to a more equitable future 
of genetic research.
Ethics in Indigenous Genomics
Biological materials from Indigenous peoples 
are still missing from genetic databases, 
basic research, and clinical studies. One major to another problem: The pool of genetic data 
in the US doesn’t include Indigenous peoples. 
New initiatives could make genetic datasets 
and research more inclusive. The Summer In-
ternship for Indigenous Peoples in Genomics 
trains budding scientists, while the Center for 
the Ethics of Indigenous Genomic Research 
works to promote Indigenous-led research in 
biobanking and precision medicine. Canada 
and New Zealand are both working on gov-
erning frameworks and libraries to include 
Indigenous peoples, relying on direction from 
local communities.
Posthumous Sperm Retrieval
In the wake of the Hamas terrorist attack on 
October 7, 2023, when hundreds of young 
men were among the Israelis who lost their 
lives, there was an unprecedented surge in 
requests for posthumous sperm retrieval 
(PSR) by embryologists and IVF special-
ists. This process involves retrieving viable 
sperm from the deceased’s testicular tis-
sue shortly after death and preserving it in 
liquid nitrogen. Families sought to preserve 
their loved one’s genetic legacy by extract-ing and freezing their sperm, hoping for the 
possibility of conceiving a child in the future. 
As a previously rare procedure, PSR required a 
family court order in Israel for unmarried men, 
while the spouse of a married individual could 
directly request the procedure. But the crisis 
led to Israel’s Ministry of Health easing regula-
tions, allowing hospitals to process requests 
from parents without court involvement. It also 
brought PSR into mainstream view, raising 
questions about whether it is ethical to retrieve 
and use sperm after death.
Gene Editing Ethics
In 2018, Chinese scientist He Jiankui caused 
a global uproar by announcing he had created 
the world’s first gene-edited children using 
CRISPR technology, targeting embryos to make 
them resistant to HIV. This led to the birth of 
twins, marking a controversial milestone in 
genetic editing. Jiankui’s actions, deemed 
“illegal medical practices” in China, resulted 
in a three-year prison sentence for him and 
his two associates, partly because the genetic 
alterations could be passed down to future 
generations. Following the scandal, China reason why can be traced back to how mem-
bers of the Havasupai tribe were treated by 
Arizona State University (ASU) in the late 20th 
century. In 1990, Havasupai were grappling 
with an increase in diabetes. They allowed 
ASU researchers to collect blood samples, 
hoping the research would help them eradi-
cate the disease. But then, unbeknownst to 
the Havasupai, the researchers changed the 
scope of the project to encompass genetic 
markers for alcoholism and various mental 
disorders. They went on to publish many 
papers in academic journals highlighting 
their results, which led to news stories about 
inbreeding and schizophrenia among tribe 
members. The Havasupai were, understand-
ably, horrified and humiliated, and they filed 
a lawsuit against ASU in 2004. ASU eventually 
settled the suit in 2010, returned the blood 
samples to the tribe, and promised not to 
publish any more research. Subsequently, 
the Navajo Nation, the second-largest group 
of Indigenous peoples in the US, banned all 
genetic sequencing, analysis, and related re-
search on its members. Although their objec-
tions were absolutely warranted, they’ve led ETHICS, TRUST AND ACCEPTANCE
317© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERINGETHICS, TRUST AND ACCEPTANCETECH
tightened regulations on human gene editing 
and banned He from conducting any repro-
ductive technology services. Despite these 
restrictions, late in 2023, He proposed a new 
study focused on editing mouse and human 
embryos to investigate potential protection 
against Alzheimer’s disease, citing the ur-
gent need to address the challenges posed by 
an aging population and the current lack of 
effective treatments for Alzheimer’s. His latest 
proposal has reignited ethical debates and 
concerns within the scientific community. The 
proposal’s reception remains mixed, reflect-
ing ongoing dilemmas over the boundaries of 
genetic research.
A dozen countries have now banned germ line 
engineering in humans, though their ranks 
do not include China, which tightened regula-
tions without banning the practice outright. 
Federal law in the US regulates the use of 
federal funds for research on human germline 
gene therapy—laws are notoriously politicized 
and have changed a few times in the past 
decade. The EU’s Convention on Human Rights 
and Biomedicine said tampering with the gene immune responses. The team plans to further 
their research by transforming these mod-
ified cells into blood-making cells to help 
humans survive acute radiation sickness, 
suggesting additional benefits in protecting 
against diseases such as cancer and dia-
betes. The experiment was deemed legal as 
it was conducted on cultured cell lines in a 
lab. But what happens when that research is 
ready to leave the lab for the real world?pool would be a crime against human dignity 
and human rights. But all those declarations 
were made before it was actually possible to 
precisely engineer the germ line. Now, with 
CRISPR, it is possible.
Engineering Super Soldiers 
Last year, a team of military medical sci-
entists in China reported that they had 
enhanced human embryonic stem cells’ 
resistance to radiation by inserting a gene 
from the water bear, a microorganism known 
for its extreme survivability. Using CRISPR 
technology, they achieved a high survival rate 
of these modified cells under lethal radiation 
exposure. The research, led by professor Yue 
Wen at the Academy of Military Sciences in 
Beijing, has sparked interest (read: alarm) 
since its publication, because of the impli-
cation: What if this is used to create a new 
version of superhumans, capable of surviv-
ing extreme conditions like nuclear fallout? 
Scientists around the world raised concerns 
about the safety and ethical implications 
of transferring genes across species, with 
the risk of harmful mutations or unknown 
318© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING
Some researchers are concerned that biological ex-
perimentation could someday produce supersoldiers 
who have been enhanced with special capabilities.
Image credit: Image credit: Future Today Institute 
and Dall-E.AUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
319© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BIOENGINEERING TECH320© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AMY WEBB  
Chief Executive Officer 
Recognized as the global leader in strategic fore-
sight, Amy Webb advises business leaders through 
disruptive change, enabling them to navigate an 
unpredictable future with confidence and take 
actions that address global challenges, create 
sustainable value, and ensure a company’s long-term growth. As founder and CEO of 
the Future Today Institute, Amy pioneered a unique quantitative modeling approach 
and data-driven foresight methodology that identifies signals of change and emerg-
ing patterns very early. Using that information, Amy and her colleagues identify white 
spaces, opportunities, and threats early enough for action. They develop predictive 
scenarios, along with executable strategy, for their global client base. In 2023, Amy 
was recognized as the #4 most influential management thinker in the world by 
Thinkers50, a biannual ranking of global business thinkers. She was also featured on 
the 2021 Thinkers 50 list, was shortlisted for the 2021 Digital Thinking Award, and re-
ceived the 2017 Thinkers50 Radar Award. Forbes called Amy “one of the five women 
changing the world, ” and she was honored as one of the BBC’s 100 Women of 2020. Amy also serves as a professor of strategic foresight at New York University’s Stern 
School of Business, where she developed and teaches the MBA-level strategic fore-
sight course with live case studies. She is a Visiting Fellow at Oxford University’s Säid 
School of Business. She was elected a life member of the Council on Foreign Relations 
and is a member of the Bretton Woods Committee. She is a Steward and Steering 
Committee Member for the World Economic Forum, a founding member of the Forum’s 
Strategic Foresight Council, a member of the Forum’s Risk Advisory Council, and serves 
on the Forum’s Global Futures Council. She was a Delegate on the former U.S.-Russia 
Bilateral Presidential Commission, representing US interests in technology.
 Regarded as one of the most important voices on the futures of technology (with spe-
cializations in both AI and synthetic biology), Amy is the author of four books, including 
the international bestseller The Big Nine and her most recent, The Genesis Machine, 
which was listed as one of the best nonfiction books of 2022 by The New Yorker. To 
date, her books have been translated into 19 languages. A widely published and quoted 
thought leader, Amy regularly appears in a wide range of publications and broadcasts.Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSBIOENGINEERING TECH
SELECTED  
SOURCES
321© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH BIOENGINEERING322© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Attal-Juncqua, Aurelia, Galen 
Dods, Nicole Crain, et al. “Shap-
ing the Future US Bioeconomy 
Through Safety, Security, Sus-
tainability, and Social Responsi-
bility.” Trends in Biotechnology, 
December 20, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2023.11.015.
Balaguer, Angels, Vinamra 
Benara, Renato Luiz de Freitas 
Cunha, et al. “RAG vs Fine-Tun-
ing: Pipelines, Tradeoffs, and a 
Case Study on Agriculture.” ArX-
iv, January 17, 2024. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.08406.
Baldock, Sara J., Punarja Kevin, 
Garry R. Harper, et al. “Creating 
3D Objects with Integrated 
Electronics via Multiphoton Fab-
rication In Vitro and In Vivo.” Ad-
vanced Materials Technologies 
8, no. 11 (2023): 2201274. https://
doi.org/10.1002/admt.202201274.
Ball, Philip. “Synthetic Morphol-
ogy Lets Scientists Create New 
Life-Forms.” Scientific American, May 1, 2023. www.scientificamer-
ican.com/article/synthetic-mor-
phology-lets-scientists-cre-
ate-new-life-forms/.
Ballard, Shawn, and Washington 
University in St Louis. “Syn-
thetic Biology Meets Fashion 
in Engineered Silk.” Phys.org, 
April 20, 2023. https://phys.org/
news/2023-04-synthetic-biolo-
gy-fashion-silk.html.
“Biomemory—DNA Digital Data 
Storage.” www.biomemory.com/.
“Bi-Terminal Fusion of Intrin-
sically-Disordered Mussel Foot 
Protein Fragments Boosts Me-
chanical Strength for Protein Fi-
bers.” Nature Communications, 
April 14, 2023. www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-023-37563-0.
Boiko, Daniil A., Robert 
MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. 
“Emergent Autonomous Sci-
entific Research Capabilities 
of Large Language Models.” ArXiv, April 11, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.05332.
Boyle, Alan. “Seattle Hub for 
Synthetic Biology Plans to Trans-
form Cells into Tiny Recording 
Devices.” GeekWire, December 7, 
2023. www.geekwire.com/2023/
seattle-hub-for-synthetic-biolo-
gy-recording-cells/.
Bran, Andres M., Sam Cox, Oliver 
Schilter, et al. “ChemCrow: Aug-
menting Large-Language Models 
with Chemistry Tools.” arXiv, 
October 2, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.05376.
Brown University. “Eric Sorge: 
Leveraging Synthetic Biology to 
Clean Arsenic-Poisoned Water.” 
January 18, 2024. www.brown.
edu/news/2023-08-24/sorge.
Burnard, Callum, Alban Man-
cheron, and William Ritchie. 
“Generating Realistic Artificial 
Human Genomes Using Adver-
sarial Autoencoders.” BioRxiv, 
December 9, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1101/2023.12.08.570767.Chulikavit, Nattanan, Cheng 
Wang, Tien Huynh, et al. “Fire-
proofing Flammable Composites 
Using Mycelium: Investigating 
the Effect of Deacetylation on 
the Thermal Stability and Fire 
Reaction Properties of Myce-
lium.” Polymer Degradation 
and Stability 215 (September 
1, 2023): 110419. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymdegrad-
stab.2023.110419.
Commissioner, Office of the. 
“FDA Approves First Gene Thera-
pies to Treat Patients with Sickle 
Cell Disease.” FDA, December 
8, 2023. www.fda.gov/news-
events/press-announcements/
fda-approves-first-gene-thera-
pies-treat-patients-sickle-cell-
disease.
Crispo, M., A. P. Mulet, L. Tesson, 
et al. “Efficient Generation of 
Myostatin Knock-Out Sheep 
Using CRISPR/Cas9 Technol-
ogy and Microinjection into 
Zygotes.” PLOS ONE 10, no. 8 (August 25, 2015): e0136690. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0136690.
Dalal, Vasundhra, Nagarjuna Pa-
supuleti, Gyaneshwer Chaubey, 
et al. “Advancements and Chal-
lenges in Ancient DNA Research: 
Bridging the Global North–South 
Divide.” Genes 14, no. 2 (February 
2023). https://doi.org/10.3390/
genes14020479.
“Data Science & Artificial Intel-
ligence: Unlocking New Science 
Insights.” AstraZeneca. Accessed 
January 31, 2024. www.astrazen-
eca.com/r-d/data-science-and-
ai.html.
DeAngelis, Allison. “VC Firm 
Starts a New Synthetic Biology 
Incubator, Headed by a Former 
Broad Institute Scientist.” STAT 
(blog), July 27, 2023. https://
www.statnews.com/2023/07/27/
ra-capital-synthetic-biology-in-
cubator/.Dixon, Thomas A., Paul S. 
Freemont, Richard A. Johnson, 
and Isak S. Pretorius. “A Global 
Forum on Synthetic Biology: The 
Need for International Engage-
ment.” Nature Communications 
13, no. 1 (June 18, 2022): 3516. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
022-31265-9.
Dusséaux, Simon, Victor For-
man, and Sotirios C. Kampranis. 
“Precision Fermentation to 
Make Non-Alcoholic Beer Taste 
Great.” Trends in Biotechnology, 
November 23, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2023.10.016.
Gim, Gyeong-Min, Dong-Hyeok 
Kwon, Kyeong-Hyun Eom, et al. 
“Production of MSTN-Mutated 
Cattle without Exogenous Gene 
Integration Using CRISPR-Cas9.” 
Biotechnology Journal 17, no. 
7 (2022): 2100198. https://doi.
org/10.1002/biot.202100198.SELECTED SOURCESTECH BIOENGINEERING323© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Guo, Rihong, Yongjie Wan, 
Dan Xu, et al. “Generation and 
Evaluation of Myostatin Knock-
out Rabbits and Goats Using 
CRISPR/Cas9 System.” Scientific 
Reports 6, no. 1 (July 15, 2016): 
29855. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep29855.
Hahn, Jaeseung, Suwan Ding, 
Jongwon Im, et al. “Bacterial 
Therapies at the Interface of 
Synthetic Biology and Nanomed-
icine.” Nature Reviews Bioengi-
neering, October 10, 2023: 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-
023-00119-4.
Han, Ping, Wei Zhe Teo, and Wen 
Shan Yew. “Biologically Engi-
neered Microbes for Bioreme-
diation of Electronic Waste: 
Wayposts, Challenges and Fu-
ture Directions.” Engineering Bi-
ology 6, no. 1 (February 26, 2022): 
23–34. https://doi.org/10.1049/
enb2.12020.Honu, Mandana Manzari, Bog-
dan Knezevic, and David Yen. 
“Make Better, Data-Backed Deci-
sions to Hit Biotech Milestones 
Faster.” Trends in Biotechnology, 
January 3, 2024. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2023.11.011.
“How Artificial Intelligence Is 
Revolutionizing Drug Discov-
ery.” Bill of Health, Petrie-Flom 
Law Center at Harvard Law 
School, March 20, 2023. https://
blog.petrieflom.law.harvard.
edu/2023/03/20/how-artifi-
cial-intelligence-is-revolutioniz-
ing-drug-discovery/.
“Human Fetal Brain Self-Or-
ganizes into Long-Term Ex-
panding Organoids”. Cell 187, 
issue 3 (February 1, 2024). www.
cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-
8674(23)01344-2.
Imperial News. “First UK Patients 
Receive Experimental mRNA 
Therapy for Cancer.” Imperi-
al College London, February 4, 2024. www.imperial.ac.uk/
news/251213/first-uk-pa-
tients-receive-experimental-mr-
na/.
Intellia Therapeutics. “MAGNI-
TUDE: A Phase 3, Multinational, 
Multicenter, Randomized, Dou-
ble-Blind, Placebo-Controlled 
Study to Evaluate the Efficacy 
and Safety of NTLA-2001 in 
Participants With Transthyretin 
Amyloidosis With Cardiomyop-
athy (ATTR-CM).” Clinical trial 
registration. January 19, 2024. 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/
NCT06128629.
Jones, Sam. “How Genetically 
Modified Mosquitoes Could 
Eradicate Malaria.” Nature 618, 
no. 7967 (June 28, 2023): S29–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-
023-02051-4.
Kale, Sampreeti Sri Sai, Rohith 
Kode, Sai Kiran Kuchana, and L. 
V. Simhachalam Kutikuppala. 
“Breakthrough in the Scientific 
World: Lab-Grown Red Blood 
Cells Used in Transfusions.” Asian Journal of Transfusion 
Science 17, no. 1 (2023): 143–44. 
https://doi.org/10.4103/ajts.
ajts_148_22.
Kasman, Laura M., and La Donna 
Porter. “Bacteriophages.” In 
StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL): 
StatPearls Publishing, 2024. 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK493185/.
Kitson, Philip J., Guillaume Marie, 
Jean-Patrick Francoia, et al. “Dig-
itization of Multistep Organic 
Synthesis in Reactionware for 
On-Demand Pharmaceuticals.” 
Science 359, no. 6373 (January 
19, 2018): 314–19. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aao3466.
Kreitz, Joseph, Mirco J. Friedrich, 
Akash Guru, et al. “Program-
mable Protein Delivery with a 
Bacterial Contractile Injection 
System.” Nature 616, no. 7956 
(April 2023): 357–64. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-023-05870-
7.LeMieux, Julianna. “New Organ-
oid AirGels May Boost Infectious 
Disease Research.” Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnolo-
gy News, August 1, 2023. www.
genengnews.com/topics/
infectious-diseases/new-or-
ganoid-airgels-may-boost-infec-
tious-disease-research/.
Lin, Belle, Isabelle Bousquette, 
and Angus Loten. “Synthetic 
Biology Moves From the Lab to 
the Marketplace.” Wall Street 
Journal, September 19, 2023. 
www.wsj.com/articles/synthetic-
biology-moves-from-the-lab-to-
the-marketplace-3f409a87.
Lv, Hui, Nuli Xie, Mingqiang Li, et 
al. “DNA-Based Programmable 
Gate Arrays for General-Purpose 
DNA Computing.” Nature 622, no. 
7982 (October 2023): 292–300. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
023-06484-9.
“Machine Learning for Molecu-
lar Simulation. Annual Review 
of Physical Chemistry 71 (April 2020). www.annualreviews.
org/doi/10.1146/annurev-phy-
schem-042018-052331.
Melton, Lisa. “Synbio Salvag-
es Alcohol-Free Beer.” Nature 
Biotechnology 40, no. 1 (Janu-
ary 1, 2022): 8–8. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41587-021-01202-0.
Merchant, Amil, Simon Batzner, 
Samuel S. Schoenholz, et al. 
“Scaling Deep Learning for Mate-
rials Discovery.” Nature 624, no. 
7990 (December 2023): 80–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
023-06735-9.
“Metagenomics.” www.genome.
gov/genetics-glossary/Metage-
nomics.
MIT News. “AI System Can 
Generate Novel Proteins That 
Meet Structural Design Targets.” 
April 20, 2023. https://news.mit.
edu/2023/ai-system-can-gen-
erate-novel-proteins-structur-
al-design-0420.SELECTED SOURCESTECH BIOENGINEERING324© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MIT News. “Harnessing Syn-
thetic Biology to Make Sustain-
able Alternatives to Petroleum 
Products,” July 20, 2023. https://
news.mit.edu/2023/viso-
lis-startup-sustainable-alter-
naties-petroleum-0720.
New Atlas. “Synthetic Biology 
Breakthrough Fixes CO2 from 
the Air Better than Nature.” Jan-
uary 3, 2024. https://newatlas.
com/biology/synthetic-biolo-
gy-co2-fixing-better-nature/.
Ni, Bo, David L. Kaplan, and 
Markus J. Buehler. “Generative 
Design of de Novo Proteins 
Based on Secondary-Struc-
ture Constraints Using an 
Attention-Based Diffusion 
Model.” Chem 9, no. 7 (July 
13, 2023): 1828–49. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chem-
pr.2023.03.020.Northwestern Engineering. 
“When Bioelectronics and 
Synthetic Biology Unite.” www.
mccormick.northwestern.
edu/news/articles/2023/08/
when-bioelectronics-and-syn-
thetic-biology-unite/.
Pathak, Kalyani, Riya Saikia, 
Aparoop Das, et al. “3D Printing 
in Biomedicine: Advancing Per-
sonalized Care through Additive 
Manufacturing.” Exploration 
of Medicine 4, no. 6 (December 
29, 2023): 1135–67. https://doi.
org/10.37349/emed.2023.00200.
Peel, Michael, and Clive Cook-
son. “Scientists Reprogramme 
Microbes in Quest to Create 
New Materials.” Financial Times, 
January 11, 2024. www.ft.com/
content/19989e64-6f52-49ff-
bcb6-124c7e41ca7f.
“Programmable DNA Machines 
Offer General-Purpose Comput-
ing.” IEEE Spectrum September 
26, 2023.” https://spectrum.ieee.
org/dna-computing.“Researchers Use Quantum 
Biology to Understand Human 
Response to Earth’s Magnetic 
Field.” Johns Hopkins Universi-
ty Applied Physics Laboratory, 
March 13, 2023. www.jhuapl.edu/
news/news-releases/230313-us-
ing-quantum-mechanics-to-un-
derstand-biology.
Rice University. “Rice University 
Launches Rice Synthetic Biology 
Institute to Improve Lives.” Jan-
uary 10, 2024. https://news.rice.
edu/news/2024/rice-universi-
ty-launches-rice-synthetic-biolo-
gy-institute-improve-lives.
Schneider, Gisbert. “Automating 
Drug Discovery.” Nature Reviews 
Drug Discovery 17, no. 2 (Feb-
ruary 2018): 97–113. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrd.2017.232.
“Semiconductor Sequencing 
Technology - US.” www.ther-
mofisher.com/us/en/home/
life-science/sequencing/
next-generation-sequencing/
ion-torrent-next-generation-se-
quencing-technology.html.“Shapes 3D-Printed into Living 
Worms Could Be Future of Brain 
Implants.” New Scientist, April 
17, 2023. https://cacm.acm.org/
news/272112-shapes-3d-printed-
into-living-worms-could-be-fu-
ture-of-brain-implants/fulltext.
Snyder, Alison. “Scientists Build 
Yeast with Artificial DNA in a Ma-
jor Synthetic Biology Advance.” 
Axios, November 9, 2023. www.
axios.com/2023/11/09/synthet-
ic-biology-yeast-artificial-ge-
nome.
South China Morning Post. 
“Team Behind Extreme Animal 
Gene Experiment Eyes Human 
Nuclear Resistance.” March 29, 
2023. www.scmp.com/news/
china/science/article/3215286/
chinese-team-behind-extreme-
animal-gene-experiment-says-
it-may-lead-super-soldiers-who-
survive.Stock, Michiel, and Thomas E. 
Gorochowski. “Open-Endedness 
in Synthetic Biology: A Route to 
Continual Innovation for Biolog-
ical Design.” Science Advances 
10, no. 3 (January 19, 2024): 
eadi3621. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.adi3621.
Sulis, Daniel B., Xiao Jiang, Chen-
min Yang, et al. “Multiplex CRIS-
PR Editing of Wood for Sustain-
able Fiber Production.” Science 
381, no. 6654 (July 14, 2023): 
216–21. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.add4514.
Symes, Mark D., Philip J. Kit-
son, Jun Yan, et al. “Integrated 
3D-Printed Reactionware for 
Chemical Synthesis and Anal-
ysis.” Nature Chemistry 4, no. 5 
(May 2012): 349–54. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nchem.1313.
“Synthetic Biology Market 
Trends.” Mordor Intelligence. 
Accessed January 28, 2024. 
www.mordorintelligence.com/
industry-reports/synthetic-biol-
ogy-market/market-trends.“Telomere-to-Telomere.” National 
Human Genome Research Insti-
tute. www.genome.gov/about-ge-
nomics/telomere-to-telomere.
“Transformative Life Sci-
ences Trends for 2024.” Bio-
Spectrum, January 2, 2024. 
www.biospectrumasia.
com/analysis/27/23518/
transformative-life-scienc-
es-trends-for-2024.html.
“US Trends in Synthetic Biolo-
gy Research Funding.” Wilson 
Center. www.wilsoncenter.org/
publication/us-trends-synthet-
ic-biology-research-funding.
Wang, Kankan, Hongsheng Ouy-
ang, Zicong Xie, et al. “Efficient 
Generation of Myostatin Muta-
tions in Pigs Using the CRISPR/
Cas9 System.” Scientific Reports 
5, no. 1 (November 13, 2015): 
16623. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep16623.SELECTED SOURCESTECH BIOENGINEERING325© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Williams, Rory L., and Chang C. 
Liu. “Accelerated Evolution of 
Chosen Genes.” Science 383, no. 
6681 (January 26, 2024): 372–73. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
adn3434.
Wong, Carissa. “UK First to 
Approve CRISPR Treatment for 
Diseases: What You Need to 
Know.” Nature 623, no. 7988 
(November 16, 2023): 676–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-
023-03590-6.
World Economic Forum. “How 
Investment into Synthetic Biolo-
gy Could Help Achieve Net Zero,” 
January 2, 2024. www.weforum.
org/agenda/2024/01/synthet-
ic-biology-potential-at-scale-in-
vesting/.
Yang, Fei, Kaili Zheng, and Yu 
Yao. “China’s Regulatory Change 
Toward Genome-Edited Crops.” 
Trends in Biotechnology, De-
cember 30, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2023.12.008.Yin, Wenqi, Chao Qiu, Hangyan 
Ji, et al. “Recent Advances in Bio-
molecule-Based Films and Coat-
ings for Active and Smart Food 
Packaging Applications.” Food 
Bioscience 52 (April 1, 2023): 
102378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fbio.2023.102378.
Zaman, Qamar U., Ali Raza, Jorge 
Lozano-Juste, et al. “Engineering 
Plants Using Diverse CRIS-
PR-Associated Proteins and 
Deregulation of Genome-Edited 
Crops.” Trends in Biotechnology, 
November 21, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2023.10.007.
Zarnack, Kathi, and Eduardo 
Eyras. “Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learning in RNA Biolo-
gy.” Briefings in Bioinformatics 
24, no. 6 (November 15, 2023): 
bbad415. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bib/bbad415.Zhu, Jingen, Himanshu Batra, 
Neeti Ananthaswamy, et al. “De-
sign of Bacteriophage T4-Based 
Artificial Viral Vectors for Human 
Genome Remodeling.” Nature 
Communications 14, no. 1 (May 
30, 2023): 2928. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-023-38364-1.SELECTED SOURCESTECH BIOENGINEERINGENERGY • CLIMATE2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITIONTECH
328© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSENERGY & CLIMATE 
330 T op Headlines
331  State of Play
332 Key Events
333 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
334 Why Energy & Climate  
Trends Matter to Y our 
Organization 
335 When Will Energy &  
Climate Trends Impact  
Y our Organization?
336 Opportunities and Threats
337 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
338 Central Themes
340 Ones T o Watch
341  Important T erms
342 Energy Production
343 New Solar
343 Concentrated Solar 
343 Multitasking Solar 
343 Dispatchable Solar 347 Digitalization 
348 Small Scale Hydro 
348 Hydro as a Water Battery 
348 New Turbine Design 
349 Clean Fuels 
349 Hydrogen 
349 Reducing the Cost of Hydrogen 
Production 
349 New Base Materials 
349 Biofuels 
349 Biofuels From Hemp 
350 Biofuels From Algae 
350 Syngas From the Sun 
351 Fossil Fuel Innovation
351 Rededication of Contaminated 
Land
351 Reducing the Carbon Footprint 
of Fossil Fuels
351 Methane Emissions 
Reductions
352 New Nuclear352 Fusion 
352 Fusion Momentum 
352 Privately led Fusion Projects 
352 Molten Salt Reactors 
352 Laser-Driven Fusion 
352 Small Modular Reactors 
354 Emerging Forms of  
Energy Production
354 Energy From Thin Air 
354 Wave Power
354 Tidal Turbines
354 Mimicking Photosynthesis
355 Alternatives to Minerals and 
Rare Earths
355 Local Sourcing 
355 Alternative Materials 
355 Rare Earth Avoidance 
356 Scenario: What If the World 
Runs on Thermal Energy? 
357 Energy Infrastructure
358 Energy Storage358 TPV Batteries
358 Iron Batteries 
358 Solid State Batteries
359 Gravitational Energy Storage
359 Flow Batteries
359 Capacitors
359 Compressed Air Storage (CAES)
360 Energy Transport
360 UHV Power Lines
360 Superconductors
361 The Grid
361 Dynamic Line Rating (DLR)  
Systems
361 Balancing the Flow of Power 
Within the Grid
362 Emissions Removal
363 Carbon Capture and Storage 
363 Natural CSS 
363 Direct Air Capture 
363 CO2 Storage 343 Perovskite Cells 
344 Dye-sensitized Solar Cells 
344 Organic Solar Materials 
344 Solar Thermophotovoltaics 
345 New Wind
345 Offshore Floating Wind 
Turbines
345 Vertical Wind Turbines
345 Going Bladeless 
345 Airborne Wind Energy
346 AI Wind Farms
346 Dispatchable Wind Energy 
Production
347 Other Renewables
347 Geothermal 
347 Supercritical Geothermal 
347 Using Geothermal for  
Energy Storage 
347 Ocean Thermal Energy 
Conversion 
347 Hydropower TECH
329© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSENERGY & CLIMATE 
364 CCS-as-a-Service 
365 Carbon Utilization 
365 Carbon-Based Food 
365 Diamonds 
365 Hair Care, Soap, and Laundry 
Detergent 
365 Chemical Production 
366 Carbon Tracking
366 Funding Influx 
366 Tracking Platforms 
366 Government Investment and 
Regulation 
366 Individual Consumer Tracking 
367 Scenario: What If CO2 Is the 
Foundation for Consumer 
Products?
368 Emissions Reductions
369 Green Processes
369 Construction
369 Carbon Neutral or Negative 
Building Materials 374 Mushroom Plastic 
374 Self-Healing Materials 
375 Lab Grown Leather 
376 Green Transport
376 Micromobility
376 Cars
376 Heavy Trucks
376 Trains
377 Air
377 Ocean
378 Environmental Manipulation
379 Earth
379 Rewilding: Animals/Nature
379 Bioengineering
380 Sky
380 Geoengineering
380 Solar Geoengineering
380 Cloud Seeding
381 Ocean381 Microplastics
381 Living Breakwater 
381 Ocean Chemistry
381 Gene Editing
382 Scenario: What If a Sunshield 
Leads to a New World Order?
383 Effects of Climate Change
384 Monitoring Climate Change
384 Emissions
384 Extreme Weather 
384 Crops
385 Community-based Efforts
385 Digital Twins of Earth
386 Living in a New Reality
386 Floating Cities
386 Other Concepts for Cities
386 Underground Climate Change 
386 Indonesia’s New Capital
386 Domed Cities 387 Climate Economy
388 Carbon Credits
388 Investment From Traditional 
Banks 
388 Verification Methodology 
388 Focus on Asset Management
388 Blockchain Integration
388 Measuring Carbon 
Sequestration 
389 Blue Economy 
389 Blue Carbon Offsets 
389 Ocean land mapping
389 Foundational Data US
389 Data Platforms 
390 Fishing 
390 Desalination
391 Authors
393 Selected Sources369 3D Printed Houses 
370 Heavy Industries 
370 Steel and Iron
370 Chemicals 
371 Agriculture
371 Plants Without Plants
371 Fertilizer Innovation 
371 CRISPR Edited Crops
371 Waste
372 Digital Emissions
372 Reducing Carbon Emissions
372 Measuring Emissions
373 Recycling
373 AI Waste-Sorting Robots 
373 Food 
373 Plastic
374 Green Materials
374 Cross-Laminated Timber
374 Mycelium ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
Private and public 
climate efforts widen 
and accelerate in 
the light of the most 
extreme weather we 
have ever experienced01
02
03
04
05
330© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Investment is shifting from clean energy to enabling technologies
As wind and solar provide more power, venture capital is targeting bottlenecks  
in supporting infrastructures such as the grid and monitoring technology.
Extreme weather sets new records  
2023 was the hottest year in the history of humankind; as the ocean warms,  
the collapse of the Gulf Stream is projected to be much more likely.
Tracking carbon has become popular with regulators 
Regulators have shifted their focus from establishing the carbon market to 
adding transparency, standards, and verification frameworks.
Polluters being held accountable  
A slew of groundbreaking litigation set precedents for holding governments and  
companies accountable for the effects of climate change caused by their (in)action.
Governments are considering a broader set of tools 
Regulators are exploring solar geoengineering, considering softer regulations for  
CRISPR crops, and redesigning urban concepts to adapt to hostile environments.TOP HEADLINESSTATE 
OF PLAYIn 2023, attention shifted from scaling of renewable energies and electric 
vehicles to ensuring that these scaled technologies could be viably inte-
grated into existing systems. Venture capital moved from transportation, 
energy, and food and land use to the built environment and heavy industry 
decarbonization, making significant innovation likely. Governments tight-
ened ESG regulations, putting pressure on companies to bring transparen-
cy into carbon emission reporting, even while standardization frameworks 
for measuring and reporting these emissions along the entire supply 
chain are still being developed. These increased reporting pressures run 
the risk of leading to a focus on the wrong metrics, crippling effective envi-
ronmental initiatives.
Environmental impacts are now defined more broadly, which increases 
companies’ responsibilities. The framework passed at the 2022 UN’s Bio-
diversity Conference amplified the protection of biological ecosystems, eq-
uitable access, and human rights. In 2023, COP28 had its first-ever health 
day, and nations committed to include food systems into their updated 
Nationally Determined Contributions. Further responsibilities might come 
from a series of lawsuits which decide if actors can be held responsible for 
the effects of climate change they caused. If courts rule they are, prepare 
for drastically changed efforts in regulation and business practices.From revolution to evolution:  
The global focus shifts to the 
creation of an enabling ecosystem 
for climate action at scale.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ENERGY & CLIMATE 
331TECH
332© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MARCH 8, 2023
Carbon injected in the sea  
Denmark became the first nation 
to import CO2 for the purpose of 
burying it in the North Sea.
MARCH 14, 2023
Forever chemicals ban  
In the US, toxic PFAS are 
banned from water while  
the EU backpedals.JULY 5, 2023
Looser GMO rules in EU  
The European Commission 
proposes looser restrictions in 
light of innovation in the field.JUNE 29, 2023
Fraud task force for ESGs  
The Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission announces a task 
force to combat ESG related fraud.DECEMBER 3, 2023
First Ever COP Health Day  
The acknowledgment of the intercon-
nectedness of health and environment 
at the UN Climate Change Conference 
gives hope for integrated actions.KEY EVENTSENERGY & CLIMATE 
TECH
333© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CHANGE IS THE NEW NORMAL
Two opposing forces will make the 
corporate landscape highly volatile 
and unpredictable. On the one hand, 
active regulatory bodies, scaling of 
renewable energy production, and 
increased investment in innovation 
that aims to solve the remaining 
bottlenecks will require and empower 
corporations to integrate sustain-
ability in ways not imaginable just 
a few years ago. On the other hand, 
economic headwinds in the form of 
heavy inflation and a looming reces-
sion might lead consumers to priori-
tize affordability over sustainability, 
and escalating geopolitical tensions 
could strain the supply chain, in-
crease the price of raw materials, and 
hinder collaboration in research—
slowing down innovation.Price Beats Ethics
As inflation soars and the fear of a recession 
festers, consumers might put affordability 
above climate considerations, at least when it 
comes to their wallets. This will put additional 
strain on business owners, as they determine 
how to adjust for climate demands.
Shifts in Mobility
More and more people, at least in Europe, are 
committing to not use air travel. The resulting 
smaller spheres of mobility could lead to an 
increasing need for companies to have local 
hubs, especially as the terms of remote work 
are still being negotiated.Rethinking Supply Chains
Governments are expanding their require-
ments for reliable and consistent reporting of 
direct and indirect emissions (scope 1, 2, and 
3), putting pressure on corporations to curate 
their vendor networks and on the vendors to 
ensure their operations are still profitable 
under increased standards.From Early Bird to Night Owl
Excessive heat impacts daily lives around the 
globe, forcing people to stay indoors during 
the day and only leave their houses in the eve-
ning. As these heat phases expand, industries 
dependent on people’s physical presence will 
have to rethink operations as habits and tim-
ing of activities shift.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Accountability Changes
The resolution of a number of upcoming 
court cases will begin to determine govern-
ment and corporate responsibility for climate 
change. If verdicts fall on the side of holding 
institutions responsible, we could see funda-
mental changes in how climate is addressed.Climate Upskilling
With climate regulation expanding and evolv-
ing, and climate technology innovation accel-
erating (thanks to AI) and scaling, companies 
need to make sure they have the necessary 
know-how in-house to understand and moni-
tor relevant developments.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
334© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Energy and climate 
technologies can help 
businesses transform in 
revolutionary ways that 
increase profitability 
significantly: Changed 
processes, new materials, 
updated supply chains, a 
different set of partners 
and collaborators, and 
investment in research 
can lead to new products 
and services—and a 
competitive edge.Embracing climate 
technology brings 
long-term savings. 
Reduced energy use and 
operational expenses 
enhance overall 
efficiency, positively 
impacting the bottom 
line. This positions the 
company for sustainable 
growth, demonstrates 
commitment to a green 
future, and fosters a 
culture of environmental 
responsibility.Increased frequency, 
severity, and wider 
occurrence of extreme 
weather events force 
all businesses to think 
about how to mitigate 
impacts, not just those 
in disaster-prone regions. 
Flexible measures are 
needed to maintain 
continuity, protect 
assets, and promote 
sustainable growth in the 
face of an increasingly 
unpredictable climate.As climate-conscious 
funding continues to 
surge, businesses with 
innovative climate 
solutions gain greater 
access to capital, 
enabling them to 
scale operations and 
accelerate the transition 
to a more sustainable 
future. This provides a 
unique opportunity to 
stay ahead of regulatory 
requirements and tap into 
growing green markets.Businesses that 
invest in their own 
renewable energy 
production can achieve 
a high degree of energy 
independence, reducing 
their vulnerability to 
fluctuations in pricing 
and increasing grid 
failures. They’ll gain 
greater control over energy 
supply, with insulation 
from market uncertainties 
and enhanced long-term 
stability.Implementing climate 
technologies and 
adhering to environmental 
regulations may raise 
production costs, due to 
upfront investment or 
compliance expenses, 
impacting profitability. 
Strategic planning 
and collaboration are 
crucial to navigating this 
transition successfully.Opportunity for  
InnovationCost Savings & 
EfficienciesClimate Risk 
ResiliencyInvestment & Financing 
OpportunitiesEnergy  
IndependenceAttack on  
ProfitabilityWHY ENERGY & CLIMATE TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
335WHEN WILL ENERGY & CLIMATE TRENDS DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?
0-4 YEARS 5-9 YEARS 10-14 YEARS 15+ YEARSForecasted Time of Impact
Agriculture
Energy generation
Transportation
Construction
Insurance
Real estate
Hospitality
Retail
City management
ManufacturingPharma
Financial services
Consumer goods
Health care
Information technology
Water management
Infrastructure development
Waste managementSpace exploration All trends will be relevantENERGY & CLIMATE 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Assessing the existing expertise and hiring or training employees with 
the necessary skills to integrate climate technologies is a must yet can be 
challenging in an already tight labor market and an overworked workforce.
Companies might be confronted with a much higher cost of doing business 
after integrating sustainable processes and raw materials. This might pose 
existential risks or fundamental shifts in operations and threaten profitability.
Geopolitical tensions and a higher frequency of extreme weather events 
increase the risk for supply chain disruptions, as well as rising prices and 
scarcity of necessary base materials and labor.
As tracking capabilities expand through scope 1, 2, and 3 emissions, 
businesses should be prepared to find that their carbon emissions footprint  
is much more significant than expected (and less under their control).
Proactive regulators are needed to ensure we reach our climate goals. However, 
new regulations as well as changes to existing rules will redesign business 
environments and create a strain for companies as they try to navigate their 
operational transformation. Opportunities
Look for new partners to collaborate with and selectively outsource activities for 
implementing sustainability measures as part of a new supportive ecosystem. 
This keeps costs at bay and expands the opportunity for cross-pollination of 
ideas.
Price volatility and stricter regulation will trigger a rethink of business operations. 
This can lead to new efficiencies in tangential contexts outside of environmental 
considerations and positively affect margins.
First movers will be able to define the new normal. They’ll build competitive 
advantage by transforming common business procedures in their industry and 
setting standards as they improve their business operations.
Think beyond the changes necessary to comply with sustainability requirements 
by also considering structural changes that could make the company more 
flexible and responsive to innovation.
Energy and captured CO2 emissions are just two examples of products that the 
integration of climate technologies can add to a company’s portfolio. Thinking 
expansively can open up avenues into new industries, including but not limited 
to energy.TECH
336© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
337© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.With innovation making 
huge strides in carbon 
tracking, invest time into 
finding the platform and 
sensor ecosystem that’s the 
best fit for your business 
and supply chain. These 
technologies will touch ev -
ery aspect of your business, 
making the implementation 
of new hardware and soft -
ware very expensive.Consider all workforce as-
pects: Companies need to 
weigh the skills and exper -
tise available, where to hire 
or upskill, whether structure 
and hierarchies need to 
evolve, as well as where 
employees should be 
working. All these factors 
are relevant for the carbon 
footprint but also need to 
be considered for maximiz -
ing profitability.Sustainability is becoming 
a broader effort and now 
includes biodiversity, ethi-
cal practices, and protec-
tion of indigenous commu-
nities. Work toward gaining 
insights about these areas 
throughout your entire 
supply chain to prepare for 
regulatory pressures.Explore new avenues to not 
only stay on top of innova-
tion but to become part of 
the ecosystem of investing, 
research and develop-
ment. This ensures that the 
bottlenecks and problems 
specific to your business 
are being solved, and might 
even lead to new business 
models licensing the devel-
oped technology.Global demographics will 
change significantly over 
the next few decades, 
with migration, aging, and 
overpopulation all con-
tributing factors. Investi-
gate how this affects your 
current customer base, 
and where new markets, 
either in regards to location 
or customer profile, could 
emerge globally.Clearly define goals, 
benchmarks, and deadlines 
for the assessment and 
implementation of climate 
technologies in your com-
pany. Identify a sensible 
organizational structure, 
relevant stakeholders, re-
sponsible parties, and how 
the company will efficiently 
integrate the findings and 
technologies.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6ENERGY & CLIMATE CENTRAL THEMESTECH
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 338ENERGY & CLIMATE 
Proactive Regulators
On both sides of the Atlantic, regulators stepped up 
to enable significant climate action. The EU’s Green 
Deal Industrial Plan includes easier access to financ-
ing, simplification of permitting processes, regulatory 
sandboxes for member states, and the announcement 
of the European Hydrogen Bank to quickly scale the 
fuel’s use in the region. In the US, regulators banned 
certain forever chemicals (PFAS) in drinking water, 
strengthened pollution standards for cars and trucks, 
and widened eligibility for clean-energy tax credits. To 
avoid greenwashing, the EU proposed the Green Claims 
Directive to eliminate misleading messaging. In the 
US, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission cre-
ated a task force to combat environmental fraud, and 
the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed 
stricter climate disclosure rules for publicly traded 
companies.Focus on Enabling T echnologies
After passing the $1 trillion investment mark in 2022, 
overall venture capital in climate tech dropped 40% 
in 2023. However, most of that decrease took place in 
later stages and growth funding; seed funding actual-
ly grew 23%, and the number of deals rose by 34%. In 
addition, investors are showing enthusiasm for solving 
new problems, after renewables have moved into the 
scaling phase. Investment in the big three—transpor-
tation, energy, and food and land use—saw significant 
drops, while investment in industry processes and the 
built environment, both historically underfunded, saw 
gains. But there is still much to be done: Transforming 
the grid to accommodate non-dispatchable energy 
sources; searching for alternative materials for batter-
ies, solar cells, and wind turbines; capturing and stor-
ing carbon; tracking emissions; and bringing transpar-
ency and validity to carbon markets are just some of 
the bottlenecks that urgently need innovation.Alternative Materials
The race to find alternative materials for renewable 
energy production and tangential technologies (such 
as batteries) is on. In a tense geopolitical environment 
where the location of needed raw materials is limit-
ed to areas often plagued by political and economic 
instability, there’s an increased desire for nations to be 
resource independent. Recently, Sweden and Norway 
made inroads on this independence when the larg-
est rare earth and mineral deposits were found in the 
region. While China responded to the US’s 2022 export 
controls on advanced computing and semiconductors 
manufacturing equipment with its own restrictions on 
exporting gallium and germanium (needed for solar 
technologies), impact is less significant thanks to the 
ability to expand in alternative markets in the mid-
term. Innovation intensified last year around finding 
alternative materials for climate technologies, pre-
dominantly in electric vehicle motors (rare earth) and 
batteries (metals).CENTRAL THEMESTECH
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 339ENERGY & CLIMATE 
Looking Beyond Carbon
While carbon dioxide emissions are front and center 
in the climate conversation, a more holistic approach 
has gained significant traction and increased public 
awareness. Both the US and the EU have taken steps to 
control methane emissions, and global leaders came 
together during the United Nations Biodiversity Con-
ference (COP 15) in December 2022 to agree on global 
action on addressing biodiversity loss, restoring eco-
systems, and protecting indigenous rights. As a result, 
30% of the planet and 30% of degraded ecosystems will 
be under protection by 2030. EU regulators have agreed 
on the Nature Restoration Law, which requires coun-
tries to work toward restoring at least 20% of land and 
sea areas, and the US expressed its intention to join 
the High Ambition Coalition on Biodiversity Beyond 
National Jurisdiction, supported by the UN. Currently, 
95% of the ocean falls beyond national jurisdiction, 
and the coalition represents a group of countries that 
have pledged to protect that ecosystem. Rewilding 
efforts have also increased, often on state, local, and 
even individual levels.Tracking Climate Change
The tightened regulatory requirements for companies 
to reduce their carbon footprint increases the need for 
cohesive and reliable emissions tracking, as well as 
common measurement standards. In the carbon credit 
market, frameworks to verify actual results of carbon 
projects and create a viable rating system are crucial 
for credibility and effectiveness. As extreme weather be-
comes more frequent, severe, and widespread, govern-
ments have increased their efforts to build better pre-
diction systems to protect lives and ecosystems. Amid 
a landscape where insurers are pulling out of states like 
California and Florida because risks deemed uninsur-
able, these systems can provide the industry with the 
data necessary to calculate risks. The development of 
these monitoring technologies is being accelerated by 
artificial intelligence and innovation around imaging, 
such as hyperspectral imaging. Also helping to unify the 
integrity frameworks are joint efforts by various stake-
holders in the voluntary carbon markets.Blue Economy on the Rise
Originally used by small developing island states, the 
term “blue economy” today encompasses socially 
equitable, environmentally sustainable, and economi-
cally profitable ocean-based industries and spaces. In 
2023, the US launched a global initiative of more than 
$800 million to protect oceans and support devel-
oping nations. This follows the EU’s previous efforts 
to create the Atlantic Smart Ports Blue Acceleration 
Network to transform Atlantic ports, the G20 Supreme 
Audit Institutions cooperating to meet the challenge of 
auditing the blue economy, and African funds’ focus on 
innovation to advance blue economy solutions for the 
continent. These initiatives triggered a flurry of innova-
tion focusing on the ocean, from means and devices to 
collect data underneath the surface, to platforms that 
synthesize and analyze the data and make it available 
to all relevant stakeholders, to advanced desalination 
methods and increased support for sustainable fish-
ing. As the ocean is also moving more into the climate 
conversation for carbon sequestration and power 
generation, we can expect to see an acceleration of not 
just technological advances but also novel business 
activity in this space.Dr. Stefaan De Wolf, professor of material 
science and engineering of the KAUST So-
lar Center, for setting the world record for 
tandem solar cell efficiency.
Alexander Bormann, founder of EnerKite, 
for expanding the EV-charging infrastruc-
ture with airborne wind.
Dr. Motiar Rahaman, research associate 
at University of Cambridge, for leading 
research on a solar-powered reactor that 
converts CO2 captured from industrial 
waste or air into sustainable fuel.
Andrew Ponec, co-founder and CEO of 
Antora Energy, for developing thermal 
energy storage that turns renewable energy 
into on-demand power usable by the heavy 
industries.
Xiaomeng Liu, researcher at University of 
Massachusetts Amherst, for his research 
on creating energy from air.
Mateo Jaramillo, CEO of Form Energy, for 
building a 1 gigawatt hour demo system of 
an iron air battery, expected to come online 
in 2025.John Connell, senior scientist at NASA 
Langley Research Center, for advancing 
research on a solid state battery to be used 
in aviation.
Lee Suk-bae, Ji-Hoon Kim, and Y oung-
Wan Kwon of the Quantum Energy 
Research Centre, for their preprint on 
developing the first room temperature 
superconductor.
Hudson Gilmer, co-founder and CEO of 
LineVision, for creating the only non-con-
tact overhead power line monitoring sys-
tem, used by UK’s National Grid.
Isabella Arzeno-Soltero, postdoctoral 
scholar at Stanford University, for deter-
mining that seaweed farming cannot scale 
enough to meet climate goals.
Dr. Graciela Chichilnisky, co-founder of 
Global Thermostat, for creating one of the 
largest direct air capture machines ever 
operated.
T alal Hasan, CEO of 44.01, for leading the 
first CO2 mineralization project in the Mid-
dle East that utilizes seawater.Pasi Vainikka, CEO of Solar Foods, for 
creating food out of renewable energy and 
carbon dioxide.
Freddie Lintell, founder and CEO of Ree-
wild, for creating a carbon tracking app for 
consumers.
Josh Dorfman, co-founder and CEO of 
Plantd, for transforming perennial grass 
into carbon-negative building materials.
Virginia San Fratello, architect, for 3D 
printing houses out of indigenous materi-
als such as salt and clay.
Dr. William Dichtel, chemistry professor at 
Northwestern, and Brittany Trang, Sharon 
Begley Science Reporting Fellow at STAT, 
for developing a low temperature, inexpen-
sive method to break down PFAS.
Shimrit Bar-El, co-founder and CRO at 
Novella, for growing botanical ingredients 
without the plant.
 Hunter Swisher, founder of Phospholu-
tions, for reducing the amount of phospho-
rus in fertilizer by 50%.Nathalie Berezina, founder and CEO of 
Norbite, for transforming plastic waste 
into sustainable products with the help of 
moths.
Khaled Hassounah, co-founder and CEO 
of Ample, for providing an alternative to EV 
charging: battery swapping.
Tim Duehrkoop, co-founder and CEO of Xil-
va, for developing a methodology to assess 
forest sequestration projects.
Dr. T om Jackson and his team at Lough-
borough University, for the creation of the 
“Data Carbon Ladder,” which enables the 
tracking of digital emissions.
Bob Mumgaard, CEO of Commonwealth 
Fusion Systems, for being a frontrunner in 
the nuclear fusion race.ONES TO WATCHTECH
340© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE IMPORTANT TERMS
341Ammonia
A compound of nitrogen and hydrogen. It can 
be used directly as a fuel in direct combustion 
processes, as well as in fuel cells or as a hydrogen 
carrier. To be a low emissions fuel, ammonia must 
be produced from low-carbon hydrogen and the ni-
trogen separated through the Haber process using 
electricity generated from low-carbon sources. 
Bioenergy
Energy content derived from biomass feedstocks 
and biogas. It comes in solid, liquid, and gaseous 
form. Its liquid form is often labeled biofuel. 
Biogas
A mixture of methane, CO2, and small quantities 
of other gases produced by anaerobic digestion of 
organic matter in an oxygen-free environment. 
Carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS)
The process of capturing CO2 emissions from fuel 
combustion, industrial processes or directly from 
the atmosphere. Captured CO2 emissions can be 
stored in onshore or offshore underground geologi-
cal formations, or used as an input or feedstock in 
manufacturing.biomass, and used as a source of energy or fuel. 
Depending on the resource and energy type used 
to produce it, hydrogen production can be emis-
sions-intensive or carbon neutral.
Liquid bioenergy (biofuel)
Liquid fuels derived from biomass or waste feed-
stock. They include ethanol, biodiesel, and biojet 
fuels.
Conventional: Fuels produced from food crop feed-
stock such as sugar cane or vegetable oil, among 
others.
Advanced: Fuels produced from non-food crop 
feedstock that don’t directly compete with food and 
feed crops for agricultural land.
Process emissions
Emissions from industrial processes that involve 
chemical or physical transformations (separate 
from fuel combustion).
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is the process of heating organic materi-
als, such as biomass, in the absence of oxygen.Solid bioenergy
Charcoal, fuelwood, dung, agricultural residues, 
wood waste and other solid wastes.
Traditional: Refers to the use of solid biomass with 
basic technologies, such as a three-stone fire, often 
with no or poorly operating chimneys.
Modern: Refers to the use of solid bioenergy in im-
proved cook stoves and modern technologies using 
processed biomass such as pellets.
Solar photovoltaics (PV)
A process which converts sunlight into electricity 
using a technology based on the photoelectric ef-
fect. With the photoelectric effect, materials absorb 
photons (light) and release electrons, generating 
electricity.
Zero carbon-ready buildings
A zero carbon-ready building is a highly energy 
efficient building. It uses either renewable energy 
sources directly or energy sources that can be de-
carbonized, for example electricity or district heat. 
Zero emission vehicles (ZEVs)
Vehicles that operate without emitting CO2 emis-
sions (such as battery electric and fuel cell vehicles).Direct air capture
A technology that captures CO2 from the atmo-
spheric air through a chemical reaction.
Dispatchable generation
Dispatchable generation is a source of electricity 
that can be turned on or off, such as nuclear, mean-
ing it can be controlled. Non-dispatchable energy 
sources, such as wind and solar photovoltaics, 
cannot be controlled by operators.
Electrolysis
Electrolysis is a process where electric current 
passes through a substance to effect a chemical 
change. In hydrogen production, electricity is used 
to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. If the 
power used for the process comes from sustain-
able energy sources, the process does not produce 
greenhouse gas emissions.
Energy intensity
Energy intensity is the amount of energy used to 
produce a certain level of output. 
Hydrogen
Hydrogen is the simplest and most abundant 
element in the universe. It can be produced from a 
variety of resources such as water, fossil fuels, or 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
342© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
ENERGY  
PRODUCTIONTECH
Concentrated Solar 
Concentrated solar power (CSP) uses para-
bolic mirrors or “heliostats” to focus sunlight 
and generate extremely high temperatures. A 
common implementation of CSP is the “pow-
er tower,” in which concentric circles of helio-
stats all focus on the receiver of a single, cen-
tral tower hundreds of meters off the ground. 
Although the concept was first developed in 
the 1970s and ’80s, new methods and plant 
designs have inspired a modest resurgence, 
particularly in Australia and Africa. Bolstering 
the case for CSP plants is the dispatchability 
of the energy generated. Because CSP gen-
erates thermal energy, it can be transferred 
using liquid sodium and stored long term in 
molten salt reservoirs. Due to the abundance 
of the elements required, large-scale thermal 
storage would be relatively cheap when com-
pared with the rare earth elements needed for 
electric batteries, such as lithium and cobalt. 
For this reason, concentrated solar is being 
viewed as an economical alternative to photo-
voltaic solar for nighttime use.Dispatchable Solar 
Dispatchable power enables a generation 
source to scale up or down based on fluctu-
ations in demand. Solar power installations, 
traditionally implemented in a way that 
always maximizes energy output, are getting 
smarter, able to adjust individual panel an-
gles to change their aggregate power gen-
eration and better accommodate the needs 
of the grid. On large-scale solar farms, this 
system of dispatching can go so far as to 
independently adjust subsections of panels, 
or even individual panels, to compensate 
for others that are temporarily obscured 
by cloud cover or experiencing operation-
al issues, thus ensuring a responsive and 
consistent output. Counterintuitively, many 
of the problems with static solar power gen-
eration stem from creating too much pow-
er: When the sun is at its zenith and solar 
generation peaks, solar plants can potential-
ly produce so much energy they overwhelm 
local electric grids. Dispatchable solar power 
eliminates this problem, creating a more 
dynamic and responsive source of power.Perovskite Cells 
Perovskite is a crystalline compound that 
can be used as a semiconductor in solar cells 
as an easier, cheaper, and more sustain-
able alternative to silicon. Furthermore, it is 
transparent and flexible, making it easier than 
silicon to integrate into the landscape. In April, 
researchers at the King Abdullah University 
of Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia 
developed a new combination silicon/per-
ovskite solar cell, which achieved an efficiency 
of 33.2%, a new world record for two-junction 
solar cells. Advances in perovskite-based cells 
are occurring quickly, and the technology is 
regularly setting new efficiency and lifetime 
records.Multitasking Solar 
Companies are building new solar installa-
tions with a mind toward additional benefits 
beyond electrical power generation. When 
installed in tandem with wind turbines, solar 
panels are arranged to take advantage of 
the Venturi effect, essentially creating wind 
tunnels. These configurations increase air-
flow and wind turbine output by up to 60%. 
Solar windows are becoming transparent 
enough not to impact aesthetics in building 
construction, thanks to organic semicon-
ductors that can be liquified and spread as a 
coating on glass. In California, a pilot pro-
gram dubbed Project Nexus is placing solar 
panels above irrigation canals in the San 
Joaquin Valley. Researchers estimate that 
placing similar solar panel canopies above 
the state’s 4,000 miles of open canals would 
generate 13 gigawatts of power while simul-
taneously saving 63 billion gallons of water 
annually in a region that has seen severe 
drought over the past decade. The solar can-
opies cool water temperatures, halt evapora-
tion, and prevent the growth of water-based 
plants.NEW SOLARENERGY & CLIMATE 
343© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEW SOLARTECH
Dye-sensitized Solar Cells 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSC) are made 
using organic dyes that capture photons from 
light. They are cheaper to manufacture than 
silicon solar cells, more flexible in their de-
sign, and can even be semitransparent. Fur-
ther, they operate on a wider spectrum of light 
than traditional silicon solar cells. Ambient 
Photonics, an Amazon-backed startup, has 
completed construction on a new, large-scale 
DSC manufacturing facility. The company 
claims its products can operate at low levels 
of light, such as indoor environments, and is 
aiming to eliminate the need for batteries in 
small electronic devices.Solar Thermophotovoltaics 
While normal photovoltaic cells respond 
only to less than half of the sun’s rays that 
are visible, solar thermophotovoltaics create 
electricity from heat waves. Antora Energy, 
a US-based startup, has completed a large-
scale manufacturing facility that produces 
thermophotovoltaic cells with 40% efficien-
cy. Meanwhile, researchers at the University 
of Houston have developed a new design for 
thermophotovoltaic cells with an improved 
intermediary layer, which prevents thermal 
energy from being wastefully radiated away. 
This development could push efficiency lev-
els even higher.Organic Solar Materials 
Organic solar materials that can be printed 
or stuck onto surfaces have continued to 
shrink in size. These photovoltaics can be 
50 microns thin, less than the width of a 
human hair, and can be adhered to surfac-
es after they’re manufactured, ostensibly 
making any surface a power-generating 
opportunity. Because of the small footprint 
of organic solar cells, they can also be ad-
hered to transparent surfaces. As a result, 
solar windows are reaching the point where 
they are transparent enough not to impact 
aesthetics and could be used more widely in 
buildings. Recent experimentation aims to 
increase these organic solar cells’ viability 
for power production on larger areas.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
344© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Flexible, transparent solar cells might soon be 
adhered to building windows.TECH
Offshore Floating Wind Turbines 
Offshore floating wind technology is growing 
with changes in base designs, innovative tur-
bine configurations, and strengthened regu-
latory backing in the US and Europe. In recent 
years, “super-sized” structures have become 
popular as major players unveil groundbreak-
ing designs. Among these is Wind Catching 
Systems, a 2017-established entity situated 
near Oslo, Norway. Pioneering the multi-tur-
bine approach, the company focuses on a 
“floating wind power plant.” The Dublin-based 
Gazelle, a company focused on advanced 
offshore wind platforms, has introduced a 
new hybrid dynamic mooring system—this 
revolutionary platform design promises 
unmatched stability, courtesy of its light-
weight and compact structure and flexibility 
as it can be seamlessly assembled at global 
port facilities. In the realm of US regulation, 
the Biden administration has announced a 
comprehensive 20-month study of the West 
Coast’s burgeoning floating offshore wind 
potential. This investigation aims to optimize 
transmission networks and connect the grid flows to cater to the chaotic wind patterns 
of urban areas. Available in varied sizes to 
suit diverse buildings, O-Wind turbines can 
connect to the grid or operate independently 
with battery units. From Xenecore, a design 
that incorporates I-beam ribs and micro-
sphere structural foam amplifies power gen-
eration with its fan-shaped wind blades. And 
because the future needs wind technology 
that will work at relatively low wind speeds, 
the fastest-growing energy sector across the 
globe is bladeless wind energy. It leverages 
vortex shedding, a vorticity phenomenon, 
through a vertical cylinder affixed with an 
elastic rod. It oscillates within the wind’s 
range and powers an alternator system 
to generate electricity. Prominent players 
include Vortex Bladeless, Tyer Wind, Agile 
Wind Power, Silent Wind, and Sway Turbine 
AS in Europe; Saphon Energy in Africa; and,  
Mag-Wind Vertical Axis Turbine, Atmocean, 
Enomad, and SheerWind in the US. Airborne Wind Energy
Kitemill, a Norwegian enterprise, is pioneer-
ing the advancement of airborne wind ener-
gy, which involves attaching a turbine to a 
flying device, to revolutionize wind energy’s 
effectiveness, versatility, and affordability. 
Its latest triumph, the KM2 system, is double 
the size of the KM1 prototype, has a 16-me-
ter wingspan, and integrates four propellers 
for vertical takeoff. The system can generate 
an average power cycle of 100 kilowatts. In 
another promising collaboration, EnerKíte and 
Volkswagen embarked on a feasibility study 
to explore the potential of a mobile e-charging 
station. These innovative airborne wind tur-
bines hold the promise of charging electric 
vehicles even in the remotest regions, reduc-
ing reliance on conventional power grids and 
enhancing green mobility. with pioneering floating wind projects; it will 
be supported by a $100 million public fund.
Vertical Wind Turbines
Vertical wind turbine innovation reached a 
milestone with Norway’s March 2022 ap-
proval of a vertical-axis floating wind pilot 
project. SeaTwirl and the Marine Energy Test 
Centre will test the prototype for five years 
near Lauplandsholmenoff. The project’s 
progress stalled due to appeals from envi-
ronmental and fishing groups, but Norwe-
gian regulators’ rejection of the appeals en-
sures SeaTwirl’s S2X pilot can move forward 
without further challenges. Additionally, 
3D-printed vertical wind turbines are grow-
ing, with several companies experimenting.
Going Bladeless 
New innovation in wind turbines includes 
evolving designs beyond traditional blades. 
O-Wind has pioneered an omnidirection-
al design that simultaneously captures 
winds from all directions, a breakthrough 
that uniquely blends horizontal and vertical NEW WINDENERGY & CLIMATE 
345© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
AI Wind Farms
Like most other industries, AI is also reshap-
ing renewable energy. Israeli company vHive 
has introduced an advanced tool for wind 
turbine inspections, leveraging autonomous 
data collection and a novel digital twin plat-
form. This innovation empowers wind farm 
operators to strategically digitize assets, ele-
vate operational efficiency, and curtail output 
decline. UK’s Cognitive Business is working 
with RWE’s Robin Rigg offshore wind farm, de-
livering an AI-powered package that encom-
passes pattern recognition and production 
forecasting to ensure precise maintenance 
predictions and optimal performance. AI has 
also proven pivotal in the setup, upkeep, and 
enhancement of offshore wind farms. The 
Dhalion Inspection System by Perceptual 
Robotics is an interesting example with a 
fully autonomous solution for wind blade 
inspection, encompassing data acquisition, 
insights, and decision-making.Dispatchable Wind Energy Production
As scientists find more ways to store wind 
energy, it will grow as a dispatchable elec-
tricity solution from which power grids can 
demand electricity based on market needs. 
One way to ensure such storage is by fusing 
hydrogen with the grid, like what’s being 
done in the Netherlands. There, an alliance 
of prominent partners led by Shell is using 
hydrogen from offshore wind energy plants 
to stabilize the electricity grid, and aims to 
maintain 70% renewable electricity by 2030. 
The FlexH2 consortium, which includes TNO 
and other industry players, collaborates 
closely on joint research and pioneering 
technology development, expediting integra-
tion into the energy matrix. NEW WINDENERGY & CLIMATE 
346© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
AI helps to make Windfarms more efficient and maintain and optimize performance.TECH
Geothermal 
Unlike other renewables, geothermal ener-
gy represents a stable source of power that 
doesn’t fluctuate with time of day or weather 
patterns. This energy can be harnessed by 
tapping into hot water and steam reservoirs 
beneath the Earth’s crust. Once accessed, it 
can be used for direct heating or to generate 
electricity through geothermal power plants.
Supercritical Geothermal 
Supercritical geothermal energy production 
requires going deeper into the Earth’s crust 
than conventional geothermal, tapping into 
the extreme temperatures and pressures 
present there (in excess of 374 degrees Cel-
sius and 221 bar, respectively). While con-
taining enormous power generation poten-
tial, these conditions also present extreme 
technological challenges. Some of those may 
be alleviated by recent research, which has 
focused on tapping into supercritical geo-
thermal fluids at sites adjacent to volcanic 
activity. At these sites, extreme temperatures 
and pressures can be found closer to the of electrical batteries, which require large 
quantities of rare earth elements and are not 
as efficient. Multiple research efforts have 
recently focused on using carbon dioxide as 
the storage medium, which has the added 
benefit of sequestering greenhouse gases. 
In the US, the National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory has begun efforts to identify high 
storage potential sites, and in Germany, the 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology is evaluat-
ing how geothermal energy storage might be 
integrated into the existing grid.
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion 
Ocean thermal energy conversion generates 
power from the temperature difference that 
exists in ocean water. Because this differ-
ence is unaffected by weather and climate 
conditions, it represents a reliable source of 
sustainable energy. Furthermore, the sea-
water output from the process is usable in 
commercial applications such as fisheries, 
agriculture, and air conditioning. Japanese 
shipping company Mitsui O.S.K. Lines has 
announced a pilot program that would pump water from a depth of 600 meters at 
near-freezing temperatures to be used in a ti-
tanium heat exchanger; the process is expect-
ed to generate 1 megawatt of electric power by 
2026.
Hydropower 
Accounting for more than 15% of global elec-
tricity generation in 2022, hydropower con-
tinues to be the largest source of renewable 
power, contributing more than wind, solar, and 
biofuels combined. New opportunities for hy-
dropower manifest in efficiency, storage, and 
small scale (but widespread) deployments.
Digitalization 
Hydro plants have invested significantly in 
digital management for their equipment and 
systems, all with the aim of optimizing energy 
output and safety. Utilizing cloud computing 
and big data, operators hope to build machine 
learning models to guide automated deci-
sion-making in these complex environments. 
Given the risk involved with such a digital 
transformation, some operators have even Earth’s surface, greatly reducing the risk 
and investment required to utilize them. In 
Japan, the New Energy and Industrial Tech-
nology Development Organization has been 
experimenting in volcanic regions of Hokkai-
do. Meanwhile, new geothermal research and 
startups push the boundaries of existing 
technologies. Researchers are testing work-
ing fluids composed of supercritical carbon 
dioxide to transfer and pump heat back to 
the Earth’s surface. Companies are develop-
ing new tools, like Thermochem’s probe and 
logging tool rated to operate at temperatures 
up to 400 degrees Celsius. Barriers to devel-
opment remain, however, mainly in the form 
of policy and international cooperation.
Using Geothermal for Energy Storage 
Geothermal energy storage techniques hold 
energy in the form of increased temperature 
and pressure which is “pumped” into the 
earth and released as needed. Research-
ers and government agencies are looking 
closely at this option for storing sustainably 
generated energy in lieu of massive banks OTHER RENEWABLESENERGY & CLIMATE 
347© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
opted to create digital twins of their plants, 
enabling a safe environment for training the 
algorithms of the future. Spain has made sig-
nificant investment so far, and officials plan 
to onboard 160 of its power plants to a digital 
management platform. China, too, is making 
strides, and officials have put all data from 
the Three Gorges Dam (the largest hydroelec-
tric project in the world) into the cloud of 
Chinese company Huawei Cloud.
Small Scale Hydro 
Small scale hydro projects are allowing en-
ergy suppliers across the globe to add more 
renewable energy generation to their portfolio 
without the need for massive, upfront invest-
ments of capital. In California, a pilot program 
led by startup Emrgy places small, modular 
turbines into irrigation canals to produce 
modest amounts of electricity, between 2 
and 10 megawatts. The turbines operate in 
a manner that does not require damming 
the water. This, paired with the fact that all 
the canals used are pre-existing, means the 
impact to the local environment is minimal. ity by 2031. Spain started building a 200 
megawatt plant in the Canary Islands. China, 
meanwhile, continues to lead the world in 
pumped storage capacity, with 51 gigawatts 
currently in operation and more planned to 
come.
New Turbine Design 
Companies continue to innovate on the de-
sign of hydro turbines. Turbulent, a Belgian 
engineering company, has developed an un-
derwater vortex turbine capable of operating 
in remote locations. With low maintenance 
and water flow requirements, it is ideal for 
rural communities with simple irrigation. 
Similarly, Emrgy is working on hydrokinetic 
turbines that can be dropped into canals 
and other low pressure, low flow environ-
ments. Voith Hydro in Germany made ad-
justments to the centuries-old Pelton Wheel 
design, which allows its turbines to operate 
in a horizontal configuration, as opposed to 
vertical. More injectors can be utilized in its 
operation, increasing its overall output. Addi-
tionally, companies such as Natel are work-ing to minimize the environmental impact 
of hydropower. Its latest turbine implements 
a curved blade design aiming to drastically 
reduce the rate of marine life fatality for crea-
tures passing through.The European Union has also funded pilots 
for small scale hydro in sites across Central 
Asia. Though this region has the world’s sec-
ond largest potential for hydroelectric power, 
larger hydro developments there have been 
slow due to political, economical, and legal 
factors, such as water rights claims and con-
cerns about environmental impact. Small 
scale hydro has the ability to simultaneously 
provide a significant source of power while 
avoiding many of those pitfalls.
Hydro as a Water Battery 
Hydro storage, or “pumped storage,” involves 
pumping water into uphill reservoirs when 
energy is cheap (or when renewables are op-
erating) and then allowing that water to flow 
downhill and generate energy as needed. 
Recently, large investments in the field have 
been made across the globe. Switzerland 
just opened a 20-gigawatt-hour plant in the 
Swiss Alps that can transition from energy 
storage to energy generation in less than 10 
minutes. In Utah, a $2.5 billion project broke 
ground that could provide 9GWh in capac-OTHER RENEWABLESENERGY & CLIMATE 
348© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Hydrogen 
Hydrogen fuel technology has been around 
since the 1950s, and for the past 75 years, it 
has served as the main propulsion source for 
spacefaring vehicles. Recent developments, 
including updated designs for hydrogen fuel 
cells, have reignited conversations of using 
the fuel source closer to home. In particular, 
“green hydrogen” (hydrogen fuel produced us-
ing renewable energy), has been viewed as an 
emissions-free alternative for long distance 
naval, aerial, and ground transportation. How-
ever, issues of economics and scale remain.
Reducing the Cost of Hydrogen Production 
Researchers are making progress in reducing 
the cost of green hydrogen generation. Many 
of these efforts focus on improving the ma-
terials coating the electrodes used to extract 
pure hydrogen from water. Separate research 
teams, both in Korea, have perfected pro-
tective titanium oxide coatings that reduce 
corrosion in the electrodes and have experi-
mented with using cheaper iron nitride as a 
coating alternatives. An Oxford-based team Biofuels 
Biofuels encompass any fuel made or de-
rived from organic matter—typically corn, 
sugar cane, or soy. These fuels include etha-
nol, biodiesel, and biogas. While biofuels rep-
resent an alternative to fossil fuels, concerns 
have arisen over the amount of farmland 
needed to provide significant amounts of 
energy and the impact large scale operations 
might have on food systems.
Biofuels From Hemp 
Hemp represents a unique opportunity for 
biofuels. It can be turned into multiple types 
of fuel (e.g., ethanol, methanol, biodiesel) 
and boasts one of the highest energy den-
sities of any land-grown crop. However, the 
plant’s association with cannabis is often 
seen as hindering widespread adoption 
(industrial hemp has only a fraction of the 
THC associated with recreational marijuana). 
A bipartisan bill in the US hopes to change 
that by deregulating hemp and legally 
decoupling it from cannabis. Meanwhile, 
researchers at Texas A&M are breeding new has pursued similar coating-based improve-
ments, focusing on alkaline electrolyzers. 
Meanwhile, American company TFP Hydrogen 
has announced plans to scale up its electro-
lyzer coating capacity threefold over the next 
year, up to 600 megawatts annually. Cana-
da-based Loopflow has developed a new fuel 
cell design with a unique geometry and flow 
field properties that increase the stability of 
internal conditions and efficiency.
New Base Materials 
Currently, hydrogen is typically extracted 
from treated freshwater. As issues of water 
scarcity continue to grow, hydrogen power 
companies have sought to harness alter-
native sources. Efforts in Guam, the Nether-
lands, and Australia have focused on using 
seawater, both treated and untreated, for hy-
drogen generation. A large EU pilot program 
will explore using wastewater as a base ma-
terial. Other efforts are looking into an even 
more direct method: accessing “geologic hy-
drogen,” or sources of pure hydrogen trapped 
in the earth, in gaseous or other forms.CLEAN FUELS ENERGY & CLIMATE 
349© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Hemp’s high energy density makes it a great source 
for biofuel.TECH
strains of hemp that are both suitable for 
the state’s dryer climates and fall within THC 
compliant ranges.
Biofuels From Algae 
Through photosynthesis, certain kinds of 
algae can produce biofuel. As added bene-
fits, they absorb carbon dioxide and grow 
organically. In spite of this, scaling biofuel 
extraction from algae is slow and expen-
sive. Researchers in Brazil have conducted 
experiments with microalgae in which they 
“stress” the culture to induce it to make 
more lipids, the key component in biofuel 
production. Other experiments have focused 
on genetically modifying algae to optimize 
their efficiency and survivability characteris-
tics. United Airlines has invested $5 million 
in biofuel startup Viridos, which focuses on 
producing sustainable aviation fuel from 
algae in seawater.Syngas From the Sun 
Synthesis gas, or syngas, is a mixture of 
hydrogen and carbon monoxide that can be 
used as fuel and in the production of meth-
anol. Researchers at the University of Cam-
bridge have devised a solar-powered reactor 
that extracts carbon dioxide from industrial 
waste, or even from the atmosphere, and 
converts it into syngas using what they de-
scribe as “artificial leaves.” By infusing ceria 
(a common material used in syngas produc-
tion) with a nickel catalyst, researchers at 
the University of Florida have demonstrated 
the ability to create syngas at lower tempera-
tures—700 degrees Celsius instead of 1,000 
degrees—a reduction that provides economic 
benefit to producers.CLEAN FUELS ENERGY & CLIMATE 
350© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Scientists are exposing algae to stressors to increase lipid production, the key component for biofuels.TECH
Rededication of Contaminated Land 
Abandoned coal mines could be the solution 
to warming homes in Europe, where homes 
across the continent are sitting on top of old 
mines filled with warm water. The water gets 
warmer the deeper it goes and can be brought 
up through boreholes, run through heat 
pumps and extractors to increase the tem-
perature even more, and then sent through 
heating networks to warm homes. Once the 
water is used, it can be redirected back into 
the mines where it is heated again. The UK 
is currently exploring this project beginning 
with 12 preliminary boreholes in Glasgow. 
Reducing the Carbon Footprint of Fossil Fuels
In many countries, regulators and research-
ers are attempting new ways to reduce fossil 
fuels’ impact on the climate crisis. The US 
Environment Protection Agency has proposed 
new regulations on limits for pollutants from 
American coal and gas power plants, forcing 
facilities to track and report emissions. Ko-
rean companies have successfully operated 
a gas turbine with a cleaner 60% hydrogen US. Oil and gas companies will pay a fee if 
they emit more than 25,000 tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent per year into the atmo-
sphere, thus spurring innovations in meth-
ane emission monitoring to avoid the fee. 
A team of Princeton University researchers 
has developed extremely agile drones with 
remote-sensing lasers to detect gas leaks 
up to 25 times smaller than can be detected 
using traditional methods. The drones only 
require a small mirror and laser and can 
be outfitted to measure other gases such 
as carbon dioxide and ammonia as well as 
methane. Swiss-based Distran, an innovator 
in ultrasonic camera technology to detect 
gas leaks, has recently closed $8.3 million 
in funding to diversify their products and 
tap into new markets to expand the safety of 
industrial plants and reduce their environ-
mental impact.blend fuel. Japan is turning coal into “clean 
hydrogen” through the Hydrogen Energy Sup-
ply Chain project, which uses carbon capture 
and storage technology and has attracted 
$2.35 billion in investment. Botswana is 
working with South African-based Sasol’s ex-
tensive coal resources to produce synthetic 
fuels to support Europe’s energy crisis. And 
in the UK, Net Zero Teesside Power is on track 
to be the world’s first commercial-scale 
gas-fired power station with carbon capture. 
The project will drive the UK government to-
ward its decarbonization goals and produce 
enough electricity to power 1.3 million homes 
per year. 
Methane Emissions Reductions
Methane, a potent greenhouse gas, plays 
a major role in trapping heat in the Earth’s 
atmosphere. Recognizing its importance 
as a driver of climate change, regulators 
and scientists are turning their attention 
to finding ways to reduce methane emis-
sions. The Inflation Reduction Act contains 
the first ever greenhouse gas fee in the FOSSIL FUEL INNOVATIONENERGY & CLIMATE 
351© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Abandoned coal mines could support warming 
homes in Europe.TECH
Fusion 
Long considered the “holy grail of energy 
production,” nuclear fusion technology would 
allow humans to emulate the atomic process 
that powers the stars. Most experimental fu-
sion reactors today seek to fuse hydrogen at-
oms into helium, the same reaction our own 
sun has been conducting for billions of years. 
This reaction creates substantial amounts 
of energy in the form of extremely fast mov-
ing atomic particles, which can be converted 
to heat and then used to power generators. 
The only byproducts are heavier (potentially 
useful) elements and trace amounts of ra-
diation at harmless levels. Given the cosmic 
abundance of hydrogen, nuclear fusion would 
provide a virtually limitless source of energy.
Fusion Momentum 
Following the Lawrence Livermore Nation-
al Laboratory’s landmark achievement in 
2022, when researchers created the first 
human-controlled, net-positive energy-pro-
ducing fusion reaction, conversations around 
the technology have reignited, capturing the German startup Proxima Fusion has raised 
$8.6 million to pursue a twisting, new reac-
tor design, one drastically different from the 
widely used, toroidal tokamak design.
Molten Salt Reactors 
Although the idea of using molten salt as 
a coolant for nuclear fission reactors has 
been around since the 1950s, it was more or 
less abandoned as most commercialized 
nuclear installations opted for water cooling 
instead. Now, companies and researchers 
are revisiting the concept, seeing it as a way 
to increase efficiency (by making it easier 
to extract thermal energy), generate addi-
tional fissile material (which can then be 
used in subsequent reactions), and reduce 
radioactive waste. Researchers at MIT plan to 
explore the practicality of molten salt reac-
tors while companies such as Kairos Power 
and TerraPower are developing commercial 
models.Laser-Driven Fusion 
Laser-driven fusion, also known as “inertial 
confinement fusion,” is a means of triggering 
fusion reactions by firing high energy laser 
volleys at small pellets of deuterium and triti-
um to increase temperature and pressure. Fol-
lowing the landmark net positive fusion reac-
tion from Lawrence Livermore in 2022, which 
utilized laser-driven ignition techniques, 
additional funding is finding its way into 
the space. Marvel Fusion, a German startup, 
plans to build a $150 million high-power laser 
and fusion research facility at Colorado State 
University. With an expected completion date 
of 2026, the facility will be the most techno-
logically capable research site for laser fusion 
energy and high-energy density physics.
Small Modular Reactors 
Early in 2023, the US Nuclear Regulatory Com-
mission certified the first design for a small 
modular reactor capable of nuclear fission, 
meaning utilities can now select it when 
building a new power plant. This could repre-
sent a major opportunity for new nuclear proj-attention of both private and public sectors. 
Lawrence Livermore has already repeated—
and improved upon—its initial experiment. 
Startups funded by tech millionaires have 
begun to enter the field. However, large ob-
stacles remain—namely the massive amount 
of investment and lengthy timelines needed 
to develop the technology into something 
meaningful. Even the most generous esti-
mates place large scale nuclear fusion over 
30 years away, a sobering reality check given 
the planet’s immediate need for sustainable 
sources of energy.
Privately led Fusion Projects 
The US Department of Energy injected 
capital into a growing ecosystem of private 
fusion projects, by distributing $46 million 
in funding to eight companies. Incumbent 
players, such as TAE Technologies, continue 
to iterate and produce new reactor designs 
while newer ventures, such as the Sam Alt-
man-backed Helion, aim to bring a Silicon 
Valley-esque sense of disruption to the 
industry by targeting small scale reactors. NEW NUCLEARENERGY & CLIMATE 
352© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEW NUCLEARTECH
ects, especially as a complementary solution 
to less reliable emissions-free generation, 
such as solar and wind. Conventional nuclear 
power plants are bespoke, heavily site-de-
pendent, and must be constructed on-site. 
These small modular reactors can be factory 
made and integrate much more easily into 
existing grids. The approved design is rated 
at 50 megawatt output though the company 
behind it, Nuscale, is hoping to get higher 
capacity models approved soon.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
353© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Extraordinary sums of money continue to flow into nuclear fusion, however, timing for scaling remains elusive.TECH
Energy From Thin Air 
New technology is being developed to create 
clean energy from the materials in the Earth’s 
atmosphere. At KU Leuven University, Belgian 
researchers have created solar panels that 
produce hydrogen from the water vapor in the 
atmosphere and convert it into electricity via 
a hydrogen fuel cell. The hydrogen panels will 
be on the market through the startup Solhyd; 
they can produce up to 250 liters of hydrogen 
a day, and the gas can be stored in a tank 
to use later. At the University of Massachu-
setts Amherst, researchers have developed a 
device that harnesses the same technology 
as lightning, by using electricity generated 
from water droplets passing through the 
generator’s porous material. The “air gener-
ator,” or Air-gen, can make clean electricity 
almost anywhere and runs only on ambient 
humidity, providing a completely sustainable 
energy source. And in Australia, an enzyme 
has been found by scientists that can do 
something similar, by turning air into ener-
gy. The enzyme, commonly found in soil, can 
create electrical currents using low amounts 
of hydrogen in the atmosphere. aquaculture, and renewable energy resourc-
es to maritime communities. 
Tidal Turbines
Underwater, companies are turning the 
movements of the tide into electricity. Scot-
land’s MeyGen tidal power project, an array 
of four underwater turbines about 66 feet 
below the ocean’s surface, has generated 50 
gigawatt hours of electricity as of February 
2023, the first of its kind to do so. This is 
roughly equivalent to the annual electrici-
ty consumption of 4,700 US homes. Off the 
coast of Eastport, Maine, Ocean Renewable 
Power Co. is beginning to test turbine gener-
ators that could be commercially viable. The 
turbine will have a 12 month test period, and 
then the company plans to implement a full 
scale four turbine system further along the 
coast. There are also many other tidal energy 
startups that have secured substantial fund-
ing, showing a trend in attention returning 
to tidal power, including Sustainable Marine 
Energy, which raised $11.3 million; Orbital 
Marine Power, which raised $11.4 million; and 
Verdant Power, which raised $8.73 million.Mimicking Photosynthesis
Researchers at the University of Cambridge 
have made a groundbreaking discovery in the 
photosynthesis process that could change 
how we generate renewable energy and clean 
fuel. Photosynthesis powers a majority of 
life on Earth, and it was previously believed 
that the chemicals that can extract electrons 
occurred later in the photosynthesis process. 
However, researchers discovered it takes place 
much earlier and pathways exist to move 
electrons that were previously unknown. This 
new discovery opens up new ways of using 
power and the ability to mimic photosynthesis 
to create clean fuels from water and sunlight. 
This ability to regulate photosynthesis could 
also increase crops’ ability to tolerate sunlight 
in a world facing climate change.Wave Power
Wave power, or using wave energy to cre-
ate electricity, is a growing industry that is 
expected to increase 4.7% to $30.44 million 
by 2030. In Australia, Wave Swell Energy has 
done this with floating devices. The com-
pany uses the concept of oscillating water 
columns to power its turbines: As waves 
push water up and down into a hole at the 
bottom of the floating devices, the air in the 
space is pushed out of the device and in 
turn spins a turbine that creates electricity. 
Closer to shore, Eco Wave Power uses“float-
ers” that can be attached to existing man-
made structures. These floaters rise and fall, 
moving a piston, accumulator, and hydraulic 
motor to create power in a generator. The 
company’s floaters were added at the Port of 
Los Angeles and are currently being scaled 
up; they could generate up to 69% of Cali-
fornia’s electricity production if fully scaled. 
And on the support side, AWS Ocean Energy, 
who is currently working with Wave Energy 
Scotland,  is providing technology and ser-
vices for those in the marine energy industry. 
The company services oilfield infrastructure, EMERGING FORMS OF ENERGY PRODUCTIONENERGY & CLIMATE 
354© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Local Sourcing 
Chinese mines account for about 60% of 
the global supply of germanium and 80% of 
gallium—minerals used in everything from 
smartphones to electric car batteries. Last 
year, in what appeared to be retaliation for 
American technology trade limitations, China 
enacted heavy export restrictions on these 
materials, sending many nations scrambling 
to find alternate sources. These actions have 
raised concerns that restrictions on rare 
earths, which China also dominates (70% of 
global production), might not be far behind. 
As a result, in recent years Australia, Canada, 
the US, and the EU have all invested in finding 
domestic sources of rare earths. For exam-
ple, mining company Northern Minerals has 
invested $80 million in the exploration of the 
Browns Range in Western Australia and plans 
to use the site to add dysprosium and terbi-
um to its current offerings of neodymium and 
praseodymium. The demand for rare earths 
has also kicked off a heated debate over deep 
sea mining and which countries can lay claim 
to the rich resources on the ocean floor; how-
ever, international law does not yet permit rare earths. Vitesco Technologies, an electric 
vehicle parts manufacturer, has developed 
an “externally excited synchronous ma-
chine” (ESM) motor design that can replace 
the permanent magnet synchronous motor 
(PSM) design that currently dominates the 
EV market. In high-performance vehicles, 
which often require larger or more powerful 
magnets, the ESM design offers an econom-
ic advantage over the PSM design due to its 
reduced dependence on costly rare earth ele-
ments. Tesla has likewise announced a pow-
ertrain design that reduces the company’s 
dependence on rare earths, citing economic, 
stability, and environmental motivations.such large scale operations, and the environ-
mental impact is not well understood.
Alternative Materials 
As another strategy to decrease dependen-
cy on rare earths, researchers have begun 
developing alternative materials to replace 
them. A number of Japanese companies 
claim to have developed valid substitutes 
in the magnet space. Proterial has produced 
a “high performance ferrite magnet” made 
from iron that claims to replace neodymium 
magnets in electric vehicle motors. Automo-
tive parts manufacturer Denso has purport-
ed a similar breakthrough, making a magnet 
using iron and nickel. Others have developed 
a design using iron and samarium. It is per-
haps not surprising that these companies 
are all based in Japan; that nation was the 
first to feel the brunt of China’s rare earth 
trade restrictions in 2010.
Rare Earth Avoidance 
Certain manufacturers have attempted to 
strengthen their supply chains by reducing, 
or completely eradicating, their need for ALTERNATIVES TO MINERALS AND RARE EARTHSENERGY & CLIMATE 
355© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Countries are looking to diversify their sources for 
rare earth and minerals.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
What If the World Runs on Thermal Energy? 
In 2035, Thermal Symphony Networks power our world with renewable energy. This technology’s dual capabilities 
are leveraging temperature contrast for clean electricity generation and provide heating and cooling with no mov-
ing parts. Initially designed to enhance urban energy production and efficiency where wind and solar were not as 
easily integrated, Thermal Symphony Networks quickly transcended their purpose: sidewalks paved with thermo-
electric tiles captured footfall heat to power nearby buildings, and architectural facades lined with thermoelectric 
panels balanced indoor temperatures while generating electricity.
As the networks gained traction, industries experienced a paradigm shift. Farmers established “Energy Orchards,” 
where temperature-controlled environments enclosed by thermal tiles optimized crop growth while generating 
power. Global maritime transport saw the implementation of thermoelectric ship coatings, converting tempera-
ture differences between ocean water and cargo into energy. Electric vehicles equipped with thermoelectric sys-
tems harnessed the heat generated during braking to recharge their batteries, extending their range. Airports 
showcased runways embedded with thermoelectric materials, converting the temperature contrast between 
asphalt and air into additional power for terminals.
The benefits of Thermal Symphony Networks even extend underwater: The technology’s heat exchange mecha-
nisms promote coral reef health, reversing the damage caused by rising sea temperatures.TECH
356© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
357© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY  
INFRASTRUCTUREENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
TPV Batteries
Given the inherent intermittency of wind and 
solar power, electricity generated from these 
sources needs a more dependable energy 
storage system that would work irrespective 
of weather patterns. TPV batteries are one 
such solution to bottle and store renewable 
energy. 
Experiments are being conducted across 
the world to find storage alternatives that 
are affordable, eco-friendly, and scalable. In 
Italy, Enel X and Magaldi Group are building 
a 13-megawatt-hour thermal energy storage 
using patented fluidized sand bed technol-
ogy. This stores heat that is then used to 
release steam at 120-400 degrees Celsius. In 
Spain, researchers created a battery that uses 
renewable power to melt metals like silicon, 
storing latent heat that powers a thermopho-
tovoltaic generator to produce electricity. In 
the US, Antora Energy has innovated on TPV 
(thermophotovoltaic) technology to convert 
carbon block light back into electricity, offer-
ing cost-effective and emissions-free heat 
and power innovation. Using wind and solar technology has also bridged the perfor-
mance gap with materials like nickel and co-
balt. Our Next Energy, a startup, is launching 
production of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) 
batteries in Michigan. It plans to expand 
via a new $1.6 billion plant that will supply 
200,000 electric vehicles with LFP batteries 
by 2027. Among the larger companies, Ford 
has chosen to license LFP battery technolo-
gy from China-based CATL to provide more 
cost-effective options for customers, while 
General Motors is also exploring using LFPs 
to cut costs. Delta has introduced an outdoor 
lithium-iron battery system meticulously 
tailored for megawatt-level energy storage 
applications, addressing the pressing re-
quirements for grid ancillary services, solar 
plus storage, and backup power assurance.
Solid State Batteries
Introducing a groundbreaking leap in mak-
ing battery-powered flight a reality, NASA’s 
Solid-state Architecture Batteries for En-
hanced Rechargeability and Safety (SABERS) 
team has unveiled a sulfur selenium pro-totype battery with a high energy density of 
500 watt-hours per kilogram. With a storage 
capacity twice that of traditional lithium-ion 
batteries, these batteries offer the rapid dis-
charge capabilities necessary to be used in 
aircraft. Toyota has set its sights on launching 
solid-state batteries in its mass-produced 
EVs by 2027. The company has discovered a 
new way to simplify the production of sol-
id-state batteries and enable shorter charge 
times with an extended driving range. Nio, an 
EV company, in an update to its user manu-
als, has introduced a new 150 kilowatt-hour 
semi-solid state battery pack alongside its 
existing battery lineup. The Nio ES6 model in 
China will incorporate these solid-state bat-
teries. Factorial Energy, a solid-state battery 
developer, has forged collaborative partner-
ships with Hyundai, Kia, and Mercedes-Benz 
to implement its vision of scaling solid-state 
technology by 2026. The company has expand-
ed beyond the US to South Korea, Japan, and 
Germany. Furthermore, the realm of 3D-print-
ed solid-state batteries holds transformative 
potential, promising enhanced energy storage 
solutions for various applications.energy to heat solid carbon blocks over 1,500 
degrees Celsius, Antora can also provide its 
technology to industrial processes requiring 
high levels of heat. In line with the idea of 
ensuring high-temperature stability, a novel 
nanophotonic material—embodying struc-
tural variations on a scale comparable to the 
wavelength of light—has shown promising 
potential for efficient production and control 
of thermal radiation. Scientists at the Law-
rence Berkeley National Lab and Scripps Re-
search are also exploring new ways to handle 
high energy levels in extreme conditions.
Iron Batteries 
With its abundance, iron continues to be 
a reliable source for energy storage, and 
companies are devising new ways to use iron 
batteries to do this on a large scale. Form En-
ergy, a startup, will supply iron-air batteries 
to Xcel Energy’s 1-gigawatt-hour project that 
is slated for operation in 2025. Lithium-iron 
batteries are also gaining popularity. While 
their environmental and geopolitical signif-
icance has always been central to growth, ENERGY STORAGEENERGY & CLIMATE 
358© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Gravitational Energy Storage
In exploring innovative energy storage solu-
tions, gravitational energy is gaining trac-
tion as a way to create kinetic energy. Swiss 
company Energy Vault is nearing completion 
of gravity battery installations in the US and 
China that are projected to produce 36 and 
100 megawatts, respectively. Australian start-
up Green Gravity has joined forces with min-
ing contractor RUC to fast-track the adoption 
of its gravitational energy storage technology. 
Their technology moves ultra-heavy weights 
in mine shafts to turn turbines and create 
electricity. Meanwhile, UK-based Gravitricity 
is set to initiate pilot demonstrations of its 
gravity energy storage systems in India, with 
plans for broader deployment in the future.
Flow Batteries
An emerging idea, flow batteries leverage the 
flow of special liquids to generate electric 
current. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
is using β-cyclodextrin, a basic sugar extract-
ed from starch, in a flow battery formulation. 
This innovative sugar can be synthesized pled with an impressive life cycle of 50,000 
cycles and higher safety standards. Addition-
ally, a research group at Japan’s Osaka Met-
ropolitan University has developed a highly 
deformable solid electrolyte. Being touted 
as the world’s first bulk-type all-solid-state 
capacitor, this capacitor can function at 
high current densities and promises higher 
efficiency and performance.
Compressed Air Storage (CAES)
These systems use high pressure air to spin 
turbines and generate electricity. Current-
ly, only two commercial CAES plants exist 
globally: the Huntorf plant in Germany and 
the McIntosh plant in Alabama. They utilize 
diabatic processes, where off-peak electrici-
ty compresses air for storage, later mixing it 
with natural gas for combustion during peak 
demand. Hydrostor, a Toronto-based develop-
er, has devised an innovative plan scheduled 
for completion in 2028; it involves drilling 
three deep shafts that are about 100 yards 
high and as long as two football fields. The 
company will use excess renewable energy to compress air into them, later releasing 
high-pressure air to generate power. Stan-
ford University researchers have developed 
a model to gauge the required compressed 
air storage for deep decarbonization of power 
systems. Testing their model on California’s 
energy grid, the group has highlighted the 
cost-effectiveness of compressed air storage 
on a dollars-per-kilowatt-hour basis as com-
pared with other sources of energy. within laboratory settings, offering a sus-
tainable and environmentally friendly alter-
native to currently used materials. The US 
Army collaborated with Lockheed Martin to 
test a new flow battery that aims to store en-
ergy for a longer duration and at scale. Called 
GridStar Flow, this rechargeable flow battery 
will use engineered electrolytes to charge 
itself. Energy Dome, an Italian startup, is us-
ing “CO2 Battery” to store energy. With fresh 
funding secured, the tech company plans to 
operationalize two standard 20MW-200MWh 
frames by the close of 2024. 
Capacitors
Supercapacitors store and release electro-
chemical energy using a flow of electrons 
between two conductive plates separated by 
an electrolyte. Skeleton Technologies, an Es-
tonian company working on energy storage 
technology, has introduced the SuperBattery, 
which combines the attributes of super-
capacitors and batteries. This innovation 
boasts an extraordinary charging speed 100 
times faster than lithium-ion batteries, cou-ENERGY STORAGEENERGY & CLIMATE 
359© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
UHV Power Lines
Ultra high voltage (UHV) power lines can 
efficiently carry electricity over long distances 
with minimal loss, enabling energy optimi-
zation across vast areas. While China leads 
UHV use, other countries and alliances across 
the world are exploring projects to use this 
technology. One example is the North Sea 
Wind Power Hub, a collaboration from nine 
European countries to generate 120 gigawatts 
of wind power by 2030 and 300GW by 2050. 
The project aims to support Europe’s transi-
tion to a low-carbon energy system through 
wind power and uses UHV transmission lines 
to interconnect the electricity grids of these 
different countries. Beyond Europe, India, Bra-
zil, and Russia are also exploring UHV imple-
mentation. 
Superconductors
Superconductors can unlock high-speed en-
ergy transportation without resistive loss. In 
a feat first hailed as groundbreaking, scien-
tists at the University of Rochester seemed to 
have crafted a superconductor from nitro-gen-doped lutetium hydride that was able to 
transmit electricity at low temperatures and 
pressure. However, the experiment couldn’t 
be replicated. If successful, superconductors 
could scale technologies such as levitating 
high-speed trains and make long-distance 
energy transport (including wind and solar 
energy) a feasible alternative. The SCARLET 
initiative, supported by the EU, unites 15 
partners from seven countries to develop 
superconducting cables, enhancing cost-ef-
fective and efficient power transmission of 
renewable energy along with hydrogen in the 
same pipeline. The project took off in Sep-
tember 2022 at the Institute for Advanced 
Sustainability Studies in Potsdam, Germany. 
Focused on further improving long-distance 
energy transmission through supercon-
ductors, SuperNode, an Irish renewables 
technology company, has partnered with 
CERN. CERN, a leader in superconductivity re-
search, will bring its cryogenic and vacuum 
expertise to analyze sample materials and 
subsystems.ENERGY TRANSPORTENERGY & CLIMATE 
360© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Ultra high voltage power lines are needed to effectively distribute energy from renewable resources.TECH
Dynamic Line Rating (DLR) Systems
With climate change, energy grids across the 
globe are under more pressure, and grid oper-
ators are increasingly using new technologies 
like dynamic line rating (DLR) systems to 
enhance the grid. Using sensors, the technol-
ogy delivers real-time information on factors 
affecting grid performance, such as wind 
speed and temperature. In the US, PPL Corp. 
has been sending hourly forecasts to PJM 
Interconnection, the regional transmission or-
ganization, since 2022. UK’s National Grid has 
collaborated with LineVision, the only compa-
ny specializing in noncontact power line mon-
itoring, to deploy sensors and a DLR platform. 
This advancement aims to optimize grid 
performance by accurately assessing power 
line conditions. In Australia, the Renewable 
Energy Agency granted Infravision $732,000 
to support the development, testing, and trial 
of the “Next Generation Line Monitoring Sys-
tem,” thus enhancing electrical transmission 
grid performance.ing based on this data. The project explicitly 
highlights the importance of local and re-
gional decision-making in decarbonization. 
In Ireland, the transmission system operator 
EirGrid has partnered with Smart Wires to 
implement advanced power flow control 
devices that automate and optimize the 
grid and increase the use of new renewable 
energy. Balancing the Flow of Power Within the Grid
Balancing the flow of power within the 
grid is important to ensure that electricity 
demand is met in real time with supply. The 
University of Applied Sciences of Western 
Switzerland has pioneered an optimization 
algorithm that can identify the coordinates 
of electric current surges in power grids 
without knowing the grid’s overall structure, 
thus reducing outage costs. Another grid-en-
hancing technology is the Advanced Power 
Flow Control, where devices can rapidly push 
or pull power from over or under-utilized 
lines within a transmission network. The Na-
tional Grid Electricity Distribution, a project 
aimed at decarbonization, has launched the 
Planning Regional Infrastructure in a Digital 
Environment (PRIDE) project to bring togeth-
er key stakeholders on a unified platform to 
analyze data and make decisions on energy 
systems. Collaborating with the West Mid-
lands Combined Authority and Advanced 
Infrastructure, PRIDE explores the potential 
of digital twins to understand the regional 
energy demands and enable decision-mak-THE GRIDENERGY & CLIMATE 
361© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
As the percentage of renewable energy in the grid 
increases, we need smart technologies to ensure 
stable distribution and supply.TECH
362© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
EMISSIONS 
REMOVALTECH
Natural CSS 
One method of naturally removing carbon 
dioxide from the atmosphere is the mass 
farming of seaweed, which sucks the gas 
from the air. However, a new study has re-
vealed that the amount of seaweed needed to 
make an impact (a million square kilometers) 
may be too much for turning this solution 
into a widespread strategy for combatting 
climate change. Mosses are showing sub-
stantial promise after a new study revealed 
that moss-covered soil can store 6.43 billion 
metric tons more carbon in the soil beneath 
it than soil can on its own. The total poten-
tial amount of carbon dioxide that could 
be stored by mosses is about six times the 
annual global emissions caused by activities 
such as deforestation, urbanization, and min-
ing. A French startup is trying to grow geneti-
cally modified house plants to better filter the 
air around them. In Georgia, foresters have 
begun planting acres of the first genetically 
engineered trees, which are designed to grow 
faster and capture more carbon than their 
traditional counterparts. anese utility company Tokyo Gas is investing 
in Global Thermostat in pursuit of its net-ze-
ro goal for decarbonization. 
CO2 Storage 
Denmark made history last March with 
Project Greensand, which captured carbon 
dioxide at a site in Belgium, transported 
the liquid gas to the Danish North Sea and 
then injected it into the seabed at a depth 
of about 1,800 meters. Project Greensand is 
also working with Danish company Resen 
Waves, which created buoys that generate 
power through the ocean waves and can be 
used to monitor the seabed-injected carbon 
dioxide, detect leaks, and also work as Wi-Fi 
hotspots at sea. The project 44.01, involving 
partners Abu Dhabi National Oil Co., Fujairah 
Natural Resources Corp., and Abu Dhabi Fu-
ture Energy Co., eliminates carbon dioxide by 
turning it into a solid rock formation. It is the 
first mineralization project to use seawater 
and the first carbon-negative project by a 
Middle Eastern energy company. Direct Air Capture 
Directly capturing carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere is expensive and requires a lot 
of energy. But because the industry is so 
visible and young, it’s attracting new innova-
tors such as ex-Tesla Director Douglas Chan 
who founded Climeworks with the goal of 
being able to remove carbon dioxide by the 
gigaton by 2050. Climeworks has announced 
plans to scale up its US operations after suc-
cessfully running several European plants. 
California-based HolyGrail uses electrical-
ly powered modular scrubbers to remove 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and 
turn it into mineralized cubes, which can be 
stacked on top of each other above ground. 
Global Thermostat is at the forefront of car-
bon removal technology and has unveiled its 
new Direct Air Capture machine—one of their 
largest yet, the unit can remove 1,000 tons a 
year. The company provides customers with 
the main components and associated de-
sign plans of the machine, so that the actual 
building and implementation can be done by 
a construction company of their choice. Jap-CARBON CAPTURE & STORAGE ENERGY & CLIMATE 
363© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Seaweed captures carbon, but it’s questionable if 
there is enough to make an impact.TECH
CCS-as-a-Service 
As the demand for carbon capture and 
sequestration services increases, CCS-as-a-
service business models continue to spread. 
EnQuest, a UK oil and gas company, secured 
carbon storage licenses from North Sea Tran-
sition Authority in the UK’s first-ever carbon 
sequestration licenses. The company plans 
to ship carbon dioxide in liquid form to the 
Sullom Voe Terminal in Shetland, a 1,000-acre 
future carbon storage hub, before sending it 
via an existing pipeline for injection and per-
manent offshore storage. Due to the flexibility 
of shipping carbon dioxide in liquid form, this 
should make it easier for EnQuest to service 
more isolated carbon emitters that may not 
otherwise have access to this type of stor-
age. Ørsted’s Asnæs biomass power station 
and Northern Lights JV have signed a carbon 
dioxide Transport and Services Agreement 
to store 430,000 tons per year of biogenic 
carbon dioxide from two Danish power plants. 
This is a major milestone for both the Euro-
pean commercial CCS market and Northern 
Lights JV. Charm Industrial, a company that turns agricultural remnants into bio-oil, will 
be getting $53 million from carbon-removal 
credits to turn its agricultural waste into oil 
that can lock up carbon dioxide for a million 
years and be stored underground. CARBON CAPTURE & STORAGE ENERGY & CLIMATE 
364© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
First carbon storage licenses have been secured for the North Sea.TECH
Carbon-Based Food 
Traditional farming methods cause mass 
damage to our environment in the forms of 
habitat loss and deforestation—using up 
land, drying up water sources, and releasing 
a third of all greenhouse gas emissions. Solar 
Foods wants to change that by making food 
directly from carbon dioxide. The company is 
aiming to start production in 2024 in the first 
commercial-scale factory in Finland. Solar 
Foods’ technology involves bacteria that use 
hydrogen as their energy source; it creates a 
yellow powder that is 70% protein and can re-
place animal sourced proteins, such as eggs 
in noodles and pasta. The process will use 
200 times less land, 600 times less water, 
and emit up to 200 times less carbon dioxide 
than traditional protein sources.
Diamonds 
Diamonds come with a shady history that 
can frequently involve corrupt governments 
and exploitative working conditions. Aether is 
providing a completely conflict-free option by 
making diamonds out of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide. The US company captures carbon Chemical Production 
The research team at RWTH Aachen has 
developed a new chemical reaction that uses 
carbon dioxide in the creation of a chemical 
compound called aromatic carboxylic acids. 
This compound has a variety of uses from 
herbicides to plastics—but most important-
ly, it is used in medicine. In the pharmaceuti-
cal industry, a common type of aromatic car-
boxylic acid is salicylic acid, which is used in 
aspirin. The RWTH Aachen team’s discovery 
not only opens the door to many new indus-
tries but creates the opportunity to utilize 
waste carbon dioxide and more sustainably 
turn it into a chemical compound that can 
be used globally.dioxide from the atmosphere with a ther-
mochemical process, purifies it, adds green 
hydrogen to create atmospheric methane, 
and then puts it in specialized chambers 
where diamond material can begin to form. 
The diamond material is cut and polished 
with traditional methods and can be placed 
in a variety of jewelry from engagement rings 
to earrings. The diamonds themselves are 
carbon-negative.
Hair Care, Soap, and Laundry Detergent 
Theoretically, carbon can be sequestered 
in household products, and CleanCO2 has 
found a way to do that. The company cap-
tures carbon dioxide from building heating 
systems using a device called CarbinX and 
processes it into potassium carbonate (a 
non-toxic pearl ash). This pearl ash is used 
in the soap formula to create a sudsy lather 
when used, and ends up in everyday products 
such as hair care, soaps, and laundry deter-
gents. Founded in Alberta, Canada, the com-
pany has now expanded to the US and Japan 
and is deploying its CarbinX units globally. CARBON UTILIZATION ENERGY & CLIMATE 
365© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
US Company Aether is manufacturing  
carbon-negative diamonds.TECH
Funding Influx 
The rapidly growing climate technology 
industry is facing an overall mass increase 
in funding initiatives. Microsoft’s Climate 
Innovation Fund has pledged to distribute $1 
billion by 2024, and Amazon’s Climate Pledge 
Fund has pledged $2 billion; these projects 
vary from concrete that can trap atmospher-
ic carbon to portable batteries that could 
replace diesel-burning generators. Venture 
capitalists are investing more than $140 mil-
lion in startups, resulting in unprecedented 
funds for climate technology: Persefoni raised 
$114 million, Watershed raised $85 million, 
SINAI raised $36 million, and Sphera raised 
$21 million. 
Tracking Platforms 
Large, established companies are seeing the 
value in carbon tracking software, and many 
are creating their own or expanding their 
services to cover carbon data. SAP’s Sustain-
ability Data Exchange will allow companies 
to securely exchange sustainability data in 
a standardized format with suppliers and sion to decarbonize federal buildings, and 
nZero, a carbon management and account-
ing platform, is at the forefront. The company 
will track federal buildings’ electricity usage 
in real time in an effort to make them net-ze-
ro. The agency, along with the US Department 
of Energy, will invest $30 million toward this 
net-zero buildings goal. The EU enacted its 
Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive, 
which requires companies to report scope 
3 (indirect emissions) and double materi-
ality—the implications on the company’s 
financial value as well as impact to the 
environment and world overall. This directive 
also includes stricter rules on corporation’s 
social and environmental disclosures.
Individual Consumer Tracking 
A variety of new tools are encouraging indi-
vidual consumers to consider carbon foot-
print when making decisions. Reewild, a UK 
company, has created an app for consumers, 
food brands, and retailers to see the carbon 
footprint of a variety of food products. They 
simply need to scan an item’s barcode while using the app, which is still in its beta phase. 
While it is only in the UK, the company plans 
to scale the app to the EU and the US. Ameri-
can Express and MasterCard have introduced 
an emissions tracker for consumers to see 
how their actions, habits, and spending be-
haviors impact their personal carbon footprint 
based on purchases. Google Flights and Uber 
have also rolled out emissions data tools for 
individual consumer tracking. Australian bank 
Westpac developed a tool with Cogo, a car-
bon footprint management fintech, that will 
provide customers with personalized carbon 
emissions trackers based on their spending. 
The bank hopes the transparency will help 
close the knowledge gaps that are preventing 
individuals from making more sustainable 
decisions. Consumers can also track their 
waste using Bintracker, a software company, 
that uses QR codes to track waste streams 
down to individual tenants and then analyzes 
and reports on trends and data down to the 
source, day, and composition.partners in order to quickly reduce carbon 
emissions in supply chains. EY has released 
the beta version of EY OpsChain ESG on its 
EY Blockchain SaaS Platform; the product 
will provide verifiable and accurate carbon 
dioxide emissions information and allow 
clearer tracking of an enterprise’s carbon 
footprint, providing companies and regula-
tors with a transparent, trusted platform for 
carbon emission and credit traceability. Mi-
crosoft has introduced the Microsoft Cloud 
for Sustainability to help organizations 
more easily track their emissions and is 
continuing to add capabilities and updates 
to the platform, including a way to track 
indirect carbon emissions that frequently 
go untracked. Amazon Web Services has 
customizable solutions that use AI, machine 
learning, data analytics, and the Internet of 
Things to capture, analyze, and manage a 
company’s sustainability data.
Government Investment and Regulation 
The US General Services Administration’s 
Green Proving Ground program is on a mis-CARBON TRACKINGENERGY & CLIMATE 
366© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2050
What If CO2 Is the Foundation for Consumer Products? 
In the year 2050, consumer goods conglomerates such as Walmart and Amazon have utilized the scaling of nan-
otechnology to not only effectively integrate carbon capture, utilization, and storage into their operations but also 
to provide the delivery of personalized products at scale. A network of specialized nanobots, which the compa-
nies release into the atmosphere en masse, attract and bind carbon dioxide molecules from the atmosphere and 
transport them to central processing units. Within these central processing units, the carbon dioxide is convert-
ed into versatile carbon-based raw materials that can be tailored to various applications. The processing units 
receive customer orders within a 30-mile radius in real time and are equipped with hundreds of 3D printers, as 
well as a wide range of other raw materials and chemical components. Based on the order of each customer, the 
carbon dioxide raw materials are integrated into the appropriate material concoction and printed into everything 
from highly specific building components to carbon-based foods and intricate consumer goods.TECH
367© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
368© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
EMISSIONS 
REDUCTIONSTECH
CONSTRUCTION
Carbon Neutral or Negative Building 
Materials 
From plant-based building materials to more 
sustainable concrete, companies are exper-
imenting with new ways to construct build-
ings. Plantd, a sustainable building materials 
company, creates strong, moisture resistant 
carbon-negative building materials from 
fast-growing perennial grass. With $10 million 
from recent funding, Plantd’s products will 
provide a direct substitute for traditional 
home construction materials and lock in 80% 
of the atmospheric carbon dioxide the plants 
captured in the field. Elsewhere, a new type of 
engineered wood that traps carbon dioxide, 
strengthens the material for use in construc-
tion—the natural material goes through a 
process that makes it carbon dioxide-sorbent 
and stronger than its more natural state. The 
company MAA’VA is creating eco-concrete, 
a sustainable carbon negative construction 
material, by transforming nonplastic and 
plastic waste. This eco-concrete is adaptable 
to both conventional and 3D printing con-partnership between Eco Material Technolo-
gies—a cement alternatives company—and 
Hive 3D—an automated construction com-
pany. The result will be a building process 
which will emit 92% fewer emissions and 
cost 30%-40% less than a traditional con-
struction project of the same size.struction, which can create housing for one-
tenth the cost and half the waste. 
3D Printed Houses 
The use of 3D printing methods to build 
housing is expanding rapidly, and the use 
of natural materials is expanding with it 
thanks to designers Ronald Rael and Virgin-
ia San Fratello. They created Potterware, a 
browser-based application that allows for 3D 
designing without the need to understand 
3D modeling software; it also allows the 
use of natural materials such as clay, salt, 
mud, sawdust, or Chardonnay grape skins 
in designing and printing. In Europe, the 
continent’s largest 3D printed building is 
being built in Heidelberg, Germany, to house 
a data center. The construction is expected 
to take 140 working hours of robots apply-
ing layers of concrete, instead of dozens of 
human workers. In Round Top, Texas, the 
seasonal tourist town is about to see five 
vacation rental homes that are being called 
the world’s first “near-zero-carbon, 3D-print-
ed homes.” These homes are the result of a GREEN PROCESSESENERGY & CLIMATE 
369© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Companies are increasingly using materials such 
as clay and sawdust for the 3D printing of houses.TECH
HEAVY INDUSTRIES (Steel, Chemicals)
Steel and Iron
Steel production is responsible for 7%-9% 
of the world’s total carbon emissions, and 
investments in green steel companies are 
ramping up. While more resources are com-
ing into the industry than product rolling out, 
that may soon change. Hydrogen is playing 
a role in advancing the steel refinement 
process: The first large-scale green steel 
production plant is being built by H2 Green 
Steel in Sweden, aiming to cut greenhouse 
gas emissions by 95% during the production 
process. Using hydrogen technology instead 
of blast furnaces, the plant plans to start 
shipping its first commercial batches of 
steel by 2025. Across Europe, companies like 
France’s GravitHy, Germany’s Thyssenkrupp, 
and Spain’s ArcelorMittal are constructing hy-
drogen-based plants. Another advancement 
to soon enter the steel industry is the use of 
Molten Oxide Electrolysis, a process that uses 
electricity to separate oxygen from iron ore, 
leaving oxygen instead of carbon dioxide as a 
byproduct. Boston Metal hopes to bring this Physics Laboratory has applied “nanowhis-
kers,” aluminum-based membranes that 
attract PFAS contaminants and are designed 
with a cost-effective coating. Northwestern 
University chemists have found a process 
that uses low temperatures and common, 
inexpensive reagents can remove two major 
types of PFAS chemicals and leave them as 
benign products—this powerful solution 
from a simple technique could be the key 
to removing the chemicals at a large scale. 
University of British Columbia has also dis-
covered a scalable solution in the form of a 
filter that uses a unique absorbing material 
to trap and hold the chemicals. technology to the steel industry within the 
next two to three years. The US has a goal of 
a net-zero steel sector and is on its way to 
that, claiming to have the cleanest global 
emissions footprint due to the steel it pro-
duces being roughly 70% made from recycled 
scrap.
Chemicals 
As US regulators move to restrict two forever 
chemicals in drinking water, companies are 
experimenting with the technology to do it. 
Also known by their proper name of perfluo-
roalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances, PFAS 
are in everything from waterproof clothing to 
dental floss and can cause cancer, liver dam-
age, fertility problems and more. While the 
removal of these chemicals with convention-
al filtering techniques is nearly infeasible 
and can be costly, researchers at Fraunhofer 
Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Bio-
technology IGB have found a way to use plas-
ma-based technology to reduce the chemi-
cal’s molecular chains and remove them at a 
low cost. Johns Hopkins University’s Applied GREEN PROCESSESENERGY & CLIMATE 
370© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
A variety of research institutions have come up 
with promising filtering systems to remove forever 
chemicals from our ecosystem.TECH
GREEN PROCESSESENERGY & CLIMATE 
371© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AGRICULTURE
Plants Without Plants
Novella is creating plants without the whole 
plant by growing botanical ingredients with 
necessary macronutrients through nutrient 
cultivation—no plant needed. This will help 
address the increasing demand for neces-
sary macronutrients, help overcome supply 
chain disruptions, expand plant’s life cycles, 
and reduce climate impact. While typically a 
majority of a plant could be discarded, just to 
get to the specific bioactive compounds, this 
avoids that waste. This process costs less, 
wastes less, and provides more safe, natural 
botanicals without chemical additives than 
current processes, rising to meet the global 
demand. CRISPR Edited Crops
CRISPR is a technique that allows for the 
editing (such as addition or deletion) of an 
organism’s DNA—it’s a different technology 
from what’s used in genetically modified or-
ganisms, or GMOs. While many international 
governments have strict GMO regulations, 
they’ve responded differently to crops that 
have genes edited with CRISPR. Under a new 
law, the UK will allow for gene-edited crops 
to be planted, Canada will not regulate crops 
that have gone through changes, and the 
European Commission is considering next 
to no regulation for genetically modified 
crops. This is a dramatic change from the 
European Commission’s previous stance, 
which put in place an intense and expensive 
approval process for such crops. But regula-
tors see a lot of possibilities in gene-edited 
crops, including saving many from famine 
due to climate change and high demand 
for food. Already, gene editing is beginning 
to help expand the yield and temperature 
resistance of staple foods like rice and cow-
peas to meet demand. Waste
Organic waste used to be something to be 
disposed of, but now opportunities are arising 
to utilize this material in new ways. Wasted, 
a Vermont-based company, created portable 
toilets that transport the human waste it 
captures to nutrient recovery facilities that 
process the waste and turn it into fertilizer. 
Mill Industries is doing something similar but 
with household waste. The company offers a 
food waste bin and service for $33 a month 
where the bin will collect, grind, and dehy-
drate the organic matter. The company then 
notifies the owner when the material, in the 
consistency of coffee grounds, needs to be 
shipped to a processing facility to be turned 
into chicken feed.Fertilizer Innovation 
New developments in fertilizer technology  
 are helping ensure stronger, healthier 
plants—and experimenting with new uses 
for waste material. EnGeniousAg has re-
ceived a grant of $1 million to create soil 
nitrogen sensors that are low cost, provide 
instant readouts, and can help farmers 
measure nitrogen levels in their crops in a 
matter of seconds. Along the same lines, 
startup Phospholutions recently won the 
Africa AgTech Startup Showcase by show-
ing fertilizer efficiency can be increased to 
maintain crop yield by reducing the phos-
phorus in it by 50%. Tracegrow Oy, a Finnish 
cleantech startup set to expand operations, 
is creating certified organic fertilizer from 
alkaline batteries. Taking the used batteries, 
extracting micronutrients needed by crops, 
and placing them in fertilizer has not only 
enhanced crop productivity but also reduced 
carbon dioxide emissions compared to tra-
ditional fertilizers. TECH
DIGITAL EMISSIONSENERGY & CLIMATE 
372© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Reducing Carbon Emissions
The increased interest in machine learning 
has also raised questions about the carbon 
footprint of developing and using such tech-
nology. Google published the “4Ms”—Model, 
Machine, Mechanization, and Map Optimiza-
tion—four practices the company believes can 
reduce emissions involved in machine learn-
ing by 1,000 times and energy by 100 times. 
Model refers to selecting model archetypes 
for machine learning that can produce quality 
while reducing computation by 3-10 times. 
Machine refers to using processors specifi-
cally for machine learning that can improve 
energy efficiency by 2-5 times. Mechanization 
refers to using cloud computing in data cen-
ters customized for that type of processing 
which use higher efficiency servers resulting 
in less emissions. Finally, Map Optimization 
refers to allowing customers to select loca-
tions with the cleanest energy, which will 
increase demand and thus the growth of such 
green data centers, reducing carbon footprint 
by 5-10 times. Measuring Emissions
With Google employing the “4Ms,” the rest of 
the tech giants are also stepping up to ad-
dress emissions from devices. Taken togeth-
er, all devices globally linked via the internet 
have a similar electric consumption to that 
of the entire country of France. Amazon, Meta, 
Microsoft, Samsung, and Sky have teamed 
up with the Carbon Trust to set an industry 
standard for measuring and cutting carbon 
emissions from their devices while they are 
being used by consumers. The group aims 
to find a baseline to report energy efficiency 
improvements, apply technology to reduce 
energy use of connected devices, and drive 
toward its ultimate goal of industry-wide net 
zero emissions. Researchers from the Lough-
borough Business School have also created 
a new tool that helps businesses determine 
the carbon footprint of their data and allows 
them to create data strategies that are envi-
ronmentally sustainable.
Google hopes to reduce emissions caused by machine learning by 1000 times through its 4M practice.TECH
RECYCLINGENERGY & CLIMATE 
373© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AI Waste-Sorting Robots 
AI’s accuracy is being used to improve the 
sorting of recycling in order to cut costs. 
After a two year trial, Google’s AI-driven recy-
cling-sorting robots have showcased a high 
degree of accuracy. The reinforcement learn-
ing system used on the robots in the study 
increased accuracy by providing feedback 
through rewards and penalties, and the AI 
improved the robots’ decisions to maximize 
the amount of rewards received. A UK start-
up, Recycleye, has developed an AI-based 
waste-sorting robot, which recently won  $17 
million in funding. The robot uses “vision” 
to sort waste into plastics, aluminum, card-
board, and paper with greater accuracy than 
humans. Recycleye also announced a part-
nership with Il Solco, an Italian company 
that plans to use the AI-based waste-sorting 
robots in that country. Plastic
The startup Norbite uses the greater wax 
moth (Galleria mellonella), which naturally 
digests plastic, to get rid of the material. It 
also uses the moth’s larvae for a variety of 
products, such as protein for animal feed, 
and the moth’s feces for biofertilizer. Re-
searchers at Leipzig University have discov-
ered an enzyme that can degrade lightweight 
PET plastic packaging. The enzyme is able 
to compost this plastic type at a higher 
efficiency than previously seen in other en-
zymes, including those discovered in Japan 
in 2012 that were dubbed “plastic eaters.” 
Enzyme PHL7 was discovered to be the 
fastest enzyme to break down PET plastic by 
90% in 16 hours, and the byproduct of this 
enzyme can be rebuilt into new plastic. Food 
Organic waste in landfills eventually builds 
up, breaks down, and produces methane, 
a powerful greenhouse gas. The company 
Divert recently received $1 billion to increase 
the use of microbes to break down this or-
ganic waste; this process is called anaerobic 
digestion, and it could help reduce the 40% 
of methane released from landfills by avoid-
ing sending the waste there in the first place. 
Another method is biohydrogen production, 
which turns waste into a renewable, clean 
energy source. Many processes can be used 
in this production but all use microorgan-
isms to break down organic waste materials 
and create hydrogen gas. Water is the only 
byproduct.
The greater wax moth digests plastic, the feces can 
be used for biofertilizer.TECH
Cross-Laminated Timber
Cross-Laminated Timber is a minimum of 
three layers of timber glued together with 
grains that cross. Typically, timber can be-
come structurally unsound if enough force is 
applied along its grain, but with cross-lam-
inated timber this is far less of an issue. 
The material is lightweight, has increased 
strength, and has even shown to have a 
higher resilience to seismic forces than tra-
ditional timber. But the product is also a way 
to use smaller trees, the types of trees that 
are usually removed from forests in order to 
make them less prone to fire. Mercer Mass 
Timber, a company that specializes in CLT, is 
preparing for an increase in demand due to 
building codes in Oregon, Washington, and 
California now classifying it as a new class of 
construction. OPAL Architecture has created 
a unique, all-electric home using cross-lam-
inated timber and wood-fiberboard insula-
tion to achieve the goal of creating a home 
with the lowest-possible carbon output. The 
Maine-based company cited the new timbers 
as the only material that would work due to 
its structural capacity, dimensional stability, Mushroom Plastic 
New research has focused on the fungus 
Fomes fomentarius and the way its multi-
ple layers could soon replace a multitude of 
plastic products. The mushroom has three 
layers: a hard outer layer, a soft middle layer, 
and an inner layer similar to the texture of 
wood. These multiple layers can potentially 
be used in many different products, from 
windshield impact-resistant coating using 
the hard outer layer to leather-like materials 
using the soft middle layer. Led by a scien-
tist from VTT Technical Research Centre of 
Finland, a research team was able to create 
prototype headphones using the mush-
room’s structure. The applications for the 
different parts of this mushroom are vast, 
and the researchers’ hope is that this will 
soon be the more sustainable alternative to 
many plastics. 
Self-Healing Materials 
There’s a lot of historical precedent in this 
field—ancient Roman concrete structures 
have long been known to be self-healing. 
The structures contain lime clasts, which were originally believed to be an unfortunate 
byproduct. But reevaluations of the durability 
of Roman concrete structures have concluded 
that this was an intentional choice: As cracks 
formed in concrete, the liquid that reached 
these lime clasts would reactivate calcium 
sources and create calcium carbonate to refill 
the cracks and keep the structure sound. Now, 
researchers are experimenting with engineer-
ing different materials to similarly heal them-
selves. While performing experiments on how 
cracks form and spread, researchers at New 
Mexico’s Sandia National Laboratories saw 
cracks in copper and platinum spontaneously 
heal. The team believes this self-healing could 
be engineered into metals to react this way to 
stress and cracks. At North Carolina State Uni-
versity, researchers have created self-healing 
composite material that allows its structures 
to be repaired in place without having to be 
removed from service. There is also research 
underway to create self-healing plastic at the 
University of Michigan, and scientists have 
successfully created self-healing solar pan-
els for use in outer space using the mineral 
perovskite.and carbon-storing capacity. Besides being 
strong, the cross-laminated timber panels 
provided such air sealing that heating or 
cooling the interior space would only require 
one-third of the typical amount of energy. 
Mycelium 
Mycelium, a natural fiber from mushrooms, 
can be used as a plastic alternative in items 
such as textiles, building materials, pack-
aging, and health care products. Completely 
biodegradable, this material can be used to 
replace plastics such as polyester, building 
polymers, concrete, packing materials, and 
threaded wound covers. Mushroom Inc. is fo-
cused on finding new ways to use mycelium 
hyphae to reduce toxic plastics and waste 
while creating more carbon-neutral prod-
ucts. Researchers at Newcastle University 
have been able to grow construction mate-
rials using mycocrete, a composite paste of 
mycelium. Using a knitted framework, the 
composite is fed and allowed to grow until 
it reaches the needed density, and then it is 
dried out and used as an eco-friendly alter-
native to plastic, timber, or foam. GREEN MATERIALSENERGY & CLIMATE 
374© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
GREEN MATERIALSENERGY & CLIMATE 
375© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Lab Grown Leather 
Vegan leather is becoming more popular as a 
sustainable alternative to traditional leather, 
but the material typically uses polyurethane 
which is toxic. The material innovation com-
pany Von Holzhausen has created Liquidplant, 
a top coating for textiles that can help make 
vegan leather more durable without using 
harmful chemicals. Other companies are ex-
perimenting with using different materials for 
vegan leather, including TômTex’s work with 
shrimp shells. Using shrimp shells ground 
into flakes and then turned into a liquid, the 
company is creating vegan leather for wallets, 
mimicking leather and its durability without 
any petrochemicals. ProjectEx, a Singapore 
lab-grown exotic leather producer, is aiming 
to raise $1 million in order to create a sustain-
able, cruelty free exotic leather for the luxury 
market. The first leathers are expected within 
two years of completed funding with plans of 
scaling afterwards. The project is a partner-
ship between designer Adrian Furstenburg 
and deep-tech startup Cellivate Technologies. 
And 3D Bio-Tissues has successfully grown leather “skin” in a lab without any need for 
animals. The company believes that lab-
grown leather technology could be mar-
ket-ready in five years. 
A Singapore project aims to create cruelty free exotic leather.TECH
Micromobility
Micromobility refers to compact personal 
transportation, like bicycles, skates, and 
scooters, and companies are making it easier 
for people to use these devices for greener 
daily commutes. French-based startup At-
mosGear has created the first set of electric 
inline skates; they have a range of 20 miles 
on a fully charged battery that is stored in a 
fanny pack, bringing back the Rollerblading 
aesthetic. The skates connect to the battery 
via a wire that travels down the back of the 
leg and allows the wearer to go up to 20 mph. 
Another startup increasing micromobility 
options is electric bike and scooter company 
Yulu. Its app shows rentable scooters’ avail-
ability in real time. Lime is doing something 
similar by focusing on electric scooters and 
bike-sharing. The California startup is a lead-
er in the space, and is operating in 250 cities 
across 30 countries. It has backing from Uber 
and other investors that could help this start-
up expand even more. Heavy Trucks
Truck platooning, where one driver and truck 
are connected to a convoy of autonomous 
trucks via a network and drive close behind 
each other, could ease passenger traffic on 
motorways. This use of autonomous vehicles 
would increase fuel efficiency through lesser 
air resistance and would save costs for long-
haul trucking. This technology is in the trial 
phase in several countries and could soon 
see the road, with an expected cost savings 
of up to 45% compared to today’s trucks 
and drivers. Wireless charging is another 
technology that so far has been mainly ex-
plored within freight transport. Electreon, a 
company specializing in charging electrical 
vehicles in motion, has an agreement with 
France to equip a portion of a southwest 
Paris motorway with its Wireless Electric 
Road System. Currently pursuing similar 
projects in Sweden, Germany, Italy, and 
the US, the company says its product will 
increase power transfer capacity and include 
real-time monitoring software for all types 
and classes of vehicles. However, for now 
the focus remains on commercial EV fleets. Tesla’s purchase of Wiferion, a German-based 
wireless charging company, further signals 
that the technology is prone to enter passen-
ger driving sooner rather than later.
Trains
Sun-Ways is making trains green by going be-
yond the locomotives themselves. The compa-
ny is using the spaces between railway tracks 
to lay out solar panels “like carpet.” Sun-Ways 
estimates that a terawatt-hour of solar energy 
per year could be produced from the national 
rail network in Switzerland, equivalent to 2% 
of the country’s total energy consumption. 
Meanwhile, Polish company Nevomo is ex-
ploring hyperloop-inspired technology for the 
potential future of rail freight. Nevomo uses 
MagRail technology, magnetic propulsion that 
could be a traction enhancer. While capacity, 
reliability, and frequency are more important 
factors than speed for rail freight, this tech-
nology could have a revolutionary impact on 
the industry—especially considering it would 
allow trains to work on both the company’s 
MagRail system and traditional tracks. Nev-
omo also signed a deal with the French rail Cars
Until now, charging electric vehicles (EV) has 
been the primary way of keeping them on the 
road. But startup Ample has a battery-swap 
system that can swap out an empty EV 
battery for a fresh one in 5 minutes, far less 
than batteries take to charge. With many 
other companies pursuing the idea, battery 
swapping could bring the ease of a gas sta-
tion to EVs on the road. For combustion cars, 
there may be a new alternative that can keep 
them on the road in the EU despite the 2035 
deadline to phase out polluting vehicles—
running on e-fuels. E-fuels are synthetic fu-
els made from hydrogen and carbon dioxide, 
and can be processed in today’s combustion 
engines. While e-fuels do still emit carbon 
dioxide when they are burned, the amount 
taken out of the atmosphere to produce 
the fuel offsets the amount that is created 
when the fuel is burnt. Luxury car company 
Porsche has also created its own synthetic 
fuel made of carbon dioxide and water that 
can be used in its current cars. The Porsche 
e-fuel is among the many seeing the poten-
tial in the fuel market. GREEN TRANSPORTENERGY & CLIMATE 
376© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
GREEN TRANSPORTENERGY & CLIMATE 
377© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.operator SNCF to evaluate if its technology 
can increase train efficiency and capacity. 
Air
When it comes to air travel, any part, no 
matter how small, can make a big difference. 
SWING has its focus on the front flaps of 
planes, creating them out of thermoplas-
tic polymers and decreasing their weight 
by about 20%. While this is just a first step 
with this type of material, SWING hopes that 
eventually the polymers could be used to 
craft entire aircrafts, reducing emissions by 
up to 20%. Autonomous aircrafts could first 
see their application with unmanned cargo 
planes. Dronamics, a UK-based company, 
released of one of the first unmanned car-
go aircrafts at the end of 2023. The aircraft 
takes less time to operate, saves money, and 
emits less carbon dioxide than traditional 
cargo freight, catering to underserved areas 
and multiple industries. Startup ZeroAvia has 
completed a record test flight in a 19-seat air-
craft half powered by hydrogen fuel cells. With 
investment from commercial airlines, it’s now 
looking to move into commercial tests.Ocean
With shipping being such a large part of 
global trade, many ships are looking to 
reduce their carbon footprint due to new car-
bon efficiency regulations. To do this, many 
are looking to wind and developing wind pro-
pulsion technologies to decrease fuel usage. 
US food company Cargill announced it will 
install two folding sails in its bulk carrier’s 
deck, and container shipping group Maersk 
installed two 30 meter-high rotor sails on 
one of its tanker ships. In an effort to make 
fuel cleaner, a viscosity meter has been de-
veloped to test the oil used in ship engines, 
which is typically full of impurities. The ultra-
sound device is meant to improve shipboard 
monitoring and lower the cost.
Tankers might soon be equipped with sails to make them more fuel efficient.TECH
378© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL 
MANIPULATIONENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
EARTHENERGY & CLIMATE 
379© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Rewilding: Animals/Nature
Countries across the world are initiating 
rewilding efforts, an ecological restoration 
approach that involves restoring natural 
ecosystems and habitats by reintroducing 
native plant and animal species. A NASA-sup-
ported initiative in Idaho uses remote sens-
ing data to forecast the streams that could 
support beavers and monitor the biodiversity 
shift once beaver populations are introduced. 
In the Netherlands, Marker Wadden is a 
1,300-hectare archipelago built with the mud 
and sand of the lake that now houses diverse 
plants, fish, insects, and breeding birds. 
Meanwhile, Scotland, aiming to be the world’s 
first rewilded nation, has created countrywide 
wild lands and natural corridors. This re-
building of ecosystems in Scotland has been 
enabled by land ownership laws that allow a 
few to own most of the land. (In contrast, in 
Ireland, where land ownership is limited to 
several acres, natural woodlands make up 
only 1% of the island, compared to  80% long 
ago.) In Mexico, tequila company Tromba 
strives to rewild and reforest land damaged 
by blue agave over-cultivation, targeting immense financial prospects. At the Nation-
al Black-Footed Ferret Conservation Center 
in Colorado, Dr. Della Garelle of the US Fish 
and Wildlife Service is spearheading the 
revival of America’s endangered ferrets. Over 
4,000 genetically similar ferrets have been 
released into the wild since 1991; this helps 
ecosystem restoration, but the limited gene 
pool makes them vulnerable to disease. To 
maximize breeding success, biologist Robyn 
Bortner picks and matches ferrets based on 
their genes. In this context, the San Diego 
Frozen Zoo is essential, as it leads the de-ex-
tinction field with the world’s largest living 
animal cell bank, enabling DNA collection 
and storage for future restoration efforts.
For more on rewilding in cities and municipal-
ities, please see our the Rewilding trend in our 
Built Environment book.1,000 hectares in a decade. Citizen-driven 
initiatives are also growing. Designer Kiki 
Grammatopoulos has introduced “Rewild the 
Run,” featuring bristly running shoe out-
soles that aid plant and seed dispersion in 
cities. Agricultural rewilding has also grown, 
combining rewilding with agriculture to 
maintain food self-sufficiency and promote 
sustainable and ethical high-quality meat 
production.
Bioengineering
Scientists predict that almost a quarter of 
all species on Earth are at risk of being lost 
within the next few decades. De-extinction 
is a scientific method to bring back and 
resurrect extinct or close to extinct spe-
cies. Organizations like nonprofit Revive & 
Restore and for-profit Colossal Bioscience, 
are pioneering these efforts. For instance, 
Colossal is using gene editing to revive 
the dodo bird, while Revive is focused on 
the passenger pigeon. In both cases, the 
newly created animal will be a hybrid and 
not a replica of the predecessor, qualifying 
for patent protection and thus producing 
The black footed ferret is one of the species that is 
being rewilded in the US.TECH
SKYENERGY & CLIMATE 
380© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Geoengineering
Geoengineering refers to environmental 
manipulation—manipulation of Earth’s 
resources including oceans, rivers, soil, and 
atmosphere. Although it’s in an early stage of 
development, geoengineering technology is 
already being commercialized, leading to crit-
icism from scientists across the world. The 
regulation around it is also mired in conflict, 
with different countries adopting contrasting 
approaches. In Mexico, the company Make 
Sunsets is sending gas-filled balloons into 
the atmosphere and selling “cooling credits” 
without much scientific validation. The lack 
of regulation is allowing such companies to 
function despite low credibility. On the other 
hand, the European Union is grappling with 
the complexities of this issue and consid-
ering potential regulations. Meanwhile, in 
China, geoengineering is being considered as 
a tool for hybrid warfare strategy. Especially in 
the realm of regional geopolitics, China could 
amplify its gray zone capabilities and use 
weather modification for military purposes, 
obstructing river water flow, and even creat-
ing artificial islands.ing up with innovation, MIT scientists have 
proposed a unique approach to use a fleet 
of “space bubbles” to reflect sunlight from 
space instead of injecting particles into the 
atmosphere, potentially reducing harmful 
effects. Meanwhile, startups are considering 
iron particle spraying above the ocean to 
combat climate change by breaking down 
methane, a natural phenomenon that may 
have influenced ice ages. However, scientists 
stress that more fundamental research is 
needed before considering large-scale imple-
mentations.
Cloud Seeding
Cloud seeding is a decades-old weather 
modification technique that enhances pre-
cipitation by dispersing specialized particles 
into the atmosphere. With increased focus 
on climate change, new and improved cloud 
seeding techniques are being developed and 
embraced across the world, including in the 
US, China, Russia, and parts of the Middle 
East. India recently made strides in this 
field by embarking on its first cloud-seed-
ing initiative where an aircraft released chemical powder to stimulate rain in clouds. 
Experimentation continues in other countries 
as well with diverse seeding materials. The 
United Arab Emirates, at the forefront of inno-
vation, has been using cloud seeding for more 
than two decades, leading to a 25% annual 
increase in optimal precipitation. Researchers 
are now employing nanotechnology and har-
nessing algorithms to optimize cloud seeding 
conditions, and they are exploring the use of 
drones to amplify the efforts. In Texas, Dan 
Martin from the Department of Agriculture’s 
Agricultural Research Service is investigating 
the use of electrically charged particles to trig-
ger cloud condensation. In an experiment, an 
aircraft with tanks of water released a spray 
of electrically-charged water particles into the 
cloud to see its effect on precipitation. The 
United Kingdom, meanwhile, is pioneering the 
use of electrical pulses as a potential seeding 
technique. Solar Geoengineering
Still in a nascent stage, solar geoengineer-
ing is very controversial. It theorizes that by 
reflecting more sunlight into space, global 
warming can be controlled, but countries 
and international institutions are grap-
pling with how to regulate the space. The 
US government, recognizing the need for 
further research, has proposed a study of 
risks associated with deploying solar geoen-
gineering techniques. The EU, while formally 
disqualifying solar geoengineering as a 
climate solution, also recognizes the need to 
deepen understanding of the implications 
associated with the technology. More recent-
ly, the United Nations convened a panel of 
climate experts to deliberate international 
regulation of the stratosphere, stressing 
the need to manage risks associated with 
spraying aerosols to reflect sunlight. In the 
UK, a first-of-its-kind solar geoengineering 
test flight has been conducted, showcasing 
ongoing exploration of the concept. As a part 
of it, scientists launched a high-altitude 
weather balloon into the stratosphere that is 
low-cost, controllable and recoverable. Keep-TECH
OCEANENERGY & CLIMATE 
381© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Microplastics
Innovative ideas are surfacing in the battle 
against microplastic pollution, offering hope 
for a cleaner ocean. One such initiative, GoJel-
ly, harnesses the mucus produced by jellyfish 
species to craft filters that effectively trap 
plastic particles from wastewater, preventing 
their entry into the ocean. The project is inno-
vatively using the growing jellyfish population 
to curb microplastics. Another breakthrough 
comes in the form of sound wave technology. 
Recent research reveals that pulsing sound 
waves can efficiently dislodge microplastics 
from the ocean’s depth including tiny small 
specks that may otherwise be easy to miss. 
The team experimented with a prototype 
comprising sturdy 8 millimeter steel tubes 
and a powerful transducer. With the sound 
waves, even the small particles vibrated and 
accumulated.
Living Breakwater 
Living Breakwater is an innovative approach 
to coastal protection and ecological resto-
ration that utilizes nature-based solutions. A 
remarkable milestone has been achieved in water. Researchers at University of California, 
Santa Barbara have recently been exploring 
a proposal to enhance ocean alkalinity for 
accelerated carbon sequestration. By enrich-
ing the ocean with minerals and increasing 
alkalinity, they aim to stimulate geologic 
processes that efficiently remove carbon 
dioxide from the atmosphere. Promisingly, 
their study reveals that crucial plankton 
groups in the marine food chain respond 
positively to this treatment, encouraging 
further research in this climate change inter-
vention. Despite the positive outlook, con-
cerns have increased about using minerals 
such as basalt to increase the alkalinity of 
seawater: These methods may disrupt nu-
trient cycles and affect marine ecosystems. 
Acknowledging the significance of marine 
geoengineering in climate change mitiga-
tion, the Australian Labor government has 
taken a proactive step by introducing a bill 
to regulate “marine geoengineering” activi-
ties. The proposed legislation seeks to gov-
ern and control interventions in the ocean 
environment. Listed marine geoengineering 
activities would require permits, ensuring proper oversight and safeguarding against 
ecological consequences.
Gene Editing
Gene editing coral refers to the scientific 
practice of using advanced genetic engineer-
ing techniques to modify the DNA of corals. 
The goal is to introduce specific changes to its 
genetic code, which can enhance its resilience 
to environmental stressors, such as rising sea 
temperatures, ocean acidification, and dis-
ease. Scientists, including Carnegie Science’s 
Amanda Tinoco, have employed genome 
editing tools to unlock a pivotal discovery in 
coral development. Their research highlights 
the significance of a specific gene known as 
SLC4γ, which is essential for the growth of 
skeletons in young coral colonies. This gene, 
exclusive to stony corals, encodes a protein re-
sponsible for transporting bicarbonate across 
cellular membranes, a crucial process in coral 
skeleton formation. This breakthrough offers 
opportunities for further research into coral 
resilience and conservation strategies.the Port of Rotterdam, where 17 Reefy Reef-
Blocks have been successfully installed in 
the river Meuse. The project experiments 
with innovative nature-based wave barriers 
to safeguard the shores from the impact of 
large ship waves while preserving and re-
storing regional biodiversity. By reviving the 
intertidal environment, the living breakwater 
provides a vital sanctuary for migratory fish 
species like sturgeons and European eels, 
facilitating their journey between the Atlan-
tic Ocean and major European rivers. In New 
York, the “Living Breakwaters” project off the 
south shore of Staten Island aims to protect 
coastal communities and promote ecologi-
cal restoration by creating habitats for ma-
rine life and fostering biodiversity. Encom-
passing a series of eight in-water structures 
stretching 2,400 linear feet, the project was 
initially slated for completion by the end of 
2024 but is currently ahead of schedule. 
Ocean Chemistry
Ocean chemistry is a multidisciplinary field 
that delves into the chemical processes and 
composition of Earth’s biggest bodies of SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2045
What If a Sunshield Leads to a New World Order? 
As the effects of climate change became more dire and governing bodies noticed that conventional climate mit-
igation efforts would not be sufficient to prevent catastrophic impacts to their populations, the most impacted 
nations launched “Project Celestial Shield.” The core of this initiative involved launching an array of solar reflec-
tors into space, positioned to intercept a portion of the sun’s energy and redirect it away from Earth to counter 
rising global temperatures. Initially celebrated as a revolutionary solution, Project Celestial Shield successfully 
attenuated the planet’s temperature rise. However, with the reduced influx of solar energy, regions that once relied 
on specific temperature patterns faced abrupt shifts in climate. Agricultural cycles even in thriving regions have 
been disrupted, leading to decreased crop yields and global food shortages. Ecosystems accustomed to specific 
temperature ranges experienced upheaval, resulting in mass migration of species and a ripple effect throughout 
food chains.
As atmospheric dynamics adjusted to the altered energy balance, unforeseen weather patterns have emerged. 
Rainfall distribution has dramatically shifted, causing both unexpected droughts and deluges in areas previously 
not affected by these extreme weather events. Diplomatic tensions are high as the geopolitical power dynamics 
fundamentally shifted in response to the newly defined ecological realities, resetting the political stage for the 
coming decades.TECH
382© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
383© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
EFFECTS OF 
CLIMATE CHANGETECH
Emissions
With increasing recognition of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) as a significant driver of 
climate change, there is a pressing need to 
reduce these emissions. The United Nations’ 
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
is taking the lead in ensuring standard-
ized, real-time tracking of GHGs that can be 
used to influence policy making. WMO uses 
weather prediction and climate analysis to 
monitor greenhouse gases in an integrated 
framework. Another initiative is the Global 
Greenhouse Gas Watch, where WMO is collab-
orating with the global greenhouse gas mon-
itoring community to ensure sustained and 
regular monitoring of GHGs. In this context, 
methane, a potent greenhouse gas, is import-
ant. Scientists posit that 60% of atmospheric 
methane results from human actions. To 
better monitor methane emissions, Harvard 
researchers, private space companies, activ-
ists, and philanthropists are launching the 
MethaneSAT project. Scheduled for 2024, the 
satellite will revolutionize methane moni-
toring by providing a comprehensive view of 
emissions across vast areas, surpassing ex-and Huawei have introduced machine-learn-
ing methods capable of predicting weath-
er patterns as accurately as conventional 
methods and with much greater speed. How-
ever, given the unpredictability associated 
with future weather events, it remains to be 
seen if these AI-powered forecasting models 
trained on historical weather data can make 
proficient predictions. For extreme heat, Goo-
gle is taking a proactive approach by part-
nering with the Global Heat Health Informa-
tion Network to push notifications to users 
in affected locations. Addressing flooding 
risks, companies like C2S are leveraging 
technology to help insurers better under-
stand and underwrite flood risk and monitor 
flood events in real time. Using machine 
learning, the company analyzes data from 
satellites, historical flood maps, and on-the-
ground intelligence to provide insights into 
flood extent and impact.
In another initiative to decrease flooding 
risks, the National Digital Twin program is 
creating an interactive demonstrator tool to 
showcase how connected digital twins can enhance infrastructure resilience to flooding. 
Additionally, real-time flood sensors devel-
oped by the FloodSense project at NYU and the 
CUNY Advanced Science Research Center aim 
to provide hyperlocal street-level flood event 
information to stakeholders, including policy-
makers, government agencies, emergency re-
sponse teams, and citizens. In the face of hur-
ricanes, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration is equipping forecasters with 
a new model called the Hurricane Analysis 
and Forecast System. The model offers ear-
lier warnings of rapid intensification and 
improved predictions of impacts like rainfall 
and storm surge, empowering communities to 
better prepare for and respond to hurricanes.
Crops
In Africa, scientists are using artificial in-
telligence to predict the yields of vital crops 
by harnessing satellite remote sensing and 
machine learning. The tool can analyze vast 
agricultural landscapes, providing real-time 
predictions of crop yields and offering farmers 
and policymakers valuable insights into crop 
productivity.isting aerial and ground-based methods. The 
core instrument of MethaneSAT is a spec-
trometer, a sophisticated device capable of 
precisely detecting methane concentrations. 
By monitoring methane emissions at a 
global scale with higher speed and efficien-
cy, MethaneSAT can shed light on emissions’ 
sources, pinpointing areas for targeted cli-
mate mitigation strategies.
Extreme Weather 
The increasing frequency and severity of ex-
treme weather events is causing significant 
challenges for insurers and communities 
worldwide. In states like Florida and Califor-
nia, insurance companies are withdrawing 
from offering homeowner insurance due to 
the growing risks associated with extreme 
weather events like hurricanes and wildfires. 
In Germany, insurers are demanding that 
house-building cease in flood-prone areas 
to mitigate potential damages. More accu-
rate weather prediction could be helpful in 
such cases. Recent advancements in artifi-
cial intelligence have shown promise so far: 
Researchers from Nvidia, Google DeepMind, MONITORING CLIMATE CHANGEENERGY & CLIMATE 
384© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Community-based Efforts
With climate change becoming a global 
phenomenon, community movements have 
grown. In an attempt to make climate mod-
eling easy, researchers from Northwestern 
University and Argonne National Laboratory 
have deployed Nvidia’s Jetson-driven Wag-
gle devices worldwide.  Waggle is an open-
source platform, empowering scientists and 
researchers globally to join climate studies 
using edge computing and sensors. The 
platform collects hyperlocal climate data, en-
abling communities to access crucial infor-
mation for climate resilience. Parallely, a new 
collaborative, is blending indigenous knowl-
edge with earth science to bolster climate re-
silience in vulnerable coastal communities by 
bringing indigenous knowledge-holders and 
university-trained scientists together. In In-
dia, a crowdsourced initiative brought togeth-
er community scientists and professional 
researchers to develop a meteorology-based 
landslide prediction system called “Satark” 
for India’s Western Ghats mountain range. 
With an impressive 76.5% accuracy, Satark 
predicts landslides along the southwestern egy, furthering the goals of green and digital 
transitions and contributing to a sustain-
able future.coast a day in advance, safeguarding lives 
and livelihoods.
Digital Twins of Earth
To tackle climate change, researchers are 
experimenting with digital twins of Earth as 
part of a strategy to combat warming. The 
Nvidia Earth-2 initiative’s digital twins could 
revolutionize weather predictions, climate 
projections, and the development of effec-
tive mitigation and adaptation strategies 
using data-driven analysis at the global 
scale. Powered by machine learning and 
accelerated computing, this groundbreaking 
project uses the largest supercomputing 
systems to make unprecedented advance-
ments in weather information and climate 
emulation. The European Commission’s flag-
ship initiative, DestinE, is equally ambitious. 
Using technology to ensure high accuracy, 
local detail, access-to-information speed, 
and interactivity, this digital model of the 
Earth will monitor, simulate, and predict in-
teractions between natural phenomena and 
human activities. It aligns with the European 
Commission’s Green Deal and Digital Strat-MONITORING CLIMATE CHANGEENERGY & CLIMATE 
385© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
A digital twin of the earth is aiding with strategies 
against global warming.TECH
Floating Cities
The Institute for Economics and Peace pre-
dicts that by 2050, more than 1 billion people 
may have to deal with inadequate infrastruc-
ture due to sea-level rise. Floating cities will 
thus become a part of our new living reality. 
Projects like Oceanix City in Busan, South 
Korea, Baltic Sea islands developed by Blue21, 
and Maldives Floating City are great early ex-
amples of this. Oceanix, in fact, is built from 
biorock with the ability to self-sustain and 
self-repair. Another example is Waterbuurt, 
or the Water District, in Amsterdam, where 
100 floating houses have been built by Dutch 
architect Marlies Rohmer on Lake Eimer. 
Other Concepts for Cities
Smart Forest City, an ambitious project by 
Italian architect Stefano Boeri, was revealed in 
2019 near Cancún. This visionary metropolis, 
deeply rooted in the region’s Mayan heritage 
and culture’s reverence for nature, is designed 
to house 7.5 million plants, creating a harmo-
nious blend of urban living and green spaces. 
The company behind the project says the 
goal is to create a “perfect balance between contract, and crack. Recently, scientists from 
Northwestern University have verified this 
phenomenon based on data from sensors 
in urban basements, subway tunnels, and 
underground parking garages. The study 
predicts that underground climate change in 
cities poses long-term challenges for urban 
structures, and researchers anticipate these 
issues will persist for years.
Indonesia’s New Capital
Acknowledging climate change as an essen-
tial issue, Indonesia is building a new cap-
ital—Nusantara—that aims to transcend typi-
cal planned cities. The intent is to fulfill the 
Indonesian president’s vision of “a new work 
ethic, new mind-set, new green economy.” It 
will stand as a green metropolis powered by 
renewable energy, free from suffocating traf-
fic jams, offering serene paths for strolling 
and biking amid lush greenery. Embodying 
adaptation to a warming planet, the high-
tech city, also known as I.K.N., intends to 
attract digital nomads and millennials, who 
will embrace cryptocurrency to invest in chic 
apartments. Nusantara seeks to set a par-adigm for a sustainable and forward-looking 
urban lifestyle.
Domed Cities 
Cities with sealed bio-domes that control air 
temperature, air composition, and air quality 
are also being explored as a potential solution 
for cities affected by climate change. Saudi 
Arabia’s Prince Mohammed bin Salman has a 
new vision for the country’s capital in line with 
this idea: it will include a redesigned down-
town with a 400-meter-high cube or “Mukaab.” 
The cube will offer its residents immersive 
experiences, including changing landscapes 
and holographic technology. The project is 
called “New Murabba” and is scheduled to be 
ready by 2030. The city Riyadh will expand by 
19 square kilometers as a part of the project. 
The country also has other futuristic projects 
underway, including Neom City, which plans to 
include robot maids, flying taxis, and a giant 
artificial moon and The Line, a huge project 
that will house 9 million people.the amount of green areas and building 
footprint.” Equitism is the idea of an eco-
nomic model empowering citizens with land 
ownership. Inspired by this idea, billionaire 
Marc Lore aims to establish a new American 
city called Telosa to “set a global standard for 
urban living, expand human potential, and 
become a blueprint for future generations.” 
While the exact location is yet to be deter-
mined, the city’s design by Bjarke Ingels 
Group places pedestrians and bikers at the 
forefront, supplemented by a few “slow-mov-
ing autonomous vehicles.” Sustainability 
is at the city’s core, with renewable energy, 
protected green spaces, and on-site water 
recycling. Targeting a population of 5 million 
by 2050, Telosa is poised to redefine the par-
adigm of urban development.
Underground Climate Change 
Underground climate change is a silent 
hazard. In general, cities and urban areas 
release and hold heat more than rural areas. 
As cities heat up, the ground also traps more 
heat, affecting building foundations and, in 
some cases, leading the ground to expand, LIVING IN A NEW REALITYENERGY & CLIMATE 
386© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
387© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
CLIMATE  
ECONOMYTECH
Investment From Traditional Banks 
Interest in carbon credits and green investing 
has increased as companies strive toward 
their net-zero emissions goals. Nine global 
banks have invested $45 million toward scal-
ing a new platform called Carbonplace that 
will be able to handle more transactions of 
voluntary credits and make it easier for bank 
customers to participate. Carbonplace will 
connect credit buyers and sellers through the 
banks. The investors, UBS, National Australia 
Bank, BNP Paribas, and Itaú Unibanco among 
them, have invested $5 million each in the 
interest of accelerating corporate climate 
change through visible and secure means. 
Verification Methodology 
With increased interest in carbon credits, 
it’s necessary to make sure the methods are 
sound to avoid greenwashing. One compa-
ny, Isometric, is planning to do just that by 
launching a platform that can vet carbon 
removal companies and review new ones. 
It will include a list of fully verified carbon 
removal companies and the ability for scien-
tists and researchers to view and comment one that is simply greenwashing. Sylvera, a 
UK-based startup, is on a mission to provide 
transparency and trust to carbon offset proj-
ects by using data and assigning ratings to 
the projects. Its goal is to ensure the projects 
with the best credibility receive investments 
in order to make a real climate impact. The 
company’s recently closed Series B funding 
of $57 million will be used for US expansion. 
Blockchain Integration
CarbonKerma is a platform that is embrac-
ing blockchain technology and combining it 
with a carbon capture marketplace in order 
to provide companies with trackable, quality, 
measurable carbon credits. The platform’s 
listed credits are highly regulated and vetted 
through a stringent process. CarbonKerma 
offers a deeply needed value to the market: 
transparency. Each credit can be tracked, 
traded and, once removed from circulation, 
retired to never be used again. The visibility 
and auditability of this platform provides full 
transparency along with reputable carbon 
removal companies to ensure the quality of 
carbon removal.Measuring Carbon Sequestration 
The New Acre Project, which recently partnered 
with Albo Climate and ALUS, is an investment 
platform for corporations that is identifying 
carbon stocks and sequestration for trees 
using a remote sensing-based platform. This 
AI-powered product will be directed at four 
Canadian provinces: Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, 
and Saskatchewan. The participating sites are 
private lands managed by ranchers and farm-
ers in the ALUS program. The credits will be 
“ecosystem credits” and will allow investment 
in any project that involves carbon removal, 
biodiversity, and other environmental benefits 
to the provinces. on data provided by new companies, namely 
startups, that enter the industry. The Integ-
rity Council for the Voluntary Carbon Market 
and the Voluntary Carbon Markets Integri-
ty Initiative are joining together to craft a 
market integrity framework. This framework 
is built to instill confidence in investors 
using the Voluntary Carbon Market for their 
carbon credits and ensure top quality of all 
companies on the market. Governments are 
beginning to create their own frameworks as 
well, with the EU creating a Carbon Removal 
Certification Framework, which will influ-
ence the rules set in the Voluntary Carbon 
Market. Xilva, a Swiss company, is pursuing 
a similar verification but specifically for 
forest projects. The company provides an 
evidence-based assessment of a project’s 
impact by considering multiple criteria such 
as economic viability, ecological integrity, 
and social equity in order to provide a holis-
tic assessment on their platform. 
Focus on Asset Management
Investors are frequently unsure if their 
credits are going to a verified company or CARBON CREDITSENERGY & CLIMATE 
388© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Blue Economy 
The term “blue economy,” originally champi-
oned by developing small-island countries 
including Fiji, Palau, and the Bahamas, was 
coined to describe the benefits of ocean 
industries. This includes establishing and 
supporting socially equitable ocean spaces 
and industries, ensuring they are environ-
mentally sustainable, and that they can have 
an economic profit. The US highlighted a 
newly launched global initiative at the Our 
Ocean Conference, which would total more 
than $800 million to protect its ocean and 
support developing countries. The initiative 
focuses on securing and protecting marine 
areas and improving the resilience of coast-
al areas that could be impacted by climate 
change. European ports have received fund-
ing from the European Maritime and Fisheries 
Fund through the Atlantic Smart Ports Blue 
Acceleration Network to support the growth of 
new and sustainable business at more than 
40 ports to grow the blue economy. The goal is 
to reduce the current carbon footprint of the 
port and increase the diversity of activities. 
Africa’s blue economy is receiving attention used. In a space that is used by so many, so 
frequently, and is home to so much wildlife, 
conflicts of interest are bound to arise when 
it comes to ocean activities. MSP serves 
as a clearly defined line for any disputes to 
ensure that all activities remain sustainable. 
It is frequently used to detect marine life or 
habitats and restrict building to the oceans’ 
least impactful locations. MSP is frequent-
ly used by Manna Farms, a fish farming 
company, to ensure their practices remain 
sustainable.
Foundational Data US
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration is providing free and open-
source ocean and coastal data that pro-
vides a perfect foundation for the future 
blue economy. This data is used by a broad 
variety of organizations, from federal, state, 
and local governments, to academia and 
business and especially offshore aquacul-
ture and wind farms. Open Ocean Robotics, a 
Canadian company, received $1.75 million to 
create an uncrewed, solar-powered surface 
vehicle that can capture information via sensors and cameras, and relay it instantly to 
researchers. The company’s robot vehicles can 
travel on the surface of the ocean for months 
without stopping, producing carbon dioxide, 
making noise, or risking oil spills.
Data Platforms 
Cognizant, a technology services and con-
sulting company, has partnered with Tidal 
to make the company’s ocean information 
platform available to the wider aquaculture 
market to allow companies to make more 
informed decisions. Tidal uses machine learn-
ing, artificial intelligence, underwater percep-
tion, and automation innovations to gather 
and analyze data sets. True Ocean, a German 
company, is also looking to provide compa-
nies with more maritime information and has 
already become a prominent maritime data 
platform. The platform offers solutions for 
data processing and management, empower-
ing organizations to see the value of the data 
they hold by providing a suite of services with 
the goal of increasing efficiency and sustain-
able practices, and facilitating more educated 
decision-making. after venture launcher Triggering Exponen-
tial Climate Action awarded $55,000 to 
seven startups to make an economic impact 
at a local level.
Blue Carbon Offsets 
Blue Carbon Offsets are the management of 
marshes, mangroves, kelp, and seagrasses 
in ocean ecosystems for carbon offsetting. 
Indonesia and the World Economic Forum 
have signed an agreement aimed at im-
proving the country’s efforts by supporting 
a blue carbon roadmap. The blue carbon 
credit financing will help ocean conserva-
tion and restoration efforts. Researchers in 
China called the “Blue Carbon Catchers” are 
a collaboration between Tencent’s Carbon 
Neutrality Lab and Xiamen University. The 
group is dedicated to understanding the 
ocean’s capacity to act as a carbon sink and 
the future of its capacity. 
Ocean Land Mapping
Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) is the ocean 
equivalent of land zoning planning and is 
helping to ensure the ocean is sustainably BLUE ECONOMY ENERGY & CLIMATE 
389© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Fishing 
GAIN (Green Aquaculture Intensification in 
Europe) is an EU project that has monitors 
and sensors located around fish farms and 
placed into fish to help track and under-
stand the activities in the farms. Paired with 
machine learning and IBM analytics, this 
real-time information will help farmers make 
more informed decisions when it comes 
to protecting fish, as well as detecting and 
preventing problems such as fish escapes, 
environmental issues, and excess feed. There 
is also an increase in transparency in the life 
journey of fish, from the farm to the table. 
Atea, with the partnership of the Norwegian 
Seafood Association and IBM, is bringing this 
transparency by using the blockchain to track 
Norwegian salmon’s journey including buyers 
and trips through customs. They believe that 
transparency is the key to sustainability and 
engaging society’s awareness.Desalination
Ocean Oasis, a Norwegian company, has 
found a way to use the oceans’ natural wave 
power to produce fresh water. The company 
uses waves off Norway’s coast to power their 
desalinator units and then fresh water is 
sent to shore through pipes along the ocean 
floor. This method of producing fresh water 
is sustainable and creates no emissions. 
EVOVE in the UK has developed technology 
to make the desalination process of water 
easier. Its Direct Lithium Extraction system 
removes the lithium from highly salinated 
water which increases the ease of the desali-
nation process. The company is aiming to 
scale its technology to provide more efficient 
desalination processes on a global scale. BLUE ECONOMY ENERGY & CLIMATE 
390© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
North Sea waves are aiding Nowergian company Ocean Oasis to desalinate water without causing emissions.AUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
391© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE TECH392© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Co-authors 
EMMA MILLER
NICHOLAS IMBRIGLIA
MAHAK CHHAJER
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
392392CHRISTINA VON MESSLING  
Senior Manager 
Christina von Messling leads our European client portfolio and our 
Life Sciences practice area at Future Today Institute. She is re-
nowned for her expertise in strategic foresight and an unparalleled 
ability to navigate complex industry landscapes. With a career 
spanning over two decades, she has guided multinational corpora-
tions through transformative strategies, leveraging his deep understanding of market dynamics and 
future trends.
Christina’s diverse experience across sectors enables her to craft visionary scenarios and strate-
gies, driving sustainable growth and innovation for clients worldwide. Having split her time between 
Europe, the UK, Brazil, and the US, she combines a global perspective with in-depth, holistic expertise 
of the main drivers of change: technology, geopolitical, economic, and societal developments. She 
has advised leading pharmaceutical and healthcare companies, as well as beauty, entertainment, 
media, and retail brands.
Christina is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She 
holds a Masters in Law from the Freie Universität Berlin, where she graduated within the top 10% of 
the nation. She works from offices in New York City, Berlin, and London.
TECH
393© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENERGY & CLIMATE 
SELECTED  
SOURCESTECH
394© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“3D Printing Cement Alternative 
Boasts 92% Fewer Emissions.” 
Professional Builder, July 18, 
2023. www.probuilder.com/uto-
pia/3d-printing-cement-alterna-
tive-boasts-92-fewer-emissions.
“44.01 Expands Into UAE With Fu-
jairah Pilot—4401.” Accessed July 
18, 2023. https://4401.earth/44-
01-expands-into-uae-with-fu-
jairah-pilot/. 
“A Strategy to Improve the 
Efficiency and Carrier Lifetimes 
of All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar 
Cells.” https://techxplore.com/
news/2023-04-strategy-efficien-
cy-carrier-lifetimes-all-inorgan-
ic.html. 
“About.” FloodNet. Accessed May 
16, 2023. www.floodnet.nyc/. 
“About Green Proving Ground 
(GPG).” Accessed July 18, 2023. 
www.gsa.gov/climate-ac-
tion-and-sustainability/
center-for-emerging-build-
ing-technologies/about-green-
proving-ground. Administrator. “New Study Finds 
That 43 000 ‘Excess Deaths’ May 
Have Occurred in 2022 from 
the Drought in Somalia.” World 
Health Organization—Regional 
Office for the Eastern Medi-
terranean. www.emro.who.int/
somalia/news/new-study-finds-
that-43000-excess-deaths-may-
have-occurred-in-2022-from-
the-drought-in-somalia.html. 
“Air Pollution Could Kill ‘Equiv-
alent of More than 40 People’ a 
Day by the next Decade.” BBC 
Science Focus Magazine. www.
sciencefocus.com/news/air-pol-
lution-could-kill-equivalent-of-
more-than-40-people-a-day-by-
the-next-decade/. 
Allen, Patricia. “Finnish Startup 
Tracegrow Bags Fresh Capital 
to Turn Batteries into Fertil-
izers.” EU-Startups, August 
26, 2022. www.eu-startups.
com/2022/08/finnish-start-
up-tracegrow-bags-fresh-capi-
tal-to-turn-batteries-into-fertil-
izers/.Andajani, Rezkia Dewi, et al. 
“Tracking Supercritical Geother-
mal Fluid Distribution from Con-
tinuous Seismic Monitoring.” 
Scientific Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, 
May 1, 2023, p. 8370. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-023-35159-8.
“Apple Announces Major 
Progress toward Climate Goals 
Ahead of Earth Day.” Apple 
Newsroom. www.apple.com/
newsroom/2023/04/apple-an-
nounces-major-progress-to-
ward-climate-goals-ahead-of-
earth-day/. 
“AspBAN—Transforming the EU 
Atlantic Ports into Blue Economy 
Hubs.” June 30, 2023. https://
oceans-and-fisheries.ec.europa.
eu/news/aspban-transform-
ing-eu-atlantic-ports-blue-econ-
omy-hubs-2023-03-01_en.
Asscheman, Ed. “AgTech Sensor 
Startup EnGeniousAg Wins $1 
Million Award from NSF.” Future 
Farming, May 12, 2023. www.
futurefarming.com/smart-farm-
ing/tools-data/agtech-sensor-
startup-engeniousag-wins-1-
million-award-from-nsf/.“Austrian, Georgian Profes-
sionals Working to Imple-
ment Digital Management for 
Georgia’s Largest Hydropower 
Plant.” Azernews.az, March 28, 
2023. www.azernews.az/re-
gion/208037.html.
Avenue, 677 Huntington, et al. 
“The Supreme Court Curbed 
EPA’s Power to Regulate Carbon 
Emissions from Power Plants. 
What Comes Next?” News, July 
19, 2022. www.hsph.harvard.edu/
news/features/the-supreme-
court-curbed-epas-power-to-reg-
ulate-carbon-emissions-from-
power-plants-what-comes-next/.
Berkowitz, Rachel. “New Com-
pound That Withstands Extreme 
Heat and Electricity Could Lead 
to Next-Generation Energy 
Storage Devices.” Berkeley 
Lab News Center, February 15, 
2023. https://newscenter.lbl.
gov/2023/02/15/new-com-
pound-could-lead-to-next-gener-
ation-energy-storage-devices/.
Berkowitz, Rachel. “Pinpoint-
ing Problems in Transmission 
Power Grids.” Physics, vol. 16, June 2023, p. s83. APS Physics. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXEner-
gy.2.023009.
Blankenship, Grant. “Genetically 
Engineered Trees in a Georgia 
Forest Mark a First in the Na-
tion.” Georgia Public Broadcast-
ing, April 13, 2023. www.gpb.org/
news/2023/04/13/genetically-
engineered-trees-in-georgia-for-
est-mark-first-in-the-nation.
“‘Blue Carbon Catchers’ Find Na-
ture-Based Solutions from the 
Ocean to Offset Carbon Emis-
sions.” Tencent. www.tencent.
com/en-us/articles/2201615.
html. 
Burgos, Matthew. “Turbulent 
Electrifies Remote Locations 
with Low-Maintenance Vor-
tex Turbines.” Designboom. 
January 13, 2023. www.design-
boom.com/technology/turbu-
lent-vortex-turbines-hydropow-
er-plants-01-13-2023/.
CABI. “Impacts of Climate 
Change on Animals Will 
Be Multi-Faceted, Reveals Study.” https://phys.org/
news/2023-07-impacts-cli-
mate-animals-multi-faceted-re-
veals.html. 
“CFTC Division of Enforcement 
Creates Two New Task Forces.” 
CFTC. www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/
PressReleases/8736-23. 
“China’s Dominance of Stra-
tegic Resources.” DW.com, 
April 13, 2021. www.dw.com/en/
how-chinas-mines-rule-the-
market-of-critical-raw-materi-
als/a-57148375. 
“Climate Tech VC Market Map.” 
Pitchbook. Accessed May 30, 
2023. https://pitchbook.com/
news/articles/Q4-2022-market-
map-climate-tech-carbon-cap-
ture. 
“Climeworks Confirms Expan-
sion of U.S. Team.” https://clime-
works.com/news/expanding-
our-us-team. 
“CO2を食べる自販機！？.” Asahi 
Soft Drinks, Note.com, May 10, 
2023,. https://note.com/asahiin-
ryo100yg/n/n87818f9665b0.SELECTED SOURCESENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
395© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Cognizant and Tidal Partner on 
Ocean Information Platform for 
Aquaculture.” Global Seafood 
Alliance, June 15, 2023. www.
globalseafood.org/advocate/
cognizant-and-tidal-part-
ner-on-ocean-information-plat-
form-for-aquaculture/.
Colthorpe, Andy. “Solar-Powered 
‘Sand-Based Battery’ Thermal 
Energy Storage Project Under-
way in Italy.” Energy-Storage.
News, March 31, 2023. www.
energy-storage.news/solar-pow-
ered-sand-based-battery-ther-
mal-energy-storage-project-un-
derway-in-italy/.
“Commercial Concentrated Solar 
One Step Closer.” Australian Re-
newable Energy Agency, February 
15, 2023. https://arena.gov.au/
blog/commercial-concentrat-
ed-solar-one-step-closer/.
“Commission Outlines European 
Hydrogen Bank to Boost Renew-
able Hydrogen.” https://energy.
ec.europa.eu/news/commis-
sion-outlines-european-hydro-
gen-bank-boost-renewable-hy-
drogen-2023-03-16_en. “Compressed Air Energy Stor-
age.” Accessed July 17, 2023. 
www.eseslab.com/ESsensePag-
es/CAES-page. 
Constantinoiu, Marina. “Cap-
tured CO2 from Air Can Be Made 
into Green Fuel.” ISRAEL21c, No-
vember 20, 2022. www.israel21c.
org/captured-co2-from-the-air-
can-be-made-into-green-plas-
tic/.
“CRISPR/Cas9 Reveals a Key 
Gene Involved in the Evolution 
of Coral Skeleton Formation.” 
https://phys.org/news/2023-06-
crisprcas9-reveals-key-gene-in-
volved.html. 
Dasenbrock-Gammon, Nathan, 
et al. “Evidence of Near-Ambient 
Superconductivity in a N-Doped 
Lutetium Hydride.” Nature, 
vol. 615, no. 7951, 7951, March 
2023, pp. 244–50. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-023-05742-
0.
Destination Earth | Shaping 
Europe’s Digital Future. February 
15, 2023, https://digital-strategy.
ec.europa.eu/en/policies/desti-
nation-earth.“Document Shows Nio ES6 
With 577-Mile Range, 150-kWh 
Solid-State Battery.” InsideEVs. 
https://insideevs.com/
news/676131/nio-solid-state-
battery-577-miles-range/. 
“E-Fuels: Are These Synthet-
ic Fuels a Good Alternative to 
Electric Cars.” Euronews, April 
13, 2023. www.euronews.com/
green/2023/04/13/what-are-e-
fuels-and-can-they-really-make-
europes-cars-emissions-free.
Eldridge, David J., et al. “The 
Global Contribution of Soil 
Mosses to Ecosystem Services.” 
Nature Geoscience, vol. 16, no. 5, 
May 5, 2023, pp. 430–38. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41561-023-
01170-x.
Environment Act 2021. King’s 
Printer of Acts of Parliament, 
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukp-
ga/2021/30/enacted. 
“EPA Releases Proposed CO2 
Regulations for Power Plants.” 
www.dentons.com/en/insights/
alerts/2023/may/16/epa-re-
leases-proposed-co2-regula-
tions-for-power-plants. “EU Blue Bioeconomy Report Is 
Out.” https://oceans-and-fish-
eries.ec.europa.eu/news/
eu-blue-bioeconomy-re-
port-out-2023-01-13_en. 
European Chips Act. https://
commission.europa.eu/
strategy-and-policy/priori-
ties-2019-2024/europe-fit-digi-
tal-age/european-chips-act_en. 
“European Countries Sign 
Declaration to Make North Sea 
Wind Power Hub.” Euronews, 
April 25, 2023, www.euronews.
com/my-europe/2023/04/24/
european-countries-sign-decla-
ration-to-make-north-sea-wind-
power-hub.
“European Energy Firms 
Dominate Landmark Califor-
nia Offshore Wind Auction.” 
Offshore,  December 8, 2022, 
www.offshore-mag.com/renew-
able-energy/article/14286829/
european-energy-firms-domi-
nate-landmark-california-off-
shore-wind-auction.“European Sovereignty Fund.” 
European Commission. https://
ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/STATE-
MENT_22_5543. 
“‘Fit for 55’: Council Adopts 
Regulation on CO2 Emissions 
for New Cars and Vans.” www.
consilium.europa.eu/en/press/
press-releases/2023/03/28/
fit-for-55-council-adopts-regula-
tion-on-co2-emissions-for-new-
cars-and-vans/. 
“Floating Wind Is Making Great 
Strides.” WindEurope, May 12, 
2023. https://windeurope.org/
newsroom/news/floating-wind-
is-making-great-strides/.
“‘Forever Chemicals’ Destroyed 
by Simple New Method.” 
https://news.northwestern.
edu/stories/2022/08/forev-
er-chemicals-destroyed-by-sim-
ple-new-method/. 
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft. “Using 
Plasma against Toxic PFAS 
Chemicals.” https://phys.org/
news/2023-05-plasma-toxic-
pfas-chemicals.html. Gain, Vish. “SuperNode Teams 
up with CERN to Improve 
Energy Transmission.” Silicon 
Republic, April 24, 2023, www.
siliconrepublic.com/innovation/
supernode-cern-superconduc-
tivity-cables-energy-transmis-
sion-partnership.
Gately, James A., et al. “Coc-
colithophores and Diatoms 
Resilient to Ocean Alkalinity 
Enhancement: A Glimpse of 
Hope?” Science Advances, vol. 
9, no. 24, June 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1126/sciadv.adg6066.
GeoEnergy, Think. “First Com-
mercial High-Temp Logging Tool 
Introduced by Thermochem.” 
August 25, 2022. www.thinkgeo-
energy.com/first-commercial-
high-temp-logging-tool-intro-
duced-by-thermochem/.
George, Sarah. “Tech Giants 
Team up to Tackle Emissions 
from Connected Devices.”  Edie. 
www.edie.net/tech-giants-team-
up-to-tackle-emissions-from-
connected-devices/. SELECTED SOURCESENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
396© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Germany—Insurers Demand 
a Stop to Building New Homes 
in Flood-Risk Areas.” FloodList. 
https://floodlist.com/europe/
germany-stop-building-houses-
flood-risk-areas. 
Gipson, Lillian. “NASA’s Sol-
id-State Battery Research 
Exceeds Initial Goals.” NASA,  
October 6, 2022. www.nasa.gov/
aeroresearch/nasa-solid-state-
battery-research-exceeds-initial-
goals-draws-interest.
“‘Give Us the Tools,’ Says In-
dustry, as Europe Ramps up 
Offshore Wind Targets.” Riviera. 
www.rivieramm.com/news-con-
tent-hub/news-content-hub/
give-us-the-tools-says-industry-
as-europe-ramps-up-offshore-
wind-targets-75916. 
“Global Greenhouse Gas Mon-
itoring Infrastructure Takes 
Shape.” January 31, 2023. 
https://public.wmo.int/en/
media/news/global-green-
house-gas-monitoring-infra-
structure-takes-shape.“Global Greenhouse Gas Watch 
(GGGW).” July 14, 2022. https://
public.wmo.int/en/our-man-
date/focus-areas/environment/
greenhouse-gases/global-green-
house-gas-monitoring-infra-
structure.
“Good News About the Carbon 
Footprint of Machine Learn-
ing Training.” February 15, 
2022. https://ai.googleblog.
com/2022/02/good-news-
about-carbon-footprint-of.html.
“Green Gravity Links with Miner 
to Fast Track Gravity Energy 
Storage Tech.” PV Magazine 
International,  July 3, 2023. www.
pv-magazine.com/2023/07/03/
green-gravity-links-with-min-
er-to-fast-track-gravity-energy-
storage-tech/.
House, The White. “FACT SHEET: 
President Biden Announces New 
Initiatives at COP27 to Strength-
en U.S. Leadership in Tackling 
Climate Change.” The White 
House, November 11, 2022,  www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/state-
ments-releases/2022/11/11/
fact-sheet-president-biden-
announces-new-initiatives-at-
cop27-to-strengthen-u-s-lead-
ership-in-tackling-climate-
change/.
“How Megacities Could Lead 
the Fight against Climate 
Change.” MIT Technology Re-
view, www.technologyreview.
com/2021/04/28/1023236/
how-megacities-fight-cli-
mate-change/. 
www.facebook.com/anine.
kilian. South Africa: Redstone 
Solar Power Park Set for 2023 
Commissioning. 19 July 2022, 
https://energycapitalpower.
com/redstone-solar-pow-
er-2023-commissioning/.
Hunt, Kara. “Superhot Rock En-
ergy Is Growing, but Needs More 
Support to Reach Its Full Po-
tential.” Clean Air Task Force, 15 
Nov. 2022, www.catf.us/2022/11/
superhot-rock-energy-growing-
needs-more-support-reach-full-
potential/.“In a First, Caltech’s Space Solar 
Power Demonstrator Wirelessly 
Transmits Power in Space.” Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, 
1 June 2023, www.caltech.edu/
about/news/in-a-first-caltechs-
space-solar-power-demonstra-
tor-wirelessly-transmits-power-
in-space.
In Greening Air Travel, Small 
Parts Can Make a Big Differ-
ence | Research and Innova-
tion. https://ec.europa.eu/
research-and-innovation/en/
horizon-magazine/greening-air-
travel-small-parts-can-make-
big-difference. 
“Innovative Viscosity Meter 
Opens the Way for Smarter 
Use of Fuel Oil at Sea | Imperial 
News | Imperial College London.” 
Imperial News, 5 Jan. 2023, www.
imperial.ac.uk/news/242311/
innovative-viscosity-me-
ter-opens-smarter-fuel/.
International, Power Engineering. 
“Frame 7E Gas Turbine Operates 
with Hydrogen Blend at 60%.” 
Power Engineering International, 
14 July 2023,  www.powerengineeringint.com/
hydrogen/frame-7e-gas-turbine-
operates-with-hydrogen-blend-
at-60/.
Italian Startup Raises $60M 
in Total to Boost Energy Stor-
age. https://carboncredits.
com/italian-startup-rais-
es-60mto-boost-energy-stor-
age-for-renewables/. Accessed 
May 16, 2023.
Jack. “Electreon to Equip First 
French Motorway with Wireless 
Charging - Electrive.Com.” www.
Electrive.Com/, 15 July 2023, 
www.electrive.com/2023/07/14/
electreon-to-equip-first-french-
motorway-with-wireless-
charging/.
Jeffay, John. “Gene-Editing An 
Ancient Crop To Help Feed The 
World.” NoCamels, 19 Apr. 2023, 
https://nocamels.com/2023/04/
gene-editing-an-ancient-crop-
to-help-feed-the-world/.
Johnson, James K., et al. “Re-
moving Forever Chemicals via 
Amphiphilic Functionalized 
Membranes.” Npj Clean Water, 
vol. 5, no. 1, 1, Oct. 2022, pp. 1–6. www.nature.com, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41545-022-00193-y.
jostapiuk@siadvance.com, 
Joseph Ostapiuk |. “See Rock 
Structures Rising off Tottenville? 
Project to Blunt Waves Nears 
Completion.” Silive, 11 May 2023, 
www.silive.com/news/2023/05/
see-rock-structures-rising-off-
staten-island-breakwaters-proj-
ect-nears-completion.html.
Juvenile Alewife Passage 
through a Compact Hydropower 
Turbine Designed for Fish Safety 
- Watson - 2023 - North Ameri-
can Journal of Fisheries Man-
agement - Wiley Online Library. 
https://afspubs.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/
nafm.10866. 
Kareem, Shefy Manayil. “What’s 
New with Microsoft Cloud 
for Sustainability.” Microsoft 
Industry Blogs, 12 Oct. 2022, 
www.microsoft.com/en-us/
industry/blog/sustainabili-
ty/2022/10/12/driving-innova-
tion-for-esg-progress-with-mi-
crosoft-cloud-for-sustainability/.SELECTED SOURCESENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
397© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Karthikeyan, Smruthi, et al. 
“Wastewater Sequencing Re-
veals Early Cryptic SARS-CoV-2 
Variant Transmission.” Nature, 
vol. 609, July 2022. Research-
Gate, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-022-05049-6.
Kemper, Gregor, et al. “Pd(II)-Cat-
alyzed Carboxylation of Aromatic 
CH Bonds with CO 2.” Science 
Advances, vol. 9, no. 5, Feb. 2023, 
p. eadf2966. DOI.org (Crossref), 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.
adf2966.
Kraemer, Susan. “Add Nickel to 
Ceria for Solar Syngas at Just 
700°C.” SolarPACES, 29 Mar. 
2023, www.solarpaces.org/add-
nickel-to-ceria-for-solar-syngas-
at-just-700c/.
Kulkarni, Jeevan R., et al. 
“‘Satark’: Landslide Prediction 
System over Western Ghats 
of India.” Land, vol. 11, no. 5, 5, 
May 2022, p. 689. www.mdpi.
com, https://doi.org/10.3390/
land11050689.
L, Jennifer. “Revolutionizing 
Carbon Credits: ICVCM and VCMI Team Up to Create High-Integ-
rity Voluntary Carbon Market.” 
Carbon Credits, 20 June 2023, 
https://carboncredits.com/
vcmi-icvcm-market-integri-
ty-framework/.
---. “WEF and Indonesia Join 
Hand to Boost Blue Carbon Cred-
its.” Carbon Credits, 2 Feb. 2023, 
https://carboncredits.com/wef-
indonesia-join-hand-to-boost-
blue-carbon-credits/.
“Latent Heat Thermophotovol-
taic Battery for Renewables 
Storage.” Pv Magazine Inter-
national, 23 Mar. 2022, www.
pv-magazine.com/2022/03/23/
latent-heat-thermophotovolta-
ic-battery-for-renewables-stor-
age/.
Laws, Liza. “Nutri-Tech Startup, 
Novella, Grows Botanical Ingredi-
ents without Using the Plants.” 
Labiotech.Eu, 30 Nov. 2022, 
www.labiotech.eu/more-news/
novella-grows-botanical-ingredi-
ents-without-using-the-plants/.
Le Page, Michael. “A Factory Will 
Soon Start Making Green Food from Air and Electricity.” New 
Scientist, December 28, 2022. 
www.newscientist.com/article/
mg25634192-700-a-factory-will-
soon-start-making-green-food-
from-air-and-electricity/. 
“‘Least-Cost’ Model for Com-
pressed Air Energy Storage.” 
Pv Magazine International, 5 
Apr. 2023, www.pv-magazine.
com/2023/04/05/least-cost-
model-for-compressed-air-ener-
gy-storage/.
Liu, Yueliang, et al. “An Integrat-
ed Framework for Geothermal 
Energy Storage with CO2 Se-
questration and Utilization.” En-
gineering, March 2023. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2022.12.010.
Loria, Rotta, and Alessandro F. 
“The Silent Impact of Under-
ground Climate Change on Civil 
Infrastructure.” Communica-
tions Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, 1, 
July 2023, pp. 1–12. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s44172-023-00092-1.
Magazine, A. E. C. “Climate Resil-
ience Planning through Digital 
Twins.” AEC Magazine, August 4, 2022, https://aecmag.com/
features/climate-resilence-plan-
ning-through-infrastructure-dig-
ital-twins/.
Muniz, Ricardo and FAPESP. Re-
searchers Cultivate Microalgae 
for Biofuel Production.  
https://phys.org/
news/2023-04-cultivate-mi-
croalgae-biofuel-production.
html. Accessed 14 July 2023.
National Grid Granted Nearly £1m 
from Ofgem to Fund Eight Net 
Zero Innovation Projects | Nation-
al Grid Group. www.nationalgrid.
com/national-grid-granted-near-
ly-ps1m-ofgem-fund-eight-net-
zero-innovation-projects. 
Net Zero Industry Act. https://
single-market-economy.ec.euro-
pa.eu/publications/net-zero-in-
dustry-act_en. 
Oka, Daisuke, et al. “Conceptual 
Model of Supercritical Geother-
mal System in Shiribeshi Re-
gion, Hokkaido, Japan.” Geother-
mics, vol. 108, February 2023, p. 
102617. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
geothermics.2022.102617.Pinkus, Arin. “Mapping Climate 
Risks by County and Commu-
nity.” American Communities 
Project, February 17, 2021.  
www.americancommunities.org/
mapping-climate-risks-by-coun-
ty-and-community/.
“U.S. Department of Energy An-
nounces $40 Million as Part of 
New ARPA-E Program Focused on 
Improving Reliability, Resiliency, 
and Security of Power Infrastruc-
ture.” Arpa-e.Energy.Gov, March 
30, 2023. http://arpa-e.energy.
gov/news-and-media/press-re-
leases/us-department-energy-
announces-40-million-part-new-
arpa-e-program.
Procedure File: COM(2023)0165 
| Legislative Observatory | Euro-
pean Parliament. Accessed July 
27, 2023. https://oeil.secure.
europarl.europa.eu/oeil/pop-
ups/ficheprocedure.do?refer-
ence=COM(2023)0165&l=en. 
“Q&A on a New Outlook on the 
Climate and Security Nexus.” 
European Commission. https://
ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/qan-
da_23_3525. “Researchers Develop Coating 
That Prevents Synthetic Fabrics 
from Shedding Harmful Micro-
plastics in the Wash.” University 
of Toronto News. www.utoronto.
ca/news/researchers-devel-
op-coating-prevents-synthet-
ic-fabrics-shedding-harmful-mi-
croplastics-wash. 
Richter, P. Konstantin, et al. 
“Structure and Function of the 
Metagenomic Plastic-Degrad-
ing Polyester Hydrolase PHL7 
Bound to Its Product.” Nature 
Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, 
April 1, 2023, p. 1905. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-023-37415-x.
Salisbury, Mark. “Platooning: 
Several Trucks but Only One 
Driver.” FleetPoint, July 13, 2022. 
https://fleetpoint.org/autono-
mous-vehicles/platooning-sev-
eral-trucks-but-only-one-driver/.
Saravanapavanantham, Ma-
yuran, et al. “Printed Organic 
Photovoltaic Modules on Trans-
ferable Ultra-Thin Substrates as 
Additive Power Sources.” Small 
Methods, vol. 7, no. 1, 2023, p. 
2200940.  SELECTED SOURCESENERGY & CLIMATE TECH
398© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.https://doi.org/10.1002/
smtd.202200940.
“Scientists Have Invented a 
Method to Break Down ‘Forever 
Chemicals’ in Our Drinking Wa-
ter. Here’s How.” World Econom-
ic Forum, May 19, 2023. www.
weforum.org/agenda/2023/05/
forever-chemicals-pfas-drink-
ing-water/.
“Scottish Startup to Begin Grav-
ity Energy Storage Pilot in India.” 
PV Magazine India, November 
29, 2022. www.pv-magazine-in-
dia.com/2022/11/29/scot-
tish-startup-to-begin-gravity-en-
ergy-storage-pilot-in-india/.
Service, Purdue News. “A Simpli-
fied Way to Turn Food Waste into 
Hydrogen Energy.” www.purdue.
edu/newsroom/releases/2020/
Q1/a-simplified-way-to-turn-
food-waste-into-hydrogen-ener-
gy.html. 
Shaw, Al, et al. “New Climate 
Maps Show a Transformed Unit-
ed States.” ProPublica, Septem-
ber 15, 2020, https://projects.pro-
publica.org/climate-migration.Singh, Mrityunjay, et al. 
“Comparative Study on Heat 
Extraction from Soultz-Sous-
Forêts Geothermal Field Using 
Supercritical Carbon Dioxide 
and Water as the Working Fluid.” 
Energy, vol. 266, March 2023, p. 
126388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy.2022.126388.
“Startup of the Month: How 
Estonia’s Skeleton Technologies 
Is Changing the Energy Storage 
Game Beyond Batteries.” Silicon 
Canals. March 31, 2023. https://
siliconcanals.com/news/start-
ups/startup-of-the-month-skel-
eton-technologies/.
Stites, Katy. “CSU Researcher 
Part of Indigenous Climate 
Resilience Science Hub.” Warner 
College of Natural Resources, 
November 18, 2022.  
https://warnercnr.source.
colostate.edu/csu-research-
er-part-of-indigenous-cli-
mate-resilience-science-hub/.
“Sustainable Cloud Computing.” 
Amazon Web Services, https://
aws.amazon.com/sustainability/. “The Climate Case—Saúl vs. 
RWE.” Accessed July 27, 2023. 
https://rwe.climatecase.org/en. 
“The Dawn Of A New Era In 
Superconductor Materials.” 
OilPrice.com. https://oilprice.
com/Energy/Energy-General/
The-Dawn-Of-A-New-Era-In-Su-
perconductor-Materials.html. 
“The Future of Renewable 
Energy: Genetically Modified 
Algae Biofuel.” EnergyPortal.eu, 
July 12, 2023. www.energyportal.
eu/news/the-future-of-renew-
able-energy-genetically-modi-
fied-algae-biofuel/61227/.
“The United States Releas-
es Signed Memorandum of 
Understanding with the Dem-
ocratic Republic of Congo 
and Zambia to Strengthen 
Electric Vehicle Battery Value 
Chain.” United States Depart-
ment of State. www.state.
gov/the-united-states-releas-
es-signed-memorandum-of-un-
derstanding-with-the-democrat-
ic-republic-of-congo-and-zam-
bia-to-strengthen-electric-vehi-
cle-battery-value-chain/. “Tracking Waste in the Cloud: 
Aussie Startup’s Innovative Data 
Platform Helps Organisations 
Reduce Their Carbon Footprint 
and Save on Costs.” Microsoft 
Australia News Centre. https://
news.microsoft.com/en-au/
features/tracking-waste-in-the-
cloud-aussie-startups-innova-
tive-data-platform-helps-organ-
isations-reduce-their-carbon-
footprint-and-save-on-costs/. 
Trang, Brittany, et al. “Low-Tem-
perature Mineralization of 
Perfluorocarboxylic Acids.” Sci-
ence, vol. 377, no. 6608, August 
2022, pp. 839–45. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.abm8868.
Tubeuf, Carlotta, et al. “Increas-
ing the Flexibility of Hydropower 
with Reinforcement Learning on 
a Digital Twin Platform.” Ener-
gies, vol. 16, no. 4, 4, Jan. 2023, p. 
1796. www.mdpi.com, https://doi.
org/10.3390/en16041796.
University, Southern Cross. 
“Advanced Imaging Technology 
Helps Monitor Baby Corals on 
Great Barrier Reef.”  https://phys.org/
news/2023-07-advanced-imag-
ing-technology-baby-corals.html. 
“US Startup Begins Producing 
40%-Efficient Thermophotovoltaic 
Cells.” Pv Magazine International, 
January 25, 2023, www.pv-mag-
azine.com/2023/01/25/us-start-
up-begins-producing-40-effi-
cient-thermophotovoltaic-cells/.
Viaintermedia.com. “Biofuels—Ve-
olia Launches Innovative Solution 
to Produce CO2-Neutral Biofuel.” 
Renewable Energy Magazine, 
Apri. 6, 2022. www.renewableen-
ergymagazine.com/biofuels/veo-
lia-launches-an-innovative-indus-
trial-solution-to-20220406.
“Watch ‘Europe’s Largest 3D-Print-
ed Building’ Come into Shape.” 
Euronews, May 12, 2023. www.
euronews.com/next/2023/05/11/
only-140-hours-needed-to-put-to-
gether-europes-largest-3d-print-
ed-building.“Water Battery: Utah Com-
pany Advances Wyoming 
Pumped-Storage Project.” www.
sltrib.com/renewable-ener-
gy/2023/01/28/water-bat-
tery-utah-company/. 
“World First: Researchers Create 
CO2 Measurement Tool to Calcu-
late Emissions Caused by Digital 
Data.” Loughborough University, 
July 1, 2023. www.lboro.ac.uk/
news-events/news/2023/july/
researchers-create-co2-mea-
surement-tool/.
YARA. “EnerKíte Und Volkswagen 
Starten Machbarkeitsstud-
ie Für Mobile E-Tankstelle.” 
EnerKíte Flugwindkraftanlagen, 
April 7, 2023, https://enerkite.
de/en/enerkite-und-volkswa-
gen-starten-machbarkeitsstud-
ie-fuer-mobile-e-tankstelle/.
“Zukunft für frühere Kohlege-
biete: Es werde grün.” March 
3, 2022, www.profil.at/wis-
senschaft/zukunft-fuer-frue-
here-kohlegebiete-es-werde-gru-
en/401918623.SELECTED SOURCESENERGY & CLIMATE 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION
MOBILITY • ROBOTICS • DRONES
TECH
401© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
402 T op Headlines
403 State of Play
404 Key Events
405 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
406 Why Mobility, Robotics  
& Drones Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
407  When Will Mobility,  
Robotics & Drones Trends 
Impact Y our Organization?
408 Opportunities and Threats
409 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
410  Central Themes
412  Ones T o Watch
413  Important T erms
415  Mobility Trends
416 Electrification Transforms 
Mobility Ecosystems
416 Decarbonizing Mobility
416 Automaker Restructuring424 CarOS 
425 Scenario: What if expanded 
vehicle capabilities 
redefine the nature of home 
ownership? 
426  Data Collection Enables Safety 
and Autonomy
426  Mobility Simulation
426  Self-Aware Vehicles
426  Pilot and Passenger 
Observation
427 Mobile Weather Stations
427 Mobility Superapps
427 Utilizing Mobility Data
427 Relying on ADAS
428 Pedestrian Concerns
428 AV Viability
429 Local AV Regulations
429 Robotaxi Growth
430 Scenario: Personal Everything 
Mobility Platforms
431  Robotics & Drones Trends432 Cobots Become Coworkers
432 Accelerated Adoption
432 General Purpose Robots
433 Robots in the Home
433 Robots Coexisting with 
Creative Applications
434 Space Robots and Drones
435 Robot and Drone 
Infrastructure
435 Robot Compiling and Training
435 Robot and Drone Swarms 
435 Drone Fleets
436 Drone Traffic Management
437 Scenario: Drone Harvests
438 Moving People, Pets  
And Objects
438 Last-Mile Delivery
438 Expanded Payload Capacity 
439 Flying Taxis (eVTOLs)
439 Ocean-Faring Drones 
440 Blurring The Human-Machine 
Line440 Natural Exoskeleton Movement
440 Superhuman Abilities 
440 Personal Mobility
441 Humanoid Robots
441 Soft Robotics/Getting a Grip
442 Robot “Eyes”
443 Scenario: The Evolution of 
Disaster Response Robotics
444 Taking Cues From Nature
444 Quadrupedal Robots 
444 Necrobotics
444 Using Live Organisms 
(Ethically) 
444 Insect-Like and Animal-Like 
Designs
445 Fluid Movement
446 Moving Across Modalities
447 Scenario: Self-Regulating and 
Repairable Robots
448 Authors
450 Selected Sources416 Mass Market Goes Custom
417 Incentive-Driven Investments
417 Global Battery Belts
417 Battery Recycling
418 Better Batteries
418 Solar Vehicles
418 Shifts in the Servicing Model
419 Electrification Expands to 
Other Vehicles
420 Vehicle Charging Scales
420 Charging Gets A Roadmap 
420 Charging Standardization
420 Redefining the Roadside
421 Electrifying Cities
421 EVs At Home
422 Bidirectional Charging
423 Immersive Vehicles Connect  
to Other Ecosystems 
423 Livable Cabins 
423 Simulated Driving Experience
423 In-Vehicle Connectivity
424 Mobile Entertainment HubsThe mobility, robotics, 
and drones industries 
are building on their 
substantial gains 
of the past year to 
increase capabilities 
and capacity.
402© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
01
02
03
04
05Demand for Customization Outweighs Supply Chain Delays
Even as supply chains bounce back from extreme conditions, customers have indicated 
they are willing to wait for what they want, impacting traditional business models. 
Vehicles Are No Longer a Private Refuge  
While vehicles have traditionally functioned as a utility to get us from point A to point B, 
they are now following and integrating into our digital lives, eliminating one of the last 
spaces that was not immersed in tech.
Battery Capacity Drives Capability
The expanded capacity and shifting form factors of emerging battery technology are 
enabling units to go further, faster and take on a higher compute load to enhance their 
capabilities and communication.
General Purpose, Y et Impressive, Results  
General-purpose robots are moving closer to reality. As bots become more capable, 
they will be more versatile, able to execute on a variety of different tasks.
Cobots Merely Supplement Staff, for Now  
Assistive robots promise to help humans be more efficient at their jobs and supplement 
a shrinking labor force, but as bots improve, inevitably, they will eliminate the need for 
humans to conduct certain tasks. TECHSTATE 
OF PLAYWhile the diverse industries of mobility, robotics, and drones have prominent dif-
ferences impacting each domain, they also have common drivers. Electrification 
remains a major driver of change for all of them thanks to the support of consumer 
and ESG (environmental, social, corporate governance) demands, coupled with glob-
al, legislative shifts bringing an electric future to the forefront. 
Fully autonomous systems are still on the horizon, especially for automobiles, but 
systems are becoming smarter and more alive. A wealth of data is proving to be 
foundational for molding these systems, and virtual and simulated testing environ-
ments are increasingly being used to teach them before they are placed in real-world 
environments. 
Although these systems are getting smarter, they are still fraught with challenges. 
There is a vast dichotomy between those that have been successfully testing and 
expanding in select US markets, while others have been forced to halt real-world 
operations after too many public failures. 
Similarly, in the world of robotics, a general purpose, fully autonomous humanoid 
robot has long been a dream of many and presented as a holy grail of innovation. 
However, while there are early signals of such robots, they are unlikely to fully super-
sede the human workforce any time soon, with most job replacement coming from 
functional robots with a limited task set. Contrastingly, drones have already been 
successfully impacted by autonomous systems and are seeing annual capability 
enhancements across commercial and consumer sectors.
The bifurcation of these industries will likely continue as the world pushes to bring 
about electrified replacements for billions of vehicles and impart autonomy to make 
vehicles, robots, and drones smart enough to drive real efficiency gains across the 
marketplace. Overcoming challenges to 
electrify and bring about the age 
of smarter, autonomous systems.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
403404© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MAY 25, 2023
Ford T eams Up with T esla  
The automakers align to use 
the NACS plug, promoting 
industry standardization for 
charging.  
AUGUST 04, 2023
Ukrainian Drone Attack  
A Ukrainian drone with 450kg 
TNT hits a Russian Navy base 
in the Black Sea, damaging a 
docked warship.  SEPTEMBER 19, 2023
AI Masters Complex T asks in Hours  
Toyota Research Institute engineers 
use generative AI to teach robots new 
skills quickly and with dexterity. AUGUST 14, 2023
Self-driving Cars Block Ambulance  
Two autonomous cars prevent an 
ambulance from getting to a crash 
site, delaying an injured pedestrian’s 
transport.OCTOBER 30, 2023  
Cruise Suspends Robotaxis  
The GM business puts a stop to 
operations in Arizona and Texas, 
after having to halt operations 
in San Francisco.KEY EVENTSTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
405© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MORE CERTAINTY IN COMPLEX SYSTEMS
In the immediate future, a wave of 
transformative development is poised 
to reshape our world across various 
domains. From the continued integra-
tion of connectivity in automobiles—
fueling advanced driver assistance 
systems and enriched in-car expe-
riences—to the pressing challenges 
facing our electrical grids as we pivot 
toward an all-electric future and the 
changing regulatory landscapes im-
pacting drones and autonomous sys-
tems, these developments underscore 
the dynamic nature of technological 
progress. They collectively signify an 
era of both challenge and opportunity, 
where adaptability and forward-think-
ing will be key to navigating the dis-
ruptive forces of technology. Continued Connectedness
Automobiles are only becoming more con-
nected. This will impact advanced driver 
assistance systems as well as infotainment 
within the cabin. Automobiles will be less 
isolating as drivers and passengers seam-
lessly expand how they connect to their lives 
outside the car. 
Challenges to the Grid 
As we idealistically transition to an all-elec-
tric future, many have speculated our elec-
trical grids will not be able to handle this 
adjustment. Others are more optimistic. In 
time, we will have more certainty. Supply Chain Disruptions Persist
Even as the supply of vehicles and chips for 
robotics stabilizes, manufacturers and sellers 
should still brace for continued supply chain 
disruptions. Additionally, chip nationalism 
and other geopolitical factors will also threat-
en supplies of goods.  Viability of Drone Traffic Management  
The escalating use of drones and eVTOLs has 
necessitated advanced traffic management 
solutions. As various regions have put mea-
sures in place, the viability of ubiquitous drone 
use will be determined in the short term. LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
New Modalities for Robotics
Researchers have developed many innovative 
modalities for robotics and drones, seeking 
inspiration from various sources. This innova-
tion will continue, with unexpected inspiration 
from nature or animals, and some systems 
will incorporate several different modalities in 
their designs. Clarity on Robotaxis
Robotaxis have been the source of much con-
troversy, as different companies have tested 
their systems with varying success. The near 
future will shed light on long-term feasibility, 
especially as regulations shift to account for 
recent events and developments. 
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES406© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Increased connectivity 
and semiautonomous 
systems have led to a 
rise in data collection. 
This, combined with 
information gathered 
from fleets, vehicles, or 
bots, can provide valuable 
insights for improved 
decision-making and 
product development.Transportation is one of 
the leading contributors 
to carbon emissions. The 
regulations are already 
affecting the industry, 
and this trend is expected 
to continue. Although 
many manufacturers 
have adopted electric 
strategies, they still 
need to take steps to 
proactively offset more of 
their emissions. As businesses explore 
ways to enhance 
their workforce or 
even automate their 
operations, it may not 
always be beneficial 
for them to personally 
own their own fleet of 
robots. A comprehensive 
understanding of robots’ 
full capabilities can help 
businesses determine 
whether it is better to own 
the robots themselves or 
outsource for the service.As collaborative robots 
continue to advance 
and become more 
sophisticated, businesses 
have a chance to 
improve the efficiency 
of their workforce and 
complete tasks quicker. 
By incorporating 
collaborative robots, 
companies can also 
safeguard their employees 
from harsh working 
conditions. Keeping up 
with these trends is vital 
for optimizing workforces.The regulatory and 
technological landscapes 
for last-mile delivery are 
evolving. Companies 
that can both master 
the technology and stay 
ahead of regulatory 
changes will be well-
poised to serve their 
customers effectively, 
providing goods and 
services quickly and 
efficiently.As systems become 
semiautonomous and 
fully autonomous, 
insurance strategies will 
need to adjust. This will 
impact automobiles, 
robotic systems on 
warehouse floors, and 
even employees whose 
roles change in light 
of collaborative and 
assistive robots. A Deluge  
of DataThe “Threat” of 
DecarbonizationNew Applications for 
Robotics-as-a-ServiceOptimizing Y our 
WorkforceLeveraging Last-Mile 
DeliveryDramatic Changes  
to InsuranceWHY BUILT MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES TRENDS MATTER  
TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
407WHEN WILL MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?
0-4 YEARS 5-9 YEARS 10-14 YEARS 15+ YEARSForecasted Time of Impact
Transportation
Infrastructure development
Supply chain management
Energy generation
Warehouse management
Delivery
Last-mile delivery
ProstheticsGrid management
Energy storage
Manufacturing
Construction
Health care
EldercareSpace exploration All trends will be relevant
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
OEMs, and other automotive service and parts players, are facing uphill 
pressures if they fail to adapt to the growing electric market. The longer-term 
threat will persist as more customers seek green options and governments 
phase out fossil fuel-powered vehicles. 
As vehicles gain more ability to observe and control the passengers within 
them, the industry is creating entirely new venues for privacy and data 
security concerns. With increased levels of data collection, automobiles are 
becoming a more attractive cyber-infiltration point, posing risks for OEMs, 
third parties, and customers. 
The rapid adoption of EVs could potentially lead to an increase in 
brownouts, electrical surges, or fires resulting from overloading home or 
even commercial electrical systems. As EV adoption scales, real estate is 
at a greater risk of damage and increasing insurance premiums, until the 
infrastructure modernizes and stabilizes.
As bots become more dynamic and function across multiple modalities, 
organizations that fail to adopt general-purpose robotics could be at risk of 
falling behind competitors that masterfully incorporate these systems into 
workflows. 
While the applications for robots and drones become seemingly endless, 
organizations that are slow to conceive and execute new ways of using these 
systems risk underserving their customers and their employees.Opportunities
To get more electric vehicles on the road, manufacturers can look for new and 
novel partnerships to drive adoption. Partnerships such as ones that assist gig 
workers in leasing EVs can serve as the template for new programs. 
Technology companies and startups have a significant opportunity to create 
seamless experiences across all mobility modalities, providing consumers with 
multiple options for arriving at their desired destinations with minimal friction. 
As bidirectional charging becomes more pervasive, the traditional role of 
cars is transformed. Vehicles can now be the powerplant that runs a home or 
business in an emergency and could potentially run full time as capabilities 
and capacities increase. 
When cobots create efficiencies and robotics begin to automate repetitive and 
even dangerous tasks, organizations can upskill their workforce to engage 
in more creative and meaningful undertakings, bringing new value to the 
organization. 
Training robots and drones in virtual and simulated environments allows these 
systems to learn complex tasks virtually before transitioning to the real world. 
Championing this process will place organizations in enviable positions. 
408© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES409© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.As autonomous systems 
become more prevalent, 
data will continue to be 
widely available. Business-
es can utilize advanced 
machine learning and AI 
to unlock new insights that 
can feed into new products 
and services. This leads to 
opportunities to surprise 
and delight customers 
along their journeys.For transportation industry 
leaders, focusing on sus-
tainability is now a basic 
requirement. However, 
leaders should not become 
complacent in their efforts 
and must continue to push 
for new technologies that 
can provide competitive 
advantages, such as better 
and smaller batteries.Consider calculated in-
vestments in collaborative 
and assistive robots, which 
can supplement strained 
workforces and create 
efficiencies. However, there 
is not a blanket call for or -
ganizations to pursue such 
solutions. They will have 
to balance the threat of 
not acting with the capital 
expenditures required for 
adoption. Pilot and passenger ob-
servation technologies 
might seem invasive to 
drivers and passengers, but 
investment in this tech can 
reduce accidents and save 
lives. In a future where au-
tonomous driving becomes 
viable, these systems can 
be transformed to assess 
and anticipate the wants 
and needs of passengers, 
providing new ways to 
reach them.Electrification is radically 
changing the transporta-
tion industry, and there will 
increasingly be new ways 
to engage with consumers 
who experience this new 
paradigm. Consider new 
products and services as 
passengers wait for their 
charging vehicles, pro-
viding opportunities for 
companies outside the 
traditional transportation 
industry. Investing in robot compil-
ing and training technol-
ogies has the potential to 
radically accelerate ro-
bots’ abilities to learn and 
to adapt to their environ-
ments in real time. While 
hardware is very import -
ant to robotics, software 
is equally, if not more, 
important, potentially re-
sulting in efficiencies that 
compound in time. INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 410TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
Electrification Upends the Industry
As electrification becomes more pervasive in the world 
of mobility, the entire industry is being drastically 
redefined. While electric vehicles’ range increases, 
spurring more adoption of EVs, the roadside experience 
is radically changing to include opportunities to en-
gage drivers and passengers in novel ways. The advent 
of electrification is having impacts on the traditional 
business models associated with dealerships, forcing 
significant restructuring of how business is done. Re-
pair servicing is at significant risk, as electric vehicles 
require less maintenance and different skill sets for 
making repairs. This shift is affecting supply chains 
and changing the types of materials needed, forcing 
manufacturers to make substantial investments in ar-
eas such as lithium processing. Electrification is also 
having an impact on safety standards, as EVs are less 
likely to be heard by bystanders. Amid electrification’s 
scaling, stakeholders must fully consider its implica-
tions on the future. Better Batteries Boost Improvements
Electrification of the broader industry will continue 
to face a “chicken or the egg” dilemma—battery ca-
pabilities must grow to drive electrification demand, 
and electrification demand must grow to drive battery 
technology. However, battery development continues 
to press forward, with capacity improvements, efficien-
cy gains, and shrinking or altering of form factors to 
make them more relevant and useful. Improvements 
are helping increase the range of vehicles or the oper-
ational time of drones and robots, reducing the “range 
anxiety” of consumers and commercial buyers alike. 
These updates also enable these vehicles and units 
to focus more power on their compute abilities either 
in a trade-off for range or in addition to that extended 
range. This is leading to a new class of devices and 
vehicles that are more powerful and capable than ever 
before over longer time spans and distances. Expanded Capacity and Capability
In both automobiles and mobility at large, robotics 
and autonomous systems are growing in their capacity 
to do tasks and support payloads, while their overall 
capabilities are increasing, too. These achievements 
are due to advances in both hardware and software. A 
constellation of vision, audio, and touch sensor sys-
tems, including lidar, radar, 2D and 3D cameras, accel-
erometers, gyroscopes, bump sensors, force sensors, 
and temperature sensors are enabling these devices 
to better sense the environments around them. Ad-
vanced methods for training and modeling, including 
using virtual elements to simulate training scenarios, 
are increasing these systems’ capabilities and helping 
them achieve new thresholds of what is possible on 
even shorter timelines. As these systems become more 
adept and dexterous, they also benefit from increased 
strength and increased payload capacity. And as they 
become more dynamic, they will be better equipped to 
tackle new challenges.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 411TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
Maximizing Connectivity and Communication
The increased capabilities of vehicles, robots, and 
drones mean they can use their additional sensors and 
software to know more about their environments. This 
also requires these form factors to collect substantial-
ly more data than ever before and, in most instances, 
communicate back to their OEM, a third party, the 
end user or owner, and even each other. This is forcing 
product and vehicle designers to more closely consider 
the connectivity needs of these devices and the poten-
tial partnerships required to enable these higher levels 
of communication. As levels of autonomy increase 
over time, the compute load will as well, in addition to 
the vast amounts of data that will need to be collected 
in real time, and then streamed back and forth to the 
cloud’s future iteration.  Mimicking Y our Surroundings
When it comes to designing complex systems, nature 
is a meaningful muse for development and execution. 
To achieve fluid movement for robots, engineers often 
find inspiration from the movements of creatures and 
plants like jellyfish, caterpillars, and even vines—these 
allow the bots to be dynamic and even reactive based 
on external stimuli. Organic material also lends it-
self to the material design of robots, where tissues of 
specific organisms become instrumental in optimiz-
ing the functionality of a bot. Organisms, both living 
and dead, are increasingly finding themselves as key 
components of a robotic system, functioning as hands 
or grippers to lift and move objects. Organisms even 
factor into the training of robotics, as engineers have 
used ants as inspiration for enhancing the navigation 
capabilities of robots in challenging terrains. As robot-
ics design remains challenging, nature will continue to 
provide valuable design solutions. T empered Autonomy
The development of autonomous systems is a major 
driving force for scientific advancement across the do-
mains of mobility, robotics, and drones. Although the 
promise of fully autonomous vehicles has not yet been 
fully realized, autonomous driver assistance systems 
have significantly impacted the automotive industry 
and provide a strong signal for increased autonomy in 
the future. In the field of robotics and drones, varying 
degrees of autonomy are required for efficient and ef-
fective operation. The methods for programming these 
systems are becoming more sophisticated but are 
still in the early stages of refinement. As the technol-
ogy advances, the level of autonomy in these systems 
is expected to continue increasing, leading to more 
efficient and advanced robotics and drones. The future 
of these domains heavily relies on the development of 
autonomous systems, and the progress made in recent 
years reflects a positive step toward achieving fully 
automated systems in the future.Sertac Karaman, associate professor of 
aeronautics and astronautics at MIT, for his 
contributions in driverless cars, unmanned 
aerial vehicles, distributed aerial surveillance 
systems, air traffic control, and certification 
and verification of control systems software. 
Aaron Becker, associate professor of electrical 
and computer engineering at the University of 
Houston, for his contributions to swarm robot-
ics, distributed robotics, medical robotics, and 
motion planning. 
Jonathan How, professor of aeronautics and 
astronautics at MIT, for his role in developing 
algorithms that keep drones from colliding in 
midair.
Bilin Aksun Güvenç, research professor in 
the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering at The Ohio State University, for 
her role in the development of Vehicle-in-Virtu-
al-Environment testing, which allows testing of 
driverless cars in a safe virtual environment. 
Steven Hartley Collins, associate professor of 
mechanical engineering at Stanford University, 
for his contributions to versatile prostheses 
and exoskeleton design.Martin Nisser, a Ph.D. candidate in the HCI En-
gineering Group at MIT’s Computer Science and 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), for his 
efforts to democratize robotics and hardware by 
creating self-configurable and self-assemblable 
systems that address a diverse functionality of 
needs.
Chris Anthony and Steve Fambro, co-CEOs of 
startup Aptera Motors, for working to leverage 
a lightweight chassis, low-drag aerodynamics, 
solar cells, and materials science to provide 
high efficiency solar electric transportation. 
Wei Wang, researcher at the US Energy Depart-
ment’s Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 
for his contributions to using sugar to design 
better flow batteries. 
Gill Pratt, CEO of Toyota Research Institute, for 
his role in using generative AI technology to 
quickly teach robots new, dexterous skills. 
JB Straubel and Andrew Stevenson, co-found-
ers of Redwood Materials, for pioneering circu-
lar supply chains and recycling pathways for 
end-of-life EV batteries. 
Dr. Pisak Chermprayong and Dr. Ketao Zhang, 
who as researchers at the Imperial College Lon-
don produced innovative work on 3D printing 
with drone swarms.Daniel Preston, assistant professor of mechan-
ical engineering at Rice University, for pioneer-
ing necrobotics.
Jensen Huang, founder of Nvidia, for his vision 
in enabling key components for robotics, auton-
omous systems, and AI. 
Dr. Robert Playter, CEO of Boston Dynamics, 
for pushing the robotics industry forward while 
pledging to never weaponize technology, and 
other efforts to instill public trust.
Dr. Marc Raibert, founder of Boston Dynam-
ics, for his dedication to the study of dynamic 
moving systems, including robots with legs, 
simulated mechanisms, and animated figures.
Henry Liu, professor of civil engineering at the 
University of Michigan, for his contributions 
to the first realistic simulated driving envi-
ronment based on a “crash-prone” Michigan 
intersection. 
Manoj Raghavan, CEO of Tata Elxsi, for his 
vision in leading a company whose advanced 
sensors and AI algorithms aim to keep individ-
uals safe from the hazards of driving.
Michael Smith, postdoctoral researcher in soft 
robotics at EPFL, for his work in developing flexi-
ble, stretchable pumps for soft robotic systems. Jocelyne Bloch, neuroscientist and neurosur-
geon at Lausanne University, for her work in 
functional neurosurgery. 
Giuk Lee, associate professor at Chung-Ang 
University, for his work on assistive exoskele-
tons and wearable robots. 
Hyung Ju Suh, Ph.D. candidate in electrical en-
gineering and computer science at MIT’s CSAIL, 
for his work in enabling robots with human-like 
dexterity and intelligence in manipulation. 
Russ T edrake, Toyota Professor of Electrical En-
gineering and Computer Science, Aeronautics 
and Astronautics, and Mechanical Engineering 
at MIT, for his work in combining systems theo-
ry and robot manipulation.
Zachary Manchester, assistant professor of 
robotics at Carnegie Mellon University, for his 
efforts to enable robotic systems to match 
or exceed the level of agility, efficiency, and 
robustness demonstrated by humans and 
animals.
Josephine Galipon, associate professor at the 
Graduate School of Science and Engineering at 
Yamagata University, for exploring the potential 
benefits of collaborations between robots and 
living creatures. ONES TO WATCH
412© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESIMPORTANT TERMS
413MOBILITY
ADAS (advanced driver assistance systems)
Technologies that assist drivers by performing 
certain functions in a vehicle, such as blind-spot 
monitoring, lane departure warning, pedestrian 
detection, emergency braking, and traffic sign 
recognition.
AMD (assistive mobility device)
A mobility aid such as a wheelchair, scooter, walker, 
or orthotic.
Bidirectional charging
A system that enables an electric vehicle to transfer 
electricity back to the grid, as well as to charge 
using electricity from the grid.
EV charging port
The connector that supplies power to an elec-
tric vehicle when it is plugged in. Of the different 
connector types the most common in the US is the 
North American Charging Station, or NACS. Tesla 
uses it, and more manufacturers are adopting this 
connector.
ICE (internal combustion engine)
An engine powered by fuel combustion, most  
commonly gasoline or diesel fuel.• Level 2  
Partial Automation 
The vehicle has combined automated func-
tions, like steering and acceleration. However, 
the driver must always remain engaged and 
monitor the environment constantly.
• Level 3  
Conditional Automation 
A driver is essential. Driver does not need to 
monitor the environment, but must be ready to 
assume control at any time.
• Level 4  
High Automation 
The vehicle is capable of performing all driving 
functions under specified conditions. The driver 
has the option to take control.
• Level 5  
Full Automation 
The vehicle is capable of performing all driving 
functions under all conditions. The driver may 
have the option to take control.LEVELS OF EV CHARGING
There are three levels of charging. The higher the 
level, the less time it takes to reach a full battery.
• Level 1 
These charging stations use a standard 120v 
outlet. The time to charge a vehicle’s battery can 
take 60 hours or more.
• Level 2  
These are the most commonly available 
charging stations and are used most often for 
home charging. The time to reach a full battery 
is around 11 hours.
• Level 3  
There are two types of rapid charging stations: 
DC Fast Charging and Supercharging. Level 3 
stations can fully charge a battery in under 
30 minutes and most closely resemble the 
customer experience of gasoline-powered cars. 
Tesla’s standard is Supercharging, and the com-
pany has the largest network of Level 3 charging 
stations in North America.V2G (vehicle-to-grid)
Allows bidirectional charging so electric vehicles 
can receive electricity from a charging station, or 
share their stored electricity with the grid.
V2I (vehicle-to-infrastructure communication)
Enables vehicles to communicate with traffic 
lights, RFID readers, cameras, lane markers, and 
other parts of the physical world.
V2V (vehicle-to-vehicle communication)
Allows vehicles to exchange information with other 
vehicles, sharing data such as speed and location.
Levels of Automation
The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) clearly 
defines six levels of driving automation:
• Level 0  
No Automation 
A human driver manually performs all tasks.
• Level 1  
Driver Assistance 
A driver controls the vehicle, but the vehicle 
design may include some driving assistance 
features.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESIMPORTANT TERMS
414ROBOTICS
Cobot 
A collaborative robot built for interaction with 
human workers, assisting with certain tasks, often 
those that are repetitive or harmful to humans.
Exoskeleton
A rigid, mechanical robotic structure that encases 
the human limb, or envelops the body, and assists 
the wearer in motion-based activities, such as 
walking or lifting.
Microrobotics
A field of robotics that develops miniature robots, 
typically smaller than 1 mm (or .001 meters) in size.
Nanobot
A field of robotics that develops robots at the scale 
of a nanometer (or 10-9 meters).
Necrobotics
A field of robotics that utilizes biological material, 
such as insect cadavers, as robotic components.Drone
An unmanned vehicle that can operate in the air, on 
land, or in the sea:
• Fixed-wing drone 
A drone with one rigid wing, resembling an air-
plane. It is typically capable of remaining in the 
air longer and flying longer distances than other 
drone types.
• Fixed-wing hybrid VTOL 
A drone with a rigid wing, and rotors that are at-
tached to either side, enabling vertical takeoffs 
and landings.
• Single-rotor drone 
A drone with a single rotor on top, much like a 
helicopter.
• Multi-rotor drone 
A drone with multiple rotors. The most common 
multi-rotor drone is a quadcopter, which has 
four rotors.• Drone swarm 
Fleets of networked drones capable of coordi-
nated operations and communication.
• eVTOL (electric vertical take-off and landing) 
An electric-powered drone that has the ability to 
take off and land vertically, as well as hover.
• Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)  
Drone operators are required to comply with FAA 
rules. There are a multitude of airspace restric-
tions as well as FAA-Recognized Identification 
Areas (FRIAs). In a FRIA, a drone operator may fly 
their device without Remote ID.
• UAV  
Unmanned aerial vehicle.Quadrupedal robot
A four-legged robot.
Robotics
The use of a physical, mechanical device capable 
of performing tasks at various levels of complexity, 
either on command or via preprogrammed instruc-
tions.
DRONES
AGV (automated guided vehicle)
A robot that follows specific lines, lanes, or other 
markings, often used in industrial settings.
AUV
Autonomous (or uncrewed) underwater vehicle.
BVLOS (beyond visual line of sight)
Operating an UAV outside of the visual line of sight 
of the operator.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES415© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY 
TRENDSTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
Decarbonizing Mobility 
In the US, the transportation sector gener-
ates the largest amount of greenhouse gas 
emissions—primarily from burning fossil fuel 
for cars, trucks, ships, trains, and planes. In 
efforts to mitigate climate change, this in-
dustry is a prime candidate for impact. Some 
states offer proactive examples. California 
allocated more than $50 billion in funds to 
address climate change and move away from 
the use of fossil fuels. In the area of trans-
portation, the state is implementing regu-
lations to reduce toxic freight pollution and 
accelerate the deployment of zero-emission 
trucks; officials are also allocating emergency 
funding to ensure the safety of public transit 
riders and workers, in hopes of persuading 
more people to choose that form of transpor-
tation. California also enacted a Low Carbon 
Fuels Standard to ensure that it aligns with 
climate and environmental justice priorities. 
In Europe, the transportation sector is also a 
major contributor of greenhouse gasses, and 
officials are aiming for a 90% reduction to 
meet the EU’s target of carbon neutrality by 
2050. This transition poses significant chal-ments in an electric future, with plans and 
announcements from the late 2010s now 
becoming  reality. Western automakers are 
even investing in lithium mining companies 
to ensure a stable supply of this key com-
ponent of EV batteries, committing billions 
of dollars to secure the resource. General 
Motors has invested $650 million in Lithium 
Americas to develop the Thacker Pass Mine 
in Nevada and has entered into supply agree-
ments with lithium companies like Livent. 
Ford has arranged lithium supply deals with 
Chilean supplier SQM, Charlotte-based Albe-
marle, Nemaska Lithium in Quebec, and the 
Argentina mining company Rio Tinto. 
Ford and Uber are collaborating through the 
Ford Drive program to provide flexible leases 
of EVs to Uber drivers. The goal is to support 
Uber’s efforts to convert more drivers to EVs 
and reduce emissions, while Ford will benefit 
from expanding the presence of its Mustang 
Mach-E EVs. The initial pilot program offers 
one- to four-month leases in San Diego, Los 
Angeles, and San Francisco. School districts are replacing traditional bus-
es with electric models to reduce emissions 
and save on fuel costs, with potential orders 
up to $1 billion over the next five years. Blue 
Bird has opened a new Electric Vehicle Build-
Up Center in Georgia to meet the increased 
demand for electric school buses, and aims to 
increase production from 100 to 5,000 electric 
buses annually. Blue Bird will assemble its 
“Vision” and “All American” buses, each with a 
155 kWh battery providing 120 miles of range. 
Mass Market Goes Custom
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the shortage 
of semiconductor chips caused significant 
supply chain constraints. The lack of chips, 
used in automotive parts such as operating 
systems, cameras, sensors, and entertain-
ment systems, led to a decline in production, 
resulting in a shortage of vehicles. Dealers 
had little to no stock on their lots and were 
forced to operate as showrooms, where some 
customers placed orders for a custom vehi-
cle with a longer lead time. While supplies 
are slowly and tortuously improving, CEOs of 
major car brands anticipate that inventory lenges for European cities, which significant-
ly contribute to these emissions; to support 
them in this effort, the EU is offering help 
creating Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans. 
However, various obstacles, including gover-
nance issues, need to be addressed. Addi-
tionally, the Council of the European Union 
has recently passed a new regulation aimed 
at facilitating EV travel across the continent 
while mitigating the impact of greenhouse 
gas emissions. The regulation mandates the 
installation of fast charging stations that 
offer a minimum of 150 kW of power at a 
maximum distance of 60 km (37 miles) from 
each other along the Trans-European Trans-
port Network (TEN-T) highway system by the 
year 2025. As more electric mobility technol-
ogy is adopted, cost structures and opera-
tions will continue to change. The mobility 
industry, including vehicle manufacturers, 
is already feeling the impact and rethinking 
business models.
Automaker Restructuring
Major car companies and transportation 
platforms are making significant invest-ELECTRIFICATION TRANSFORMS MOBILITY ECOSYSTEMS
416© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
levels will never go back to where they were 
pre-pandemic. But this window has revealed 
that customers will wait and pay for their 
dream car, with the ability to pick their de-
sired color, features, and accessories. Conse-
quently, build-to-order purchases will likely 
continue to increase and render big vehicle 
inventories less necessary. Ford is extending 
this schematic to its Mustang Mach-E, offer-
ing a $1,000 discount in some instances for 
customers who pre order. This trend is likely 
to continue as more production lines shift 
to increased EV manufacturing. Such a shift 
does have tremendous implications for the 
industry, changing the nature of dealerships 
and impacting current commission and 
profit-sharing structures. Both the industry 
and consumers will have to adjust to such 
restructuring, and adequately prepare for 
impending shockwaves. 
Incentive-Driven Investments
Many vehicle manufacturers and battery 
makers are investing heavily in the devel-
opment of electric vehicles and their future 
success. A recent analysis by Atlas Public to purchase EVs, the Inflation Reduction Act 
has unexpectedly complicated the practice. 
In August 2023, the law restricted the $7,500 
tax credit to only EVs assembled in North 
America. As a result, automakers that can no 
longer incentivize new car buyers this way 
are encouraging consumers to lease EVs. 
Global Battery Belts
Major players in the automotive and battery 
chemistry industries are investing in US bat-
tery production. States that attract electric 
vehicle manufacturing and battery plants 
highlight the job opportunities these in-
vestments create, not only within the plants 
themselves but also in the surrounding 
supplier and logistics sectors. The growth in 
EV manufacturing is especially prominent in 
the Battery Belt: The area, which runs from 
Detroit to Georgia, offers lower electricity 
costs and strong manufacturing employ-
ment growth, driving industry expansion. As 
an example, Hyundai Motor Group and LG En-
ergy Solution announced a joint investment 
of $4.3 billion in a new electric battery plant 
in southeast Georgia. By late 2025, the plant expects to be producing batteries for electric 
vehicles and aims to accelerate the produc-
tion of electrified Hyundai and Kia vehicles in 
North America. But despite this push by US 
companies to produce more batteries, most 
production is still dominated by China. Last 
year, China refined approximately 95% of the 
world’s manganese, around 70% of cobalt and 
graphite, two-thirds of lithium, and over 60% 
of nickel, all of which are vital components 
in the production of lithium-ion batteries. In 
time, that could change, especially with the 
2023 discovery of lithium in a US volcano 
along the Nevada-Oregon border, which could 
result in a stable and sustainable source of 
the metal for the US for decades to come. 
Battery Recycling
The debate surrounding the sustainability of 
EVs versus internal combustion engine vehi-
cles (ICEs) revolves around the environmental 
impact caused by the mining of lithium and 
cobalt, which are crucial materials for batter-
ies. However, by using recycled battery com-
ponents, the need for new mineral mining can 
be reduced, leading to a more environmentally Policy reveals that a total of $860 billion will 
be invested globally by 2030 toward the tran-
sition to EVs. In the US, investments are ex-
pected to total $210 billion—almost a quarter 
of the entire investment. Amid this spending 
increase, some of the benefits are trickling 
down to consumers. Increased plant capaci-
ty, production scaling efforts, and improved 
battery material costs are enabling Ford to 
reduce the prices of its F-150 Lightning elec-
tric truck models by up to $10,000 to incen-
tivize sales. The base F-150 Lightning Pro will 
be priced at $49,995. Elsewhere, Geely an-
nounced the Galaxy E8 sedan (about the size 
of a Honda Accord) will be on sale in the Chi-
nese market for under $25,000. Automakers 
are also taking advantage of tax incentives 
associated with EV production. The state of 
Georgia has offered Rivian $1.5 billion in tax 
incentives for the company to build a $5 
billion factory east of Atlanta. There, Rivian 
plans to produce 400,000 electric vehicles 
annually and provide 7,500 new jobs after 
officially getting the green light to move 
forward with production. While tax credits 
have been effective at enticing consumers ELECTRIFICATION TRANSFORMS MOBILITY ECOSYSTEMS
417© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
friendly EV market. Currently over 80 compa-
nies worldwide are engaged in the recycling 
of electric vehicles, with over 50 startups 
receiving at least $2.7 billion in funding from 
corporate investors such as automakers, bat-
tery manufacturers, and mining companies. 
Industry insiders predict that by 2040, up 
to 40% of the battery materials used in new 
electric vehicles could come from recycled 
sources. A prominent player in this space, 
Redwood Materials, has partnered with Ford 
and Volvo to establish responsible disposal 
and recycling pathways for end-of-life EV bat-
teries. They are also going beyond EVs and col-
laborating with Rad Power Bikes to conduct 
the same process for retired e-bike batteries. 
Ascend Elements has secured $542 million 
in Series D funding along with $480 million 
in earlier Department of Energy grants for 
recycling lithium batteries into black mass to 
be reused in other materials. Additionally, Nth 
Cycle has secured a focused Series B funding 
round of $50 million, and Green Li-ion has 
received $20.5 million in funding to support 
its recycling initiatives. in Mitra Chem to use iron-based cathodes 
to make battery technology more accessible 
and cost-effective. Researchers at Pacific 
Northwest National Laboratory have devel-
oped a breakthrough in flow battery technol-
ogy by using a solution based on sugar to 
lead in the development of low-cost, long-du-
ration energy storage systems, which could 
impact the source of energy for charging EVs. 
Startup Ample is taking a different approach, 
focusing on battery swapping as a means to 
keep EVs on the road.
Solar Vehicles
Solar-powered EVs require less frequent 
charging and can increase efficiency. A 
recent study found that solar-powered cars 
can travel between 11 and 29 kilometers per 
day using solar energy, reducing the need 
for frequent charging. These solar cars have 
the potential to make electric transportation 
cleaner and more affordable by minimizing 
pollution from electricity production. Dutch 
startup Lightyear saw the advantage of 
solar, but despite its efforts, was declared 
insolvent in 2023 shortly after releasing its $250,000 Lightyear 0 solar car. After raising 
more capital, the company will try again with 
a more affordable Lightyear 2, which has a 
starting price of $40,000. First revealed as a 
concept, Kia’s EV9 SUV features solar panels 
to supplement its 100-kilowatt-hour battery; 
the company started taking reservations for 
the EV9 in late 2023. In contrast to a large SUV, 
California-based Aptera Motors focuses on 
producing ultra-efficient EVs through aerody-
namics and weight savings. Its three-wheeled 
EV, the Aptera, boasts a highly aerodynamic 
design with a drag coefficient of 0.13, offering 
up to 400 miles on a single charge, which can 
be supplemented through included solar pan-
els. While solar vehicles will not eliminate the 
need for charging any time soon, their integra-
tion will help the industry move toward more 
sustainable transportation. 
Shifts in the Servicing Model
While the mobile service model is not new, 
it’s increasingly impacting the mobility and 
automobile industry. Now, mechanics can 
travel to meet customers in their physical lo-
cations, and over-the-air updates can, in some Better Batteries
Electric vehicle manufacturers and their 
partners are working hard to improve batter-
ies by exploring new battery types, designs, 
and materials. The development of sol-
id-state batteries and other innovative bat-
tery solutions will make batteries smaller, 
safer, and capable of providing longer rang-
es, much like the Harvard John A. Paulson 
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
(SEAS) research that developed a new way 
to make solid-state batteries with a lithi-
um metal anode. Beyond the obvious safety 
and range benefits, enhanced batteries will 
provide greater versatility in terms of bat-
tery shape, which will allow for more options 
in different mobility platforms and provide 
more cabin space in vehicles. QuantumS-
cape is striving to make solid-state batteries 
available to the public as early as this year. 
This technology will allow EVs to travel up 
to 400 miles on one charge and recharge in 
only 15 minutes. Toyota plans to be using 
solid state batteries by 2028, reducing the 
size, cost, and weight of its EV batteries by 
50%. General Motors is investing $60 million ELECTRIFICATION TRANSFORMS MOBILITY ECOSYSTEMS
418© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESELECTRIFICATION TRANSFORMS MOBILITY ECOSYSTEMSTECH
instances, resolve digital-based issues. As the 
model takes hold, this presents a significant 
threat to traditional dealership/servicing 
models, and companies are racing to adapt. 
Rivian plans to repurpose large commercial 
Amazon vans to function as mobile service 
vehicles for its consumer and commercial 
vehicle fleet. These electric Rivian Service 
Vans will offer maintenance, repair, and ve-
hicle-to-vehicle charging. Ford is recognizing 
the need to enhance the vehicle service ex-
perience and is moving to expand its remote 
service offerings. The company will be provid-
ing complimentary pickups and deliveries of 
its vehicles and mobile repair options to more 
of its customers. Startups are also taking 
advantage of this shift. On-demand car care 
startup Spiffy has acquired $30 million in 
funding to aid car dealerships in expanding 
its mobile service offerings. Through sales 
of its software and van upfits, Spiffy plans 
to help dealerships and repair shops provide 
mobile brake maintenance and oil changes. 
Repair servicing is really beginning to go the 
extra mile to win customers and foster and 
enhance relationships. the other end of the spectrum, China has un-
veiled its first battery-electric container ship, 
the 700 TEU, which has a capacity of carrying 
700 20-foot containers. Even micro mobility 
is becoming electrified, as the e-bike compa-
ny Cowboy introduces a more affordable Core 
line of its e-bikes and startup AtmosGear 
has unveiled electric inline skates featuring 
a 20-mile range on a full charge.Electrification Expands to Other Vehicles
The rise in electrification of vehicles is 
extending beyond consumer cars. Deliv-
ery carriers like Amazon and the US Postal 
Service are investing in the technology: 
Amazon aims to deploy 100,000 electric 
delivery vehicles by 2030, and the USPS says 
it will buy over 66,000 electric vehicles by 
the end of 2028. When it comes to aviation, 
ZeroAvia has successfully flown the world’s 
largest hydrogen-electric aircraft as part of 
the HyFlyer II project, a government-funded 
initiative aimed at making small passen-
ger planes more environmentally friendly. 
Magpie Aviation, a California company, has 
proposed using electric aircraft as towing 
planes to connect with passenger or cargo 
planes that have sufficient battery power 
for takeoff, landing, and flight to alternative 
airports. Electric boating is impacting both 
small and large-scale initiatives. BMW and 
Tyde have launched the ICON electric boat, a 
43-foot eco-friendly vessel powered by hydro-
foils, six BMW i3 batteries, and two electric 
motors. It has a range of more than 50 nau-
tical miles and a max speed of 30 knots. On MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
419© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Amazon Prime electric delivery vans built by Rivian 
on the street in Seattle.
Image credit: 400tmax/istock.comTECH
Charging Gets A Roadmap 
The electric vehicle revolution is well under-
way, but a key bottleneck remains a concern: 
charging infrastructure. Rural and suburban 
consumers alike have had their desire to 
adopt EVs hampered as a result of “range 
anxiety”—the fear of running out of charge 
mid-journey. Recognizing this anxiety, regu-
lators in the US have approved $5 billion for 
EV charging projects over the next five years 
and recently allocated an additional $2.5 
billion for community chargers. Europe has 
gone even further, mandating fast charging 
stations within every 60 km length of major 
highways by 2026.
The private sector is stepping up its efforts, 
too. Automakers have gotten closer to con-
vergence on charging standards with several 
top manufacturers adopting the Tesla con-
nector for their vehicles. Major brands like 
Walmart, Sam’s Club, Comcast, Ikea, Marriott, 
and Hilton have committed to build tens of 
thousands of new chargers across all of their 
properties, in addition to tens of thousands 
in combined charging station commitments Major automakers including Ford, Rivian, 
Fisker, GM, Honda, Volvo, Jaguar, Nissan, 
and Mercedes-Benz have pledged to adopt 
Tesla’s NACS connector or offer NACS adapt-
ers, making standardization one step closer 
in the US. Tesla has also begun to expand its 
“Magic Dock ‘’ superchargers in several US 
states, adding CCS compatibility in much 
the same way it has had to in Europe. These 
two developments have not only moved 
global charging capacity closer to universal 
compatibility but have instigated a renewed 
incentive for further charger development.
As EV adoption and universal compatibili-
ty increases, the need for charging station 
capacity intensifies. This opens up a new 
vector of competition throughout the indus-
try where vendors, partnerships, and enter-
tainment offerings at charging stations may 
dictate station utilization rates, and inno-
vations like real-time pricing could allow 
for solar-powered stations to out-compete 
traditional stations during fluctuations in 
solar availability. Redefining the Roadside
The rise of EVs is transforming our roadside 
experience. Extended charge times have led 
retailers like Walmart, Ikea, and Macy’s to 
integrate charging tech, turning wait times 
into retail opportunities. Tesla’s drive-in-diner 
concept provides culinary and film experienc-
es while EVs charge, while Juxta offers autono-
mous stores at traditional charging hubs.
With the surging EV demand, innovative 
solutions are addressing infrastructure gaps. 
Ample swaps batteries in just five minutes. 
EV Safe Charge is piloting robots to charge ve-
hicles in non-equipped garages. SparkCharge 
delivers on-demand charging where fixed 
infrastructure is lacking.
Even in emergencies, adaptations are evident. 
Apple’s new satellite function broadens the 
coverage for roadside assistance in low-signal 
areas. Meanwhile, AAA assists stranded EVs 
with mobile charges and is exploring electric 
tow trucks for green, on-the-go recharging.made by BMW, GM, Honda, Hyundai, and 
Mercedes. Improvements to existing infra-
structure are also underway with Tesla prom-
ising 40% faster charging through its V4 
technology, companies like EVgo launching 
initiative’s to “renew” existing stations, and 
navigation services like Waze integrating 
charging locations into its navigation tech 
to improve peace of mind in trip planning for 
EV adopters.
Charging Standardization
One of the lingering issues in the develop-
ment of the EV market has been fragmen-
tation of charging standards. Globally, the 
Combined Charging System (CCS) has been 
the prevailing standard, but the North Amer-
ican Charging Standard (NACS)—commonly 
known as the Tesla connector—has become 
the standard in North America with Tesla’s 
overwhelming EV market share. This diver-
gence has become more complicated since 
Tesla began open-sourcing its NACS connec-
tor design at the end of 2022, but progress 
has been made toward cross-compatibility.VEHICLE CHARGING SCALES
420© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESVEHICLE CHARGING SCALESTECH
Electrifying Cities
Accelerating frequency and severity of cli-
mate events, along with rising electric vehicle 
adoption, has seen cities push their electri-
fication strategies to the top of their agenda. 
On the grid, decentralized energy systems 
have been a consistent theme. Public utilities 
like Vermont’s Green Mountain Power are in-
stalling batteries in customers’ homes to en-
sure power resilience during outages and to 
optimize costs by utilizing stored resources 
during periods of low supply or peak demand. 
In North Carolina, a residential community 
called Heron’s Nest is being developed to 
include a microgrid independent of the larger 
grid. Each home includes a solar energy sys-
tem contributing to a collective network that 
not only powers the community but ensures 
its resilience and sustainability. 
In transportation, cities like New York City 
and Los Angeles have considered requiring 
rideshares to run completely on EVs by 2030. 
To cope with rising demand for charging in 
cities, governments are racing to expand 
capacity. France, for example, is working with with initiatives from automakers to try to 
bring chargers to the home. Hyundai, for 
example, has pushed promotions that would 
provide a free EV charger and a reduction in 
installation costs to every new customer. 
These efforts to transform have paved the 
way for more widespread adoption, but the 
swift transition has also uncovered poten-
tial challenges for EVs at home. Surveys by 
the Electrical Safety Foundation indicate 
that the electrical systems of over half of 
US homes may be unable to safely carry the 
continuous load that EV charging demands. 
If the rapid adoption of EVs leads to an 
increase in brownouts, electrical surges, or 
fires resulting from overloading home elec-
trical systems, more stringent regulations 
may become more popular for concerned 
local governments and homeowners asso-
ciations. Still, forward-thinking communi-
ties may use the opportunity to collaborate 
on more communal solar arrays or shared 
charging stations, presenting an efficient 
and cost-effective solution.Electreon to install wireless charging on its 
roadways, and the US recently earmarked 
$25 billion to expand community charging 
capacity. These actions underscore what is 
becoming a global shift toward a sustain-
able and resilient urban future, ensuring 
cities remain powered, efficient, and ready 
for the next era of electrification.
EVs At Home
As the EV market has matured, a significant 
shift has been taking place in the home. On 
the heels of California’s 2020 mandate for 
solar installations in new homes, Illinois has 
passed laws requiring new and renovated 
properties to have at least one EV-capable 
parking space for each residential unit that 
has dedicated parking by 2024. A proposal 
under consideration by New Mexico legis-
lators would go even further, mandating all 
new homes be constructed with a solar-pow-
ered system and EV charger. In Germany, a 
grant to help fund home-charging installa-
tions was tapped out in one day, with over 
33,000 people applying just hours after it 
went live. These regulatory efforts coincide MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
421© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Electric vehicles taking advantage of chargers on 
city streets.VEHICLE CHARGING SCALESTECH
Bidirectional Charging
Electric vehicles with bidirectional charging 
capabilities present an exciting frontier. 
These vehicles can not only consume energy 
but also supply it for other applications, 
transforming the traditional role of cars. No 
longer merely used for transportation, bidirec-
tional EVs now have the potential to energize 
homes, businesses, and entire communi-
ties. With bidirectional charging, owners 
can strategically charge their cars overnight 
using affordable grid energy and then utilize 
the EV’s stored energy during high-demand 
daytime periods, ensuring efficient use of 
resources. Growing challenges such as the 
energy crises linked to geopolitical events 
in Ukraine, escalating climate disruptions 
across the globe, and widespread concerns 
around outdated infrastructure and cyberse-
curity only underscore the timely importance 
of this technology. 
The automotive industry has been quick to 
embrace this innovation. Ford, Genesis, Hyun-
dai, Kia, Mitsubishi, Nissan, and Volkswagen 
have all rolled out vehicles with bidirection-al charging. GM has gone a step further, 
declaring that by 2024, vehicle-to-home 
(V2H) charging will be a standard feature 
in its vehicles. Other industry leaders like 
BMW, Volvo, and Porsche are actively testing 
this technology. Even Tesla, which initially 
seemed skeptical, has announced plans to 
incorporate bidirectionality in all its vehicles 
by 2025.
Municipalities are recognizing the value of 
this transformative technology in energy 
management. Utrecht, a prominent city in 
the Netherlands, stands out in its adoption, 
actively installing bidirectional charging 
stations that allow shared vehicles to con-
tribute energy back to the grid. In the US, 
California is at the forefront, contemplating 
legislation to make bidirectional charging 
mandatory for new EVs. The possibilities are 
vast, and the trajectory suggests a future 
where our vehicles play an integral role in a 
sustainable energy ecosystem.
422© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Rendering of the Nissan Vehicle to Home (V2H) System concept
Source: NissanMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
Livable Cabins 
Auto manufacturers are revolutionizing the 
way we experience our vehicles. Rather than a 
car solely serving as an uninspired vessel to 
get us from one location to another, manu-
facturers are emphasizing enhancing cabin 
environments. Now, they’re not just for driving 
but also for riding, relaxing, working, and 
playing. In many instances, automakers at-
tempt to transform these landscapes through 
the increased use of screens. In a Peugeot 
concept called Inception, a screen-supported 
human-machine interface replaces the tra-
ditional steering wheel and displays control 
information. Continental is also capsulizing 
on the screen-infused future with its ultraw-
ide In2visible: a touchscreen that spans the 
full length of the dash resulting in a high-in-
tensity driving experience. Ultimately, such 
interfaces are intended for fully integrated 
digital experiences. Chrysler has given its 
view of a fully electric future where the cock-
pits of its vehicles integrate Stellantis-brand-
ed software, including the STLA Brain oper-
ating system, STLA AutoDrive Level 3 driver 
assist, and STLA Smart Cockpit infotainment ing drivers of auditory and even touch-based 
feedback they are accustomed to. This also 
affects bystanders. The lack of noise from 
electric cars contributes to their high rate 
of accidents: EVs are 40% more likely to hit 
a pedestrian than a normal car, and for the 
visually impaired population, this number 
jumps to 93%. 
Toyota is adding audible features to its 
electric cars—including a simulated gear 
stick and artificial “noise” simulating a 
combustion engine—aimed at drivers who 
prefer a more traditional driving experience. 
This simulated manual transmission expe-
rience might even come with the possibility 
of stalling in order to retain the charm and 
enjoyment of driving a manual transmission 
car. Hyundai and Dodge are also exploring 
sound design in the execution of their EVs, 
not just for preference reasons but because 
the addition of artificial engine noise is also 
a safety standard, alerting pedestrians to 
the presence of electric vehicles. Ultimately, 
some manufacturers are hoping that drivers 
are more likely to adopt electric cars if they sound and feel just like their gas-powered 
counterparts, while the inclusion of these sim-
ulations is primarily about keeping people safe. 
In-Vehicle Connectivity
The role of high-speed, low-latency connectiv-
ity is becoming a prominent factor impacting 
the performance of the vehicle along with the 
in-cabin experience. While internet access in 
cars is not new—Starlink currently provides 
connectivity for Subaru—carriers such as 
AT&T and Verizon have ambitions for exe-
cuting on this modality. AT&T, in particular, 
sees 5G connectivity in conjunction with edge 
computing as a way to enable new functions 
and services through this network and cloud 
convergence. This framework will not only sup-
port the safety and mission-critical functions 
of the car but also intelligent transportation 
systems, teleoperations,and autonomous 
driving, along with onboard infotainment 
systems. More tactically, Verizon launched the 
Connected Car by Verizon, which offers select 
BMW models features such as voice, data, and 
unlimited Wi-Fi hotspot connectivity through 
subscription. With regards to more tech system. This connected experience will sync 
with calendars and smart home data, handle 
driving tasks within designated areas, and 
even offer wellness and fun features, like 
meditation and in-car games. But the prolif-
eration of large and clunky screens is being 
sharply criticized, as they have impacts on 
ergonomic, safety, and aesthetic factors.  
If they continue to grow unchecked, they 
could ultimately be challenged by regula-
tors. Despite these concerns, as personal 
mobility is enhanced with longer ranges and 
increased implementation of autonomous 
driving features, auto manufacturers will 
continue to improve comfort within vehicles 
and engage customers through new onboard 
touchpoints, impacting how we’ve tradition-
ally engaged with roadside attractions and 
amenities. 
Simulated Driving Experience
Electric vehicles are known for being in-
credibly quiet, and some view this as prob -
lematic. Specifically, EVs don’t make the 
typical shifting noise that drivers are used to 
hearing, and this can cause issues by depriv-IMMERSIVE VEHICLES CONNECT TO OTHER ECOSYSTEMS 
423© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
demonstrations or spectacles, General Motors 
collaborated with Etisalat to host a gaming 
tournament that took place entirely within 
connected Chevrolet and GM cars equipped 
with in-vehicle Wi-Fi. The tournament fea-
tured 10 gamers who participated in a 12-hour 
event covering 450 km of roads in the United 
Arab Emirates, organized by OnStar. Cradle-
point partnered with The University of New 
South Wales for the Bridgestone World Solar 
Challenge race, by providing 5G/LTE wireless 
network edge solutions for the Sunswift 7 
solar race car and support vehicles. This tech-
nology allowed the team to remotely monitor 
the car’s performance and telemetry data. As 
connectivity becomes more reliable, more 
subscription services like Verizon’s Connect-
ed Car are inevitable, much to the disappoint-
ment of most consumers.
Mobile Entertainment Hubs
Vehicles are becoming increasingly equipped 
with multiple entertainment options for 
passengers and drivers, including technolo-
gies such as immersive audio, large screens, 
and the ability to stream movies, TV shows, in its vehicles. The service connects to the 
cloud to access an extensive gaming library. 
While the use of these technologies is limit-
ed for safety, inevitably, these technologies 
are intended for broader adoption as we 
inch closer to an autonomous driving future. 
Ultimately, these new platforms intend to 
simplify content discovery and enhance in-
car entertainment.
CarOS 
As cars become even smarter and offer 
more immersive experiences, navigational 
and entertainment systems will continue to 
evolve, necessitating a holistic and central-
ized operating system. In the current market, 
many options are available, developed by 
both OEMs and technology companies. While 
tech companies have taken a lead in years 
past, some OEMs are attempting to regain 
control. Google is making progress in the au-
tomotive industry through Android Auto—an 
app that operates on the user’s smartphone 
and wirelessly sends navigation, parking, 
media, and messaging to the infotainment 
system of the vehicle—and Google Built-in, which directly integrates Google services with-
in the vehicle. Brands like Chevrolet, Renault, 
Volvo, Polestar, and Honda are set to showcase 
features like YouTube available in cars with 
Google Built-in, gaming with GameSnacks, 
conferencing with Cisco, Microsoft Teams, 
and Zoom, and further integration with Google 
Assistant. General Motors is indexing sig-
nificantly on Google, and in the process is 
ditching Apple CarPlay for Android Auto in 
its upcoming electric vehicles. Relating to 
OEMs, Swedish EV manufacturer Polestar has 
teamed up with Xingji Meizu to develop an 
operating system for its cars in China, as part 
of Geely Group’s strategy to tailor vehicles for 
the Chinese market. The new system, based on 
Flyme Auto, will connect with in-car apps and 
mobile phones, and use the latest smart tech-
nologies. Jaguar Land Rover is set to release 
its new electrical/electronic (E/E) architecture, 
EVA Continuum, with the help of Continental 
subsidiary Elektrobit for running its software 
platform and operating system. This move 
enables faster development and over-the-air 
software updates, a strategy that other auto-
makers are also beginning to adopt. and video games. While Apple and Mer-
cedes-Benz have enabled spatial audio in 
vehicles, Jaguar Land Rover is turning to 
haptics to enhance the music experience. 
Its “Body and Soul Seat” technology, dubbed 
BASS, features headrest-mounted mem-
branes and transducers that provide haptic 
feedback in response to lower frequencies 
in music—and even offer health benefits 
through integrated wellness programs. Auto-
makers are continuing to add features to be 
enjoyed by passengers while they’re com-
muting or charging their EVs. Xperi and BMW 
have collaborated to use TiVo’s video media 
platform in cars to offer customers access 
to various video content providers, including 
linear and on-demand streaming services, 
covering country-specific content such as 
news, movies, and media libraries. Polestar’s 
most recent software update, P2.9, includes 
the addition of YouTube for streaming videos 
during vehicle charging and a revamped 
version of Apple CarPlay that allows Maps 
to be projected onto the instrument cluster. 
Polestar is also the first automaker to offer 
Nvidia’s cloud gaming service, GeForce NOW, IMMERSIVE VEHICLES CONNECT TO OTHER ECOSYSTEMS 
424© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2038
What if expanded vehicle capabilities redefine the nature of home ownership?    
As younger generations grapple with lower real income, higher housing prices, and an expanded tolerance for 
remote work, connected vehicles became the new starter home of yesteryear. Risks associated with pandemics, 
crime, and higher rates of depression drove people out of cities and closer to nature, and their vehicles stepped 
in as an invaluable resource. Mesh networks of 5G and satellite-enabled internet allow people to work, consume 
entertainment, and connect with others virtually in the comfort of their vehicle—no matter where it’s located. 
Vehicle cabins are redesigned around sleeping, working, and relaxing, while new features that enable cooking, 
food storage, and waste management become popular add-ons. AI allows vehicles to assist passengers with 
daily tasks like cooking food or supporting work, while providing security, health monitoring, and the ability to 
contact emergency services or autonomously drive the vehicle to receive help during situations of duress.
425© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
Mobility Simulation
Simulation has become an increasingly 
ubiquitous component across several areas 
of mobility and will be a defining characteris-
tic in the development of its future. Tesla, for 
example, has been relying on its Dojo super-
computer to simulate billions of miles of driv-
ing for its autonomous driving software since 
choosing to rely purely on cameras and neural 
nets to provide its vehicles with self-driving 
capabilities. Mercedes has also made simu-
lation more central to its strategy, forming a 
partnership with Nvidia that only underscores 
this trend. Leveraging Nvidia’s Omniverse 
Generative AI platform, Mercedes hopes to im-
prove its vehicle designs and craft enhanced 
driving algorithms by simulating countless 
potential real-world scenarios, to create ve-
hicles that respond optimally across various 
conditions. 
Universities like Ohio State and the Universi-
ty of Michigan have brought mobility sim-
ulation to academia as well. Ohio State, for 
example, uses simulated environments to 
test the safety and aptitude of real driverless sion sources, allowing vehicles to reach as 
much as 1,000 horsepower while maintain-
ing equilibrium to prevent risks like disin-
tegration. Indian technology company Tata 
Elxsi is developing technologies that would 
alert automobiles to approaching emergency 
vehicles, and indicate slippery roads, dan-
gerous curves, and potholes or roads under 
repair so that they can appropriately adapt 
to the approaching conditions. Honda and 
Sony’s Afeela cars are being designed to 
“feel” their driver’s moods and allow them to 
express themselves and interact with others 
on the road via external screens on the front 
of their cars. Ford has even patented self-re-
porting technology that allows cars to lock 
out drivers, disable features like air-condi-
tioning, restrict driving to only certain hours 
or locations, and to even utilize self-driving 
to return cars to an impound lot. As vehicles 
continue to get more connected and aware, 
mobility will look strikingly different from 
the modern day mobility environment as we 
know it.Pilot and Passenger Observation
Technological advancements have enabled 
detailed monitoring of both driver and pas-
senger behaviors, significantly enhancing 
safety and operational efficiency within vehi-
cles. Safety sensors and equipment are now 
being built to detect distraction, drowsiness, 
and substance influence. Smart Eye’s Driver 
Monitoring System, for example, gauges driver 
attentiveness, providing real-time feedback to 
prevent mishaps. Similarly, Magna’s advanced 
driver assistance systems use cameras and 
interior mirrors to identify distracted behav-
ior and try to reduce accidents. In the US, the 
government is pushing to require in-vehicle 
breathalyzers by 2026 so that drivers under 
the influence cannot take the wheel until the 
vehicle confirms their capacity to wield it 
responsibly. As vehicles gain more ability to 
observe and control those within them, entire-
ly new privacy and data security concerns are 
emerging. With monitoring systems becoming 
more common in standard vehicle require-
ments and designs, a balanced framework 
that addresses both safety enhancements 
and privacy concerns will become crucial for cars, while the University of Michigan has 
begun running simulations on historically 
crash-prone intersections to try and reduce 
incidents. Globally, the Indian city of Chennai 
is now using traffic simulation to study and 
improve congestion within its borders; while 
academics in Egypt and Brazil are relying 
on simulation to test and demonstrate new 
innovations in traffic signal technology. As 
data abundance exponentially expands, 
simulation will increasingly be at the heart 
of mobility design. 
Self-Aware Vehicles
Vehicle connectivity is changing the land-
scape of mobility. The abundance of sensors, 
monitors, computing power, and network 
availability has enabled vehicles to provide 
information and, in some cases, act on it 
in ways that would have once been consid-
ered unprecedented. For example, this year, 
Goodyear tested its SightLine tires, which 
can measure tire-road friction, wear, load, 
inflation pressure, and temperature. Soft-
ware-enabled vehicles can integrate with 
and monitor multiple powertrains or propul-DATA COLLECTION ENABLES SAFETY AND AUTONOMY
426© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
getting the best out of these technologies.
Mobile Weather Stations
The Mobile Weather Station (MWS) has be-
come a crucial instrument for the real-time 
monitoring of weather and environmental 
conditions, offering granular insights crucial 
for sectors like transportation, agriculture, 
and emergency response. While universities 
across the United States, along with com-
panies like Verizon, are creating some of 
the technologies that enable the stations, 
several states and municipalities are using 
them to bring about improvements across 
their domains. For example, in New York 
City, the FloodNet Initiative utilizes MWS to 
monitor water levels, predict flooding events, 
and optimize drainage systems to minimize 
potential damage to the metropolitan area. 
In California, MWS is being used to detect 
early indicators of potential wildfires and 
changes in algae levels that can ultimately 
save lives and preserve ecological health. In 
Connecticut, MWS was introduced to gather 
air pollution data to ensure public health and 
enforce breaches in regulatory compliance. ers invaluable data that enhances the user 
experience in addition to providing insights 
that can inspire better urban planning, pub-
lic transit, and infrastructure decisions by 
local governments. Companies across Asia 
and the Middle East have already proven the 
viability of superapps, but now US mobility 
and technology companies are striving to 
be the first to make superapps the norm 
domestically.
Utilizing Mobility Data
Mobility data has become a pivotal asset in 
modern transport dynamics. Real-time mon-
itoring and analytics, combined with geo-
spatial data, enables companies to harness 
spatial information to create and enhance 
products and services across the mobili-
ty spectrum. New open map data sets like 
what are provided by the collective efforts of 
Amazon, Microsoft, and Meta add to the map 
data already offered by Apple and Google; 
this additional competitive pressure will 
likely lead to further innovation across the 
space. More widespread availability of data 
and analytics has also allowed companies like Uber and Lyft to leverage mobility data 
to pinpoint underserved areas and identi-
fy burgeoning potential for new markets or 
services. This data can also help automakers 
and municipalities identify optimal locations 
for charging stations or micromobility docks, 
to effectively spread charging capacity and 
achieve optimal utilization. Richer mobility 
data can also lead to improved regulatory 
efforts. For instance, data insights can help in-
form regulations for autonomous vehicles and 
ride-sharing frameworks, and potentially be-
come the catalyst for standardizing data-shar-
ing protocols among mobility providers. As the 
investment in and availability of mobility data 
continue to grow and the sources for collect-
ing the data expand, a future where mobility 
solutions are seamless, efficient, and tailored 
to individual needs will start looking like the 
norm. 
Relying on ADAS
As the auto industry continues to push toward 
fully autonomous self-driving, advanced driver 
assistance systems (ADAS) are giving drivers 
a glimpse of what that future might look like. As drones, cameras, sensors, meteorological 
instruments, particle detectors, mobile net-
working, and high precision GPS technology 
continue to improve, expect to see the MWS 
become more ubiquitous across the US.
Mobility Superapps
Superapps are emerging as a powerful 
force, amalgamating various transportation 
services into a singular mobile platform, 
and subtly changing the mobility landscape 
for governments, businesses, and con-
sumers alike. They embody a convergence 
where ride-hailing, public transit, and even 
non-transportation services harmonize, 
offering a seamless user experience. Lead-
ing this transition are companies like Uber 
and Grab. For example, Uber’s ambition 
extends beyond ride-hailing; in the UK, its 
app integrates bikes, scooters, trains, buses, 
and even planes, aspiring to set a precedent 
in global mobility solutions. They’re not just 
about consolidating services for consumer 
convenience but also about orchestrating a 
smarter, sustainable urban mobility frame-
work. And with every transaction, Uber gath-DATA COLLECTION ENABLES SAFETY AND AUTONOMY
427© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
New vehicles are increasingly coming with 
automated technology to monitor blind spots, 
stay within lanes, parallel park, and trigger 
automatic emergency braking (AEB). The driv-
er’s experience is evolving, with ADAS reduc-
ing the manual load, creating a more relaxed 
yet controlled driving environment. Estimates 
suggest that ADAS implementation has the 
potential to prevent up to 250,000 deaths 
between 2021 and 2050, not only saving lives 
but likely also reducing insurance and health 
care costs . On the regulatory front, regulators 
are already proposing stricter requirements 
for AEB to mitigate high-speed collisions 
and better protect pedestrians and drivers. 
Looking ahead, ADAS applications will con-
tinue to expand. Advancements like adaptive 
cruise control and intersection assist can 
further mitigate risks and improve traffic 
flow. Several collaborations are taking place 
across the industry to make these systems a 
reality. Porsche and Mobileye, for example, are 
pushing the boundaries, developing systems 
capable of full collision avoidance and other 
sophisticated functionalities. Such advance-
ments portend a future where features of These real-world incidents have spurred a 
mix of public, regulatory, and commercial 
responses. In California, legislation requiring 
safety operators on autonomous trucks was 
a notable step toward ensuring safer road in-
teractions, but in San Francisco, the expan-
sion of driverless taxi services has prompted 
protests by city officials and civic groups. 
Commercial entities are also pitching in; 
Cruise officials in Austin have been training 
first responders to foster safer interactions 
with their AVs. As AVs and micromobility 
solutions continue to meld with urban mo-
bility, addressing pedestrian safety con-
cerns through a combination of legislation, 
community engagement, and technological 
advancements will be paramount.
AV Viability
Autonomous vehicles are making major 
strides in capability and level of adoption, 
but full self-driving still remains far out of 
reach. Most come standard with autono-
mous features that keep them in lanes and 
cause them to brake automatically, and 
features that allow automobiles to auton-omously change speeds, change lanes, and 
take advanced actions like parallel park are 
becoming increasingly common. Mercedes 
has begun to test Level 3 autonomous driving, 
and more major auto manufacturers are slat-
ed to begin testing their Level 3 vehicles in the 
coming years. Some AV software developers 
have been testing robotaxi services in select 
municipalities, with some going as high as 
Level 4 autonomy. Meanwhile, several auto 
manufacturers have started adding features 
and services to their vehicles to facilitate pro-
ductivity and entertainment for passengers 
in anticipation of autonomous driving freeing 
up drivers’ attention. Yet several major hurdles 
remain for Level 5 autonomy. Some friendly 
legislators have resisted pressure from stake-
holders like truckers and pedestrians, giving 
AV manufacturers some breathing room to 
begin testing and rolling out their vehicles. 
But federal legislation to address the topic 
has been stuck in Congress for six years with 
no signs of life. With challenges that include 
safety concerns, cybersecurity threats, insur-
ance liability risks, and questions regarding 
infrastructure readiness, privacy protection, these kinds are the standard and hopefully 
driving is safer, more accessible, and eco-
nomically beneficial as a result.
Pedestrian Concerns
The advent of autonomous vehicles (AVs) 
and micromobility solutions like e-scoot-
ers and e-bikes in urban landscapes has 
triggered a cascade of pedestrian concerns. 
In Austin, Texas, complaints are rife about 
dangerous encounters with AVs, one nota-
ble incident being a Cruise vehicle veering 
off-road into a small building. Similarly, in 
San Francisco, robotaxis have been report-
ed blocking traffic, obstructing emergency 
vehicles, and causing nuisances. The micro-
mobility sphere isn’t devoid of issues either; 
e-scooters and e-bikes have been associ-
ated with injuries, like in incidents report-
ed where riders navigate recklessly amid 
pedestrian traffic or lose control, leading to 
accidents. Research from the US Consum-
er Product Safety Commission shows that 
micromobility incidents increased by 21% 
year over year in 2022, as e-bikes, e-scoot-
ers, and hoverboards grew more popular. DATA COLLECTION ENABLES SAFETY AND AUTONOMY
428© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESDATA COLLECTION ENABLES SAFETY AND AUTONOMYTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
429© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.and ethical frameworks to dictate how AVs 
make decisions in trade-off situations, full 
implementation faces many major hurdles. 
That’s why Ford, for example, stopped devel-
oping full self-driving in favor of nearer-term 
goals like Level 3 and Level 4 autonomy. 
What’s clear is that whether it’s full self-driv-
ing or not, autonomy is here to stay.
Local AV Regulations
As vehicles become more sophisticated, add-
ing semi- or full-autonomous features, local 
governments must determine when and how 
to authorize their use within city limits. Many 
local governments and business communi-
ties eye autonomous vehicles as an engine 
for economic growth. Cities and states are 
exploring new ways to integrate autonomous 
vehicles into their longer-term planning. Phoe-
nix and Los Angeles, among other cities, are 
developing innovative approaches to design-
ing, building and testing autonomous vehicle 
systems. Several states and cities are consid-
ering legislation to help bring the technology 
to market. But regulations intended to spur 
development could hit a roadblock—city and miles, the initial results are encouraging. 
Yet, challenges persist. Cruise, projected 
to incur over $2 billion in losses in 2023, 
has been striving to extend service hours 
and geographic coverage to bolster revenue 
and meet the high demand. The rollout of 
robotaxis in Texas and California has also 
spurred public protests, especially follow-
ing a series of incidents relating to traffic 
congestion and safety. And despite a string 
of approvals to expand service in California, 
the state’s DMV recently moved to suspend 
Cruise’s permits following a number of new 
incidents. Concurrently, a lawsuit challeng-
ing the regulatory body overseeing robotaxi 
deployments in the state has started to gain 
traction, and federal authorities initiated a 
probe into Cruise’s safety practices during 
its operational rollout. To achieve broader 
public acceptance, autonomous vehicles will 
need to demonstrate markedly better safety 
outcomes when compared to human drivers. 
The enthusiasm from manufacturers and 
municipalities to expedite robotaxi adoption 
globally is palpable, yet public apprehen-
sions and the accident incidence rate during the testing phase will influence whether the 
pioneering companies can achieve substan-
tial testing benchmarks to draw meaningful 
comparisons with human drivers, and the 
time frame required to reach this goal.state governments control their local streets, 
but the federal government regulates sur -
rounding highways; for autonomous vehicles 
to become ubiquitous and practical, Ameri-
ca’s roads would need to be interoperable.
Robotaxi Growth
Robotaxis are undergoing significant test-
ing and deployment across numerous US 
cities, with 23 states having enacted laws 
permitting companies to do so. Moreover, 
at least eight other countries in Europe, 
Asia, and the Middle East have embraced 
the robotaxi revolution through testing and 
operations. Operating up to Level 4 auton-
omy, robotaxis primarily function within 
geofenced urban areas that are well-mapped, 
characterized by slower speed limits, and 
highly trafficked, which provides ample 
data for system refinement. Robotaxis have 
now amassed several million miles, and 
over 100,000 users wanting to experience a 
robotaxi service are still on Waymo’s waitlist 
alone. Although assertions that robotaxis are 
safer than human-driven vehicles may be 
premature pending more extensive service SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2028
Personal Everything Mobility Platforms    
While superapps were ubiquitous in Asian countries as early as the 2010s, they didn’t gain momentum in North 
America until the mid-2020s. The movement began when Elon Musk pushed for X to become the everything 
platform, but his vision did not come to fruition after the company failed due to advertising conflicts and us-
ers abandoning the platform. Instead, where everything platforms began to gain traction was in the travel and 
mobility industries. While there’s still competition among these platforms to avoid antitrust laws, one particu-
lar platform has risen to prominence: OmniMoble, which successfully aggregated many major touchpoints and 
access points for an individual’s comprehensive mobility needs. By fully integrating into users’ schedules, the 
platform removes most frictions, frustrations, and hurdles that present themselves in the tediousness of every-
day life. Now, when a user is told to go on a business trip, OmniMoble will recommend, unprompted, available 
livery, flight, and hotel options, accounting for both her personal preferences and company allowances. Once 
she’s presented with options meeting those criteria, the user can make her selections with minimal effort. On 
the day of travel, she boards her flight with ease. However, while on her flight, she realizes she didn’t pack a belt 
for her business attire. From the plane, she consults OmniMoble, and it provides available options closest to her 
hotel from her favorite designers. Before landing, the belt is delivered to the hotel. 
430© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES431© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ROBOTICS  
& DRONES  
TRENDSTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESCOBOTS BECOME COWORKERSTECH
Accelerated Adoption
Cobots serve to supplement or even replace 
workforces, especially those constrained by 
labor shortages. This evolution is already 
happening in Japan, which is in the midst 
of a significant demographic shift, as the 
working-age population begins to decline. The 
resulting extreme labor shortages are caus-
ing industries in Japan to turn to increased 
cobot usage, but the country is also able to 
undertake this endeavor because of a highly 
computer-literate workforce. With a strong 
knowledge base for mechanical and control 
systems and IT skills to manage the cobots, 
companies are supplementing more work-
places with these bots—and also improving 
productivity in the process. In one example, 
Fujita Works has successfully incorporated 
cobots in welding processes, reducing the 
time required to master welding techniques. 
In a broader geographic lens, cobots are 
expected to have a tremendous impact on 
the future of work. According to Grand View 
Research, the collaborative robot market is 
expected to grow by more than 30% by 2030, 
reaching a value of $11.04 billion. Cobot adop-tion is also being driven by major players, as 
Amazon seeks to expand its robotics oper-
ations at fulfillment centers with updated 
sorting machines, robotic arms, and mobile 
robots. This new system, Sequoia, is intend-
ed to work in collaboration with humans and 
is expected to increase delivery fulfillment 
speed by 25%. Amazon contends that this 
increase in speed will not be at the cost of 
eliminating humans from the workforce. 
Whether or not that turns out to be true, the 
inclusion of new bots in the workforce will 
likely have at least one positive outcome for 
human workers: They increase safety and 
reduce human injuries. 
General Purpose Robots
Versatile, general purpose robots are the holy 
grail of robotics, promising bots that do not 
have to be limited or pigeonholed into single 
categories but can be used for vast and di-
verse purposes without requiring extensive 
calibration between disparate tasks. Sev-
eral robots are in the works that may bring 
this kind of general purpose robot closer to 
reality. One, from startup Figure, is a versa-
432© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
A “Digit” robot working in an Amazon fulfillment center.
Source: AmazonMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
tile, bipedal humanoid robot that can per-
form a range of tasks, from manual labor to 
eldercare. Figure has raised $100 million and 
hired top talent from leading tech companies, 
including Boston Dynamics, Apple, Google, 
and Tesla. Its plan includes an unveiling of 
the robot this year, with a starting focus on 
warehouse and retail applications and poten-
tially a robotics-as-a-service (RaaS) leasing 
model. Tech startup Sanctuary AI is pursuing 
a similar model, and has created a humanoid 
robot named Phoenix that can perform a va-
riety of workplace tasks. Standing at 5’7” and 
weighing 155 pounds, Phoenix is equipped 
with advanced sensors and human-like 
hands with haptic sensors that enable it to 
carry out precise tasks. The robot is powered 
by Sanctuary’s AI control system, Carbon, 
which can be trained to learn new tasks either 
by simulation or human demonstration. But 
in order for general purpose robots to suc-
ceed, real-world and simulated training data 
is necessary to teach bots to adapt to various 
tasks. RoboCat, a self-improving AI agent for 
robotics, attempts to do just that. In as few 
as 100 demonstrations, it can operate various robot, is bridging the emotional gap for 
seniors, offering friendly interaction and 
ensuring their safety. The robot proactively 
engages in conversation, offers medication 
reminders and issues emergency alerts; 
these aren’t just features but a leap toward 
combating loneliness among the elderly. 
Robosen’s Grimlock transformer toy similar-
ly provides companionship, but for kids and 
young adults. Their toy not only transforms 
but is capable of understanding a variety 
of commands and can communicate with 
those who play with it. In what is maybe the 
most extreme example of robotic compan-
ionship, individuals known as iDollators 
are even using AI-augmented synthetic 
dolls to form sexual relationships at home. 
And with new ideas like Bopeep’s robotic 
furniture—carefully designed to overcome 
robots’ typically overbearing presence—or old 
ideas brought to life like Prosper Robotics’ 
robot butler, efforts are underway to blend 
household capabilities and companionship 
together. The fusion of AI with robotics is 
blurring the lines between the mechanical 
and the emotional, pushing the boundaries of what robots can offer in the home. As tech-
nology continues to evolve, the role of robots 
is set to expand, heralding a future where our 
domestic companions are not just helpers but 
friends who share in our daily lives.
Robots Coexisting with Creative Applications
The field of robotics continues to demonstrate 
how possibilities are endless for application. 
In Switzerland, AI-powered robots are now 
acting as security guards where their sur-
veillance capabilities and real-time response 
mechanisms are improving safety without 
the need for human intervention. South Korea 
witnessed a remarkable blend of art and 
robotics with EveR 6, a robot conductor that 
fuses music and technology, broadening the 
horizon of what robots can achieve in what 
are typically viewed as human-centric creative 
domains. In the US, robots designed to handle 
hazardous materials were able to execute a 
mission to safely dispose of chemical weap-
ons, reflecting a crucial application in high 
risk environments. In education, hundreds of 
kindergarten classes are now using a small 
robot named KeeKo, which tells stories, poses robotic arms and learn to perform different 
tasks. RoboCat’s approach accelerates robot-
ics research by reducing the need for human 
supervision, bringing us closer to versatile, 
general purpose robots.
Robots in the Home
The landscape of domestic robotics is 
transforming homes into hubs of automa-
tion, easing daily chores and offering com-
panionship. For instance, robotic vacuum 
cleaners have become household staples, 
tirelessly navigating living spaces to keep 
them dirt-free. Similarly, robotic lawn mow-
ers now keep lawns well-trimmed without 
the sweat, while robotic pool cleaners keep 
swimming areas sparkling day or night. As 
artificial intelligence has permeated these 
robotic devices, their ability to recognize 
voice commands, integrate with smart home 
ecosystems, and operate with minimal 
human intervention has made a significant 
stride for at-home robotics and automa-
tion. More recently, however, robots at home 
are becoming hubs for companionship. For 
instance, ElliQ, an AI-powered companion COBOTS BECOME COWORKERS
433© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESCOBOTS BECOME COWORKERSTECH
logic problems, and reacts with facial ex-
pressions when students master content. 
Scientists at MIT are using a teddy bear robot 
named Tega to improve the language and 
literacy skills of 5 and 6-year-olds, and have 
so far seen positive results. While these are 
just a few disparate examples among many, 
the versatility of robotic applications already 
appears endless, and the plethora of possible 
uses for the technology will likely only grow 
from here until robots become ubiquitous 
across our everyday experience.
Space Robots and Drones
Space exploration has long been an area 
that has embraced robots and drones. This 
technology is central to space exploration’s 
mission; without them, exploration of harsh 
and distant environments would be impossi-
ble. Currently, NASA’s Astrobee smart robots, 
operating aboard the International Space Sta-
tion (ISS), underscore the role of robotics in 
aiding scientific research and routine main-
tenance in space. These cube-shaped robots, 
capable of free flight within the ISS, allow 
astronauts to offload mundane tasks, freeing arms with the goal of creating an autono -
mous labor force for the moon and Mars to 
reduce space labor costs. Further extending 
the capabilities of space robots, NASA’s 
Goddard Space Flight Center is developing 
OSAM-1, a satellite repair robot aimed at pro-
longing the operational lifespan of satellites. 
This initiative heralds the onset of in-orbit 
servicing and manufacturing, which could 
revolutionize space infrastructure manage-
ment. The various projects and technologies 
in the realm of space robots and drones 
exhibit a confluence of robotics, aerospace 
engineering, and collaborative endeavors, 
driving forward the frontier of space explo -
ration and habitation enabled by advances 
across drones and robotics.them to focus on more critical, human-cen-
tric activities. While most people know about 
NASA’s Mars Rover, NASA’s Ingenuity drone 
has been testing off-earth flight, recently 
registering one of its longest flights. There 
are also several recent examples of new 
applications for space robotics and drones 
being developed for space. On the orbital 
front, ClearSpace, a Swiss space company, is 
pioneering efforts to mitigate space debris. 
With its ambitious ClearSpace-1 project, the 
company is building a claw-like spacecraft 
capable of capturing and deorbiting space 
junk, marking a significant step forward in 
cleaning up Earth’s orbital environment. At 
MIT, researchers are testing modular lu-
nar robots, equipped with flexible robotic 
arms resembling worms, showcasing how 
innovative approaches are being adopted 
to navigate and interact with extraterres-
trial terrain. Another project by ETH Zurich 
has been exploring how quadruped ANYmal 
robots have the potential to exhibit robotic 
teamwork in executing lunar missions, such 
as material harvesting for base construction. 
Similarly, GITAI is building robotic rovers and MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
434© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
ETH Zurich’s modified quadruped ANYmal robots.
Source: ETH ZURICH / TAKAHIRO MIKITECH
Robot Compiling and Training
Virtual training harnesses the power of AI, 
simulation, and digital twins to propel the 
capabilities of robots and drones to new 
heights. Nvidia, in particular, has been a lead-
er in this space. The company’s Isaac Sim and 
Isaac Gym platforms simulate 3D physics in 
video game–like environments, allowing for 
parallel training sessions across numerous 
virtual realms, thus significantly reducing 
robot and drone training time. A collaboration 
from Nvidia, UPenn, Caltech, and the Universi-
ty of Texas at Austin known as Eureka show-
cases this by making use of OpenAI’s GPT-4 to 
design and refine training goals. It then runs 
through parallel simulations in virtual envi-
ronments to help robots learn complex tasks 
virtually before transitioning to the real world. 
Toyota’s AI robot recently showcased the 
ability to master complex tasks in a matter 
of hours, again highlighting the accelerated 
learning curve that comes from virtual train-
ing. Digital twins are also being used to help 
autonomous robots and drones improve their 
path-planning by navigating through various 
environmental conditions safely and effi-displays, their breadth of applications have 
significantly expanded. The US and Chinese 
governments have shown a keen interest in 
using drone swarms across their militaries, 
leveraging them for surveillance, tactical 
engagements, and logistical support. The 
agricultural sector stands to gain too, with 
promising applications in pest control, 
monitoring, and harvesting, which are ripe 
for disruption by drone swarms. The technol-
ogy is also expected to highly impact emer-
gency response: sensor-equipped swarms 
can offer invaluable real-time information 
and assistance during natural disasters or 
search-and-rescue missions. However, the 
path to wider adoption faces challenges. 
Real-time data processing, communication, 
and decentralized control algorithms limit 
current drone swarms to applications with 
limited need for adaptability due to the cur-
rent requirement for extensive preprogram-
ming to effectively use them. The research 
community is actively tackling these issues. 
The University of Houston is exploring algo-
rithms for better swarm control, while MIT 
is developing WiSwarm, a novel algorithm facilitating the management of high loads of 
time-sensitive data. As the technology over-
comes these technical hurdles and continues 
to capitalize on emerging applications for 
the technology, drone swarms are poised to 
have a transformative impact across various 
domains.
Drone Fleets
Drone fleets are steadily gaining traction as 
companies seek to enhance operational effi-
ciency, reduce delivery times, and minimize 
human intervention. Amazon, for instance, has 
been testing prescription deliveries via drones 
in College Station, Texas, with turnaround 
times guaranteed to fall within an hour. This 
venture not only expedites delivery times 
but also caters to immediate medical needs, 
marking a leap toward on-demand health 
care services. Similarly, Uber unveiled plans to 
deliver Uber Eats orders via drone, though not 
direct to customers’ homes but to designat-
ed locations for final delivery by drivers. This 
hybrid model could significantly reduce meal 
delivery times. Wing, a subsidiary of Alphabet, 
is on a trajectory to handle tens of millions of ciently in virtual space. They can even help 
train robots to pack objects into tight spac-
es, as was shown by MIT, which developed 
a technique to use virtual environments to 
improve robots’ ability to optimize space uti-
lization. In anticipation of robots and drones 
working together in reality, Nvidia’s robot 
simulator recently gained the ability to sim-
ulate human co-workers as well, mimicking 
real-world scenarios to improve robot-hu-
man interactions. This evolution in digitally 
enabled training not only promises a future 
of highly skilled robots and drones but also 
hints at a paradigm shift in how training 
and development in the field of robotics and 
drones are approached and the potential for 
much more rapid development across the 
space in the future.
Robot and Drone Swarms  
Drone swarms, made up of groups of drones 
functioning as a collective unit, unlock ca-
pabilities far beyond the reach of individual 
drones. Despite their first commercial use-
case coming in the field of entertainment 
as a fireworks alternative for complex light ROBOT AND DRONE INFRASTRUCTURE
435© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESROBOT AND DRONE INFRASTRUCTURETECH
deliveries for millions of consumers, show-
casing the potential scale possible with drone 
delivery services. The collaboration between 
Wing and Walmart to offer 6-mile drone deliv-
eries over Dallas is a testament to drones’ po-
tential to revolutionize retail logistics. FedEx, 
too, is exploring autonomous drone cargo 
transports, hinting at a future where intercity 
cargo transport could be drone-driven. On a 
larger spectrum, Saildrone and the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
have collaborated to deploy sailboat drones to 
monitor climate change’s effects on oceans; 
this kind of use unveils a broader scope of 
drone applications beyond aerial vehicles. The 
infusion of drones in these diverse domains 
underscores a promising potential for au-
tomated, efficient, and perhaps, more envi-
ronmentally friendly operational frameworks 
that could come from the use of drone fleets. 
As regulatory landscapes evolve to accom-
modate drone operations, the horizon seems 
expansive for drone fleets, potentially altering 
the traditional contours of service delivery 
and environmental monitoring.and real-time communication capabilities, 
are poised to diminish communication lags 
and effectively oversee drone operations. 
Initiatives are also underway in New York, 
Oklahoma, and the UK to designate specific 
airspace corridors exclusively for drone oper-
ations. Notably, the UK’s Project Skyway aims 
to establish a 265 km UAV corridor by 2024, 
marking a significant stride towards BVLOS 
drone operations. Concurrently, MIT has de-
veloped an algorithm centered on real-time 
path planning, which could be assimilated 
into UTM systems to help drones dynamically 
adjust their paths, avoiding midair collisions. 
Collectively, these advancements highlight 
the evolving realm of drone traffic manage-
ment, each contributing uniquely to foster-
ing safe and proficient drone operations.Drone Traffic Management
The escalating use of drones necessitates 
advanced traffic management solutions 
to ensure safe and efficient operations. In 
the US, the Federal Aviation Administration, 
partnering with NASA and other bodies, is 
pioneering Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic 
Management (UTM) initiatives to oversee 
low-altitude drone operations. In 2023, they 
unveiled a UTM implementation plan that in-
cludes, in the short term, devising essential 
protocols and infrastructure, alongside long-
term goals like enabling real-time airspace 
status updates and achieving full operation-
al capability for routine beyond visual line 
of sight (BVLOS) drone operations. In India, 
the rise in drone activities has fueled the 
need for sophisticated UTM systems, leading 
to a goal of managing a daily drone fleet of 
10 million by 2030. Conventional aviation 
traffic management, dependent on commu-
nication between pilots and air traffic con-
trollers, is inadequately equipped to handle 
the burgeoning drone traffic. In contrast, 
UTM systems, with their digital interfaces MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
436© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Rendering of Altitude Angel’s ARROW technology 
enabling the UK’s Project Skyway.
Source: Altitude AngelSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
Drone Harvests    
Over the years, drones aided precision agriculture by planting seeds, assessing crop health, and using targeted 
pesticides. These integrated units have worked remarkably well to boost crop yields. But now, drones are even 
able to manipulate the weather. During the early 2020s, researchers discovered that drones could target specif-
ic clouds and use lasers to trigger rainfall by forcing water droplets to pool in the air. By the turn of the decade, 
this practice gained awareness, and precision ag startups began experimenting with it. Through such systems, 
farmers gain even more control of the crop harvesting process by manipulating the weather with drones after 
conducting health analyses on crops. They also benefit by being able to supplement irrigation systems and re-
duce associated costs. But, not surprisingly, much controversy has surrounded this new practice, as regulators 
are concerned with the possible larger implications this process has on the environment. While these concerns 
persist, there’s currently no effective way to limit the activity, and regulators are working diligently with preci-
sion ag startups and farmers to better monitor its use.
437© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
Last-Mile Delivery
Delivery robots and drones are significantly 
altering the logistics paradigm for last-mile 
delivery. Companies like Uber Eats have forged 
partnerships with Serve Robotics to begin 
bringing autonomous food delivery into the 
mainstream, though not without hurdles. Re-
cent incidents of vandalism against delivery 
robots highlight the operational challenges 
and financial implications faced by ventures 
diving into this arena. However, the convic-
tions of several people for incidents caused 
to delivery robots in LA, along with Serve’s 
claimed 99.9% delivery success rate, give rea-
son for hope. On the aerial frontier, drone de-
livery enterprises Zipline and Wing have built 
sophisticated delivery systems indicating an 
operational readiness to tackle the US market. 
The trajectory of commercial drone deliveries 
is notable. As of the first half of 2023, approx-
imately 500,000 commercial deliveries have 
already been made, and progress doesn’t 
appear to be slowing down. Walmart, for ex-
ample, has established drone-delivery hubs 
across seven US states, partnering with com-
panies like DroneUp, Flytrex, Zipline, and Wing Expanded Payload Capacity 
Increasing payload capacities and extending 
flight distances are pivotal in accelerat-
ing the adoption of drones across sectors. 
In last-mile delivery, Alphabet’s Wing has 
increased its drone’s capacity to carry up 
to 7 pounds, a significant upgrade from its 
flagship drone’s original 2.5-pound capacity. 
In the heavy-lift area of drone development, 
Elroy Air has showcased plane-like drones 
capable of transporting up to 700 pounds of 
cargo across 300 miles. This development 
could redefine how goods are transported, 
especially in remote or disaster-stricken ar-
eas where conventional delivery systems are 
unviable. In China, Northwestern Polytech-
nical University has built bionic drones that 
can fly continuously for over three hours. 
And while their exact range of expansion 
capabilities is still an open question, hydro-
gen fuel storage systems being developed 
for drones through a collaboration between 
Honeywell and the US Department of Energy 
hold the potential to dramatically increase 
capacity. Regulatory frameworks are also 
evolving to accommodate these advance-ments. The FAA recently granted licenses for 
unmanned commercial drones to operate 
beyond a pilot’s sight, opening the door for 
more commercial attempts to push the limits 
of drones. Attempts include Valmont’s joint 
trial with T-Mobile, where Valmont’s drone set 
a record for a BVLOS operation, covering 237 
miles in a single flight. In the military domain, 
Iran recently unveiled a long-range drone, with 
the ability to cover distances of 1,240 miles 
and up to 24 hours of operation—double the 
distance of the Mohajer-6 drone, which the US 
has accused Iran of supplying to Russia in its 
war with Ukraine. While Iran claims its new 
drone is the longest range drone in the world, 
that’s unlikely to be the case: Drones publicly 
known to be in operation by the US, including 
Ultra LEAP and and Global Hawk, have shown 
an ability to fly for over two days straight, and 
experiments conducted by the US Army using 
Airbus’ Zephyr 8 drone have been able to stay 
in flight for up to 62 days straight using solar 
energy to sustain operation. These develop-
ments collectively showcase the vast poten-
tial for drone technology, where increased 
payload capacity and longer flight durations to make drone delivery a key component of 
its last-mile delivery strategy. The regulatory 
landscape is also evolving to make drone de-
livery a more tangible reality. The FAA’s BVLOS 
initiative allows for drone delivery operations 
under specific conditions at seven test sites. 
As these regulatory frameworks coalesce, 
the ensuing cost advantages and sustain-
ability benefits are making drone delivery an 
attractive proposition for a variety of indus-
tries. Food delivery companies like Uber Eats, 
DoorDash, Domino’s, Starbucks, Taco Bell, 
Papa Johns, Wendy’s, and KFC have all begun 
exploring the technology; retailers like CVS, 
Amazon, Walgreens, GNC, Walmart, T-Mobile, 
and Tesco have begun testing or forming 
partnerships in the space. Even parcel deliv-
ery companies like UPS have started drone 
delivery trials. The ongoing exploration by 
mainstream retailers, combined with emerg-
ing regulatory standards, is not only pushing 
the envelope for what’s possible in last-mile 
delivery but setting the stage for an exciting 
era where drones and robots could become 
a regular facet of the logistics and delivery 
industry.MOVING PEOPLE, PETS AND OBJECTS
438© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
can push the boundaries of what’s possible in 
both existing as well as unexplored domains.
Flying T axis (eVTOLs)
The realm of urban air mobility is buzzing 
with the promise of electric vertical takeoff 
and landing (eVTOL) aircrafts, often referred 
to as “flying taxis” or “air taxis.” Like heli-
copters, these vehicles are capable of taking 
off and landing vertically, but unlike their 
predecessors, they leverage electric power, 
significantly reducing their environmental 
footprint. Companies and governments are 
undertaking several initiatives throughout 
the US and the globe to make this new form 
of transportation a reality. New York, Califor-
nia, and Utah have all begun projects in this 
space. In partnership with Delta Air Lines, Joby 
Aviation is building vertiports to support a 
future where passengers transfer from flying 
taxis to their flights at New York’s JFK airport 
and Los Angeles’ LAX airport. Utah released a 
report outlining plans for the rollout of verti-
ports across the state, leveraging underuti-
lized parking lots as potential vertiport sites. 
Meanwhile, globally, Archer Aviation recently Commercially, Yara Birkeland is a pioneering 
project developed in Norway by Yara Interna-
tional and Kongsberg Gruppen, pushing the 
boundaries in autonomous shipping. Their 
vessel is designed to operate initially with 
a reduced crew, gradually transitioning to 
fully autonomous operations using sensors, 
radar, and cameras, paired with artificial 
intelligence. On the scientific front, innova-
tive projects like the University of Bremen’s 
TRIPLE (Technologies for Rapid Ice Penetra-
tion and subglacial Lake Exploration) are 
using AUVs to probe beneath Antarctica’s ice 
shelves and potentially explore even alien 
marine ecosystems on icy moons like Jupi-
ter’s Europa and Saturn’s Enceladus. Mili-
taries are also exploring these technologies. 
The US Marine Corps, for instance, is testing 
a drone boat designed to transport loitering 
munitions for precision strikes and act as 
a reconnaissance platform for surveillance 
and intelligence. Recently, ocean-faring 
drones have even been utilized by Ukraine 
to target military ships and Russian naval 
bases throughout their military conflict. 
While the upfront costs associated with the development and procurement of ocean-far-
ing drones can be substantial, their long-term 
benefits are compelling. Reduced human risk, 
operational cost savings, and the ability to 
conduct missions in challenging or previously 
inaccessible environments underscore the 
transformative potential of these autonomous 
maritime assets. As the technology matures 
and regulatory frameworks adapt, the hori-
zons of what’s achievable on and beneath the 
world’s oceans are set to expand significantly, 
heralding a new era of maritime exploration, 
commerce, and security.announced plans to introduce eVTOLs to 
the UAE by 2025, and Paris is gearing up to 
introduce the world’s first electric air taxi 
network for the 2024 Olympics in partner-
ship with Groupe ADP. Meanwhile, China’s 
Ehang gained approval to start operating its 
EH216-S autonomous air taxi, capable of car-
rying two passengers or 600 pounds of cargo 
over a flight range of 18 miles at speeds up 
to 80 mph. As the regulatory frameworks 
evolve and public acceptance for the tech-
nology grows, the skies of urban landscapes 
may soon be dotted with eVTOLs, heralding 
a new era of urban air mobility. The collab-
orative efforts among aviation companies, 
regulatory bodies, and city administrations 
are fueling the momentum toward making 
air taxis a reality, promising a blend of inno-
vation, convenience, and sustainability in 
urban transportation.
Ocean-Faring Drones 
Ocean-faring drones, comprised of both 
unmanned surface vessels (USVs) or autono-
mous underwater vehicles (AUVs) are chang-
ing the nature of exploits across the seas. MOVING PEOPLE, PETS AND OBJECTS
439© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
Natural Exoskeleton Movement
For individuals hampered by limited mobility 
or injuries, exoskeletons can help. This past 
year, the FDA cleared Wandercraft’s Atalante 
exoskeleton for stroke rehabilitation in the 
US. The self-balancing and battery-powered 
device assists in gait training and helps 
individuals regain their walking abilities. 
Ekso Bionics, which has been optimizing 
exoskeleton bionic devices since 2005, used 
its technology to assist a paralyzed commu-
nity college graduate from Virginia to walk 
across the stage at his graduation ceremony. 
While exoskeletons have traditionally been 
large and bulky, researchers at the Swiss 
Federal Institute of Technology are turning to 
fiber-like pumps that employ high-pressure 
fluidic circuits that can be woven into fibers 
and maybe even into future clothing. This 
form factor would allow for less cumbersome 
textile-based exoskeletons that can enable 
muscular support, thermoregulation, and 
haptic feedback. In an alternative fashion, re-
searchers at Lausanne University used brain 
implants to assist a paralyzed patient with 
walking. The implants wirelessly transmitted ments, and recommended actions. While 
these technologies can be used to ease the 
burden of repetitive tasks associated with 
the logistics, construction, and health care 
industries, some worry that corporations 
might use the devices to exploit workers 
with increased output and working hours. 
Besides job-related tasks, researchers from 
Chung-Ang University in Seoul, South Korea, 
have developed a wearable exoskeleton that 
enables runners to run 0.97 seconds faster 
by assisting with acceleration and hip exten-
sion through electrical motors. 
Personal Mobility
Robotics has the opportunity to be an in-
credible democratizer, capable of support-
ing, supplementing, and enabling mobility 
for individuals with mobility impairments. 
Control Bionics is an Australian compa-
ny that specializes in advanced assistive 
technology. It recently developed a wheel-
chair module called DROVE, which uses AI 
to enhance mobility for individuals who 
cannot use traditional steering systems, 
such as joysticks, due to conditions that affect hand function. DROVE is equipped with 
a wheelchair-mounted digital camera system, 
the NeuroNode interface, and home sensors 
for precise navigation, enabling users to move 
independently within their homes. Labra-
dor Systems, a California-based technology 
company, recently launched a new product 
named Labrador Retriever. It’s an autonomous 
personal robot that can assist individuals 
with mobility impairments in carrying items 
around their homes. Users can place items 
on the robot, and instruct it to move to spe-
cific locations through a touchscreen or voice 
commands. They can also program it to navi-
gate between predefined “bus stops” located 
within the house. Researchers from Stanford’s 
Biomechatronics Laboratory are taking more 
of an assistive approach, having developed 
an exoskeleton that provides personalized 
assistance to improve limited mobility. The 
exoskeleton is not designed to walk for the 
user. Instead, it helps to decrease resistance 
and friction, thereby enhancing walking speed 
and energy efficiency. In testing, users report-
ed a 9% increase in walking speed with a 17% 
decrease in energy used. Ultimately, these the patient’s thoughts to his legs and feet 
through a second implant on his spine, and 
movements were assisted with an exoskele-
ton. This, in conjunction with smaller exo-
skeletal form factors, provides innovative 
solutions for improving conditions for those 
with limited mobility.  
Superhuman Abilities 
Exoskeletons can not only enhance worker 
performance in industrial settings but also 
impact athletic performance. Researchers at 
Virginia Tech’s Department of Industrial and 
Systems Engineering are looking into the 
effectiveness of exoskeletons in real-world 
construction applications, postulating that 
they have the potential to significantly re-
duce the risk of back injuries and shoulder 
problems. The robotic exoskeleton startup 
German Bionic has showcased two products: 
the Apogee and the Smart SafetyVest. The 
Apogee assists workers by offsetting up to 
66 pounds of load on the user’s lower back 
while the Smart SafetyVest can monitor the 
wearer’s movements and body position-
ing, providing ergonomic insights, assess-BLURRING THE HUMAN-MACHINE LINE
440© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESBLURRING THE HUMAN-MACHINE LINETECH
types of applications empower users by giv-
ing them back their independence, comfort, 
and control.
Humanoid Robots
Various companies and startups have made 
significant advancements in developing 
robots that mimic the abilities and activi-
ties of humans. While initially rudimentary 
in execution, these humanoid robots are 
becoming more capable and graceful by 
virtue of advancements in computer vision, 
machine learning, and more power-dense 
batteries. In most instances, these robots 
are intended to address the challenges of 
labor shortages and high turnover in many 
different industries. Tesla is recognized for 
its early renderings of humanoid robots and 
recently updated its associated program, Op-
timus, showing improved abilities in walking, 
picking up, and identifying objects. Intel has 
invested significantly in Figure, an AI robot-
ics company whose general purpose Figure 
01 robot is being developed to accomplish 
tasks including walking up and down stairs, 
opening doors, and picking up small ob-ply too much force, making them unsuitable 
for human replacement. But increasingly, 
soft robotics have been used for their ability 
to gently grab and pick up objects, making 
them ideal for use in warehousing and distri-
bution. Advances in both materials and com-
puter vision are enhancing the efficacy of 
soft robotics. Researchers at MIT’s Computer 
Science and Artificial Intelligence Labora-
tory have developed a robotic system called 
Series Elastic End Effectors, which uses soft 
bubble grippers and embedded mapping 
cameras to grasp tools and apply the appro-
priate amount of force for various tasks. The 
system is adept enough to write with a pen 
or wipe up liquid spills. Researchers from the 
University of California, San Diego developed 
a 3D printing method that produces soft 
robotic grippers that only require a bottle 
of high-pressure gas as their power source, 
rather than actual robotics, and is a prime 
candidate for handling delicate materials 
such as fruits and vegetables. Soft robotics 
are now also able to account for weight, in 
addition to delicate touch. Researchers at 
the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and jects. Amazon has also entered this domain, 
having tested Agility Robitic’s Digit robot to 
work in its warehouses; it is capable of high 
reach, carrying heavier loads, and interacting 
with humans. Besides these more obvi-
ous applications, Shanghai-based Fourier 
Intelligence is developing its GR-1 humanoid 
robot to address the increase in demand for 
health care services precipitated by an aging 
population. The robot is envisioned as a 
caregiver, therapy assistant, and companion 
for the elderly. More contrastingly, scientists 
at Arizona State University have developed 
the Advanced Newton Dynamic Instrument 
robot to study the impact of extreme heat on 
humans, much like a crash-test dummy is 
used to measure the impact of car crashes. 
Whether using humanoid robots in labor 
situations or for testing extreme conditions, 
there are both the clear benefits for protect-
ing humans and the perceived risk of reduc-
ing available menial jobs.
Soft Robotics/Getting a Grip
Traditionally, robots have not been nimble 
enough to handle delicate objects: They ap-MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
441© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Figure’s humanoid robots.
Source: FigureBLURRING THE HUMAN-MACHINE LINETECH
Technology developed a soft robotic gripper 
consisting of a woven structure capable of 
lifting objects weighing more than 100 kilo-
grams. As soft robotics become more dexter-
ous, they will also become stronger. 
Robot “Eyes”
As with many advanced technological sys-
tems, a constellation of disparate technol-
ogies is required to enable the effective 
and efficient use of the technology. When it 
comes to robotics, an advanced constellation 
of tech is required to help the robots “see.” 
While robots are not literally able to see their 
surroundings, vision, audio, and touch sensor 
systems, including lidar, radar, 2D and 3D 
cameras, accelerometers, gyroscopes, bump 
sensors, force sensors, and temperature 
sensors, are needed to help robots success-
fully navigate their surroundings. This phe-
nomenon is also known as sensor fusion. In 
addition to sensor fusion, other approaches 
are impacting the way robots sense the world 
around them. Researchers from the Univer-
sity of Edinburgh have developed a robot navigation system that takes inspiration 
from ants and helps robots navigate chal-
lenging terrains. They created an algorithm 
that mimics the brain processes ants use 
during navigation; when it’s implemented 
on hardware that simulates brain compu-
tations, the algorithm has outperformed 
state-of-the-art computer vision systems 
in navigation tasks. The robotics company 
CynLr (Cybernetics Laboratory) uses visual 
cognition and tactile feedback and action to 
empower bots to “see.” CynLr created a visu-
al object intelligence platform that functions 
with robotic arms to achieve universal object 
manipulation, which enables the bot to pick 
up unrecognized objects without needing 
to recalibrate hardware. Ultimately, these 
technologies have numerous potential ap-
plications for systems requiring navigation, 
including autonomous cars. 
 
442© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
CynLr’s CLX1.
Source: CynLrMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
The Evolution of Disaster Response Robotics    
When imagining how robotics would impact the world of disaster response, one might have envisioned giant, 
bulky, transformer-like robots that could be sent to a disaster site and push around debris in their path with 
brute force. However, this approach could actually make rescue efforts more complicated. Robotics company 
TechNex Robotics has been fine-tuning its MorphGuard robotics line, which consists of a swarm of tiny, shape-
shifting soft-robots  measuring 3” x 3” and each weighing around 2 pounds, which employ fluid movements to 
help those in distress. Taking cues from nature, researchers determined that a swarm or collection of smaller 
bots could actually be greater than the sum of its parts. While not as comparably strong as their natural coun-
terpart of the ant, these small units can still lift six times their weight, and researchers are diligently working to 
increase this individual capacity over time. While individually, this may not seem like much, true power comes 
from the collective unit. When 50 or 100 bots are used in concert, they can deliver meaningful results. But before 
they are able to lift or transport an individual to safety, they must first locate the victim. By employing fluid and 
shape-shifting movements, the bots can navigate various terrains and burst through pockets of debris. Small-
er, modular bots have proven immeasurably more effective for disaster response than single-unit, bulky robots. 
From these learnings, researchers are discovering additional applications for this divergent approach. 
443© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTECH
Quadrupedal Robots 
Companies such as Boston Dynamics and 
Unitree have popularized quadrupedal robots 
that can be used for a variety of purposes, 
including security, monitoring, inspection, 
and data collection. As this type of robot gets 
more popular, it becomes more agile and 
used for new applications. Researchers at 
Carnegie Mellon University’s Robotics Insti-
tute have used a reaction wheel actuator sys-
tem to enable quadruped robots to walk on a 
narrow balance beam, making the bot more 
versatile and nimble. DEEP Robotics aims 
to democratize ownership of quadrupedal 
robots through its Lite3 series, with its most 
affordable model targeted toward technolo-
gy enthusiasts and more advanced versions 
catering to research purposes and opportuni-
ties. The Lite3 bot also boasts improvements 
with the ability to perform horizontal jumps, 
high jumps, and front flips. Researchers at 
ETH Zurich have their sights on sending these 
bots to the moon, having tested their ANYmal 
robots in simulated lunar activities. Boston 
Dynamics and Unitree have incorporated 
GPT-based technologies in their quadrupedal of this activity has not all been auspicious. 
Stian Rice and James Tyner at Kent State 
University published a scathing critique of 
the practice in the journal Human Geography 
called “Along came a spider … and capitalism 
killed it.” In it, they bemoan the act of con-
verting death into “useful, productive labor,” 
going so far as to say that the acts “portend 
a deepening of necrocapitalism and the 
violence of science.” While necrobiotics may 
lead to the creation of low-cost, eco-friendly 
substitutes for existing robotic systems, 
Rice and Tyner raise important ethical con-
cerns as we continue to navigate technologi-
cal innovation.
Using Live Organisms (Ethically) 
Researchers have built applications that 
use organic and biological compounds 
and now even specimens themselves for 
robotic applications. Robotic engineers are 
increasingly incorporating living tissues 
into traditional robotics in order to achieve 
complex behaviors that would be limited by 
artificial materials. Kit Parker of Harvard’s 
Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired En-gineering, John Dabiri of Caltech, and Janna 
Nawroth of the Helmholtz Pioneer Campus 
have collaborated to create a “medusoid,” a 
creature that uses rat muscle tissue attached 
to a silicone polymer to produce an undulat-
ing jellyfish-like robot. Besides using animal 
tissue in the construction of robots, some re-
searchers are using living organisms in their 
robot applications. Dr. Josephine Galipon and 
her team at Japan’s Tohoku University have 
developed a robotic system that uses wood 
lice and chitons to serve as the effectors or 
hands of robotic arms. While both examples 
differ at their foundation in their use of organ-
ic matter, they both call into question ethical 
concerns that arise from this type of techno-
logical experimentation. Regardless, they are 
valuable explorations of how organic material 
has the potential to improve robotics in ways 
unachievable through artificial materials.  
Insect-Like and Animal-Like Designs
As robots become more capable and sophis-
ticated, engineers are turning to living organ-
isms for inspiration for overcoming even more 
complex challenges. The US Navy is using robots, boasting more realistic movements 
and the perception to understand and in-
teract with users. While Boston Dynamics 
uses this function to transform its bots into 
talking tour guides, such signals can begin 
to fuel our terminator-driven AI doomsday 
scenarios. 
Necrobotics
In 2022, Rice University researchers trans-
formed a deceased spider into a robot, giving 
rise to a new field called necrobotics. In this 
process, they manipulated the legs of the 
spider carcass with a puff of air from a sy-
ringe, exploiting the spider’s natural hydrau-
lic system for opening and closing its legs. 
Over the course of the experiment, the spider 
carcass lifted over 130% of its body weight in 
more than 1,000 open-close cycles before the 
joints degraded beyond usability. The results 
inspired other research teams to further 
explore the use of insects in robotics. Since 
the experiment, the Rice University research-
ers have been recognized for ushering in 
the era of “necrobotic” design, having been 
awarded a 2023 Ig Nobel Prize. But reception TAKING CUES FROM NATURE
444© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESTAKING CUES FROM NATURETECH
Gecko Robotics’ wall climbing and AI-powered 
bots for building digital models of its vessels 
to reduce maintenance time and keep vessels 
out of drydock. ETH Zurich has taken inspi-
ration from geckos but also spiders for its 
Magnecko, which employs electro-permanent 
magnet modules on its feet to walk on walls 
and ceilings, supporting 2.5 times its weight. 
Caterpillars are the muse for researchers 
at North Carolina State University, whose 
robots mimic the movement of the specimen 
through a system of silver nanowires that use 
heat to control their movement. Jellyfish have 
inspired researchers at the Indian Institute of 
Technology, while researchers at the Univer-
sity of Notre Dame have studied the forms of 
sea turtles, mimicking the organism’s propul-
sion with front flippers for forward movement 
and smaller hind flippers for changing direc-
tion. And it’s not just real animals: Research-
ers from Tampere University in Finland have 
taken inspiration from mythical folklore with 
its fairy-like robots made of stimuli-respon-
sive polymers capable of flight, which could 
be used to pollinate crops. MIT researchers 
have developed a platform called SoftZoo that dality in another unique way, researchers at 
Northwestern University have created a soft 
quadruped robot that could be used in haz-
ardous situations: it can sense damage and 
autonomously repair itself before resuming 
movement. The robot, which is shaped like 
the letter X and powered by compressed air, 
has a layer of self-healing sensors on its 
top surface. The sensors are made of trans-
parent rubbery material, and if one is cut, it 
can chemically react to fuse back together. 
Researchers at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara have developed a vine-like 
robot that can detect and move toward heat 
sources. The robot is also capable of mov-
ing around simple obstacles and bending 
backward to ward off heat and could be 
used for search-and-rescue and firefighting 
missions. is intended for studying soft robots, making 
use of 3D models of various animals, such 
as panda bears, fish, sharks, and caterpil-
lars, to ultimately determine the best config -
uration for a soft robot’s shape. By using na-
ture as a muse, engineers are creating more 
capable and adaptable artificial creatures. 
Fluid Movement
Fluid movement enables robots to work in 
diverse environments, which holds prom-
ise in fields like medicine and machinery 
repair. Researchers at the Soft Machines 
Lab at Carnegie Mellon University along 
with scientists from Sun Yat-sen University 
and Zhejiang University in China are mak-
ing breakthroughs in shapeshifting robots 
that are capable of moving from solid and 
liquid states through the control of mag-
netic fields. This phase change allows the 
robots to accomplish feats such as jumping, 
climbing, and even escaping from a cage. 
Researchers envision these robots could 
be used for tasks including targeted drug 
delivery, circuit assembly, or the creation of 
universal screws. To capitalize on this mo-MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
445© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Miniature metal shapeshifting robot liquefies itself 
and reforms to escape a cage.
Source: Carnegie Mellon UniversityTAKING CUES FROM NATURETECH
Moving Across Modalities
Robotics are no longer limited to a single 
modality or simple movements. They are 
becoming more complex in their operation 
and maneuverability, capable of driving, 
jumping, crawling, and even mimicking ori-
gami. Caltech is working on a versatile robot 
called the Multi-Modal Mobility Morphobot 
that can switch between various modes, 
including four-wheeled movement, crouching, 
climbing steep slopes, standing upright with 
propellers, and turning into a flying quad-
copter. Such characteristics make it a prime 
candidate to assist in search-and-rescue 
missions, as it is able to cover very diverse 
terrains. Researchers at MIT have created tiny 
soft-bodied robots that can be controlled by 
a simple magnetic field, enabling them to 
walk, crawl, and swim and making them ideal 
for tasks in confined spaces and suitable for 
transporting delicate cargo. Researchers at 
the University of Washington have created 
small robotic devices known as microfliers. 
These devices can change how they descend 
by folding themselves, using an origami technique called Miura-ori. OrigaMechs, 
developed by researchers at the University of 
California, Los Angeles add data processing 
capacity to the concept of origami robots. 
The researchers have embedded flexible 
and electrically conductive materials into a 
precut, thin polyester film sheet, resulting in 
fully flexible robots that can perform various 
complex tasks without reliance on semicon-
ductors. As robots begin to function in mul-
tiple modalities, they become better suited 
for extreme environments and are imbued 
with new abilities for sensing, deciding, and 
responding. 
446© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
University of Washington’s microflier. 
Source: Mark Stone/University of WashingtonMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2045
Self-Regulating and Repairable Robots    
QuantumSync Robotics has emerged as a trailblazer in the field, redefining the traditional boundaries in both business and 
manufacturing landscapes. It’s enabled a world where robots not only perform tasks efficiently but also possess the capability 
to diagnose and fix issues autonomously, leading to a new era of self-healing machines. By applying the Robotics-as-a-Service 
(RaaS) business model, QuantumSync can offer customers a full suite of robotics applications from the ground up, or supple-
mental robotics that just perform the diagnostic and repair functions for a preexisting robotics system.  
Robots equipped with QuantumSync’s central nervous system, known as AdaptiveMind, become highly self-aware of themselves 
and the robots integrated into their ecosystem. As a robot carries out its designated tasks, such as a manufacturing component 
or warehousing task, sensors and advanced diagnostics constantly evaluate its condition. When a robot detects a deviation from 
optimal functioning or predicts an impending failure, it notifies the network of a self-repair protocol. The system calculates the 
severity of the maintenance or repair and assigns a nearby robot with the task of resolving the issue, whether this be a simple 
calibration or something more involved such as printing and extruding replacement parts. While this will affect overall perfor-
mance in the moment, such an approach reaps meaningful returns in the long run. Capable operations will be able to continue in 
real time while addressing pressing issues with urgency and prioritization. By applying new business models with novel robotics, 
QuantumSync Robotics continues to revolutionize a more fully automated manufacturing future. 
447© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
448© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES TECH449© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NICK BARTLETT  
Director 
Nick Bartlett is a Director at the Future Today Institute and leads our 
Insurance practice area.
Before FTI, he held positions in corporate strategy and insights 
generation roles, serving as a partner to senior leadership at multiple 
Fortune 100 financial services companies. Throughout his career, he 
has specialized in framework design, corporate innovation, strategic management, and insurance.
 Nick has an extensive background in developing strategic insights across a variety of industries (e.g., 
manufacturing, transportation, construction, energy) and subject matter areas (e.g., small business, 
mobility, robotics, platforms & ecosystems), in addition to the shifting nature of business and consumer 
preferences. He has deep experience developing and implementing trend modeling and signal iden-
tification for large organizations. Nick has also led the design and establishment of internal foresight 
and scenario development capabilities across multiple institutions.
 He is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. Nick holds an 
MBA and a Bachelor of Arts in Public Relations from Quinnipiac University.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSMOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES TECH
Contributor  
 MATT HERMAN
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYSELECTED  
SOURCES
450© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES451© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Al-Ezaly, Esraa, et al. “An Inno-
vative Traffic Light Recognition 
Method Using Vehicular Ad-Hoc 
Networks.” Scientific Reports, 
vol. 13, no. 1, March 2023, p. 4009. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
023-31107-8.
“Amazon Announces 8 Inno-
vations to Better Deliver for 
Customers, Support Employees, 
and Give Back to Communities 
around the World.” US About 
Amazon, October 18, 2023. www.
aboutamazon.com/news/opera-
tions/amazon-delivering-the-fu-
ture-2023-announcements.
Ball, Philip. “Synthetic Morphol-
ogy Lets Scientists Create New 
Life-Forms.” Scientific American. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/scientifi-
camerican0523-53. 
“California Climate & Energy 
Policy Update: Summer 2023.” 
www.nrdc.org/bio/merri-
an-borgeson/ca-climate-ener-
gy-policy-update-summer-2023. California, University of, and Los 
Angeles. “Origami Robotics: Sci-
entists Push the Boundaries of 
Autonomous Capabilities.” Sci-
TechDaily, May 6, 2023. https://
scitechdaily.com/origami-robot-
ics-scientists-push-the-bound-
aries-of-autonomous-capabili-
ties/.
“Climate Change Mitigation: 
Reducing Emissions.” Octo-
ber 25, 2023. www.eea.europa.
eu/en/topics/in-depth/cli-
mate-change-mitigation-reduc-
ing-emissions.
“Computers That Power 
Self-Driving Cars Could Be a 
Huge Driver of Global Carbon 
Emissions.” MIT News, Janu-
ary 13, 2023. https://news.mit.
edu/2023/autonomous-vehi-
cles-carbon-emissions-0113.
Daleo, Jack. “DOD Officials Ap-
prove East Coast UAS and AAM 
Test Corridor.” Flying Magazine, 
June 2, 2023. www.flyingmag.
com/dod-officials-approve-east-
coast-uas-and-aam-test-corri-
dor/.Daleo, Jack. “Honeywell, DOE 
Developing Hydrogen Fuel 
Storage for Long-Range Drones.” 
Flying Magazine, Septem-
ber 18, 2023. www.flyingmag.
com/honeywell-doe-devel-
oping-hydrogen-fuel-stor-
age-for-long-range-drones/.
Doll, Scooter. “Archer Aviation 
Signs Deal to Launch Its eVTOL 
Air Taxi Service across the Unit-
ed Arab Emirates.” Electrek, Oc-
tober 16, 2023. https://electrek.
co/2023/10/16/archer-aviation-
to-launch-evtol-air-taxi-service-
across-united-arab-emirates/.
Doll, Scooter. “Freewire CEO 
Commends Ford and Tesla, 
Vows to Add NACS Connec-
tors to Its Chargers.” Electrek, 
May 30, 2023. https://electrek.
co/2023/05/30/freewire-ford-
and-tesla-vows-to-add-nacs-
connectors-chargers-ev/.
“Drone Monitoring Tackles Grow-
ing Algae Threat to California’s 
Famous Lake Tahoe.” ESRI. www.
esri.com/about/newsroom/
blog/tahoe-algae-drone-moni-
toring/. “Electreon to Equip First 
French Motorway with Wireless 
Charging.” Electrive.com. www.
electrive.com/2023/07/14/elec-
treon-to-equip-first-french-mo-
torway-with-wireless-charging/. 
“Fleet of Sailboat Drones Could 
Monitor Climate Change’s 
Effect on Oceans.” Science.org, 
March 8, 2018. www.science.org/
content/article/fleet-sailboat-
drones-could-monitor-climate-
change-s-effect-oceans. 
“Flying Shipping Containers: 
The Droneliner Revolution.” IO, 
October 4, 2023. https://innova-
tionorigins.com/en/flying-ship-
ping-containers-the-dronelin-
er-revolution/.
“General Motors Is Transforming 
How It Architects Its Vehicles.” 
MotorTrend, October 13, 2023. 
www.motortrend.com/features/
general-motors-itransform-
ing-future-vehicles-scott-mill-
er-interview/.
“German Electric Car Home-
Charging Grants Sell out in 1 Day. 
DW, September 27, 2023.  www.dw.com/en/german-elec-
tric-car-home-charging-grants-
sell-out-in-1-day/a-66942489. 
Geyer, Mike. “Mercedes-Benz 
Prepares Its Digital Production 
System for Next-Gen Platform 
With Nvidia Omniverse, MB.OS 
and Generative AI.” Nvidia Blog, 
September 20, 2023. https://
blogs.nvidia.com/blog/mer-
cedes-benz-ev-nvidia-om-
niverse-generative-ai/.
Goldberg, Jillian. “The Soft-
ware-Defined Vehicle on Display: 
CES 2023 Highlights.” https://
blog.guardknox.com/the-soft-
ware-defined-vehicle-on-dis-
play-ces-2023-highlights. 
“Google Lost Map Traffic With 
Apple Maps Switch on iPhones, 
Executive Says.” Yahoo Finance, 
September 20, 2023. https://
finance.yahoo.com/news/
google-lost-map-traffic-ap-
ple-001602673.html.
“Integrated Mobility—Surely 
There’s a Super-App for That?” 
Ride: The Urban Mobility Pod-cast. www.ridemobilitypodcast.
com/blog/integrated-mo-
bility-surely-theres-a-su-
per-app-for-that. 
“Iran Parades New ‘Lon-
gest-Range’ Drone on Iraq 
War Anniversary, State Media 
Report.” Reuters, September 22, 
2023. www.reuters.com/world/
middle-east/iran-parades-
new-longest-range-drone-iraq-
war-anniversary-state-me-
dia-2023-09-22/.
“It’ll Cost Us $18K to Power 
a House With Our Ford F-150 
Lightning.” MotorTrend, January 
27, 2023. www.motortrend.com/
reviews/2022-ford-f-150-light-
ning-yearlong-review-update-1-
sunrun-backup-power/.
Joshi, Tanvi. “Furniture Meets 
Robotics in This Future Vision 
Where Your Helpers Are Cute, 
Multifunctional Designs.” 
Yanko Design July 8, 2023. www.
yankodesign.com/2023/07/08/
furniture-meets-robotics-in-
this-future-vision-where-your-
helpers-are-cute-multifunction-
al-designs/.SELECTED SOURCESTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES452© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Juliussen, Egil. “Robotaxis: What 
Is Going On?” EE Times Europe, 
August 28, 2023. www.eetimes.
eu/robotaxis-what-is-going-on/.
Lambert, Fred. “Tesla Expands 
Magic Dock Superchargers 
for Non-Tesla Electric Cars in 
the US.” Electrek, September 
26, 2023. https://electrek.
co/2023/09/26/tesla-ex-
pands-superchargers-non-tes-
la-electric-cars-us/.
Lambert, Fred. “Tesla Finally 
Confirms Supercharger V4 
Has 350 kW Output.” Elec-
trek, July 26, 2023, https://
electrek.co/2023/07/26/
tesla-confirms-supercharg-
er-v4-350-kw-output/.
Leal, Samara Soares, and Paulo 
Eduardo M. de Almeida. “Traf-
fic Light Optimization Using 
Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic 
Algorithm (NSGA2).” Scientific 
Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, Septem-
ber 2023, p. 15550. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-023-38884-2.Leffer, Lauren. “‘Robo-Taxi 
Takeover’ Hits Speed Bumps.” 
Scientific American, September 
8, 2023. www.scientificamerican.
com/article/robo-taxi-takeover-
hits-speed-bumps/. 
Lightship VPS: Engineering the 
World’s Most Dynamic 3D AR 
Map. https://nianticlabs.com/
news/engineering-the-worlds-
most-dynamic-3d-ar-map/. 
“Long Range Drones: Revolu-
tionizing the Future of Aerial 
Technology.” Flux, March 21, 
2022, www.fluxmagazine.com/
long-range-drones-revolutioniz-
ing-aerial-technology/.
“LoRaWan Enables Weather and 
Air Quality Data-Sharing.” Smart 
Cities World, July 24, 2023. www.
smartcitiesworld.net/inter-
net-of-things/lorawan-enables-
weather-and-air-quality-data-
sharing. 
“Meet China’s Caregiver Ro-
bot to Help the Future Elder-
ly and Patients.” Euronews, July 12, 2023. www.eurone-
ws.com/next/2023/07/12/
worlds-first-mass-produced-hu-
manoid-robot-to-tackle-la-
bour-shortages-amid-age-
ing-populatio.
“NASA’s Honey Astrobee Ro-
bot Returns to Space.” NASA, 
October 5, 2023. www.nasa.gov/
missions/station/iss-research/
honey-astrobee-returns-space/.
“New Algorithm Keeps Drones 
from Colliding in Midair.” MIT 
News, March 29,. 2023, https://
news.mit.edu/2023/new-al-
gorithm-keeps-drones-collid-
ing-midair-0329.
“New Technique Helps Robots 
Pack Objects into a Tight Space.” 
MIT News, October 17, 2023. 
https://news.mit.edu/2023/
new-technique-helps-robots-
pack-objects-tight-space-1017.
“New ‘Traffic Cop’ Algorithm 
Helps a Drone Swarm Stay on 
Task.” MIT News, March 13, 2023. 
https://news.mit.edu/2023/
new-traffic-cop-algorithm-
drone-swarm-wireless-0313..Office, US Government Ac-
countability. “Science & Tech 
Spotlight: Drone Swarm Tech-
nologies.” Accessed December 
4, 2023. www.gao.gov/products/
gao-23-106930. 
“Open X-Embodiment: Robotic 
Learning Datasets and RT-X 
Models. “https://robotics-trans-
former-x.github.io/?utm_
source=tldrai. 
“Opinion: Holden’s E-Bike Li-
cense Proposal Misses the Mark 
on Pedestrian Safety.” Streets-
blog New York City. October 11, 
2023. https://nyc.streetsblog.
org/2023/10/11/opinion-holdens-
e-bike-license-proposal-misses-
the-mark-on-pedestrian-safety.
“Origami-Inspired Robots Can 
Sense, Analyze and Act in Chal-
lenging Environments.” https://
samueli.ucla.edu/origami-in-
spired-robots-can-sense-ana-
lyze-and-act-in-challenging-en-
vironments/. 
“Porsche and Mobileye An-
nounce Collaboration.” Porsche 
Newsroom, September 5, 2023. https://newsroom.porsche.com/
en/2023/company/porsche-mo-
bileye-collaboration-automat-
ed-driver-assistance-func-
tions-32250.html. 
“Preston, Four Others Win Ig No-
bel Prize for ‘Necrobotic’ Spider 
Study.” Rice University. https://
news.rice.edu/news/2023/pres-
ton-four-others-win-ig-nobel-
prize-necrobotic-spider-study. 
“RoboCat: A Self-Improving Ro-
botic Agent.” Google DeepMind. 
Accessed October 30, 2023. 
https://deepmind.google/dis-
cover/blog/robocat-a-self-im-
proving-robotic-agent/. 
Smith, Michael, et al. “Fiber 
Pumps for Wearable Fluidic 
Systems.” Science, vol. 379, no. 
6639, March 2023, pp. 1327–32. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
ade8654.
“Soft Robots That Grip with the 
Right Amount of Force.” MIT 
News, September 22, 2022. 
https://news.mit.edu/2022/
soft-robots-grasp-right-amount-
force-0922.“Stellantis Media—Chrysler 
Brand Reveals Chrysler Synthesis 
Cockpit Demonstrator, High-
lights ‘Harmony in Motion’ at CES 
2023.” https://media.stellantis-
northamerica.com/newsrelease.
do?id=24517&mid=1500. “Strategy 
Study: How Uber Disrupted An 
Industry With an Explosive Ap-
proach.” www.cascade.app/stud-
ies/uber-strategy-study. 
“Testing Real Driverless Cars in 
a Virtual Environment.” https://
news.osu.edu/testing-real-driv-
erless-cars-in-a-virtual-environ-
ment/. 
“The Sound of Silence: Electric 
Vehicle Manufacturers Innovating 
with Sound.” Ctech, June 20, 2023. 
www.calcalistech.com/ctech-
news/article/byz63jko2.
“This 3D Printed Gripper Doesn’t 
Need Electronics To Function.” UC 
San Diego Today, July 27, 2023. 
https://today.ucsd.edu/story/this-
3d-printed-gripper-doesnt-need-
electronics-to-function. SELECTED SOURCESTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES453© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Unleashing the Power of 
Intelligent Drone Swarms.” 
University of Houston, June 
5, 2023. www.uh.edu/news-
events/stories/2023/june-
2023/06052023-becker-drone-
swarms-control. 
Unmanned Aircraft System 
Traffic Management (UTM). 
Federal Aviation Administration. 
Accessed December 4, 2023. 
www.faa.gov/uas/advanced_op-
erations/traffic_management. 
US EPA, OAR. “Sources of Green-
house Gas Emissions.” De-
cember 29, 2015. www.epa.gov/
ghgemissions/sources-green-
house-gas-emissions.
US EPA, OAR. “Why We Need to 
Decarbonize Transportation.” 
February 9, 2023. www.epa.gov/
greenvehicles/why-we-need-de-
carbonize-transportation.“Valmont Records Longest 
BVLOS Drone Flight on the 
Wings of T-Mobile 5G.” Yahoo 
Finance, June 5, 2023. https://
finance.yahoo.com/news/val-
mont-records-longest-bvlos-
drone-130500787.html.
Wagner, Jerry. “New Mexico Law 
Seeks Solar on Every Roof, and 
an EV Charger in Every Garage.” 
Pv Magazine USA, January 25, 
2023. https://pv-magazine-usa.
com/2023/01/25/new-mexico-
law-seeks-solar-on-every-roof-
and-an-ev-charger-in-every-ga-
rage/.
Waypoint. “Waymo’s Autono-
mous Vehicles Are Significantly 
Safer than Human-Driven Ones, 
Says New Research Led by 
Swiss Re.” https://waymo.com/
blog/2023/09/waymos-autono-
mous-vehicles-are.html. “What Is a Driver Monitoring 
System? Complete 2023 Guide.” 
Tech.Co, June 13, 2023. https://
tech.co/fleet-management/driv-
er-monitoring-system. “What’s 
Next for Robotic Vacuum Clean-
ing?” CleanLink, August 21, 2023. 
www.cleanlink.com/news/article/
What8217s-Next-for-Robotic-Vac-
uum-Cleaning--30065. 
“World’s First Realistic Simulated 
Driving Environment Based on 
‘Crash-Prone’ Michigan Inter-
section.” University of Michigan 
News, May 1, 2023. https://news.
umich.edu/worlds-first-realis-
tic-simulated-driving-environ-
ment-based-on-crash-prone-  
michigan-intersection/.SELECTED SOURCESTECH MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONESCOMPUTING2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITIONTECH
456© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSCOMPUTING
457 T op Headlines
458 State of Play
460 Key Events
461  Likely Near T erm 
Developments
462 Why Computing Trends 
Matter to Y our Organization 
463 When Will Computing Trends 
Impact Y our Organization?
464 Opportunities and Threats
465 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
466 Central Themes
468 Ones T o Watch
469  Important T erms
471 Chips
472 Chip Onshoring
472 Chip Talent Shortage 
473 Chips to Optimize AI Workload
473 Photonic Chips
473 RISC-V485 Living AIs Solve Equations
485 BCI + Robots
486 Soft Implantables
486 Nanowire Networks Emulate 
Our Memories
486 Imitating Human Perception: 
Advancing Computer Vision
487 Storing Images in DNA With 
Biological Camera 
487 DNA-Based Molecular 
Computing
488 Image Reconstruction
489 Scenario: The Digital DNA 
Walkers
490 Scenario: AI + OI + LOE 
491 Advanced Large Scale 
Computing
492 Exascale Supercomputing
492 Supercloud 
492 Serverless Cloud
493 Alternative Energy for Data 
Center493 Photonic Computing 
Architecture
493 Photonic Cellular Automata 
494  Magnon-based Computation
495 Quantum Computing 
496 Quantum Advantage
496 Global Quantum Competition
496 Quantum Noise Reduction
497 Quantum Error Detection  
and Correction
497 Hybrid Classical-Quantum
497 Quantum Quality Over Quantity
498 Quantum Machine Learning
498 The Quantum Internet
498 Open-Source Quantum 
Software
499 A Developers’ Quantum 
Toolbox 
499 Quantum-as-a-Service
499 Quantum Resistant 
Cryptography500 Multi-tasking Quantum
500 Light-based Quantum 
Technologies
501 Scenario: Criminal Caught  
With Quantum
502 Networking
503 Scenario: Communal Compute 
at the Stadium
504 AI at the Edge
504 Efficiency Improvements
504 The 6G Cyber-physical 
Continuum
505 6G Global Competition
505 First 6G Real-time Wire 
Transmission
505 Reducing Inference for 6G
506 Wi-Fi 7
507 Scenario: The Sisyphus 
Program: A Physical-Digital 
Continuum
508 Authors 
510 Selected Sources474 AI-Driven Chip Design
474 Custom AI Chips
474 ARM-based PC Chips
475 Manufacturing Intelligence
476 Personal Computing
477 Everywhere Input 
477 Smart Textiles
477 Human-Centric Pervasive 
Computing
478 Wearable AI
479 The Convergence of Gaming 
Devices for Productivity
480 Scenario: Silent Signals
481 Right to Repair
481 Maximum Cooling to Minimize 
PC Size 
481 LLMS as Operating Systems
482 Personal Computers on Wheels
483 Biological Computing
484 Neuromorphic Computing
485 Organoid IntelligenceCOMPUTING TECH
AI’s demand for 
computational power 
challenges computing 
paradigms, driving 
researchers to rethink 
architectures and 
governments to rethink 
semiconductor policies.01
02
03
04
457© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINES
05Computing industry moves in-house 
As geopolitical tensions and supply chain concerns rise, there has been a push 
toward on-shoring critical technologies, such as semiconductors and 6G-enabling 
technologies. The US and its allied nations have imposed export restrictions on 
semiconductors and related equipment to China.
AI workloads demand new architectures 
The commercialization of AI requires novel architectures to manage its demanding 
workloads, spurring research into computer architecture design. Companies are looking 
to alternative energy sources like nuclear and geothermal to power data centers. 
Organoid Intelligence Represents A New Computing Frontier
Organoid intelligence harnesses stem cell-derived brain organoids to explore 
learning, memory, and cognition, potentially creating a biological computer.
New techniques emerge for error-prone quantum computers
Quantum researchers are focused on tackling the noise and error issues inherent 
to quantum computing. 
AI-centric form factors emerge for personal computing
As AI transforms how we engage with computers, businesses are exploring new 
interfaces and user experiences, focusing on AI-driven interactions. This includes voice-
controlled wearables and portable devices with chatbots as their core, making AI more 
central to our interactions.STATE 
OF PLAYDriven by artificial intelligence, humans and computers are in a virtuous cycle: a self-re-
inforcing loop where advancements in one area lead to progress in the other, and vice 
versa. In this case, humans created computers, which improve human productivity. More 
advanced humans created more advanced computers and so on. As the virtuous circle 
goes round and round, the separate entities—humans and computers—will get closer and 
closer to one another. 
AI’s voracious computational appetite is prompting companies and researchers to rethink 
conventional computing architectures. The Von Neumann architecture, which propelled 
the silicon era to this point, is now insufficient for meeting AI’s computational demands. 
To unlock the full potential of AI in an energy-efficient, cost-effective way, researchers are 
experimenting with alternative computing architectures, and they are finding inspiration 
by looking inward—to the human brain itself. As the most efficient computing system 
known, the brain’s architecture is ideally suited for AI workloads. 
So, researchers came up with neuromorphic computing, computer architectures inspired 
by the biological brain’s structure and function. Just like our brains, neuromorphic com-
puters can simultaneously store and process information, a capability that makes them 
more energy efficient than classical computers. Researchers at Johns Hopkins University 
are taking this even further. Last year they broke ground on a new computing field called 
organoid intelligence. Whereas neuromorphic computing aims to mirror the brain’s effi-
ciency in the design of computing systems using silicon, organoid intelligence aims to 
utilize the inherent capabilities of biological materials or systems for information pro-
cessing. Basically, organoid intelligence uses human brain cells as a computer. 
This isn’t merely a matter of drawing inspiration from the brain; it’s an endeavor to adapt 
and enhance our innate physiological blueprint to fabricate computational devices that 
not only match the efficiency of the human brain but surpass it in intelligence. Simulta-
neously, breakthrough technologies like soft implantable brain-computer interfaces are AI is enabling novel form factors for more 
natural human-computer interaction, while 
its intensive workloads challenge existing 
computing models. These developments, 
combined with the risks of advanced AI 
in adversarial hands and supply chain 
vulnerabilities, are leading the US and allies 
to reevaluate their trade relationships.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH COMPUTING
458© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH COMPUTING
facilitating the tangible integration of our biological essence into computational systems. 
The future of computing, it seems, is not an external tool that we engage with but rather, 
the future of computing is an innate element fused into our sensory perception, motor 
control, and cognitive processing. This vision posits a future where computing is no longer 
an external interaction but an integrated aspect of our very being.
To get to a future where computing seamlessly merges with the human experience, it’s 
crucial to recognize that this technological progression won’t occur in a vacuum. It is in-
tertwined with, and frequently stimulated by, a complex mosaic of geopolitical events and 
international frictions. This can be observed in the mounting tensions, chiefly between the 
US and China, over powerful chips. The US and its allies are implementing restrictions on 
the export of advanced semiconductors and their manufacturing equipment to China. The 
effectiveness of these restrictions, however, is challenging to ensure. China has already 
bypassed these export controls and obtained sophisticated Nvidia chips. Additionally, 
technologies like RISC-V, freely downloadable from the internet, will likely become pivotal 
for Chinese companies and government entities aiming to rival US expertise in semicon-
ductor design. 
There is also a battle between the US and China over the pursuit of quantum suprema-
cy. The first nation to achieve this could place the other in a precarious position from a 
national security standpoint. The sense of urgency is further amplified by an increasingly 
protectionist global outlook, catalyzed by the vulnerabilities in worldwide supply chains 
exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, governments worldwide are taking 
measures to repatriate the production of vital technologies, a movement that includes 
quantum technologies, semiconductors, and even the emerging realm of 6G telecommu-
nications. This intricate nexus of innovation and geopolitics is a testament to our age—a 
time of immense change and potential, when computing not only drives our technologies 
but also shapes the very contours of our societal and global narratives.STATE 
OF PLAY
459TECH
460© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FEBRUARY 28, 2023
OI: A new scientific field 
Scientists form a new field, 
organoid intelligence (OI), 
considered the frontier of 
biocomputing.  
MARCH 21, 2023
GPU-accelerated quantum device 
Nvidia announces the world’s 
first GPU-accelerated quantum 
computing system. JUNE 14, 2023
Closer to quantum advantage 
UC Berkeley/IBM paper 
demonstrates a path toward 
quantum advantage over 
classical computers. MAY 22, 2023
Long-distance quantum internet
Researchers achieve the first long-
distance quantum repeater node for 
telecommunications, transmitting 
quantum information over 50 km. NOVEMBER 6, 2023
US Further Restricts Chip Exports
The measures aim to tighten 
China’s access to US semiconductor 
technology, a key element in 
developing powerful AI platforms.KEY EVENTSCOMPUTING
TECH
461© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AI, ARCHITECTURE & ALLEGIANCE
Geopolitical tensions are accelerating 
some key computing developments. 
Expect semiconductor talent shortages 
as nations adjust how they manage skills 
for self-reliance. Also expect the rush 
to prepare for “Q-Day” to become more 
urgent as countries race toward quantum 
advantage. We will see more companies 
boast quantum-resistant cryptography 
as a value proposition. And as countries 
become more wary of supply chain dis-
ruptions, more inputs will be brought in-
house. As nations do this, RISC-V adoption 
may increase.
Technological developments in AI are also 
driving near term developments. To power 
AI, companies are rethinking computing 
architectures using inspiration from the 
human brain and existing gaming devices. 
AI will soon flip the script on human-com-
puter interaction; rather than users 
learning to operate computers, AI allows 
computers to learn to interact on human 
terms. With AI, the computer will adapt to 
the person—not the other way around.Research and Debates on OI
Expect a surge in organoid intelligence 
research. Organoids may be the key to AI’s 
efficient boost, but the convergence of AI and 
OI may stir ethical debates.  
Semiconductor Skills Shortage 
Anticipate a talent crunch in the semicon-
ductor sector as countries aim to internalize 
production. This skill gap will necessitate 
refocusing, driving universities and commu-
nities to prioritize these skills. Chip Freedom
Expect a rise in RISC-V adopters as it trans-
forms the chip industry. Offering freedom 
from costly licenses, RISC-V enables custom, 
application-driven hardware, making chip 
design more accessible, thereby lowering the 
entry barrier. Surge in Q-Day Preppers
Businesses will prepare more seriously for 
“Q-Day”—when quantum computers can 
break internet encryption protocols. As China 
and the US both achieve breakthroughs to-
ward quantum advantage, expect a surge in 
investments in this domain.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
The New BYOD Policy: Gaming Devices 
AI requirements will spur non-gamers toward 
powerful gaming devices, prompting demand 
for enterprise software integration. This 
signals a new wave of bring-your-own-de-
vice hardware—powerful yet portable. Expect 
increased enterprise application integration 
with such devices. 
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionCOMPUTING
AI-Driven Form Factors
Expect an emergence of new form factors 
driven by AI, that diverge from the conventional 
laptop, keyboard, and mouse setup, as AI facil-
itates more intuitive communication methods. 
We might also see a surge in specialized de-
vices designed for specific AI applications, like 
dedicated translation gadgets or AI-enhanced 
cameras.TECH
462© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Semiconductor 
companies may face 
growth constraints due 
to a scarcity of skilled 
workers, which could slow 
innovation or production 
delays. These difficulties 
can ripple through to 
other industries, such as 
automotive, which heavily 
rely on semiconductors. 
Amid rising geopolitical 
tensions, companies that 
secure talent may gain a 
competitive edge.RISC-V’s open-source 
nature empowers 
companies to customize 
chip designs, catering to 
specific needs. Its free-
to-use model makes it 
attractive for budget-
conscious companies. 
This lessens dependence 
on particular vendors, 
mitigating supply chain 
risks and bolstering 
resilience. Particularly in 
China, RISC-V advances 
national objectives of 
curtailing foreign IP 
reliance and achieving 
semiconductor self-
sufficiency.AI-designed chips 
may increase product 
performance and 
reduce costs, shifting 
competitive dynamics and 
market shares. For talent, 
expect less demand 
for chip designers and 
more for AI specialists. 
The AI optimization 
of chip design could 
disrupt semiconductor 
market leadership, with 
innovators gaining the 
upper hand. Further, 
cost-effective chip design 
may spur innovation in 
AI-dependent sectors, 
leading to new business 
opportunities. The portable PC market, 
initially fueled by 
gamers, shows promise 
for enterprise users as 
a lightweight, powerful 
secondary device. Portable 
PCs could soon be viewed 
as a BYOD option for 
enterprises, disrupting 
reliance on laptops. If 
optimized for business, 
portable PCs may find 
a role as compact work 
devices, expanding 
hardware and software 
markets.Quantum superiority 
poses an existential threat 
to business data. The 
first to achieve quantum 
advantage will be able to 
upend security by quickly 
cracking encryption or by 
unmasking anonymized 
data. Mitigating this risk 
will require a complete 
transition to quantum-
safe cryptographic 
algorithms. Though the 
security challenges are 
daunting, solutions are 
emerging to fortify for the 
quantum era.As the US tightens 
restrictions on 
semiconductor exports, 
the potential for Chinese 
retaliation poses a threat 
to the global consumer 
electronics market. 
China’s dominance in 
legacy chip production, 
critical for a wide range of 
products, from household 
appliances to military 
hardware, means these 
restrictions could lead to 
higher prices and scarcity 
of various consumer 
electronics globally.Chip T alent  
ShortageAchieving 
Independence 
With RISC-VUsing AI to Design 
Chips for AIPortable PCs: From 
Gaming to the 
Enterprise Investment in 
Quantum-Resistant 
CryptographyUnintended 
Consequences of 
Export ControlsWHY COMPUTING TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONCOMPUTINGTECH
463WHEN WILL COMPUTING DISRUPT YOUR ORGANIZATION?COMPUTING
Forecasted Time of Impact
6G
Commercial BCI
Commercialized DNA storage Physical-cyber continuum 
Biocompute outperforms classic
True quantum advantage
True pervasive computing
0-4 YEARS 5-9 YEARS 10-14 YEARS 15+ YEARSChip talent shortage
AI at the edge
Work-ready gamer devicesPerson-centric form factors
Enterprise supercloud use
Quantum-resistant cryptography  
as a value proposition
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Ethical debates about organoid intelligence’s human-like cognition may impede 
research, delaying innovations in health care, computing, and robotics.
Reshoring semiconductor manufacturing to the United States can involve 
significantly higher costs compared to overseas production, requiring government 
subsidies and policy reforms to offset higher domestic labor and tax expenses if 
the U.S. aims to make domestic chip fabrication globally competitive.
With notable talent shortages in semiconductors, onshoring success requires 
workforce development, immigration reform, and public-private partnerships for 
training.
Integrating neuromorphic systems with existing computer architectures poses 
complex challenges for synchronizing biological cognition with digital logic 
requiring new design paradigms.
Organoid and neuromorphic technologies risk ethical and legal scrutiny over 
human-like synthetic intelligence; clear governance is needed to enable innovation 
responsibly.
Quantum advantage may enable cracking encryption, threatening security; global 
rules and norms are needed to prevent misuse while fostering continued progress.
Increasing US-China tension over quantum risks could stifle collaboration; a 
technology embargo could cede leadership. Cooperative policy is key to preventing 
a tech cold war.Opportunities
RISC-V’s open architecture democratizes chip design, empowering innovation 
and strategic autonomy for companies and nations, reducing reliance on external 
suppliers.
Applying AI to optimize chip design unlocks major performance and cost 
efficiencies, enabling next-gen semiconductors accessible to more applications.
Neuromorphic computing’s efficiency from processing and storing data 
simultaneously is a breakthrough for energy optimization vital for sustainability 
across industries.
Neuromorphic chips’ brain-like adaptability can revolutionize machine learning, 
making algorithms more robust and powerful for transformative AI applications.
Quantum internet provides virtually unhackable communications, realizing 
enhanced data/infrastructure security to protect information at unprecedented 
levels.
Quantum-as-a-service opens quantum’s potential to more industries and 
researchers, fostering innovation and progress toward real-world impact.
More efficient AI edge models expand access for new applications and users, driving 
innovation and economic opportunity by democratizing transformative technology.TECH
464© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTINGTECH
465© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.As AI permeates enterprise 
apps, modify software 
and operating systems 
to support mobile form 
factors like gaming PCs, 
which already offer 
advanced portability and 
processing that mobile 
workers will expect. Enable 
apps on compact yet 
powerful devices, and 
support policies like BYOD 
as gaming converges with 
productivity needs.For enterprises using 
hybrid and multicloud, 
consider implementing 
the supercloud to save 
developers time managing 
complex multicloud 
environments. Supercloud 
abstraction layers 
integrate disparate clouds 
into one platform, handling 
management overhead 
so developers can focus 
on revenue-generating 
activities.Prepare for 6G by investing 
now in the foundational 
technologies that will 
enable the immersive 
experiences promised 
by a 6G-enabled cyber-
physical continuum. For 
instance, consider investing 
in technologies like 
terahertz communications, 
advanced edge computing, 
integrated satellite 
networks, and advanced 
materials.Create domestic internship 
and apprenticeship 
programs to build talent 
pipelines in semiconductor 
and quantum skills, where 
shortages loom due to 
onshoring. Partner with 
schools to develop a 
homegrown workforce 
proficient in these 
technologies vital for 
national strategic interests.Diversify sourcing of 
critical components 
to reduce overreliance 
and risk from any single 
country or region, and 
improve resilience. Build 
relationships with multiple 
suppliers and partners to 
mitigate concentration 
and gain flexibility to adapt 
to changing political and 
market conditions.Fund research on 
organoid intelligence and 
neuromorphic computing, 
enabling collaborations 
to translate findings into 
commercial technologies. 
Partner with academia and 
startups on initiatives like 
brain-inspired chips and 
synthetic neural tissues 
to drive innovation in 
human-like cognition for 
applications from health 
care to robotics.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6COMPUTINGCENTRAL THEMESTECH
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 466COMPUTING
AI-Driven Design
As AI’s computational demands grow, traditional ar-
chitectures are falling short, paving the way for alter-
natives like photonic and neuromorphic computing. 
Photonic computing leverages light’s speed for faster 
and energy-efficient computations, providing a paral-
lelism suitable for AI’s requirements. Neuromorphic 
computing, mimicking the brain’s structure, merges 
memory and processing, drastically reducing data 
fetch times for AI tasks. We aren’t just reevaluating the 
architectures themselves—we are reevaluating how we 
even think about the architecture. And it may be the 
case that we aren’t the best candidates for the job. The 
best candidate for designing an architecture suited to 
AI just might be AI. It’s aiding in optimizing transistor 
placement, addressing cost, speed, and power efficien-
cy issues. AI’s impact is thus two-fold; it’s driving the 
demand for advanced computation and also contribut-
ing to its design.Protectionist Policies, Attitudes 
The 2022 Chips Act provides roughly $280 billion to boost 
domestic research and manufacturing of semiconductors 
in the US, aiming to make the country less vulnerable to 
disruptions in the supply chain by bringing semiconduc-
tor fabrication plants in-house. We’re now seeing similar 
protectionist attitudes emerge in other strategic technology 
areas like quantum computing and the technology that will 
eventually enable 6G. However, despite subsidies, this shift 
may still increase US production costs compared to coun-
tries like Taiwan, pressuring chip producers. It could also 
trigger talent shortages in relevant skills. While the goal is 
technological independence, these protectionist strategies 
may have implications on cost, talent acquisition, and glob-
al cooperation in key tech sectors. Pursuing self-reliance has 
trade-offs.Computing Gets More Personal 
Computers are becoming deeply integrated with us, 
redefining the “personal” in personal computing. De-
vices such as MIT Media Lab’s AttentivU glasses enable 
us to control robots like Boston Dynamics’ Spot with 
our eyes, while spray-on meshes developed by Seoul 
National University and Stanford University enable AI 
to interpret our hand gestures. Everyday objects are 
transforming into interactive interfaces, and as tech 
advances, our devices comprehend us more intimately. 
We’re becoming interfaces for devices, which are mor-
phing into extensions of us. Screens are moving closer 
to our faces via glasses and AR/VR headsets, while our 
brains can control artificial limbs, exemplifying this 
profound integration. Even our own skin can be an 
interactive interface, as seen with Cornell University’s 
SkinPaper, which facilitates on-skin interactions for a 
range of applications, from art to health care. CENTRAL THEMESTECH
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 467COMPUTING
Accelerating Growth Through Open Source  
Open-source software is spreading into new domains 
previously dominated by proprietary solutions. One 
example is in quantum computing, where the high 
costs of proprietary hardware and software has made 
quantum experimentation inaccessible for most re-
searchers. Open-source quantum software toolkits like 
Qiskit and SuperConga are changing this by providing 
free access to simulate quantum circuits and mate-
rials. This allows a broader community to collaborate 
and drive innovation in quantum computing. Similarly, 
open-source chip architectures like RISC-V are trans-
forming the semiconductor industry. Traditionally, 
companies like Intel and Arm have controlled chip de-
sign and manufacturing, but RISC-V makes instruction 
set architectures freely available for anyone to build 
custom chips. By opening access, open source allows 
more minds to tackle complex problems together, 
leading to advancements in fields that were previously 
dominated by closed, proprietary systems.Abstraction: Layers on Layers 
As computing grows more complex, new abstraction 
layers emerge to simplify access. In quantum com-
puting, companies like Horizon Quantum Computing 
compile classical code so developers can program 
without grasping quantum mechanics. Quantum-
as-a-service similarly insulates users from hardware 
intricacies. Conventional computing exhibits similar 
abstraction layers upon layers. Early cloud computing 
abstracted physical servers, enabling users to focus on 
applications without infrastructure concerns. Now “su-
percloud” layers integrate disparate cloud platforms, 
further simplifying management and cross-ecosystem 
operations. These abstraction layers divorce users from 
technical complexities, dramatically streamlining pro-
cesses. Developers avoid wrestling with infrastructure 
intricacies, innovating instead at higher levels. Users 
interact with user-friendly interfaces rather than deal 
with technical details.Researchers T ake on Noise
Quantum computers face significant reliability chal-
lenges due to noise and errors that introduce inaccu-
racies during computations. “Quantum noise” refers to 
the inherent fluctuations and uncertainties that arise 
in quantum systems due to the principles of quan-
tum mechanics. Researchers are pursuing various 
strategies to mitigate these issues. Noise reduction 
techniques aim to isolate qubits from environmen-
tal disturbances that cause errors. Other approaches 
focus on modeling the impact of noise to estimate and 
subtract out its effects after computations finish. There 
are also efforts to optimize qubit connectivity to reduce 
noise. Progress is happening, but substantially reduc-
ing errors remains an ongoing challenge. The inherently 
probabilistic nature of quantum physics means some 
baseline of noise will likely persist. However, research-
ers are encouraged by experimental demonstrations 
showing meaningful computations are possible even 
on today’s error-prone hardware. Continued incremental 
advances in mitigating noise will help make quantum 
computers more robust and capable. Despite remain-
ing limitations, researchers in this field are optimistic 
about eventually achieving practical applications.Alireza Marandi, assistant professor of electri-
cal engineering and applied physics at Cali-
fornia Institute of Technology, for research on 
photonic cellular automata.
Alon Loeffler, synthetic biological intelligence 
postdoctoral scientist at the University of Syd-
ney, for demonstrating nanowire networks can 
exhibit both short- and long-term memory like 
the human brain.
Ben Lanyon, physicist in the Department of 
Experimental Physics at the University of Inns-
bruck, for his work on the first long-distance 
quantum repeater node for telecommunication 
networks.
Brian Johnson, postdoctoral researcher at Uni-
versity of Colorado Boulder, for developing new 
soft actuators, sensors, and control algorithms 
for intelligent robotic materials.
Christina Tringides, postdoctoral fellow at ETH 
Zürich, for research on hydrogel scaffolds for 
neural cell differentiation.
Cindy Hsin-Liu Kao, assistant professor and 
director of the Hybrid Body Lab at Cornell, for 
work on wearable and ubiquitous computing, 
particularly on-skin interfaces.Dirk Grundler, head of the Lab of Nanoscale 
Magnetic Materials and Magnonics in the 
School of Engineering at the Swiss Federal In-
stitute of Technology, Lausanne, for research on 
magnon-based computation.
Brad Aimone, a Distinguished Member of 
Technical Staff in the Center for Computing 
Research at Sandia National Laboratories, for 
research on neuromorphic computing.
Chueh Loo Poh, principal investigator and pro-
fessor at the College of Design and Engineering 
at the National University of Singapore, and the 
NUS Synthetic Biology for Clinical and Techno-
logical Innovation, for work on developing a bio-
logical camera that captures and stores images 
directly into DNA.
Hussam Amrouch, professor of AI processor 
design at the Technical University of Munich, 
for work on energy-saving AI chips.
Sanghyo Lee, senior research associate at Uni-
versity of Cambridge, for work on development 
of next-generation smart textiles.
Gordon H.Y. Li, graduate student at California 
Institute of Technology, for research on photon-
ic cellular automata.Jonathan Xu, researcher at Stanford and the 
National University of Singapore, for his work on 
brain image reconstruction using fMRI.
Mikael Fogelström, professor of theoretical 
physics at Chalmers, for his work on SuperCon-
ga, an open-source framework for mesoscopic 
superconductivity.
Nataliya Kos’myna, research scientist at MIT, 
for work on brain computer interface systems 
and research on fluid interfaces.
Pat Pataranutaporn, research assistant at MIT, 
for his research on synthetic virtual humans 
and synthetic biology, specifically at the inter-
face between biological and digital systems.
Patric Holmvall, postdoctoral researcher in 
condensed matter physics at Uppsala Univer-
sity, for work on developing open-source, freely 
available software to speed quantum research.
Sajant Anand, Ph.D. candidate at University 
of California, Berkeley, for research on tensor 
network algorithms for simulation of quantum 
many-body systems on both classical and 
quantum computing.Sunil Pai, quantum architect at PsiQuantum, 
for research that demonstrates in situ back-
propagation can train photonic neural networks 
to solve a task.
Thomas Hartung, professor at Johns Hopkins, 
for his work to develop a collaborative, multi-
disciplinary program that aims to establish 
organoid intelligence as a genuine form of 
biological computing.
Vasha DuT ell, postdoctoral fellow at MIT, for her 
work on perceptual straightness in computer 
vision.
Y asha Iravantchi, doctoral candidate at Univer-
sity of Michigan EECS, for work on developing 
novel sensing hardware, particularly SAWSense.
Y oungseok Kim and Andrew Eddins, research 
scientists with IBM Quantum, for their 2023 pa-
per “Evidence for the Use of Quantum Comput-
ing Before Fault Tolerance.”
Bradley Theilman, a postdoctoral appointee at 
Sandia National Laboratories, for research on 
neuromorphic computing.ONES TO WATCHTECH
468© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTINGIMPORTANT TERMS
469Biocomputer
A computer that uses biological molecules like DNA 
and cells to store and process information.
Brain-computer interface (BCI) 
A direct interface between the brain and comput-
er that can enable control and communication by 
thought alone, with potential to help people with 
disabilities as well as elucidate cognition.
Cellular automata
Computational models that evolve in discrete space 
and time according to simple rules based on local 
neighbor interactions.
Central processing unit (CPU) 
The key computer component that performs the 
computations, makes decisions on data, and tells 
the other components what to do. You can think of it 
as the computer’s mission control center.
Classical computer
The standard binary digital computer that manip-
ulates zeros and ones to store data and perform 
computations sequentially using hardware chips 
and switches.Magnonics
Aims to develop devices and circuits that use mag-
nons for information processing and transmission.
Moore’s law
The observation made by Intel co-founder Gordon 
Moore in 1965 that the number of transistors on an 
integrated circuit doubles about every two years. Re-
cent challenges suggest Moore’s law is approaching 
fundamental limits due to physics and cost.
Nanowire networks
Meshes or arrays of nanoscale wires used to build 
devices and circuits. They can exhibit unique opti-
cal, electrical, thermal, and chemical characteristics.
Neuromorphic computing
Computer architectures that are inspired by the 
biological brain’s structure and function.
Open source
Computer software or other products with source 
code that anyone can inspect, modify, and enhance.
Organoid intelligence
A new scientific field of study that aims to actual-
ize biological computing by utilizing 3D cultures of 
human brain cells and brain-machine interfaces.Parallel spatial computing 
Computer architectures optimized to perform many 
operations simultaneously across a large grid or 
array of simple spatial processing elements.
Perceptual straightness 
The ability to perceive dynamic visual information 
and transform it into a stable mental representation.
Pervasive (ubiquitous) computing 
Aims to seamlessly integrate computer hardware 
and software into all objects and activities, creating 
an always available, helpful computing environment.
Photonic chips 
Integrated circuits that generate, manipulate, and 
detect light waves and photons to process informa-
tion.
Q-Day  
The hypothetical point in the future when a fully 
operational quantum computer capable of running 
practical quantum algorithms finally becomes 
available.
Quantum advantage 
Also known as quantum supremacy, refers to the 
potential capability of quantum computers to solve Exascale computers
Supercomputers capable of performing over 1 
exaFLOPS, which is a quintillion calculations per 
second.
Fault tolerance
The ability of a quantum system to operate reliably 
despite errors and noise.
Form factor 
The overall physical attributes and dimensions of a 
device according to standard specifications or for 
particular use cases. It impacts the usability and 
compatibility of hardware.
Graphics processing unit (GPU) 
A specialized circuit designed to rapidly process and 
manipulate computer graphics and image data.
Hybrid classical-quantum
A computational architecture that combines both 
classical computers and quantum computers to 
exploit the complementary strengths of each.
Machine learning
A subfield of artificial intelligence that trains al-
gorithms to learn from data, identify patterns, and 
make predictions or decisions without being explic-
itly programmed.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH COMPUTINGIMPORTANT TERMS
470certain problems that are intractable for classical 
computers in practical timeframes.
Quantum-as-a-service 
The provision of quantum computing resources on 
demand as a cloud service.
Quantum circuit model 
The most common model for quantum program-
ming and computation. One key aspect is that 
programs are expressed as circuits consisting of 
qubits and quantum gates operating on the qubits. 
The circuit model provides a simple abstraction to 
reason about quantum programs.
Quantum computer  
A type of computer that utilizes quantum mechan-
ical phenomena like superposition and entangle-
ment to perform computations. Unlike classical 
computers which operate on binary bits (0 or 1), 
quantum bits, or qubits, these computers can 
represent a 0, 1, or a quantum superposition of both 
states at the same time. Since they consider multi-
ple possibilities simultaneously, they can potentially 
be vastly faster at some types of problems than 
classical computers.RISC-V 
An open-source instruction set architecture based 
on established reduced instruction set computer 
(RISC) principles.
RSA encryption  
A public-key algorithm currently widely used for 
secure data transmission that will become insecure 
in the quantum era. RSA security depends on the 
difficulty of factoring large integers, which quantum 
computers will be able to efficiently solve.
Superconductor 
A material that can conduct electricity with zero 
electrical resistance. This means that, unlike typical 
conductors, superconductors can carry an electrical 
current indefinitely without losing any energy to 
heat or electrical resistance.  Quantum entanglement  
A phenomenon in which two or more quantum 
particles are intrinsically linked to each other in 
such a way that the state of one particle cannot be 
described independently of the others, even when 
separated by a large distance.
Quantum internet 
A hypothetical global quantum communication 
network that connects quantum processors using 
quantum entanglement and teleportation.
Quantum superposition 
Allowing a quantum system to exist in multiple pos-
sible states at the same time until it is measured. 
The quantum parallel processing enabled by super-
position is fundamental to achieving speedups and 
novel applications using quantum computers.
Qubit 
The basic unit of information in quantum comput-
ing. Unlike classical bits, qubits can be in a superpo-
sition of 0 and 1 simultaneously. The superposition, 
entanglement, and interference properties of qubits 
are what allow quantum algorithms to efficiently 
solve certain problems that are believed to be intrac-
table on classical computers.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH COMPUTINGTECH
471© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING
CHIPSTECH
Chip Onshoring
The CHIPS Act, signed into law in August 
2022, has sparked numerous initiatives to 
bolster the US semiconductor industry. Over 
50 new chip facility projects have been an-
nounced since the legislation was introduced, 
with private companies pledging over $210 
billion in investments. Intel unveiled plans 
for a $20 billion chip fabrication complex 
outside Columbus, Ohio; Micron plans to 
invest up to $100 billion over the next 20-plus 
years; Samsung is exploring building 11 plants 
in Texas with one plant already costing the 
chipmaker $25 billion ($8 billion more than 
forecasted). General Motors announced an 
unprecedented, long-term partnership with 
GlobalFoundries, which will establish dedi-
cated chip production capacity exclusively 
for GM in upstate New York. Taiwan Semicon-
ductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC), the world’s 
largest advanced chip manufacturer, broke 
ground on a major facility in Phoenix and in-
creased its investment to $40 billion. The aim 
of the onshoring efforts is to reduce US vul-
nerability to foreign disruptions. However, the 
US is making a trade-off with this approach; next few years, ballooning to a shortfall of 
300,000 engineers and 90,000 technicians 
by 2030. Due to a shortage of skilled labor, 
TSMC has reported new delays in the prog-
ress of its $40 billion Arizona facility. The 
skills gap extends beyond America’s borders. 
Taiwan, a leader in cutting-edge chipmak-
ing, faced a shortage of over 30,000 work-
ers at the end of 2021, up 77% from 2020. 
China’s massive semiconductor industry is 
wrestling with a shortfall of 300,000 skilled 
workers. South Korea expects at least 30,000 
fewer skilled workers than required over the 
next decade as universities produce less 
than half the number of graduates needed. 
In Japan, major manufacturers warn that 
the industry’s revival is in jeopardy with-
out 35,000 additional engineers. European 
semiconductor growth is also hampered by 
a substantial talent deficit, industry lead-
ers say. The push to reshore semiconductor 
manufacturing has put the unintended con-
sequences into sharp focus. While bringing 
chip production back to America could bol-
ster supply chain security, developing talent 
will take time.onshoring is often costlier. In a recent sub-
mission to the US Commerce Department, 
TSMC complained the Phoenix plant would 
cost substantially more than an equivalent 
facility in Taiwan, citing higher wages and 
taxes, lower productivity, a greater likelihood 
of delays, and more stringent regulations. 
These onshoring initiatives coincide with a 
tightening of tech export controls to China. 
In March 2023, NVIDIA introduced the H800 
chip, compliant with Commerce Department 
guidelines and a substitute for the restricted 
H100 chips in China. October 2023 saw new 
restrictions halting China-specific A800 and 
H800 exports, disrupting NVIDIA’s plans to 
fulfill additional orders. This shift forced Chi-
na to turn to non-US chip suppliers, resulting 
in companies like Baidu, a long-term NVIDIA 
client, opting for Huawei’s AI chips instead.
Chip T alent Shortage 
The global semiconductor industry is grap-
pling with a shortage of skilled talent. Ac-
cording to some estimates, the US will face 
a deficit of 70,000 to 90,000 workers over the CHIPSCOMPUTING
472© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
The booming US semiconductor sector faces a 
shortage of skilled chip fabrication skills, raising 
concerns that a lack of qualified talent could jeop-
ardize billions invested in expanding domestic chip 
manufacturing.TECH
Chips to Optimize AI Workload
Embedding advanced AI comes at a com-
putational cost. For instance, researchers 
estimated that for Google to add GPT-3 into 
every search query, it would need 2.7 billion 
of NVIDIA’s old A100 chips, which would cost 
more than $40 billion. This staggering price 
tag highlights the demand for more efficient 
AI chips to make AI scalable and accessible. 
NVIDIA responded with the H100 chip, opti-
mized for generative AI and named after pio-
neer Grace Hopper. With substantially faster 
processing than previous chips, the H100 is 
crucial for companies seeking to develop AI 
services. In November 2023, NVIDIA escalated 
its AI computing power further with the NVIDIA 
HGXTM H200, building on the HopperTM archi-
tecture. As the first GPU with HBM3e memory, 
the H200 enables faster processing essential 
for generative AI and large language models, 
while boosting scientific computing. Com-
pared to the A100, it delivers double the mem-
ory capacity and 2.4 times more bandwidth. In 
a parallel development, Amazon Web Services 
(AWS) announced Trainium2, engineered spe-
cifically for training AI models. Moreover, AWS ing light rather than electricity, show prom-
ise in improving efficiency. They are more en-
ergy efficient than alternatives because they 
excel at performing matrix multiplications, 
a fundamental operation in deep learning 
models. But until now, the application of 
photonic AI chips was limited to inference 
tasks, as they struggled with implementing 
the vital algorithm required to train neural 
networks, known as backpropagation.
A team at Stanford has overcome this chal-
lenge by successfully training AI on an op-
tical chip, a first in the field. Their photonic 
chip allows light signals to pass in both di-
rections through an optical neural network, 
and it has built-in light detectors to measure 
the intensity of light passing through each 
component. This enables the chip to optical-
ly implement backpropagation. As a result, 
the researchers were able to train a simple 
neural network to label data points with up 
to 98% accuracy. While there is still room for 
improvement, this milestone demonstrates 
the potential of photonic processors to in-
crease the energy efficiency of AI.RISC-V
RISC-V, an open-source computer chip ar-
chitecture, is disrupting the semiconductor 
industry. Traditionally, companies like Intel 
designed proprietary chip blueprints and sold 
pre-made chips to customers. Conversely, 
RISC-V specifications are free for anyone to 
use to design chips. RISC-V defines the basic 
functions, known as the instruction set, that a 
chip can perform to manipulate the values of 
transistors—for adding numbers, for example. 
Around 3,100 members, including compa-
nies and universities worldwide, collaborate 
through the nonprofit RISC-V International to 
develop these specifications. Intel announced 
a $1 billion fund to support companies build-
ing RISC-V chips, and Google wants RISC-V to 
become a “tier-1” Android architecture. 
Worldwide, events like the global chip short-
age and Arm’s corporate instability are fueling 
interest in RISC-V. In China, an added urgen-
cy is driving RISC-V’s adoption. The country 
wants to reduce reliance on foreign intellec-
tual property and achieve self-sufficiency in 
chip design, particularly in light of US trade plans to provide access to NVIDIA’s next-gen-
eration H200 GPUs through a specialized 
computing cluster, accessible to both AWS 
customers and NVIDIA. To reduce dependence 
on Nvidia, Microsoft has developed its propri-
etary AI chip designed for training LLMs. Ad-
ditionally, the company has created its own 
ARM-based CPU tailored for cloud workloads. 
These chips will be used to power Azure data 
centers for their AI-hungry customers. 
Researchers are also advancing AI chip 
architecture in ways that could shape the 
next generation. For example, one computer 
scientist developed an in-memory computing 
chip that processes and stores data directly 
within each transistor, taking inspiration 
from the human brain’s ability to simultane-
ously process signals and store information. 
This chip delivers twice the power efficiency 
of alternatives.
Photonic Chips
With the continued growth of AI models, 
energy consumption also escalates. This is 
where photonic AI chips, which operate us-CHIPSCOMPUTING
473© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
restrictions on advanced integrated circuit 
technologies. Consequently, many Chinese 
companies that design computer chips but 
don’t make them are considering a switch to 
RISC-V, which is becoming an increasingly 
attractive option in the region. In late 2023, 
the House Select Committee on the Chinese 
Communist Party suggested the formation 
of an interagency governmental committee 
to assess the potential risks associated with 
RISC-V. This recommendation stems from 
concerns that the open-source, easily ac-
cessible nature of RISC-V might weaken US 
export control efforts.
AI-Driven Chip Design
Major tech companies like NVIDIA are using 
AI to improve AI chip design. Designing chips 
involves placing billions of transistors, and 
their placement has an enormous impact on 
cost, speed, and power efficiency. In March 
2023, NVIDIA released a paper building on 
existing research from Alphabet, showing 
that a combination of AI techniques can find 
more optimal ways to place large groups of Custom AI Chips
Instead of relying on traditional chip suppli-
ers like Intel, major tech companies like Meta, 
Google, and Microsoft are developing their 
own AI chips and hardware to improve the 
efficiency, cost, and performance of running 
AI models. Meta’s AI chip is currently focused 
on inference, not training; the project signals 
the company’s ambition to catch up to rivals 
in custom AI hardware after previously relying 
on off-the-shelf CPUs, GPUs, and costly data 
center redesigns. Microsoft is also reported-
ly developing its own AI chips to train large 
language models, reducing reliance on costly 
NVIDIA GPUs. Microsoft aims to cut costs with 
these in-house chips; they may be available 
internally and for OpenAI next year, with 
future generations planned. The chips won’t 
directly replace NVIDIA but could lower Micro-
soft’s AI costs as the company expands AI in 
Bing, Office, GitHub, and more.
ARM-based PC Chips
For decades, the personal computing mar-
ket has run on x86 chips from the likes of 
Intel and Qualcomm. But ARM architecture, renowned for power efficiency, is staging a 
takeover. ARM already dominates mobile. 
Now major players are bringing ARM to PCs, 
challenging the x86 foothold. NVIDIA and 
AMD are making strategic moves by adopting 
ARM’s technology. NVIDIA is venturing into 
the central processing unit (CPU) arena for 
personal computers with ARM-based designs. 
These CPUs, compatible with Microsoft Corp.’s 
Windows operating system, are anticipated to 
be available as early as 2025. Similarly, AMD 
is also reported to be developing ARM-based 
CPUs for Windows PCs, marking a significant 
diversification from their traditional prod-
uct offerings. Microsoft announced plans in 
November 2023 to roll out its own ARM-based 
CPU, expected to happen sometime in 2024.  
The entry of NVIDIA and AMD into the ARM-
based PC market poses a new challenge to 
Intel and Qualcomm. Intel, in particular, faces 
increased competition at a time when it is 
striving to reclaim its market share and tech-
nological edge. With AMD and NVIDIA joining 
the ranks of Apple and potentially Microsoft in 
adopting ARM’s architecture, the pressure is 
mounting on Intel to innovate and compete.transistors. As per-transistor costs increase 
with each new generation of chip manufac-
turing technology (contrary to Moore’s law), 
NVIDIA chief scientist Bill Dally emphasizes 
the need for more intelligent design instead 
of relying on cheaper transistors. 
Besides NVIDIA, other major players in the 
industry are also recognizing the benefits of 
integrating AI into their chip design pro-
cesses. For instance, Synopsys and Cadence 
Design Systems are in a race to provide 
AI-infused software that companies can 
use to create their own optimized chips. The 
integration of AI will help engineers boost 
the proportion of defect-free chips coming 
off the production line. Synopsys CEO Aart 
de Geus said the company intends to invest 
more in AI tools, especially as the semicon-
ductor industry transitions to chiplets—mul-
tiple chips stacked and integrated together 
to create larger, more complex chips. With 
major players ramping up AI adoption, the 
semiconductor industry is poised to benefit 
from smarter, more automated design.CHIPSCOMPUTING
474© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Manufacturing Intelligence
To tap into AI’s potential, leading companies 
like Foxconn and NVIDIA are collaborating 
to build a new generation of data centers 
purpose-built for AI workloads. Dubbed “AI 
factories”, these state-of-the-art data centers 
packed with NVIDIA’s latest chips, enterprise 
software, and other hardware will fuel a wave 
of AI innovation. Foxconn plans to leverage 
them to digitize inspections, develop smart-
er robotics and vehicles, power generative 
AI applications, and more. The scale of data 
and model training needed for industrial AI 
adoption requires specialized infrastructure. 
While AI chips continue advancing, massive 
computational horsepower is still essen-
tial. Dedicated AI data centers like Foxconn 
and NVIDIA’s can crunch vast datasets into 
valuable AI assets far faster than typical 
facilities. Looking ahead, we can anticipate a 
trend where more data centers will tailor their 
services to accommodate these demanding 
AI workloads. Such specialized data centers 
could emerge as a distinctive offering in 
the market, characterized by their focus on AI-specific computing resources. This shift 
signifies a pivotal moment in the evolution 
of data centers, aligning them more closely 
with the rapidly advancing realm of artificial 
intelligence.CHIPSCOMPUTING
475© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
AI factories will offer the vast computational power and customized infrastructure essential for enabling 
widespread AI adoption.TECH
476© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING
PERSONAL 
COMPUTINGTECH
Everywhere Input 
Researchers at the University of Michigan 
have developed a system that can turn 
everyday surfaces into high-accuracy input 
devices. Named SAWsense after the “surface 
acoustic waves” it utilizes, the system em-
ploys acoustic sensors to transform everyday 
objects like couches, tables, and sleeves that 
respond to commands in the form of taps, 
scratches, and swipes. Imagine sitting on 
your living room couch, watching a movie 
on your smart TV. Instead of reaching for a 
remote control, you merely tap twice on the 
armrest of your couch, and the movie paus-
es. The system works on materials like wood, 
metal, and fabric with 97% accuracy. These 
new forms of interaction with computers, 
through more integrated and personalized 
interfaces, signal the emergence of ubiqui-
tous and ambient computing. Expanding this 
concept further, engineers from the University 
of Colorado Boulder envision a future with dy-
namic 3D interfaces. Imagine an iPad with a 
surface that enables you to draw 3D designs; 
the shape-shifting display uses a grid of 
soft robotic “muscles,” called HASEL actua-hydrogel and graphene nanosheets between 
layers of silk fabric to sense touch in real 
time. The fabric has been demonstrated to 
control a computer game and sketch on a 
computer. The fabric innovations could help 
drive the widespread adoption of e-textiles 
and open new opportunities for wearables 
and smart devices. Scientists also developed 
the first smart fabric that changes both col-
or and shape in response to temperature and 
electricity. Made of polymer nano-fibers from 
recycled plastic, this cost-effective material 
has extensive potential uses. It represents 
a milestone in creating practical, affordable 
smart textiles that can transform our every-
day environments.
Human-Centric Pervasive Computing
Pervasive computing, also known as ubiq-
uitous computing, embeds computation-
al capabilities into ordinary objects and 
environments so that computing can 
become an invisible and seamless part of 
everyday life. It’s even being integrated onto 
skin—researchers at Cornell University have 
developed technologies that allow users to tors. Each of these actuators is a miniature 
plastic pouch shaped like an accordion that 
expands to create patterns when electrified. 
The innovation is precise enough to gener-
ate scrolling text and even imitate physical 
sensation, providing a rare haptic touch to 
the digital world.
Smart T extiles
An international research team led by the 
University of Cambridge has developed 
next-generation smart textiles that are low-
cost, sustainable, and produced using stan-
dard industrial looms. Unlike previous smart 
fabrics, these textiles can withstand bend-
ing and folding thanks to a process that 
coats conductive fibers with stretchable ma-
terials. The 46-inch woven prototype seam-
lessly integrates flexible embedded displays. 
The researchers envision the use of these 
flexible, eco-friendly smart textiles in various 
applications such as buildings, car interi-
ors, and clothing. Separately, researchers 
developed a touch-responsive fabric arm-
band that can act as a flexible keyboard and 
wearable sketchpad. It uses clear conductive PERSONAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
477© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Pervasive computing will enable people to interact 
with computers without screens.TECH
easily construct and use customized on-skin 
devices for sensing and display. One device, 
called SkinPaper, uses silicone-treated washi 
paper that conforms to the body to enable 
simple on-skin interactions; it could eventu-
ally enable a range of promising applications, 
from health monitoring and personal safety 
to assistive technologies for the disabled. 
Another team from Seoul National University 
and Stanford University developed a spray-
on smart skin that uses AI to recognize hand 
gestures and typing. This spray-on mesh is 
made of nanowires embedded in a polyure-
thane coating, and is applied directly to the 
skin, conforming to its wrinkles and folds. 
This smart skin allows for seamless gesture 
recognition without cameras, gloves, or virtu-
al reality systems; it could enable new ways 
for people to communicate with each other 
and control devices. 
Microsoft researchers are also experimenting 
with new ways for people to communicate 
with each other and control devices using our 
tongues. By combining tongue gestures with 
gaze, selections occurred faster than just us-ing gaze alone. The researchers have found 
that the tongue-gaze method can be used as 
a nonintrusive point-and-click interface. 
Wearable AI
AI is changing human-computer interaction, 
shifting us away from screens, trackpads, 
and keyboards towards more intuitive, 
voice-based interfaces. This is giving rise to 
a new class of lightweight, wearable gadgets 
and screenless computers that integrate 
seamlessly into daily life. By reducing screen 
fatigue and intrusive features, these de-
vices foster a more natural, human-centric 
approach to technology. A prime example 
is the newly-launched Humane AI Pin, an 
OpenAI-powered wearable priced at $699, 
plus a $24 monthly subscription. Forgoing 
traditional app interfaces, this 34-gram 
device focuses solely on voice interactions. 
Users access information and perform tasks 
by speaking to the Pin’s built-in microphone. 
By stripping down the technological inter-
face, Humane aims to create a streamlined, 
human-like experience. Another device is the 
Rewind AI Pendant which captures real-world PERSONAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
478© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
As AI enables more natural computer interaction, there are increasing use cases for compact, perhaps 
screenless wearables.TECH
conversations, storing encrypted transcripts 
and audio locally on the user’s phone. Be-
yond recording, Rewind’s platform searches 
transcripts, generates meeting summaries 
and analyzes speech patterns. Essentially, the 
Pendant serves as a personalized assistant 
harnessing environmental information to 
support the user. Both the Humane Pin and 
Rewind Pendant epitomize the shift towards 
invisible, assistive technology that facilitates 
life’s tasks and interactions much like a help-
ful human companion would. This evolution 
in form and function represents a paradigm 
shift, integrating technology more seamlessly 
while making it feel more intuitive and hu-
man-centric.
The Convergence of Gaming Devices for 
Productivity
The portable PC market is gaining momen-
tum, fueled in part by interest in dedicated 
gaming devices. While many portable PCs 
were initially targeted at gamers seeking pow-
er and performance on the go, they show po-
tential for other applications. This potential is reflected in a leaked video showing Microsoft 
exploring an optimized “Windows handheld 
mode” for gaming devices like the Steam 
Deck. The video shows a prototype with a 
custom game launcher, controller-friendly 
keyboard, and floating taskbar designed for 
touchscreens. If developed further, this could 
enable handheld PCs to run Windows and 
games from multiple stores. 
Going in the opposite direction, a developer 
separately created a way to use Steam Deck 
controls in Windows, suggesting the gam-
ing-centric design could suit more general 
purposes. Though preliminary, these signs 
indicate the promise of handheld PCs for 
both gaming and productivity. They could 
serve enterprise and business users as 
ultralight yet high-performance secondary 
machines or bring-your-own-device options. 
Their versatility, comfort with both touch 
and keyboard input, and suitability for en-
tertainment and productivity make them an 
intriguing form factor for multiple use cases.PERSONAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
479© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Handheld gaming devices pack impressive computing power that could be utilized for AI-assisted  
productivity tools.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
Silent Signals 
A dense forest in a hostile territory: Night has fallen, and visibility is limited. A special forces team is tasked with 
rescuing hostages from a heavily guarded compound. Their mission depends on stealth and silent communica-
tion, which is why they’re equipped with the latest spray-on smart skin technology. 
The team gathers at a concealed location near the target and applies the smart skin mesh to each team member’s 
hands. They will use hand gestures to communicate with each other and the remote tactical operations center.
They move silently toward the compound. The team leader raises his hand in the “hold” signal, and the team 
freezes. Using more hand gestures, he conveys there are enemy guards nearby. That gesture data also makes the 
tactical operations center immediately aware of the team’s status—without any verbal communication or inter-
ceptable radio communications that would give away their location.
The team leader signals that he needs feedback from the overhead drone to check movement out of his line of 
sight. He receives silent haptic feedback in his gloves; the staccato pulse vibrations confirm that there is move-
ment, and the opposing forces know the soldiers are there. He signals to his team to execute plan B. The element 
of surprise is lost but the technological advantage remains. 
The primary benefit of this technology lies in enabling communication where radio transmissions and verbal 
commands might otherwise betray position. These silent gestures serve not only for on-the-ground communica-
tion between team members but also facilitate remote interaction with tactical operations, providing a discreet 
and untraceable channel for vital information exchange.
480© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECHTECH
Right to Repair
The Right to Repair movement has rapidly 
gained momentum across the United States, 
with several states passing laws to empower 
consumers and independent repair shops 
in the face of repair restrictions imposed by 
manufacturers. This addresses growing con-
cerns that companies severely limit access to 
replacement parts, tools, and service informa-
tion for items like electronics and machinery, 
forcing reliance on often costlier authorized 
service providers. California is the latest state 
to enact Right to Repair legislation, follow-
ing New York, Colorado and Minnesota over 
the last year. The bill guarantees consumer 
access to the components, manuals and 
diagnostic software needed to service and 
repair electronic products. Significantly, Apple 
expressed support for the law despite past 
lobbying efforts against repair reforms. This 
shift came amidst criticism of Apple for uti-
lizing software locks that prevent functioning 
hardware from operating fully unless repaired 
by Apple technicians using strictly Apple 
components.barely one frame per second. Because adding 
more AirJets doesn’t make the device thicker 
or noisier, in the future PCs equipped with 
the technology could be quieter, thinner and 
have bigger batteries. The company sees po-
tential for AirJet in gaming smartphones, 4K 
webcams, stick PCs, storage devices, door-
bell cameras, and LED light bulbs. 
LLMS as Operating Systems
In November 2023, AI luminary Andrej Karp-
athy introduced a groundbreaking concept 
that could redefine our interaction with com-
puters: an operating system fundamentally 
powered by a LLM. The LLM would not just be 
an add-on feature; the LLM would function 
as the core kernel of the OS. Routine tasks 
could be executed with an unprecedented 
level of sophistication, automating opera-
tions that once required manual interven-
tion. The user interface in this envisioned 
OS departs from traditional graphical user 
interfaces (GUIs) and command-line interac-
tions. It embraces a more intuitive, natural 
language–based interface. Users can interact 
with their computers through conversa-However, challenges linger regarding adher-
ence to the spirit of the laws. For example, 
Apple’s recent iPhone 15 contains proprietary 
software locks that inhibit non-Apple re-
placements, triggering warning messages 
or disabled features. Repair authority iFixit.
com has highlighted how these exclusive 
locks undermine Right to Repair progress 
by limiting choice and affordability around 
genuine repairs. 
Maximum Cooling to Minimize PC Size 
There are traditionally two cooling methods 
for PCs: active cooling with fans and pas-
sive cooling without fans. A startup called 
Frore Systems has developed a novel third 
method: an innovative solid-state device 
called AirJet that provides active cooling in 
a quieter and more compact form factor. 
AirJet’s vibrating membranes in the chip 
create suction and push high-velocity air 
to cool the copper heat spreader below the 
chip. Frore Systems found PCs equipped with 
AirJet performed better than those without 
while running intensive graphics stress 
tests: 9-11 frames per second compared with PERSONAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
481© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
The right to repair advocates for allowing custom-
ers and independent shops to fix their own devices 
independently of the original manufacturer.TECH
tional commands, inquiries, or requests for 
specific tasks. The LLM, understanding these 
requests, would perform a series of actions to 
accomplish the desired outcomes. This con-
cept has moved beyond theory into practical 
application, as demonstrated by Jesse Lyu, 
CEO and founder of Rabbit. Lyu launched the 
R1, a compact device about half the size of 
an iPhone, running on Rabbit OS—an oper-
ating system grounded in a LLM. Rabbit OS 
functions as a universal app controller, akin 
to systems like Alexa or Google Assistant, 
yet it offers a unique twist. It simplifies user 
interaction by removing the need to navigate 
through multiple apps or perform repetitive 
logins. Instead, users can directly communi-
cate their needs to the device, and R1, under-
standing these natural language requests, 
efficiently executes the desired tasks. 
Personal Computers on Wheels
Major automakers are transforming their 
cars into personal computers on wheels. Intel 
recently introduced a new AI-enhanced sys-
tem-on-a-chip specifically for cars, with Zeekr 
being the first to implement this technology. These advancements signal a paradigm 
shift in vehicle interfaces, aligning them 
more closely with digital lifestyles. As people 
grow accustomed to constant access to 
entertainment and information, car manu-
facturers are acknowledging the transfor-
mation of cars into multifunctional personal 
devices. These vehicles are now platforms for 
productivity, social connectivity, and leisure, 
marking a pivotal evolution in the automo-
tive industry and fundamentally changing 
how we interact with our vehicles.Intel’s move into the automotive sector is 
marked by the introduction of the “first-gen-
eration AI-enhanced software-defined 
vehicle system-on-chip.” This development 
is part of its broader strategy to integrate AI 
across various platforms, emphasizing the 
importance of personal computing devic-
es, including cars, as secure environments 
for AI processing compared to cloud-based 
solutions. Volkswagen is another example, 
showcasing its integration of the AI-based 
ChatGPT in its IDA voice assistant in vehi-
cles. Volkswagen plans to standardize this 
feature in many of its production vehicles 
in 2024, being the first volume manufac-
turer to do so. BMW is also reimagining the 
in-car experience. The company is enhancing 
its vehicles with streaming video, gaming 
options, and augmented reality, powered by 
AI-driven voice assistants, using Amazon’s 
Alexa technology as a base. This assistant is 
designed to interact in a more human-like, 
conversational manner, offering both infor-
mation about vehicle functions and control 
over some of these functions. PERSONAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
482© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Since AI enables natural language input, we can 
now communicate more effectively with computers 
in vehicles, making personal computing accessible 
wherever we choose, including in our cars.TECH
483© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING
BIOLOGICAL 
COMPUTINGTECH
Neuromorphic Computing
Researchers are experimenting with new 
architectures to make computers faster and 
more energy efficient. One such approach is 
neuromorphic computing, which is inspired 
by the most energy-efficient computer on 
earth: our human brains. Where conventional 
computers must run commands sequentially, 
laboriously moving data back and forth be-
tween the memory and processor, neuromor-
phic chips simultaneously store and process 
information. Intel’s neuromorphic chips have 
already achieved up to 1,000 times higher en-
ergy efficiency compared to general-purpose 
chips and excel at detecting sensory input 
like gestures, sounds, and even smells. These 
chips have enabled a variety of systems, 
from artificial skin that can sense touch to 
an “electronic nose” capable of identifying 
scents from explosives. Other large-scale 
neuromorphic architecture projects include 
IBM’s TrueNorth, SpiNNaker, BrainScaleS, and 
Tianjic. While neuromorphic computers have not 
yet replaced conventional hardware, re-
cent research shows promise. For instance, 
researchers at Sandia National Laboratories 
have demonstrated that approximation algo-
rithms can be implemented on neuromor-
phic hardware to efficiently solve complex 
optimization problems. Separately, a joint 
team from Purdue, USCD, and ESPCI is work-
ing on research that underscores the need 
for materials vastly different from silicon, 
which can naturally replicate synapses and 
neurons. The team’s breakthrough involves 
using vanadium dioxide, a material exhibit-
ing both synaptic and neuristor capabilities. 
They’ve discovered a way to visually monitor 
changes within this material, revealing that 
memory accumulates across the entire sam-
ple. This insight opens up new possibilities 
on how and where to control this property, 
potentially enhancing the synaptic behavior 
of neuromorphic materials. BIOLOGICAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
484© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Neuromorphic computing mimics the neural structure and processing method of the human brain to cre-
ate more efficient computer systems.TECH
Furthermore, running AI on organoids would 
be more energy efficient. As AI systems like 
self-driving cars become more complex, they 
will require massive amounts of computing 
power and energy; for instance, self-driving 
cars are estimated to use up to 20% more 
energy than conventional cars. In the next 
decade, computers utilizing biological hard-
ware could begin to address the increasingly 
unsustainable energy consumption de-
mands.
Living AIs Solve Equations
Indiana University researchers have crafted 
an organoid with lab-grown human brain 
cell clusters capable of solving elementary 
math tasks. Named Brainoware, this sys-
tem harnesses living brain tissue for com-
putations, potentially lowering the energy 
demands of sophisticated AI platforms. In 
initial tests, the brain organoids could solve 
a complex math problem called the Hénon 
map, demonstrating their ability to perform 
computations. While the organoids are 
limited in size due to a lack of blood vessels, 
the research shows promise for using living hardware to address the energy and hard-
ware limitations faced by increasingly com-
plex AI systems. It should be noted that the 
Brainoware research has been published on 
the preprint server bioRxiv, though not yet in a 
peer-reviewed journal.
BCI + Robots
MIT Media lab and Boston Dynamics are col-
laborating to build the first brain-controlled 
robot. The project, called Ddog, combines 
Boston Dynamics’ Spot robot with an EEG 
brain-computer interface system called At-
tentivU that uses wireless glasses to measure 
brain activity and eye movements. These sig-
nals are then interpreted to control the Spot 
robot in real time. Ddog builds on an existing 
app called Brain Switch, which allows people 
with limited mobility to communicate nonver-
bally with the help of caregivers; it’s complete-
ly wireless and autonomous, running on two 
iPhones without the need for electrodes or 
heavy computing equipment. Ddog conveys 
the promise of combining neurotechnology 
and robotics to empower users and assist 
them in meaningful ways, such as by deliver-Researchers at Johns Hopkins University 
recently outlined a vision for the future of 
biocomputers, powered by human brain 
cells, in a paper published in the journal 
Frontiers in Science. Led by Thomas Hartung, 
the team outlined a roadmap for “organoid 
intelligence,” aiming to bring biological 
computing to life using 3D cultures of hu-
man brain cells. These tiny 3D organoids, no 
larger than the point of a pen, are equipped 
with neurons and circuitry capable of sup-
porting fundamental functions such as 
learning and memory. Organoid intelligence 
holds significant potential for augmenting 
computing capabilities while concurrently 
addressing the escalating energy consump-
tion demands driven by advancements in 
artificial intelligence and supercomputing. 
Despite traditional computers’ ability to pro-
cess calculations at speeds far surpassing 
human capabilities, human brains demon-
strate superior performance in complex 
decision-making tasks, such as differenti-
ating between a dog and a cat. Running AI 
on organoids could be the key to achieving 
human-like complex decision-making. BIOLOGICAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
485© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Organoid Intelligence
The key distinction 
between biocomputers and 
neuromorphic computing 
resides in the systems and 
elements they each seek 
to replicate and harness. 
Neuromorphic computing 
aims to mirror its efficiency 
in the design of computing 
systems while biocomputing 
looks to utilize the inherent 
capabilities of biological 
materials or systems for 
information processing. TECH
ing groceries or other objects, moving furni-
ture, or retrieving items using Spot’s robotic 
arm. Because the system is highly mobile and 
practical for in-home use, it has significant 
applications for less mobile populations, in-
cluding those with disabilities and the elderly. 
As populations continue to age, human work-
ers may not be able to provide assistance to 
all those who need it. Systems like Ddog show 
how robots can help fill in the gaps, providing 
autonomy and a better quality of life for users.
Soft Implantables
Conventional brain implants are rigid, mak-
ing them ill-suited for the soft tissues of 
the brain. To address this, engineers at Rice 
University developed an alternative: ultraflex-
ible nanoelectrodes that can achieve connec-
tions with minimal harm. These tiny, flexible 
implants deliver targeted electrical pulses 
that closely match natural neural signaling. 
With their precision and biocompatibility, 
the flexible nanoelectrodes could enable new 
therapies like sensory or motor prosthetics. 
Separately, Harvard researchers are develop-
ing a soft electrode using natural hydrogels leads to scarring around the implant. The 
researchers’ biomimetic approach, allowing 
the brain’s own movements to shape the im-
plant, holds promise for crafting neural in-
terfaces that last as long as they are needed.
Nanowire Networks Emulate Our Memories
Researchers at the University of Sydney built 
nanowire networks that physically mimic 
the structure of the human brain. These 
networks—composed of mesh silver wires—
exhibited both short-term and long-term 
memory, which suggests that brain-like 
learning and memory could potentially be 
replicated in non-biological systems. When 
information in the nanowire network is re-
peatedly reinforced, it becomes consolidated 
into long-term memory, similar to how our 
brains convert short-term memories into 
long-term memories. This research expands 
on previous work showing nanotechnology 
can be used to build brain-inspired devices 
with neural network-like circuits and syn-
apse-like signaling; the results suggest the 
essence of human-level intelligence could 
arise from physical structures. Imitating Human Perception: Advancing 
Computer Vision
Humans are good at predicting how objects 
and people will move. When we pass a person 
on the sidewalk, we have a good model of their 
trajectory; when we are stopped at a red light 
at an intersection, we can reasonably predict 
which oncoming cars will turn. This is because 
we exhibit “perceptual straightness”—the 
ability to perceive dynamic visual information 
and transform it into a stable mental repre-
sentation. Unlike humans, computer vision 
models typically lack this ability, which is a 
problem if we want to interact with mobile 
robots or autonomous vehicles. But that could 
change, after MIT researchers identified a 
property that helps computer vision models 
learn to represent the visual world in a more 
stable, predictable way. The researchers found 
that training computer vision models using 
adversarial training, which makes them less 
sensitive to small errors in images, improves 
their perceptual straightness. They also found 
that the task a model is trained on affects its 
perceptual straightness: It’s more effective 
to train models on abstract tasks like image extracted from seaweed. These gels possess 
the same pliability and responsiveness as 
the brain itself. Anchored to the organ’s 
movements rather than resisting them, 
hydrogel electrodes could foster connections 
that stand the test of time. The researchers 
note that soft, biologically based electrodes 
may permit more natural cell contact and 
integration than their stiff, metallic counter-
parts.
Conventional implants have another limita-
tion: they are temporary. As the soft brain 
moves, it repeatedly collides with rigid elec-
trodes and gets damaged. In response, scar 
tissue builds up around the implant, cutting 
it off from surrounding neurons. Within a few 
years, this scarring isolates the device to the 
point that it must be replaced. Researchers 
at Linköping University developed a solution: 
Rather than building an electrode outside 
the brain and forcing it in, they designed 
an injectable gel. Once inside the brain, the 
gel solidifies into a conductive, yet pliable, 
electrode. Because this electrode moves 
with the brain, it avoids the damage that BIOLOGICAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
486© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
classification than fine-grained tasks like 
pixel-wise classification. Understanding 
perceptual straightness in computer vision 
could help make robot/human interaction 
safer since better computer vision would help 
robots better predict trajectories of people 
and vehicles. 
Storing Images in DNA With Biological 
Camera 
Researchers are exploring DNA computing as 
an alternative storage medium to resource-in-
tensive data centers, due to DNA’s immense 
storage capacity and long-term stability. How-
ever, current DNA storage research focuses 
on synthesizing DNA strands outside of cells, 
an expensive, complex, error-prone process. 
To overcome this challenge, researchers at 
the National University of Singapore turned to 
live cells containing DNA that act as a natural 
“data bank.” The system—called BacCam—em-
ulates a digital camera’s functions using bio-
logical components. “Imagine the DNA within 
a cell as an undeveloped photographic film,” 
explained associate professor Chueh Loo Poh, 
who led the research. “Using optogenetics—a uses DNA molecules and biological enzymes 
to perform logic gate operations, the build-
ing blocks of all computer programs. Unlike 
live cell biocomputing, Trumpet is nonliv-
ing, so it avoids evolutionary constraints 
on live cells and signal leakage issues. The 
researchers demonstrated they can use 
Trumpet to build all universal Boolean logic 
gates (e.g., “and,” “or”) and also built a web-
based platform for designing Trumpet gates. 
The lead author of the study and Ph.D. can-
didate Judee Sharon is exploring the use of 
the Trumpet platform to develop biomedical 
applications for early cancer diagnosis. An-
other promising area is “theranostics”—the 
fusion of diagnostics and therapeutics—and 
Trumpet could be used to detect conditions 
like low insulin levels. By harnessing the 
computational power of biology, Trumpet 
could transform how diseases are diagnosed 
and treated in the coming decades.technique that controls the activity of cells 
with light akin to the shutter mechanism of 
a camera, we managed to capture ‘images’ 
by imprinting light signals onto the DNA 
‘film.’” BacCam can capture and store mul-
tiple images simultaneously using different 
light colors, and the images were marked 
with barcoding for labeling purposes. Ma-
chine learning algorithms organized, sorted, 
and reconstructed the images, constituting 
a “biological camera” that mirrors a digital 
camera’s data capture, storage, and retrieval 
capabilities. Importantly, compared to prior 
DNA storage methods, the team’s innovative 
system is easily reproducible and scalable.
DNA-Based Molecular Computing
Traditional computer hardware is limited in 
its ability to interface with living organs, and 
computerized implants require a constant 
supply of electricity and cause damage to 
soft tissue. Researchers at the University of 
Minnesota have developed a biocomputing 
platform to overcome both of these chal-
lenges. The Transcriptional RNA Universal 
Multi-Purpose GatE PlaTform, or “Trumpet,” BIOLOGICAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
487© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
DNA-based molecular computing uses the unique 
properties of DNA molecules to perform compu-
tations, offering a potential for massively parallel 
processing and storage capabilities.TECH
Image Reconstruction
Recent advancements are allowing us to 
glimpse inside the human mind, offering 
a way to reconstruct thoughts and images. 
Although still in its early stages, this tech-
nology shows promising potential. Consider 
the two images: the first, known as the “seen 
image,” is a picture of what a human saw 
with their eyes; the second, called the “recon-
struction,” is what a machine learning model 
thinks the person saw, based only on a brain 
scan. State-of-the-art brain image reconstruc-
tion techniques made these results possible.
In the rapidly growing field of fMRI recon-
struction, new projects aim to improve 
performance, interpretability, and versatil-
ity. Diffusion-based methods have already 
created images from pure noise, with breath-
taking results seen in projects like MindEye, 
designed to retrieve and reconstruct viewed 
images from brain activity. It can map brain 
activity to high-dimensional spaces, allow-
ing image reconstruction using generative 
models. Compared to other methods, MindEye 
achieves top performance in both reconstruc-tion and retrieval, even among highly sim-
ilar images. Another exciting development 
is Mind-Video, which reconstructs human 
vision in video form from continuous fMRI 
data. By learning from the brain’s spatial and 
temporal information, Mind-Video can create 
high-quality videos at varying frame rates. 
Together, these innovations are breaking 
new ground in understanding human cog-
nition and unlocking our ability to visualize 
the mind’s content. They mark an exciting 
step toward a future where thoughts might 
be visually represented and no longer con-
fined within our skulls.BIOLOGICAL COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
488© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
The seen image is what is physically presented to a person, while the reconstruction is the image generat-
ed by AI from analyzing the person’s brain FMRI scan.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2039
The Digital DNA Walkers 
The world is facing an unprecedented explosion of data. Conventional storage methods are energy intensive and 
expensive, leading companies to turn to an unconventional solution: human beings as walking, living data stor-
age devices. A tech startup named GeneBank offers individuals a unique opportunity to monetize their DNA. By 
becoming a “Data Carrier,” they can lease space within their DNA to corporations, research institutions, or private 
clients. The procedure is simple, painless, and perfectly safe, according to GeneBank’s marketing materials. 
Given the value of the data stored within human carriers, insurance companies start offering specialized DNA 
data insurance as part of their health insurance plans. These policies cover potential data loss, corruption, or 
unauthorized access. Data Carriers are required to undergo regular check-ups to ensure the integrity of the infor-
mation they carry, and premiums are tied to the volume and sensitivity of the data. This is an ideal side hustle 
for anyone engaged in the gig economy.
489© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECHSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2039
AI + OI + LOE 
Organoid intelligence has become the forefront of computational evolution, merging human-like decision-mak-
ing capabilities with the speed of traditional computers. However, the ethical dilemma around these brain 
organoids sparked global debate and protests, leading to a radical decision by a pioneering company called 
NeurAI. 
Facing mounting pressure from ethical watchdogs, human rights activists, and protesters equating organ-
oid-powered AI with slavery, NeurAI sought an innovative solution: relocating manufacturing and computation 
to outer space, outside any specific country’s jurisdiction—and legal or ethical boundaries. 
Through the move to space, NeurAI capitalizes on the ease of creating organoids in microgravity—in micrograv-
ity they form more uniform structures. It lets customers access the organoid powered AI through NeurAI’s cloud 
platform, The Celestial Mind. This network becomes globally accessible, providing unparalleled computational 
power for applications ranging from scientific research to business analytics. 
490© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECHTECH
491© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING
ADVANCED 
LARGE SCALE 
COMPUTINGTECH
Exascale Supercomputing
Exascale computers are digital computers 
that are much more powerful than today’s 
supercomputers but different from quantum 
computers. While quantum computers use 
unique quantum properties to perform com-
putations, exascale computers use the same 
transistor-based architecture as today’s 
most powerful computers, just taken to the 
extreme. In 2022, the world’s first exascale 
computer, known as Frontier, came online at 
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Frontier 
can perform calculations seven times faster 
and hold four times more data in memory 
than previous supercomputers. Two more 
exascale computers, El Capitan and Aurora, 
are expected soon. All three are projects of 
the US Department of Energy and its National 
Nuclear Security Administration to run the 
calculations that help maintain the nuclear 
weapons stockpile. The supercomputers also 
exist to solve intractable problems in science. 
For instance, exascale computers could refine 
hurricane predictions in meteorology or simu-
late molecular structures for the pharmaceu-
tical industry. In medicine, exascale comput-with various providers such as AWS, Google 
Cloud, and Azure while ensuring a consis-
tent user experience; it means that devel-
opers don’t need to repeatedly configure a 
new app with security features and various 
operating systems for every cloud platform 
their organization employs. Supercloud also 
implies that end users can transfer data and 
applications smoothly across clouds and 
data centers without hindrance. Companies 
like Snowflake are already offering data ser-
vices that connect to major hyperscale cloud 
providers, but the concept of the supercloud 
is still far from mainstream. Hurdles remain, 
such as the dissolution of closed ecosys-
tems and issues surrounding data gravity, 
security, backup, and monitoring.
Serverless Cloud
Serverless cloud computing is a transforma-
tional approach to cloud services. The term 
is often misunderstood—serverless com-
puting still relies on servers. However, the 
cloud provider takes on the responsibility of 
managing and operating those servers. Tra-
ditionally, cloud computing requires renting ers have already analyzed genetic mutations 
of SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing COVID—re-
ducing the calculation time from a week to 
a day—to comprehend how these genetic 
variations impact the virus’ infectiousness.
Supercloud 
Cloud computing holds value in part be-
cause of its user-friendly nature—it provides 
an abstraction layer over storage, process-
ing, and applications, eliminating the need 
for users to handle hardware and software 
maintenance. However, in an era where 
businesses manage multiple cloud environ-
ments, there’s a reemergent need for another 
abstraction layer to simplify management. 
Enter the supercloud. First coined in a 2017 
study by Cornell University, the term refers 
to an added abstraction layer that oper-
ates independently of the underlying cloud 
platforms. This layer allows various cloud 
environments to interact and function as 
a cohesive whole, facilitating the effortless 
movement of software, applications, and 
data across different cloud ecosystems. It 
lets companies maintain service contracts ADVANCED LARGE SCALE COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
492© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Supercloud is a cloud architecture that integrates 
services, data, and applications across multiple 
clouds for greater flexibility, scalability, and in-
teroperability.TECH
virtual machines (VMs) from a provider; the 
user must handle security, failure recov-
ery, and overload prevention for those VMs. 
Serverless computing revolutionizes this 
model by shifting all server management 
duties to the cloud provider. This concept is 
exemplified by Amazon Web Services’ (AWS) 
recent serverless innovations. For instance, 
AWS introduced Amazon Aurora Limitless 
Database, a part of Amazon Aurora now in 
preview. This service scales to handle millions 
of transactions per second and manages vast 
data volumes. It functions by automatically 
distributing data and queries across multiple 
serverless Aurora instances, relieving cus-
tomers from managing a complex database 
system. Other serverless innovations from 
AWS include Amazon ElastiCache Serverless, 
which enables creating highly available data 
caches without manual setup. Additionally, 
Amazon Redshift Serverless proactively ad-
justs resources based on workload patterns, 
no manual tuning needed. Microsoft, IBM, and 
Cloud Flare also have solutions in this space. 
These innovations in moving the responsibili-
ty of server management from the user to the of meeting the high energy demands of AI 
and achieving climate goals. Microsoft’s 
exploration of this avenue, including seeking 
expertise in SMR rollout, reflects a broader 
industry trend. 
Photonic Computing Architecture
Machine vision allows computers to inter-
pret images similar to how the human eye 
and brain “sees,” but even faster and more 
accurately. Researchers at Tsinghua Univer-
sity are proposing a photonic computing 
architecture to enhance this capability. 
Current photonic computing is limited by 
slow memory access. The researchers’ new 
architecture combines parallel spatial com-
puting (simultaneous tasks) and temporal 
computing (fast sequential tasks) in a “3D 
spatiotemporal plane.” They’ve also devel-
oped a new training system to optimize both 
the physical system and the network model. 
In doing so, they’ve been able to speed video 
processing 40 times with 35 times fewer 
parameters than traditional systems. The 
researchers believe their new system could 
be the first step toward ultrafast machine vision that isn’t held back by the slow speeds 
of computer memory, with applications in un-
manned systems (like drones or autonomous 
robots), autonomous driving, and ultrafast 
science.
Photonic Cellular Automata 
Caltech researchers have leveraged optical 
hardware to create cellular automata, com-
puter models consisting of cells that can 
live, die, reproduce, and evolve. From these 
simple rules emerge complex behaviors that 
can be used to perform computing tasks. For 
instance, cellular automata can be used to 
generate random numbers, conduct physics 
simulations, and do cryptography. Cellular 
automata are ideal for photonic technologies 
because information processing happens 
locally (cells only interact with immediate 
neighbors), eliminating much of the hardware 
that makes photonic computing difficult. 
Furthermore, the high bandwidth of photonic 
computing allows cellular automata imple-
mented with light to run extremely fast, up to 
three orders of magnitude faster than digital 
computers. In Caltech’s photonic computing cloud provider greatly simplify usage while 
allowing for flexible scaling.
Alternative Energy for Data Center
The monumental computational require-
ments of advancing AI could catalyze a nu-
clear power renaissance. A job posting from 
Microsoft hints that the company is explor-
ing using small modular nuclear reactors 
(SMRs) to meet its AI and cloud computing 
needs. SMRs promise cheaper, faster mod-
ular construction compared to traditional 
nuclear plants, which are often over-bud-
get and delayed. Microsoft’s approach was 
hinted at further in the fact that they already 
have a deal to buy Clean Energy Credits from 
Ontario Power Generation, which is on track 
to be the first utility to deploy an SMR in 
North America. Companies like Rolls-Royce, 
Last Energy, NuScale, Oklo, and TerraPower 
(backed by Bill Gates) are also developing 
various SMR models. Similarly, Kärnfull Next 
in Sweden plans to use SMRs to power data 
centers. The pivot towards nuclear ener-
gy, particularly next-generation SMRs, is a 
strategic response to the dual challenges ADVANCED LARGE SCALE COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
493© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
device, the cellular automata cells are puls-
es of light interacting on a hardware grid to 
process information without the slowdown 
caused by digital computing layers. This tech-
nology could enable next-generation com-
puters that perform tasks far more efficiently 
than digital electronic computers.
Magnon-based Computation
Traditional computing architectures sep-
arate processors and memory, requiring 
energy-intensive signal conversions to move 
data between components. This bottleneck, 
known as the memory wall, slows computa-
tion and wastes energy. However, a team led 
by Dirk Grundler at the Swiss Federal Insti-
tute of Technology is developing an alterna-
tive computing approach using magnonics 
to overcome this limitation. Magnonics, an 
emerging field that aims to enable faster, 
more efficient information technologies, 
uses magnons, which are quanta of spin 
waves that can encode and transport data in 
magnetic materials without electron flows or 
Joule heating. The researchers harnessed this 
property to design a magnonic computing device that enables in-memory computa-
tion, where processing and memory occur 
in the same physical location. With memory 
and processing occurring in the same place, 
the magnonic technique could significantly 
reduce computing’s energy consumption by 
overcoming the memory wall. Theoretically, 
it could enable terahertz data processing 
speeds, far exceeding today’s gigahertz 
processors. While still requiring optimiza-
tion, this approach shows promise for more 
sustainable computing through wave-based 
in-memory processing. By attracting re-
searchers to magnonics, the team hopes to 
spur interest in this field.ADVANCED LARGE SCALE COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
494© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Magnon-based computing utilizes magnons—quasiparticles associated with the collective spin wave 
excitations in magnetic materials—to process and store information, offering a potential pathway to 
low-power, high-speed computing.QUANTUM  
COMPUTINGTECH COMPUTING
495© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
Quantum Advantage
Quantum advantage, also known as quan-
tum supremacy, is the theoretical point when 
quantum computers outperform classical 
computers by solving problems more effi-
ciently, accurately, or faster. In June 2023, IBM 
Quantum and University of California, Berkeley 
researchers unveiled a major step forward 
in the quest for quantum supremacy. In an 
experiment, they both executed increasingly 
complex physical simulations—IBM Quantum 
on the 127-qubit IBM Quantum Eagle proces-
sor, and UC Berkeley using state-of-the-art 
classical approximation methods on super-
computers. At certain computational levels, 
the traditional supercomputer’s brute-force 
methods failed while the quantum processor 
continued to deliver solutions. Even when 
classical solutions weren’t possible, advanced 
classical approximation methods were used 
for comparison with quantum outcomes. It 
was observed that the quantum processor’s 
results were more accurate than the classical 
approximations, marking a significant ad-
vancement in quantum computing. For Darío 
Gil, senior vice president and director of IBM Though both countries purport to be the 
global quantum leader, between 2011 and 
2020, the US led in quantum computing 
publications and secured double the num-
ber of highly cited publications compared to 
China, according to Foreign Policy. US quan-
tum computing companies also reportedly 
received 30 times more funding than their 
private Chinese counterparts, though signif-
icant investment is being made in govern-
ment-backed research in China. But China is 
moving quickly: Despite trailing in quantum 
computing, the country leads the world in 
quantum communications, a subfield that 
promises ultra-secure data transfers. And 
Chinese quantum researchers claim to have 
developed an algorithm that can break pub-
lic-key encryption, much earlier than antic-
ipated. Though these claims have been met 
with much skepticism, if valid, they would 
imply a significant quantum advantage for 
China. 
Notably, following controls on semiconduc-
tors, the US Commerce Department seems 
to be turning its attention to quantum computing, expressing concern that China 
could weaponize this emerging technology. It 
is anticipated that export controls on quan-
tum computing hardware, error correction 
software, and provision of cloud services to 
Chinese entities will become the next battle-
ground in the US-China tech war. Despite this 
competition, tech companies acknowledge 
that achieving true quantum advantage re-
quires collective effort, so expect an increase 
in partnerships within the sector.
Quantum Noise Reduction
In 2023, researchers made several advances 
in strategies to overcome noise and errors 
that limit the accuracy and reliability of 
quantum computers. One approach is IBM’s 
zero noise extrapolation (ZNE) which aims to 
mitigate these issues, and was key to achiev-
ing the aforementioned major step forward in 
quantum advantage. ZNE intentionally intro-
duces more noise into quantum circuits and 
then estimates the noiseless result by extrap-
olating backward. This relies on modeling how 
noise impacts the quantum computer’s out-
puts. Other approaches aim to protect qubits Research, this achievement marks the first 
instance of quantum computers modeling a 
physical system in nature beyond the ca-
pabilities of leading classical approaches. 
According to him, this milestone signifies 
the advent of a new era of practical utility for 
quantum computing. Although IBM’s exper-
iment doesn’t serve as definitive proof, it 
offers a valuable data point suggesting that 
by using error mitigation, current quantum 
computers can provide benefits much sooner 
than previously anticipated.
Global Quantum Competition
Both the US and China are competing to be-
come the global leader in quantum—a posi-
tion that would enable the leading country to 
threaten adversaries’ various information in-
frastructures by cracking existing encryption 
methods, building impenetrable encrypted 
communication networks, and developing 
highly precise sensors. Furthermore, the first 
country to commercialize quantum would 
have enormous market power; by 2035, the 
global market value of quantum computing 
alone is predicted to reach $1 trillion. QUANTUM COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
496© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
from noise during computations and improve 
measurements of their states. For example, 
National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy scientists created a device with a toggle 
switch to adjust qubit connectivity and iso-
late them when not needed. This helps reduce 
environmental noise that disturbs the qubits. 
Separately, MIT researchers developed a new 
parametric amplifier that squeezes noise over 
a broader bandwidth. By redistributing noise, 
they can amplify the lower-noise variable and 
get more accurate readouts. Though quantum 
hardware remains error-prone, these advanc-
es reflect encouraging progress toward prac-
tical noise reduction.
Quantum Error Detection and Correction
Quantum error detection and correction are 
essential for the advancement of quantum 
computing, ensuring accurate computations. 
2023 witnessed several significant strides in 
this area. MIT researchers developed a super-
conducting qubit architecture using a new 
type of superconducting qubit called fluxo-
nium, enhancing the accuracy of operations 
between qubits. This architecture is scalable, efforts, reaching the highest-ever observed 
entanglement rate in such systems. Collec-
tively, these advancements represent major 
steps towards realizing robust, scalable, and 
accurate quantum computing.
Hybrid Classical-Quantum
As we await the era of full quantum suprem-
acy, hybrid classical-quantum computing 
has emerged as a practical solution in 
the interim. Hybrid systems combine the 
strengths of quantum computers, like run-
ning complex simulations or factoring large 
numbers, with the capabilities of classical 
computers for tasks like data management 
and error correction. This allows us to tap 
into the potential of quantum even with its 
present limitation. In March 2023, Nvidia 
announced an important advancement in 
hybrid computing with the DGX Quantum 
system, the first GPU-accelerated quantum 
computer. The DGX Quantum incorporates 
Quantum Machines’ sophisticated quantum 
control platform OPX together with Nvidia’s 
powerful Grace Hopper Superchip and CUDA 
Quantum programming model.This combination enables researchers to run 
intricate applications that utilize both quan-
tum and classical computing strengths. Key 
capabilities like quantum error correction, 
calibration, control, and execution of hybrid al-
gorithms are now viable, ushering in a new era 
of quantum-accelerated supercomputing.
Quantum Quality Over Quantity
Some quantum computing companies have 
shifted their focus from chasing qubit count 
records to building practical systems that 
can solve real-world problems. For example, 
IBM’s new 133-qubit Heron processor shows 
an emphasis on qubit quality over raw qu-
bit numbers. Though lower qubit count than 
previous IBM chips, Heron’s modular design 
may enable scaling to far larger sizes by 
connecting multiple processors. This “modu-
lar” approach could be key to more powerful 
quantum computers. IBM will connect Heron 
chips using conventional electronics, dis-
rupting their quantum states. However, IBM’s 
vision is that quantum-compatible links, like 
fiber optics or microwaves, will enable modu -
lar chips to connect into a distributed, scaled potentially suitable for building large-scale 
quantum computers. This design achieved 
over 99.9% accuracy in both two-qubit gates 
and single-qubit gates. Separately, RIKEN 
scientists leveraged machine learning for 
efficient approximate quantum error correc-
tion, outperforming other methods. Another 
team, in a collaboration among Harvard, MIT, 
and QuEra Computing, reported a signifi-
cant breakthrough in Nature. Their platform, 
based on an array of cold, laser-trapped 
rubidium atoms, each acting as a qubit, 
demonstrated near-flawless performance of 
two-qubit entangling gates with extreme-
ly low error rates. They achieved the ability 
to entangle atoms with error rates below 
0.5%, a major step forward in quantum error 
correction. Additionally, Caltech researchers 
demonstrated a type of quantum eraser, 
effectively pinpointing and correcting “era-
sure” errors in quantum computing systems. 
They developed a system where erroneous at-
oms fluoresce when hit with a laser, allowing 
for precise error location and removal. Their 
method achieved a tenfold improvement in 
entanglement rates compared to previous QUANTUM COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
497© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
system—potentially millions of high-quality 
qubits. Companies like PsiQuantum have 
similar modular visions. 
PsiQuantum, a company using photons as 
qubits, is nearly done with a modular silicon 
quantum chip design. According to Chief 
Scientific Officer Peter Shadbolt, an ultrafast, 
low-loss optical switch—the last component 
needed—will mean all features are in place 
for a scalable quantum chip. PsiQuantum 
will then connect many chips into a cohesive 
system at warehouse scale. Announcements 
from multiple companies point to modular 
multi-chip quantum systems as a key area of 
progress to watch in 2024 and beyond. They 
could signify a path to finally achieving quan-
tum computers with hundreds of high-quality 
qubits and meaningful computational power.
Quantum Machine Learning
The complexity and enormity of drug design 
pose significant challenges for traditional 
computational methods. Due to the countless 
number of possible molecular candidates, 
even the most advanced supercomputers A quantum internet could provide virtually 
unhackable communications since qubits 
rely on the physical properties of photons, 
which cannot be intercepted. The laws of 
quantum mechanics simply do not allow it; 
any attempt to observe particles in a quan-
tum state will alter the particles and thus 
destroy any information they transmit. In 
May 2023, researchers at the University of 
Innsbruck built the first long-distance quan-
tum repeater node for telecommunication 
networks transmitting quantum information 
over 50 km of optical fiber. This is significant 
because until now, the likelihood of photons 
being lost over long distances was very high. 
The researchers showed that with some 
improvements, their design could transmit 
over 800 km, enough to connect Innsbruck 
and Vienna. Separately, Princeton research-
ers have also made a significant advance-
ment in quantum communication by devel-
oping a new type of quantum repeater—key 
for linking quantum computers over large 
distances. Unlike classical data, which can 
travel long distances without interruption, 
quantum information requires quantum re-peaters to relay information in segments. The 
Princeton team’s device stands out for its use 
of infrared light, which is more robust for fiber 
optic transmission than the visible light used 
in other designs. They achieved this by embed-
ding a single rare earth ion in a crystal, emit-
ting light at the ideal infrared wavelength, thus 
eliminating the need for signal conversion. 
Open-Source Quantum Software
Quantum computing holds great promise 
but remains prohibitively expensive for most 
researchers. Individual hobbyists cannot build 
quantum computers in their garages; only 
governments and large companies can afford 
the capital required. This poses a problem 
because, like any scientific field, quantum 
computing would accelerate with more minds 
contributing. So, researchers are motivat-
ed to develop open-source tools for greater 
collaboration. One example is SuperConga, 
open-source software to simulate quantum 
materials. Researchers at Chalmers University 
in Sweden created SuperConga specifically 
to understand unconventional superconduc-
tors, which have properties that could protect are exhausted. But these types of complex 
computation problems are where quantum 
computers shine. A team from the Russian 
Quantum Center in Skolkovo, Moscow, has 
demonstrated that quantum computing 
devices together with machine learning can 
be used for generative chemistry and drug 
design. They developed a hybrid architecture 
that melds quantum computers with deep 
classical networks, overcoming the com-
plexities inherent in the structural space of 
potential drug-like molecules. Their compact 
model successfully generated 2,331 novel 
chemical structures from a subset of the 
ChEMBL database of biologically active com-
pounds. This outcome is exciting because 
it demonstrates the feasibility of using 
currently available or soon-to-be-released 
quantum devices for real-world health appli-
cations. 
The Quantum Internet
The quantum internet is a proposed future 
network that would allow quantum comput-
ers and quantum devices to communicate 
with each other using quantum information. QUANTUM COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
498© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
quantum information. But because experi-
ments are difficult, expensive, and time-con-
suming, a lot is unknown about these lit-
tle-explored superconductors. 
That’s where a tool like SuperConga comes in. 
The key is studying quantum properties from 
the microscopic particle level up to the macro-
scopic scale. Researchers need tools that work 
in between, at the mesoscopic level. Open-
source software like SuperConga lowers the 
barrier so more researchers can drive progress 
in quantum computing. With a collaborative 
ecosystem, the field can advance more rapidly.
A Developers’ Quantum T oolbox 
Programming quantum computers presents 
significant challenges, primarily because 
they introduce an entirely new computation-
al paradigm. Quantum computations are 
often described using the quantum circuit 
model, where algorithms are expressed as 
a predefined sequence of quantum opera-
tions. This structure can make it difficult to 
implement certain programming concepts 
common in classical computing, such as es and a high level of technical expertise. 
To increase accessibility, many companies 
now offer quantum computing as a cloud-
based service, also referred to as quan-
tum-as-a-service or serverless quantum. 
IBM is one such company providing more 
accessible quantum computing through its 
open-source Qiskit software. Qiskit allows 
classical code to have low-latency access to 
quantum processors, enabling much faster 
execution for workloads that leverage quan-
tum hardware through repeated iterations. 
Everything is provided as encapsulated 
cloud services, with no capacity planning or 
lifecycle management required by the user. 
Microsoft, too, has embraced the quantum-
as-a-service model, announcing its Inte-
grated Hybrid feature in Azure Quantum, the 
company’s open software cloud: Researchers 
can now build applications combining clas-
sical and quantum code to run on Quantin-
uum’s quantum computers through Azure 
Quantum. It’s not just companies that are 
offering quantum in the cloud; China recent-
ly launched two quantum cloud platforms to 
allow public access to the country’s quan-tum computers. One provides access to Chi-
na’s fastest quantum computer, Zuchongzhi 
2, and the other access to Quafu, a computer 
from the Beijing Academy of Quantum Infor-
mation Sciences. Both will provide researchers 
and students hands-on access to advance 
quantum computing research and education.
Quantum Resistant Cryptography
“Q-Day” refers to the threshold when quantum 
computers can crack traditional internet-se-
curing encryption protocols. This possibility 
was first predicted in 1994 by Peter Shor of 
Bell Labs, who published a paper showing 
quantum algorithms could crack RSA encryp-
tion, a system relying on large prime number 
keys, unsolvable by today’s supercomput-
ers but potentially crackable in minutes by 
quantum computers. This suggests the first 
entity to create a working quantum computer 
gains massive hacking capabilities. Acknowl-
edging this, companies like Vodafone have 
announced partnerships with companies like 
SandboxAQ to test quantum-safe VPNs, using 
cryptographic algorithms from the US Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology. flexible routines with conditional logic and 
loops. Once a quantum circuit is executed 
and an output is generated, the quantum 
state collapses upon measurement, marking 
the end of that specific computation. Hori-
zon Quantum Computing is building a set of 
programming tools that enable developers 
to perform flexible computation routines on 
quantum computers. The approach would 
allow users to write programs in classical 
languages that can be compiled on quantum 
computers, without requiring any knowledge 
of quantum computing. There is also grow-
ing recognition of the need for new “non-
standard” quantum programming approach-
es. Hybrid quantum-classical computing 
and versatile programming models are in-
creasingly seen as promising paths forward. 
Companies like Algorithmiq are pursuing 
these paths by combining quantum comput-
ing with classical algorithms specifically for 
drug discovery.
Quantum-as-a-Service
Owning and maintaining a quantum com-
puter requires substantial financial resourc-QUANTUM COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
499© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
They’re anticipating cyberattackers may al-
ready be collecting data for future decryption 
with quantum computers—a threat known as 
“Store Now, Decrypt Later”—and testing quan-
tum vulnerability scenarios on smartphones. 
Multi-tasking Quantum
Researchers at the University of Sussex and 
Universal Quantum have achieved a major 
milestone in quantum computing: success-
fully demonstrating the direct transfer of 
quantum bits (qubits) between microchips 
at remarkable speed and accuracy. Published 
in Nature, this advancement addresses a key 
challenge in constructing potent quantum 
computers to tackle complex problems. The 
team used a new “UQ Connect” technique 
involving electric field links to rapidly and 
precisely transfer qubits between quantum 
microchip modules. This Lego-like assembly 
method enables larger, multi-tasking quan-
tum systems. Unlike classical sequential 
processing, quantum computers can per-
form calculations simultaneously, leveraging 
quantum properties like superposition and 
entanglement. Reliable inter-chip qubit trans-tance communication. Separately, Univer-
sity of Waterloo scientists developed an 
optical system to control individual barium 
ion qubits with record precision, targeting 
them just microns apart. Barium ions are 
gaining popularity in the field of trapped ion 
quantum computation for their manipula-
tion with visible versus ultraviolet light. This 
enables the researchers to use commercial 
available optical technologies. Their new 
laser focusing method via a glass waveguide 
establishes a straightforward yet highly pre-
cise approach to controlling qubits for com-
puting, communication and more. Together, 
these advances strengthen quantum foun-
dations while bringing practical, efficient 
quantum devices closer to reality.fers have been a major obstacle, often caus-
ing information degradation. However, Sus-
sex’s breakthrough achieved 99.999993% 
accuracy, overcoming this barrier. Collabo-
ration with Rolls-Royce aims to apply en-
hanced quantum capabilities to develop 
highly efficient machines. This rapid, precise 
qubit chip connectivity brings advanced, 
multi-tasking quantum computers closer 
to reality. It demonstrates the feasibility of 
linking multiple quantum microchips to 
construct vastly more powerful systems and 
expands possibilities for real-world quantum 
applications.
Light-based Quantum T echnologies
Two recent studies showcase significant 
progress in efficiently manipulating light 
and quantum particles to advance quantum 
technologies. Researchers at the University 
of Stuttgart enhanced the efficiency of a 
vital quantum component, surpassing the 
presumed theoretical limit. By increasing 
efficiency from 50% to 57.9%, their seeming-
ly small gain enables multiple sequential 
quantum measurements, boosting long-dis-QUANTUM COMPUTINGCOMPUTING
500© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
Unlike traditional computers, quantum computers 
use quantum bits or qubits, which can represent and 
store information as both 0 and 1 simultaneously 
thanks to superposition, enabling quantum comput-
ers to process complex data and perform calculations 
at speeds unattainable by classical computers.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2038
Criminal Caught With Quantum 
New York City, 2038—In a groundbreaking revelation, two of New York’s premier banks, JPMorgan Chase and 
Citigroup, have successfully thwarted an advanced cyber intrusion, thanks to their recent implementation of 
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD). The security breach, which went unnoticed for years, was finally detected and 
led to the capture of the notorious hacker known as Cipher. Cipher, whose real identity remains confidential, 
had been intercepting sensitive financial transactions between the two banking giants for several years. The 
stealthy infiltration managed to bypass all classical encryption measures, leaving the banks unaware of the 
constant surveillance. However, a recent upgrade to QKD technology changed the game.
With QKD’s arrival, the banks initiated a trial run to ensure the efficacy of the system. During a routine transac-
tion, the technology signaled an anomaly in the quantum channel. Kate Garlow, JPMorgan’s head of cybersecu-
rity, explains, “When we implemented QKD, we didn’t expect to find evidence of a security breach. We realized 
something was amiss when the qubits’ state collapsed during transmission, a clear indication of eavesdrop-
ping.” Jorrie Norris, Citigroup’s chief technology officer, adds, “We knew right away that this wasn’t an ordinary 
attempt. Cipher had been watching us for years, but QKD made his presence known.”
501© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECHTECH
502© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING
NETWORKINGSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2026
Communal Compute at the Stadium 
Carson makes her way to her seat at Arrowhead Stadium. She’s a life-long Kansas City Chiefs fan, and she’s tak-
ing advantage of being on call to catch the game, confident that her boss won’t find out.
Not long after she sits down, though, Carson’s phone buzzes; it’s her boss, urgently requesting her to run a 
quick test on a model. A pang of panic hits her. She’s without her work computer, and the model requires signif-
icant processing power to run. However, she has her Steam Deck with her, which allows her to access her work 
applications and data in the cloud. While the Steam Deck is powerful, it’s not enough to run the model efficient-
ly and quickly enough to avoid raising her boss’s suspicions.
Then, Carson remembers a recent announcement from her network provider about a new proximity-based com-
pute-sharing feature. This feature allows her device to tap into the spare processing capacity of other nearby 
devices connected to the same network platform.
Quickly, Carson activates this shared intelligence, making use of the crowd’s idle computing power. The model 
runs smoothly and efficiently on her Steam Deck, something that would normally be impossible given its lim-
itations. She sends off the results to her boss just as the stadium erupts in cheers for the kickoff.
503© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECHTECH
AI at the Edge
Large language models (LLMs) require massive 
computing power, often relying on distant, 
centralized data centers (cloud). However, 
providers can optimize costs and performance 
by balancing the cloud with edge computing—
processing directly on local devices. While data 
centers provide the robust computing power 
needed for training and running massive LLMs, 
processing directly on user devices at the edge 
can greatly improve performance. These LLMs 
can take months to train and run on complex 
servers costing over $30,000 per GPU, but pro-
viders can significantly cut costs by running 
lightweight versions locally on users’ devices. 
Doing this also reduces latency, improves pri-
vacy, lowers data transfer costs, and increases 
accessibility. For example, Microsoft’s Office 
365 Co-pilot uses on-device AI to assist users 
across Windows, Google’s Gecko Palm 2 model 
runs efficiently on mobile, and Meta’s LLaMA 
has a 7B parameter version for edge devices. 
By combining the power of the cloud with the 
speed and efficiency of edge computing, ven-
dors can bring the benefits of AI to more users 
at lower cost.the challenge of efficiently distributing data 
across these high-frequency spectra. To 
address this, they developed a novel antenna 
system known as a delay phased array. This 
system divides a single frequency band into 
multiple usable beams, effectively reducing 
bandwidth wastage and lag in 5G mmWave 
systems. Their prototype device decreased 
lag by 60-150%. Together, these research 
efforts aim to meet the increasing demands 
for high-speed, efficient, and reliable wire-
less communication.
The 6G Cyber-physical Continuum
In 2022, the deployment of 5G technology 
unfolded globally, albeit at a pace slow-
er than initially projected. Meanwhile, its 
successor, 6G, is already in the early stages 
of development, with an expected market 
launch in the early 2030s. 6G, characterized 
by its remarkably low latency, is anticipated 
to facilitate truly immersive experiences. 
Telecommunications company Ericsson, a 
frontrunner in 5G and edge technologies, 
envisions that 6G will enable unimpeded 
movement within the cyber-physical contin-Efficiency Improvements
Researchers from the University of Leicester 
have made significant strides in addressing 
the growing demands on mobile telecommu-
nications networks. With an anticipated rise 
in connected devices, they developed a new 
technique known as multicarrier-division 
duplex. This technique focuses on resolving 
self-interference issues in 5G networks, a 
crucial factor that affects communication 
quality and efficiency. By utilizing fast Fou-
rier transform processing, their approach 
optimizes the assignment of subcarrier sets 
and the number of access point clusters. In 
simulations mimicking real-world industri-
al settings, this technology demonstrated 
superior performance compared to existing 
methods, achieving a notable 10% reduction 
in power consumption. This advancement 
indicates a significant step towards more 
energy-efficient and effective telecommuni-
cations networks. Simultaneously, research-
ers at the University of California San Diego 
have been working on enhancing the utiliza-
tion of the 5G-and-beyond millimeter wave 
(mmWave) network. Their research tackles NETWORKINGCOMPUTING
504© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
AI at the edge allows devices to run large language 
models locally, enabling smart applications on-the-
go without needing constant internet connectivity.TECH
uum. This continuum represents the inter-
play between our tangible world—filled with 
senses, actions, and experiences—and its 
programmable digital counterpart.
Ericsson’s vision of the cyber-physical 
continuum extends beyond the commonly 
understood metaverse, where avatars inter-
act within a virtual reality/augmented reality 
environment. It proposes a tighter integration 
with reality, enabling the projection of digital 
entities onto their physical counterparts rep-
resented in the digital space. This fusion of 
realities paves the way for a “merged reality,” 
thereby enriching our actual world. According 
to Ericsson, 6G will herald an era of a digitized 
and programmable physical world, intercon-
nected and sustainable. This new age will be 
bolstered by intelligent machines and the 
Internet of Senses, providing a synergistic 
support system for human endeavors.
6G Global Competition
The global 6G race is escalating, with the 
US, China, and India investing heavily in 
advancing their telecom capabilities. The First 6G Real-time Wire Transmission
In a major breakthrough for next-generation 
wireless technology, researchers at the Chi-
na Aerospace Science and Industry Corpo-
ration’s Second Institute have achieved the 
first real-time wireless data transmission 
using 6G cellular networks. The team suc-
cessfully transmitted data at an unprece-
dented rate of 100 gigabits per second on 
a 10 GHz bandwidth at a frequency of 110 
GHz. This marks a significant leap forward 
from current 5G capabilities by utilizing the 
higher frequency terahertz range of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum between 100 GHz and 
10 THz. Transmitting in the terahertz range 
enables substantially faster data transfer 
rates and increased transmission capacity 
compared to microwave frequencies used in 
existing cellular networks. Another key inno-
vation demonstrated was the use of orbital 
angular momentum (OAM) multiplexing for 
encoding signals. By using OAM, the re-
searchers were able to transmit multiple sig-
nals simultaneously on the same frequency, 
proving this as a more efficient method 
for exploiting the available spectrum. The research underscores the potential of 6G to 
meet the ever-growing data demands of the 
future through ultra-fast speeds, increased 
capacity, and spectral efficiency.
Reducing Inference for 6G
To achieve the faster data rates expected with 
6G networks, signals will be distributed across 
an extremely wide frequency spectrum in the 
millimeter wave and terahertz bands. However, 
spreading signals so broadly increases the 
risk of interference between communication 
channels. To address this challenge, research-
ers have sought to develop a filter that can 
protect receivers across the full 6G radio 
frequency spectrum. For practical widespread 
deployment, this filter needs to be compact, 
energy-efficient, multifunctional, and able to 
be integrated on a chip. To do this, researchers 
created a simplified photonic architecture for 
the filter. Unlike previous programmable inte-
grated microwave photonic filters composed 
of hundreds of repeating units, this simplified 
design achieves comparable performance 
with lower loss and complexity. The filter chip 
therefore has the potential to enhance wire-US, acknowledging China’s impressive 5G 
deployment and 6G satellite experiments, is 
prioritizing 6G to sustain its technological 
and defense leadership. The country’s Special 
Competitive Studies Project, led by ex-Google 
CEO Eric Schmidt, has revealed a comprehen-
sive plan promoting policies to reinstate US 
dominance in 5G and beyond, which includes 
establishing pervasive, interoperable connec-
tivity and winning the 6G race. This strategy 
underscores the US’ current shortage of ma-
jor producers of complete telecom solutions.
Meanwhile, China has designated 6G as a 
pivotal tech priority; a commitment demon-
strated by China Telecom’s white paper advo-
cating for an intelligent programmable RAN 
network. China’s national 6G coordinating 
body, IMT-2030, is encouraging innovative 
tech proposals to create a substantial repos-
itory of potential 6G technologies. Simulta-
neously, India’s intention to be a player in the 
global 6G race was made clear with Prime 
Minister Narendra Modi’s unveiling of the 
Bharat 6G Vision document, which outlines a 
plan for 6G deployment by 2030. NETWORKINGCOMPUTING
505© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH
less communication, which would lead to 
faster internet at a lower cost and with less 
energy consumption.
Wi-Fi 7
While many only recently updated their net-
works to Wi-Fi 6 or 6E, the next generation 
Wi-Fi 7 has already arrived to build on their 
advancements. With Wi-Fi 7, users can expect 
a substantial increase in network speeds, a 
leap made possible by the expansive 6GHz 
band. This new standard maintains compati-
bility with older devices, ensuring a seamless 
transition. As consumers gradually upgrade 
their gadgets, they’ll notice significant im-
provements in network stability and per-
formance. With the ability to combine links 
across bands, Wi-Fi 7 routers can dynamically 
route data based on capacity, reducing con-
gestion.
Wi-Fi 7 promises major benefits for home and 
office networks straining under the load of 
more devices and bandwidth-hungry applica-
tions. By delivering speeds exceeding 30Gbps, 
the new standard will help make activities like videoconferencing, gaming, and VR 
more reliable and responsive. The improved 
OFDMA encoding allows more simultaneous 
device connections by avoiding interference. 
With router manufacturers already support-
ing Wi-Fi 7, compatible laptops debuted 
at CES 2023 to take advantage of faster 
throughput and lower latency when unteth-
ered. As the successor to Wi-Fi 6, Wi-Fi 7 
brings the robust, high-performance wire-
less connectivity that modern smart homes 
and workspaces demand.NETWORKINGCOMPUTING
506© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.
The most recent update to the Wi-Fi standard offers the potential for “near-zero” latency, making it ideal 
for real-time applications such as wireless streaming of virtual reality content.SCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2034
The Sisyphus Program: A Physical-Digital Continuum 
Albert lost his manufacturing job to automation a year ago. Since then, he’s been receiving a similar level of 
compensation by selling his personal data but he soon falls into a rut, feeling useless without being able to 
mentally tie his monetary compensation to actual work output. 
When he hears of the Sisyphus program, he decides to give it a try. Sisyphus is a pervasive application—it’s not 
an app to download to a phone but rather one you can download to a home. The app assigns daily goals tailored 
to an individual’s interests and tasks around the home, awarding points for completed activities, thereby pro-
viding a sense of accomplishment and pride similar to receiving a paycheck for work output.
Sisyphus starts assigning Albert daily goals optimized for his interests. The home hub uses internal sensors to 
identify things that need to be fixed and locate where he last left his guitar, and external sensors to tell him the 
ideal time to take his dog for a walk based on the temperature outside. Albert is awarded points for these activi-
ties. Even though it isn’t real money, he feels the same sense of pride he experienced when receiving a paycheck 
because he can more clearly tie his physical tasks to rewards.
507© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECHAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
508© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMPUTING TECH509© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SAM JORDAN  
Manager 
Sam Jordan is a Manager at Future Today Institute. She leads our Advanced Comput -
ing practice area, which includes technology, artificial intelligence, virtual realities, 
networking, telecommunications, and space. She is a distinguished practice area 
lead, where she enables organizations to navigate through uncertainty with inno-
vative strategies. With a proven track record across various sectors, Sam’s visionary 
leadership has driven growth and resilience for Future Today Institute’s global clients and partners.
Before joining FTI, Sam was the CEO and co-founder of TrovBase, a secure data discovery and analysis-sharing plat -
form. Sam grew the company from idea to launch and executed the company’s transition from scientific replication to 
its current focus. In parallel, Sam engaged with the open science community, advocating for better data management 
practices to address challenges in scientific replication. Previously, she worked for IBM, where she helped large enter -
prises in the retail and distribution sector modernize their IT stack. Her expertise centered around mainframes, assisting 
with the integration of new software and modern methodologies to legacy systems.
Sam is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She holds a BS in Economics 
and Data Analysis from George Mason University and an MBA from New York University’s Stern School of Business.Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSCOMPUTING TECH
SELECTED  
SOURCES
510© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TECH COMPUTING511© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“About RISC-V.” RISC-V Interna-
tional. riscv.org/about/.
Agnesina, Anthony, et al. 
“AutoDMP: Automated 
DREAMPlace-Based Mac-
ro Placement Haoxing Ren.” 
International Symposium 
on Physical Design 2023. 
March 26, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3569052.3578923.
Amazon. “AWS Announces 
Three Serverless Innovations 
to Help Customers Analyze and 
Manage Data at Any Scale.” 
Amazon Press Center, November 
28, 2023. press.aboutamazon.
com/2023/11/aws-announces-
three-serverless-innovations-
to-help-customers-analyze-and-
manage-data-at-any-scale.
Basak, Sayan, et al. “Spatially 
Distributed Ramp Reversal 
Memory in vo2.” Advanced 
Electronic Materials, vol. 9, no. 
10, July 10, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1002/aelm.202300085. Baumgaertl, Korbinian, and D. 
Grundler. “Reversal of Nanomag-
nets by Propagating Magnons in 
Ferrimagnetic Yttrium Iron Gar-
net Enabling Nonvolatile Mag-
non Memory.” Nature Commu-
nications, vol. 14, no. 1, March 29, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-023-37078-8. 
Bayerbach, Matthias J, et al. 
“Bell-State Measurement Ex-
ceeding 50% Success Probability 
with Linear Optics.” Science 
Advances, vol. 9, no. 32, August 
9, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.adf4080.
Bhattacharya, Ananya. “Thanks 
to US Curbs, Chinese Internet 
Giants Are Seeking Suppliers 
outside of Nvidia.” Quartz, No-
vember 7, 2023. qz.com/thanks-
to-us-curbs-chinese-internet-gi-
ants-are-seeking-1850998032. 
Binai-Motlagh, Ali, et al. “A 
Guided Light System for Agile 
Individual Addressing of Ba+ 
Qubits with 10−4 Level Intensity 
Crosstalk.” Quantum Science and Technology, vol. 8, no. 4, 27 
July 2023. pp. 045012–045012, 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2058-
9565/ace6cb. 
“Caltech Team Unlocks Photonic 
Computing Power with Artificial 
Life.” Photonics, June 16, 2023. 
www.photonics.com/Articles/
Caltech_Team_Unlocks_Pho-
tonic_Computing_Power/
a69080. 
Candanosa, Roberto Molar. 
“Could Future Computers Run 
on Human Brain Cells?” The 
Hub, February 28, 2023. hub.jhu.
edu/2023/02/28/organoid-intel-
ligence-biocomputers/.
Chalmers University of Tech-
nology. “Researchers Develop 
Open-Source Software to Speed 
up Quantum Research.” Phys.
org, June 20, 2023. phys.org/
news/2023-06-open-source-
software-quantum.html. 
Chen, Zijiao, et al. “Cinematic 
Mindscapes: High-Quality Video 
Reconstruction from Brain Ac-
tivity.” May 19, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/arxiv.2305.11675. “China’s Semiconductor De-
velopers Eye Shift to RISC-V 
Architecture amid Growing Chip 
Demand in Cars, Data Centres 
and AI, Executive Says.” South 
China Morning Post, May 18, 
2023. finance.yahoo.com/news/
chinas-semiconductor-develop-
ers-eye-shift-093000039.html.
Choe, Man-Su, et al. “Why Korean 
Chipmakers Struggle with 
Talent Shortages.” KED Global, 
June 10, 2022, www.kedglobal.
com/the-deep-dive/newsView/
ked202206100004.
Clark, Robert. “Chinese Govern-
ment Confirms Focus on 6G 
Development.” LightReading, 
January 17, 2023.  
www.lightreading.com/6g/chi-
nese-government-confirms-fo-
cus-on-6g-development.
“DOE Explains...Exascale Com-
puting.” Energy.gov. www.energy.
gov/science/doe-explainsexas-
cale-computing.Engstrom, Jenn. “Statement: Gov-
ernor Newsom Signs Right to Re-
pair Act.” Pirg, October 10, 2023. 
pirg.org/california/media-center/
statement-governor-newsom-
signs-right-to-repair-act.
Evered, Simon J., et al. “High-Fi-
delity Parallel Entangling Gates 
on a Neutral-Atom Quantum 
Computer.” Nature, vol. 622, 
no. 7982, October 1, 2023. pp. 
268–272, www.nature.com/arti-
cles/s41586-023-06481-y.
Fuller, Nicolle R. “Unlocking 
Photonic Computing Power with 
Artificial ‘Life.’” California Insti-
tute of Technology, June 6, 2023. 
www.caltech.edu/about/news/
unlocking-photonic-comput-
ing-power-with-artificial-life.
Gent, Edd. “Photonic Chips Curb 
AI Training’s Energy Appetite.” 
IEEE Spectrum. May 5, 2023. 
spectrum.ieee.org/backpropaga-
tion-optical-ai. 
Gircha, A I, et al. “Hybrid Quan-
tum-Classical Machine Learning 
for Generative Chemistry and Drug Design.” Scientific Re-
ports, vol. 13, no. 1, May 22, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
023-32703-4.
IBM. “IBM Quantum Computer 
Demonstrates next Step To-
wards Moving beyond Classical 
Supercomputing.” IBM News-
room, June 14, 2023. newsroom.
ibm.com/2023-06-14-IBM-Quan-
tum-Computer-Demon-
strates-Next-Step-Towards-Mov-
ing-Beyond-Classical-Super-
computing.
Intel. “Intel Launches $1 Bil-
lion Fund to Build a Foundry 
Innovation Ecosystem.” Intel, 
February 7 2022, www.intc.com/
news-events/press-releases/
detail/1525/intel-launches-1-bil-
lion-fund-to-build-a-foundry. 
Johnson, B. K., et al. “A Multi-
functional Soft Robotic Shape 
Display with High-Speed Actu-
ation, Sensing, and Control.” 
Nature Communications, vol. 14, 
no. 1, July 31, 2023. p. 4516. www.
nature.com/articles/s41467-023-
39842-2.SELECTED SOURCESCOMPUTING TECH512© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Judge, Peter. “Last Energy Claims 
to Have Sold 24 Nuclear Reac-
tors in the UK for £2.4 Billion.” 
Datacenterdynamics, March 22, 
2023. www.datacenterdynamics.
com/en/news/last-energy-
claims-to-have-sold-24-nucle-
ar-reactors-in-the-uk-for-24-bil-
lion/.
Kannan, Vishnu, and Jacob 
Feldgoise. “After the CHIPS Act: 
The Limits of Reshoring and next 
Steps for U.S. Semiconductor 
Policy.” Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, November 
22, 2022. carnegieendowment.
org/2022/11/22/after-chips-act-
limits-of-reshoring-and-next-
steps-for-u.s.-semiconductor-
policy-pub-88439.
Kao, Cindy, et al. “EarthTones: 
Chemical Sensing Powders 
to Detect and Display Envi-
ronmental Hazards Through 
Color Variation.” Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, May 2017. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3027063.3052754. Kim, Youngseok, et al. “Evidence 
for the Utility of Quantum Com-
puting Before Fault Tolerance.” 
Nature, vol. 618, no. 7965, June 14, 
2023. pp. 500–505. www.nature.
com/articles/s41586-023-
06096-3.
Klyman, Kevin. “The U.S. Wants 
to Make Sure China Can’t Catch 
Up on Quantum Computing.” 
Foreign Policy, March 31, 2023. 
foreignpolicy.com/2023/03/31/
us-china-competition-quan-
tum-computing/.
Kos’myna, Nataliya. “Ddog.” MIT 
Media Lab. Accessed January 10, 
2024. www.media.mit.edu/proj-
ects/ddog/overview/. 
Kounev, Samuel, et al. “Server-
less Computing: What It Is, and 
What It Is Not?” Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 66, no. 
9, August 23, 2023. pp. 80–92. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3587249.
Krutyanskiy, V L, et al. “Tele-
com-Wavelength Quantum Re-
peater Node Based on a Trapped-
Ion Processor.” Physical Review Letters, vol. 130, no. 21, May 22, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.1103/
physrevlett.130.213601.
Kyun Kyu Kim, et al. “A Sub-
strate-Less Nanomesh Receptor 
with Meta-Learning for Rapid 
Hand Task Recognition.” Nature 
Electronics, vol. 6, December 
28, 2022, pp. 64–75. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41928-022-00888-7. 
Lawrence, Alex. “USA Getting 
Specially Competitive on 6G.” 
6GWorld, May 24, 2023. ww-
w.6gworld.com/exclusives/
usa-getting-specially-competi-
tive-on-6g/. 
Lee, Sanghyo, et al. “Truly Form-
Factor-Free Industrially Scalable 
System Integration for Electron-
ic Textile Architectures with Mul-
tifunctional Fiber Devices.” Sci-
ence Advances, vol. 9, no. 16, April 
21, 2023. pp. eadf4049–eadf4049, 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.
adf4049. Li, Bohan, et al. “MDD-Enabled 
Two-Tier Terahertz Fronthaul 
in Indoor Industrial Cell-
Free Massive MIMO.” IEEE 
Transactions on Communi-
cations, January 1, 2024, pp. 
1–1, https://doi.org/10.1109/
tcomm.2023.3330893. 
Li, Gordon H. Y., et al. “Photonic 
Elementary Cellular Automata 
for Simulation of Complex Phe-
nomena.” Light: Science & Ap-
plications, vol. 12, no. 1, May 30, 
2023. p. 132. www.nature.com/
articles/s41377-023-01180-9. 
Lim, Cheng Kai, et al. “A Bio-
logical Camera That Captures 
and Stores Images Directly into 
DNA.” Nature Communications, 
vol. 14, no. 1, 3 July 2023. p. 3921. 
www.nature.com/articles/
s41467-023-38876-w.
Lim, Cheng Kai, et al. “A Bio-
logical Camera That Captures 
and Stores Images Directly into 
DNA.” Nature Communications, 
vol. 14, no. 1, July 3, 2023. p. 
3921. www.nature.com/articles/
s41467-023-38876-w.Loeffler, Alon, et al. “Neuromor-
phic Learning, Working Memory, 
and Metaplasticity in Nanowire 
Networks.” Science Advanc-
es, vol. 9, no. 16, April 21, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.
adg3289. 
Luterbacher, Celia. “Mag-
non-Based Computation Could 
Signal Computing Paradigm 
Shift.” Phys.org, March 29, 2023. 
phys.org/news/2023-03-mag-
non-based-paradigm-shift.html. 
Lycke, Roy, et al. “Low-Threshold, 
High-Resolution, Chronically 
Stable Intracortical Microstim-
ulation by Ultraflexible Elec-
trodes.” Cell Reports, vol. 42, no. 
6, June 27, 2023. p. 112554. www.
sciencedirect.com/science/arti-
cle/pii/S221112472300565X.
Mandelbaum, Ryan. “New IBM, 
UC Berkeley Paper Shows Path 
toward Useful Quantum.” IBM 
Research Blog, February 9, 2021. 
research.ibm.com/blog/utili-
ty-toward-useful-quantum.Marr, Bernard. “The Future of 
Computing: Supercloud and 
Sky Computing.” Forbes, April 
4, 2023. www.forbes.com/sites/
bernardmarr/2023/04/04/
the-future-of-computing-su-
percloud-and-sky-computing. 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. “New Qubit Circuit 
Enables Quantum Operations 
with Higher Accuracy.” Sci-
enceDaily, September 25, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/09/230925153807.htm.
Moss, Sebastian. “Microsoft 
Cloud Hiring to ‘Implement 
Global Small Modular Reactor 
and Microreactor’ Strategy to 
Power Data Centers.” Data Centre 
Dynamics, September 22, 2023. 
www.datacenterdynamics.com/
en/news/microsoft-cloud-hir-
ing-to-implement-glob-
al-small-modular-reac-
tor-and-microreactor-strate-
gy-to-power-data-centers/.SELECTED SOURCESCOMPUTING TECH513© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST). “‘Toggle 
Switch’ Can Help Quantum Com-
puters Cut through the Noise.” 
ScienceDaily, June 26, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/06/230626164157.htm. 
Nellis, Andrew. “What Is the 
Quantum Internet?.” University 
of Chicago News. news.uchicago.
edu/explainer/quantum-inter-
net-explained.
Novet, Jordan. “Amazon An-
nounces New AI Chip as It 
Deepens Nvidia Relationship.” 
CNBC, November 28, 2023. 
www.cnbc.com/2023/11/28/
amazon-reveals-traini-
um2-ai-chip-while-deepen-
ing-nvidia-relationship.html.
Nvidia. “Nvidia Announces New 
System for Accelerated Quan-
tum-Classical Computing.” Nvid-
ia Newsroom, March 21, 2023. 
nvidianews.nvidia.com/news/
nvidia-announces-new-sys-
tem-for-accelerated-quan-
tum-classical-computing.Optica. “Photonic Filter Sepa-
rates Signals from Noise to Sup-
port Future 6G Wireless Com-
munication.” ScienceDaily, April 
11, 2023. www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2023/04/230411150515.
htm. 
Ourari, Salim, et al. “Indistin-
guishable Telecom Band Pho-
tons from a Single Er Ion in the 
Solid State.” Nature, vol. 620, no. 
7976, August 1, 2023. pp. 977–981. 
www.nature.com/articles/
s41586-023-06281-4.
Pai, Sunil, et al. “Experimentally 
Realized in Situ Backpropaga-
tion for Deep Learning in Photon-
ic Neural Networks.” Science, vol. 
380, no. 6643, April 28, 2023. pp. 
398–404. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.ade8450. 
Patel, Prachi. “Spray-on Smart 
Skin Reads Typing and Hand 
Gestures. IEEE Spectrum. 
January 11, 2023. spectrum.
ieee.org/gesture-recogni-
tion-spray-on-skin. Patric Holmvall, et al. “SuperCon-
ga: An Open-Source Framework 
for Mesoscopic Superconductiv-
ity.” Applied Physics Reviews, vol. 
10, no. 1, March 1, 2023. https://
doi.org/10.1063/5.0100324. 
Peng, Huwan, et al. “Chiplet 
Cloud: Building AI Supercomput-
ers for Serving Large Generative 
Language Models.” ArXiv.org, 
January 2, 2024. https://arxiv.
org/abs/2307.02666.
Princeton University, Engineer-
ing School. “A Simpler Way to 
Connect Quantum Computers.” 
ScienceDaily, August 30, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/08/230830131937.htm.
Purdue University. “Neuromor-
phic Computing Will Be Great... If 
Hardware Can Handle the Work-
load.” ScienceDaily, November 
6, 2023. www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2023/11/231106202950.
htm. Quantum Computing Lab. “IBM 
Heron: A Step toward Modular 
Quantum Computing.” Quantum 
Computing Lab, March 10, 2023.  
www.quantumcomputinglab.
cineca.it/en/2023/03/10/
ibm-heron-a-step-toward-modu-
lar-quantum-computing/. 
Ravi, Sarah. “The CHIPS Act Has 
Already Sparked $200 Billion 
in Private Investments for 
U.S. Semiconductor Produc-
tion.” Semiconductor Industry 
Association, December 14, 
2022. www.semiconductors.
org/the-chips-act-has-already-
sparked-200-billion-in-private-
investments-for-u-s-semicon-
ductor-production/.
Roastbrief. “The Rewind AI 
Pendant: All the Technology 
in a Necklace.” Roastbrief US, 
October 6, 2023. roastbrief.us/
the-rewind-ai-pendant-all-the-
technology-in-a-necklace/. Scotti, Paul S., et al. “Recon-
structing the Mind’s Eye: 
FMRI-To-Image with Contrastive 
Learning and Diffusion Priors.” 
ArXiv.org, October 7, 2023. arxiv.
org/abs/2305.18274. 
Sharon, Judee A., et al. “Trum-
pet Is an Operating System for 
Simple and Robust Cell-Free 
Biocomputing.” Nature Commu-
nications, vol. 14, no. 1, April 20, 
2023. p. 2257. www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-023-37752-x.
Shen, Zhiming. “Supercloud.” 
supercloud.cs.cornell.edu/.
Smirnova, Lena, et al. “Organ-
oid Intelligence (OI): The New 
Frontier in Biocomputing and 
Intelligence-In-a-Dish.” Frontiers 
in Science, vol. 1, February 28, 
2023. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fsci.2023.1017235.
Soliman, Taha, et al. “First 
Demonstration of In-Memory 
Computing Crossbar Using 
Multi-Level Cell FeFET.” Nature 
Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, 
October 10, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-023-42110-y. Stone, Maddie. “In a Histor-
ic About-Face, Apple Publicly 
Supports Right-To-Repair Bill.” 
Grist, August 24, 2023. grist.
org/technology/in-a-historic-
about-face-apple-publicly-sup-
ports-right-to-repair-bill/. “The 
Right-To-Repair Movement Is 
Just Getting Started.” The Verge, 
November 13, 2023. www.thev-
erge.com/23951200/right-to-re-
pair-law-apple-ifixit-iphone.
Strakosas, Xenofon, et al. “Me-
tabolite-Induced in Vivo Fabri-
cation of Substrate-Free Organic 
Bioelectronics.” Science, vol. 379, 
no. 6634, February 24, 2023. pp. 
795–802. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.adc9998.
Sundararajan, Bragadeesh. 
“Envisioning the Future: LLM 
OS—the Operating System That 
Thinks.” Medium, November 
24, 2023. medium.com/@
bragadeeshs/envisioning-the-
future-llm-os-the-operating-sys-
tem-that-thinks-50c74f37af48. SELECTED SOURCESCOMPUTING TECH514© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Svore, Krysta. “Microsoft 
Harnesses the Cloud for Quan-
tum at Scale.” Microsoft Azure 
Quantum Blog, March 8, 2023. 
cloudblogs.microsoft.com/
quantum/2023/03/08/micro-
soft-is-harnessing-the-power-of-
the-cloud-to-make-the-promise-
of-quantum-at-scale-a-reality/. 
Tao, Zihan, et al. “Highly Recon-
figurable Silicon Integrated 
Microwave Photonic Filter to-
wards Next-Generation Wireless 
Communication.” Photonics 
Research, vol. 11, no. 5, February 
10, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1364/
prj.476466. 
Theilman, Bradley H, and James 
B Aimone. “Goemans-William-
son MAXCUT Approximation 
Algorithm on Loihi.” Associa-
tion for Computing Machin-
ery, April 11, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3584954.3584955. Tong, Zhang. “China Makes 
Breakthrough in Global Race 
to Provide Ultra High-Speed 
6G.” South China Morning Post, 
April 25, 2023. www.scmp.
com/news/china/science/
article/3217934/chinese-sci-
entists-take-big-step-long-dis-
tance-journey-6g-wireless-com-
munication. 
Universitaet Stuttgart. “A Linear 
Path to Efficient Quantum 
Technologies.” ScienceDai-
ly, September 12, 2023. www.
sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/09/230912110128.htm.
University of California, Berke-
ley. “New Technique in Er-
ror-Prone Quantum Computing 
Makes Classical Computers 
Sweat: Quantum Comput-
er Barely Edged out Super-
computer, Showing Utility of 
Noisy Quantum Computers.” 
ScienceDaily, June 14, 2023. 
www.sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/06/230614220609.htm.University of Minnesota. “New 
Biocomputing Method Uses 
Enzymes as Catalysts for DNA-
Based Molecular Computing.” 
Phys.org, May 1, 2023. phys.
org/news/2023-05-biocom-
puting-method-enzymes-cata-
lysts-dna-based.html.
University of Sussex. “Another 
Step Towards Practical Quantum 
Computers.” Phys.org, February 
8, 2023. phys.org/news/2023-
02-quantum.html.
Volkswagen. “World Premiere 
at CES: Volkswagen Integrates 
ChatGPT into Its Vehicles.” 
Volkswagen Newsroom, January 
8, 2024. www.volkswagen-news-
room.com/en/press-releases/
world-premiere-at-ces-volkswa-
gen-integrates-chatgpt-into-its-
vehicles-18048.
Xu, Ruidong, et al. “Skin-Friendly 
and Wearable Iontronic Touch 
Panel for Virtual-Real Handwrit-
ing Interaction.” ACS Nano, April 
19, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsnano.2c12612.Xu, Runxin, et al. “MultiγStimuli 
DuallyγResponsive Intelligent 
Woven Structures with Local 
Programmability for Biomimetic 
Applications.” Small, vol. 19, no. 
20, February 19, 2023. https://
doi.org/10.1002/smll.202207900. 
Yan, Baojun, et al. “Factoring In-
tegers with Sublinear Resources 
on a Superconducting Quantum 
Processor.” December 23, 2022, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arx-
iv.2212.12372. 
Yasha Iravantchi, et al. “SAW-
Sense: Using Surface Acoustic 
Waves for Surface-Bound Event 
Recognition.” 2023 Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, April 19, 2023. https://
doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580991. 
Youngblood, Nathan, et al. 
“Integrated Optical Memris-
tors.” Nature Photonics, vol. 17, 
no. 7, 29 May 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41566-023-01217-w. Zeng, Ye‐ Xiong, et al. “Approx-
imate Autonomous Quantum 
Error Correction with Reinforce-
ment Learning.” Physical Review 
Letters, vol. 131, no. 5, July 31, 
2023, https://doi.org/10.1103/
physrevlett.131.050601. 
Zewe, Adam. “Scientists Boost 
Quantum Signals While Reduc-
ing Noise.” MIT News, February 9, 
2023. news.mit.edu/2023/boost-
quantum-signals-squeezing-
noise-0209. Accessed 12 January 
2024.
Zewe, Adam. “Training Machines 
to Learn More like Humans Do.” 
MIT News, May 9, 2023. news.mit.
edu/2023/training-machines-
learn-like-humans-0509.
Zhou, Tiankuang, et al. “Ultrafast 
Dynamic Machine Vision with 
Spatiotemporal Photonic Com-
puting.” Science Advances, vol. 9, 
no. 23, June 9, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1126/sciadv.adg4391. SELECTED SOURCESCOMPUTING TECHBUILT ENVIRONMENT2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION517© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSBUILT ENVIRONMENT
518 T op Headlines
519 State of Play
520 Key Events
521 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
522 Why Built Environment 
Trends Matter to Y our 
Organization 
523 Opportunities and Threats
524 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
525 Central Themes
527 Ones T o Watch
528 Important T erms
529 Adaptive Urban 
Environments
530 Chrono-Urbanism
531 Self-Organized Planning
532 Rewilding
533 Regenerative Practices
534 Adaptive Reuse and 
Deconstruction552 Digital Twin Predictive 
Planning and Prevention 
Monitoring
553 Enabled Devices for Urban 
Management 
554 Scenario: The New Way  
to Walk 
555 Construction Practices
556 Mass Timber Construction
557 Net-Zero Construction
558 Additive Construction
559 Interactive Project 
Management
560 Scenario: Road Today, School 
Tomorrow
561 Scenario: Tag You Later!
562 Modular Construction
563 Augmented Construction
564 Scenario: Nostalgia-Made 
Spaces
565 Authors 
567 Selected Sources535 Metamaterials
536 Resilient Design
537 Addressing Housing Shortages
538 Regenerative Design
539 Scenario: Amphibious Cities
540 Augmented Practices
541 Sensorial Elements
542 Automated Design
543 Metaverse Enabling
544 Inclusive Design 
545 Real-Time Data Collection for 
Decision-Making and Planning
546 Scenario: Instant Permitting 
547 Smart City Implementations
548 Smart Buildings
549 Smart Home Automation and 
Monitoring
550 Smart Parking and Roadways 
Predictability
551 Ubiquitous Sensor Distribution INDUSTRYAs some cities face 
the dual challenges of 
aging infrastructure 
and urban decay, 
compounded by sinking, 
new technologies are 
emerging to tackle these 
issues along with other 
concerns like housing 
and sustainability.
518© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
01
02
03
04
05Sensors Are Predicting Structural Failures
Sensors are increasingly relied on to keep tabs on the aging and repair 
needs of buildings.
The Empty Office Crisis Persists  
Office conversion and adaptive reuse are turning spaces back into 
functional assets rather than relics of traditional 9-5, in-person workdays.
The Alarming Reality of Urban Areas Rapidly Sinking 
Many cities are reporting that, just like Venice, their foundations are eroding. 
Jakarta, Indonesia, is ranked as the fastest sinking city in the world.
Pigmentless Paint Becomes a Sustainable Solution  
University of Central Florida’s plasmonic paint uses new ways to produce 
colors that can keep buildings cooler.
World’s Largest 3D Printed Neighborhood Is Underway 
A new property development outside of Austin, Texas, is set to become 
the world’s largest additively made community.STATE 
OF PLAYAs the built environment struggles to deal with a dwindling talent pool and 
rising costs related to supply chain shortages, built environment professionals 
are facing their own existential crisis. They’re trying to hold onto their relevancy 
amid heightened interest to adopt artificial intelligence, robotics, and new con-
struction practices that deliver projects faster and more efficiently. They’re also 
unsure what skills will be most in demand for their industry in the future, and 
are considering how they can bring human-centric behaviors to the forefront in 
the meantime.
The industry is further looking in the mirror amid an increase in environmental 
activism and calls for more responsible practices—as it is, the built environment 
industry is widely known as one of the leading causes of waste and consumption 
in the world. New practices such as rewilding and deconstruction are gaining 
prominence and even regulatory backing from regions and municipalities. This 
shift is building off the focus on fostering health and wellness to create places 
where people want to spend their time.
New technologies for power generation, infrastructure, and data collection offer 
ways for projects to last longer, which then raises questions about what that 
future longevity looks like. Completely connected projects that use sensors, 
drones, and other tools are providing real-time data that is also being leveraged 
to generate drawings, models, business strategies, and practices that enable 
better-informed decisions by both companies and clients. All of these develop-
ments highlight a push to challenge outdated practices and move into a new era 
for this industry.Focusing on Responsible and 
Responsive Buildings, Structures, 
and Construction
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
519520© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FEBRUARY 15, 2023
Earthquake-Resistant T ower Completed  
In Tokyo, a new supertall skyscraper was 
specifically designed and built to resist 
the impacts of earthquakes. 
MARCH 31, 2023
India’s 3D Printed Bridge  
Thanks to a new process, India 
now has its first 3D printed bridge 
using indigenous materials. SEPTEMBER 9, 2023
ICC Code Updates Bring Necessary Changes  
Finding building code updates will be easier with 
the use of QR codes, while waste management 
also gets more attention.JULY 21, 2023
Self-Healing Metal Discovery  
Researchers investigating cracks at a 
microscopic level observe metal self-healing 
under a process called cold welding.OCTOBER 3, 2023
T allest Timber Building Approved  
Developers in Perth get the OK to start 
working on what will be the world’s tallest 
building using timber construction. KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
521© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CLIENTS HAVE NEW REQUIREMENTS 
EXPECTATIONS
Integrated data and the output from 
models that use that data are becom-
ing more of a requirement, allowing 
for greater manipulation and under-
standing in the preconstruction and 
documentation phases. Clients will 
continue to want proof that a project 
will perform financially, and to interact 
and engage with that data on a more 
routine basis. More regions and mu-
nicipalities will also want plans that 
extend beyond the structure itself, 
including options for what to do with 
the materials once the life cycle of the 
project is complete, as well as plans 
for how to convert entire blocks or just 
rooftops into functional spaces. The 
upfront planning process will become 
even more important as technology 
will more clearly show what should be 
prioritized, such as a road to be fixed 
or a new sewer system to be installed.Deconstruction Plans Become Required 
Many areas already have deconstruction 
requirements, aiming to reduce waste 
heading to a landfill. These types of 
requirements will likely only continue to 
increase, which will change permit and 
construction planning.
Cities Organize Themselves
Urban planning and development requires 
long-term strategy and planning, which can 
be complicated by sudden societal shifts and 
needs. AI and digital twins will be able to help 
accommodate for these shifts, increasing 
the chances of automated planning directing 
where developments should take place next.Immersive Design Leads to Spatial 
Relevancy
As the world becomes more immersed 
in technology, screens and devices are 
continuing to shrink. This means that 
spaces will need to accommodate for more 
immersive experiences in their design.Built Environment Develops Data Markets 
With a vast pool of human-centric data, the 
built environment is sitting on untapped 
revenue streams of information that could 
benefit many business sectors. Past client 
contracts may prevent this from occurring, but 
newly developed contracts would allow firms to 
sell this data.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Jurisdictions and Developers Require 
Second-Life Designs 
Just as deconstruction will likely be regulated, 
so will adaptive reuse projects that address 
housing shortages. New mixed-use zoning or 
urban zoning developments will likely enable 
this change.Smart Green Infrastructure Combats 
Eco-Anxiety
The urgency of climate change could lead 
to an increase in eco-friendly infrastructure 
that allows for power sharing and carbon-free 
transportation. These updates could bring 
resilience to areas where people worry about 
being displaced due to climate change.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT522© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Additive manufacturing 
will speed up 
construction, reduce 
costs and inventory 
needs, and increase 
material efficiency. The 
customization enabled 
through this process 
will also change the way 
designs come to life. This 
type of manufacturing 
has the potential to create 
new opportunities for 
on-demand and on-site 
selling.As cities and spaces 
collect more data, this 
information will continue 
to reveal what should be 
prioritized and what is 
unnecessary, enabling 
real-time management 
and decision-making. 
This will also help reduce 
upfront costs and costs 
over time as the data will 
help companies make 
better decisions.Unexpected costs for 
buildings, bridges, 
roadways, sewers, 
factories, and other 
structures will continue 
to be a headache for 
facility managers and 
city workers. New tools for 
predicting maintenance 
will enable better budget 
planning and help 
developers estimate yearly 
upfront costs with greater 
accuracy.For developing 
regions, planning and 
development takes 
massive partnerships 
and relies heavily on 
outside expertise. New 
tools for automating this 
process could provide 
cost savings to those 
regions, which would shift 
the types of business 
partnerships they might 
seek. For established 
regions, these automated 
tools will allow for longer 
planning initiatives but 
may also be unsettling for 
residents.Regenerative and greener 
infrastructure will 
ultimately lead to cost 
savings for businesses, 
cities, and residents—
as well as help address 
risks due to location and 
climate change. Investing 
in this infrastructure 
will also build bonds to 
communities and help 
investors see progress on 
declared sustainability 
goals.As younger generations 
consider where they 
want to live and work, 
creating places that 
are more inclusive will 
ultimately attract these 
future workers to regions 
that prioritize this type 
of design. This can help 
bring in new talent and 
prepare companies 
for new regulations 
that require greater 
accessibility and diversity.Additive 
ManufacturingIo T Data  
CollectionPredictive 
MaintenanceSmart Urban 
PlanningRegenerative 
InfrastructureInclusivityWHY BUILT ENVIRONMENT TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Scaling new technology and practices will continue to be a hurdle due to a 
lack of long-term planning.  
The need to evolve traditional design and business practices as the industry 
becomes commoditized is urgent. 
Communities will resist the necessity of new technologies due to a lack of 
exposure and understanding of what they are. 
The tech gap in de-prioritized cities and communities will continue to widen. 
New data privacy requirements will be a barrier as the industry begins to rely 
on even more data collection sensors and tools. 
523© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Opportunities
Cutting-edge automation will unlock efficiency to combat the talent shortage. 
Expanded practices can provide new revenue streams—if the right experts are in 
place to manage new offerings.
New sources of data can empower clients with insightful, decision-enhancing 
analytics.
Niche markets offer an opening to prominence in the industry, if innovative 
services are brought along.
State-of-the-art materials and technology plus time for upskilling encourage 
dynamic career growth. 524© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Consider investing in creat -
ing or finding LLMs specific 
to the built environment in-
dustry. Currently, there is a 
lack of an industry-specific 
model that can become an 
industry standard. The first 
to market with this devel-
opment will set the tone for 
how AI will be used in the 
future.Returning to more natu-
ral processes will require 
considerable investment in 
new details, strategic plans, 
and communications. These 
investments should be 
planned out to determine 
when their impact will be 
most relevant to clients and 
when strategic partner -
ships can be used to leap-
frog competitors.Reconstruction and de-
construction will require 
investment in new equip-
ment and monitoring of 
regulations. Lobbying for 
and adapting to regula-
tions that do not complete-
ly disrupt the industry, but 
are still proactive for the 
environment, could require 
diverse strategies.Cities will need to create 
investment strategies that 
align with chrono-urban-
ism requirements, meaning 
more mixed-use site invest -
ments and planning will be 
required. This, along with 
necessary smart city invest -
ments, could tie up budgets 
for many cities over the 
next decade.As water scarcity contin-
ues, investments in water 
monitoring will become 
more crucial. This will allow 
residents to feel safe, and 
potentially attract more 
mobile residents to shore 
up tax bases within munic-
ipalities and regions suf -
fering from people moving 
away.Additive manufacturing 
construction practices 
will continue to grow and 
scale. Investing in these 
technologies now will 
acquaint companies with 
how these technologies 
work as they evolve. Con-
sider starting with smaller 
forms of equipment that 
facilitate creating pieces 
and parts that can bolster 
supply chains.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 525INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Still Working T oward Automation
Finding the right balance between automation and 
human intervention and design is a work in progress. 
Tension comes into play when looking at what automa-
tion could mean for rising costs and labor shortages—
depending on whether you see it as a boon or a threat. 
Researchers are studying the use of artificial intelli-
gence in planning, such as in automating the itera-
tion, validation, and selection processes. While other 
industries are focusing on AI automation throughout 
the value chain, for the built environment, the focus 
for automation is mainly on the front and back end of 
a project or process: This presents opportunities that 
could be captured and developed.Data for Decisions
Data collection and modeling will keep increasing, with 
digital twins expanding what building information 
modeling can mean for projects and decisions. Besides 
allowing leaders, officials, developers, and clients to 
study the effect of their decisions on an overall proj-
ect, these intelligent models can contain sensors and 
other devices that collect more data and allow project 
components to speak for themselves in new ways. But 
because digital twins require a higher degree of mod-
eling, the quality of the models and their reporting 
require more accuracy. This data is now becoming a 
requirement for the front end of projects, even before 
construction documentation gets underway.Material Intelligence
Materials are becoming smarter and more capable of 
self-management, so  our understanding of how they 
work needs to evolve. Self-managing, self-assembling, 
and self-healing are just a few of the newer attributes 
becoming more mainstream. Documentation practices 
are changing as a result, and investments are gaining 
longevity—buildings could potentially last longer with 
less maintenance for developers and cities. The devel-
opment of material intelligence is likely to continue to 
grow, and so will the need for new staffing positions 
and updates to performance and code restrictions. CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 526INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Climate Change Responsibility
As more communities deal with extreme weather, cities 
and companies increasingly want their infrastructure 
and buildings to be prepared for a crisis. Planning for 
climate change requires heightened awareness of the 
materials used and the structure that’s created. De-
velopers require more upfront data on how and where 
materials were manufactured and shipped. The long-
term aftereffects need to be modeled to ensure the 
surrounding area will not be harmed over the life of 
the project. More mixed-use developments are occur-
ring because of these changes, with amenities being 
implemented in more condensed, neighborhood-like 
buildings and shifting what was usually found in urban 
centers to neighborhoods. Returning processes back to 
their natural way of functioning is also changing how 
land is developed and what designs are considered. New Forms of Monitoring
Aging is a big consideration for what new technology 
and products can monitor and predict. The wear and 
tear on existing places, spaces, and infrastructure is 
a concern especially in areas trying to compete with 
neighboring regions implementing smart infrastruc-
ture. Areas dealing with urban decay or failing infra-
structure have tough choices on where to allocate their 
capital improvement budgets and will expect technol-
ogy to provide more insight into when these failings 
could occur. This includes new tools for monitoring 
resources, especially dwindling natural resources. For 
smart cities, new advances are allowing for detailed 
monitoring of residents.Scaling Disruptions
Ready to upend the built environment industry, ad-
ditive manufacturing, mass timber construction, 
modular construction, and regenerative design are all 
advancing but have yet to scale. This trend can already 
be seen with new uses for modular construction for 
mobility, regenerative buildings giving back to their 
community, the use of additive manufacturing to cre-
ate more efficient builds and parts, and new possibili-
ties for structure and use types. Watching these indi-
cators to see how they develop and are regulated will 
provide useful information when these technologies 
scale to prominence and become more of a practice 
than a novelty.Dr. Mohammad T aha, researcher at Uni-
versity of Melbourne, for researching nano 
inks to change how buildings use energy.
Othmane Zrikem, chief data officer at A/O 
Proptech, for backing climate technology 
startups.
Namratha Kothapalli, principal at Speed-
invest, for their backing of industrial 
technology.
Kaj Casén, CEO at Meyer Floating Solu-
tions, for his work on floating housing.
Andrew Binet, assistant professor at Uni-
versity of British Columbia, for their work 
on ownership in neighborhoods for com-
munity engagement and health.
Luca Staricco, associate professor at 
Politecnico di Torino, for his work on 5-, 10-, 
and 15-minute cities.
Rainey Shane, social sustainability di-
rector at JLL Americas, for her work on the 
SEAM certification for social equity.Hu T engyun, Zhang Xiaodong, Xie Peng-
feiI, Li Xuecao, Liu Han, and Sun Daosheng 
of the Beijing Institute of Urban Planning 
& Design, for their work on automating the 
analysis of vacant lots within cities.
Dr. Ki-T ae Park, lead researcher at Korea 
Institute of Civil Engineering and Building 
Technology, for his work on technologies 
to predict maintenance needed for aging 
bridges.
Hiroshi Ishii, associate director at MIT 
Media Lab, and Ozgun Kilic Afsar, a grad-
uate research assistant at MIT Media Lab, 
for their research on new fabric fibers that 
promote healing.
Nathan Daix and Augustin Monfret, 
co-founders at SonarVision, for using 3D 
sound to help those who are visually im-
paired to navigate a city.
Georgina McDonald, lead of creative and 
partnerships at SPACE10, for her collabora-
tion project to use AI to design a flat-pack 
couch.Antonin Yuji Maeno and Kelsea Crawford, 
co-founders at Cutwork, for their work on 
PolyRoom, which allows for Lego-like mod-
ular construction.
Pavan Akula, assistant professor of civil 
engineering at the Oregon State Univer-
sity College of Engineering, for his work 
on creating new materials for 3D printing 
from CO2. 
K.V.L. Subramaniam and his research 
group at the Indian Institute of Technology 
Hyderbad’s Department of Civil Engineer-
ing for their work on developing new meth-
ods for 3D printing bridges.
Neri Oxman, for fusing design, technology, 
and biology for Oxman, the company she 
leads.ONES TO WATCH
527© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTIMPORTANT TERMS
528Additively made
Products, materials, or items made from 3D 
printing or additive manufacturing.
BIM (building information modeling)
This digital model is used for creating plan-
ning and construction documents. It is similar 
to a digital twin but typically does not evolve 
after the project is completed.
Biodiversity
The integration and preservation of various 
biological life-forms and ecosystems.
Built environment
This encompasses projects and practices 
within architecture, interior design, civil engi-
neering, MEP engineering, structural engineer-
ing, landscape architecture, product design 
and manufacturing, construction, experiential 
design, and urban planning.
Circular design
A design practice that focuses on creating 
products and spaces that, once they reach the 
end of their life cycle, can be repurposed or 
reused.Internet of Things (Io T)
Devices that are connected through a network 
to send and receive data.
Large language models (LLMs) 
Used to train AI models, LLMs are trained on 
vast amounts of text data, enabling them 
to perform a wide range of language-related 
tasks.
Mass timber construction
A construction process and design technique 
that uses large or solid engineered wood prod-
ucts for its structural components.
MEP
An abbreviation for mechanical, electrical, and 
plumbing services.
Metaverse
The underlying technologies that create a 
more digitally augmented physical world and 
reality.
Modular construction
A construction process that uses prefabricat-
ed components to create a space, building, or 
other structure.NAIOP
The US-based Commercial Real Estate Devel-
opment Association.
Net zero
Projects that are designed so that their use of 
energy consumed over a year is balanced out 
by the renewable energy they produce.
Urban center
Traditionally refers to the central downtown 
area of a city.Digital twins
A dynamic digital version of a physical object 
such as a city, roadway, building, or door, a 
digital twin uses real-time data to produce 
reports for the object’s performance.
Environmental, social, and corporate gover -
nance (ESG)
A framework many companies are using to 
establish their policies for how they address 
each category.
Experiential design
This is a design practice for creating interac-
tive and sensory experiences. 
Extended reality (XR)
A technology that can augment the physical 
world through either virtual or augmented 
reality.
International Code Council (ICC)
The council develops model codes and stan-
dards for the built environment and is used by 
over 50 countries.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT529© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ADAPTIVE  
URBAN 
ENVIRONMENTSINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Chrono-urbanism refers to 
municipalities seeking to contain 
everything residents need on 
a daily basis within a 5-, 10- or 
15- minute walk. This is evolving 
as urban planning studies are 
utilizing multiple technologies like 
AI and data mapping.Chrono-urbanism studies the layout of current and future planned 
amenities within a certain time-based restriction. In Melbourne, 
a pilot program found that 20 minutes is the farthest people were 
willing to walk for their daily needs, according to C40 Knowledge. 
Other cities have experimented with this type of urban planning, 
including Barcelona’s “Superblocks,” Bogota’s children priority 
zones, Buenos Aires’ car-free zone, Paris’ direction to create “capi-
tals” in neighborhoods, and more. 
In Barcelona, the city has been implementing Superblocks for the 
past decade, reclaiming urban areas used by cars for people, retail, 
and social activities. In 2021, a study found a decrease in both air 
and noise pollution in these areas, while residents also reported a 
better sense of safety and higher interactions between neighbors. 
Technology is now enabling chrono-urbanism planning for such 
developments, which increases the efficiency of the planning pro-
cess. Digital Blue Foam worked on its own LLMs that can propose 
feasible 15-minute city design ideas, so planners can create neigh-
borhoods that will give other residents a similar experience to the 
Superblocks. Now, 15-minute cities are evolving into chrono-urban-
ism, informed by a 2022 study that evaluated denser urban areas 
with tighter time-based circumferences, like 5-, 10-, and 15-minute 
neighborhoods.Chrono-urbanism can help improve accessibility and walkability 
for municipalities. As urban centers struggle to retain residents, 
a focus on chrono-urbanism can make them more inclusive, by 
attracting new people and widening the demographic. This type 
of planning can also enable greater sustainability and change 
transportation methods—both of which will become increasing-
ly important. Localizing services to neighborhoods within these 
time-centered areas will offer more niche consumers, giving op-
portunities to businesses looking to break into markets. As these 
regions grow and shift, population centers will be fluid, and may 
result in new geographic centers being prioritized. Planners will 
face the challenges of determining various necessities while also 
needing to encourage cultural synching within neighborhoods and 
regions. But ultimately, by understanding the temporal patterns of 
a city, developers can make more informed decisions about where 
and what to build. This can lead to more profitable investments, as 
developments become better aligned with the times when people 
are most active in certain areas.CHRONO-URBANISM1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 530INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Technology is automating 
planning, site selection, and 
infrastructure deployment around 
cities. It can now also be used to 
suggest where vacant sites can 
be converted for a new purpose.Site selection and verification can be a costly and time-consum-
ing process; before any structure is built, real estate developers 
have to do a lot of upfront work to analyze both the location and 
market. As cities integrate more technology, the organization and 
development of neighborhoods, streets, and regions are becoming 
self-automated.
Now, AI is providing ways to reduce much of the lift in urban 
planning and development. Software company Deepblocks has 
released tools for developers and investors to help pick the best 
site for their projects, including information on zoning and ways 
to test build through a virtual platform. It also allows for exports of 
reports based on its analysis. Other companies are looking to take 
that automation even further. A recently filed patent claims to use 
AI modeling of a city for automatic site selection based on a set of 
criteria, to help cities understand how they can utilize underuti-
lized areas. Another patent claims that it can use data to assess 
vacant areas in a city to see if they are suitable for residential use. 
With housing shortages around the world, such developments 
could help cities more efficiently plan. Zoning has been a barrier for many cities as they look to provide 
infrastructure and amenities to both attract new residents and 
support existing ones. This technology and planning methodology 
could help accomplish both goals—aiding both cities looking to 
address urban decay and developers looking to maximize their 
investments. Underdeveloped areas or rural regions could identify 
which investments could help them be more stable or leapfrog 
a neighbor. More established cities and locations could achieve 
more resiliency. Some of these new capabilities will shift stake-
holder integration and interactions, as residents will still want 
a say in how their cities are planned, but greater localized data 
could help provide better insights that reflect the communities’ 
preferences. For businesses, this technology could either end up 
enabling or disrupting the area around them. If the tools identify 
that an area is better off zoned for a different function, that could 
either disrupt the location or bring new customers. And as office 
spaces are left vacant in cities around the world, automation could 
help decide how to best replace them.SELF-ORGANIZED 
PLANNING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 531INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Urban planners, designers, 
engineers, and architects 
are using nature-inspired 
interventions to restore natural 
processes and environments in 
cities. Besides being good for the 
ecosystem, these enhancements 
are increasingly in demand by 
consumers.Since the COVID-19 pandemic, the concept of rewilding has gained 
renewed attention and importance. As lockdowns and restric-
tions prompted people to reconnect with nature and seek outdoor 
spaces, there has been a growing recognition of the mental and 
physical health benefits of green spaces and natural environ-
ments. Rewilding efforts, which emphasize restoring and preserv-
ing ecosystems, are seen as a way to address some of the planet’s 
inherent environmental challenges, and to build more resilient 
and sustainable communities.
Cities globally have been incorporating some of these concepts 
into their urban landscape. In Singapore, towering, artificial 
“supertrees” serve both aesthetic and ecological functions. These 
structures are covered in a variety of plants, and the vertical 
gardens create microhabitats for insects and birds, enhancing 
local flora biodiversity. The vertical gardens and elevated positions 
of the supertrees also attract birds, providing roosting sites and 
potential nesting areas.
Elsewhere, startups are focusing on increasing and enhancing 
trees. Living Carbon is experimenting with genetically modified 
trees designed to capture more carbon and absorb greater quanti-
ties of heavy metals from the soil than their natural counterparts. 
And GoPlant.me is leveraging the principles of crowdsourcing 
to encourage financial support and volunteerism for urban tree 
planting initiatives.Increased efforts in rewilding is a direct aftereffect of the pandem-
ic that will continue to grow as people prioritize being outside and 
look to nature to help address mental health challenges. This trend 
could benefit people and companies in multiple ways, such as by 
reducing long-term costs like air purification and lowering water 
use. Restored ecosystems can also act as a natural barrier that 
developing cities and economies could look to use for protection 
from climate change effects. Interest in their use will affect urban 
planning and structural engineering  of areas within cities where 
people want to spend their time. 
Companies that prioritize nature may also want to capitalize on 
this demand by encouraging similar rewilding efforts in the areas 
they inhabit. Eventually, we could see sponsorships for rewilded 
areas crop up just as we see parks and roads sponsored by groups 
wanting to make a statement. But the type of rewilding that’s right 
for both companies and geographic areas should be entertained on 
a case-by-case-basis because each area will have different needs. 
As leaders work to prioritize which needs should be met first, ex-
pect some tension among residents, developers, and local officials.REWILDING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 532INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENT533© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.REGENERATIVE 
PRACTICESINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
As urban decay threatens 
many cities, developers and 
practitioners are giving new life 
to often-abandoned buildings 
and areas—converting them into 
livable and workable areas and 
spaces. Repurposing existing buildings, a sustainable practice, reduces 
construction waste by up to 40% and cuts the carbon emissions 
associated with new construction and building material produc-
tion. Increasing interest in reuse can be found around the world: 
from the AMP Centre in Sydney, which was one of the first upcy-
cled buildings; to a Dutch engineer’s efforts to recycle and reuse 
all materials in a 14-story office tower; to decommissioned wind 
turbine blades in Ireland finding new life as footbridges. Such proj-
ects could be aided by studies using AI to analyze what is inside a 
building or structure to know what those materials could be used 
for in the future.
Beyond AI, other technologies are supporting this effort—specif-
ically sensors and digital twins. These tools are being used to 
make real-time adjustments as these buildings grow or change, 
and can also be helpful in maintaining structural integrity, and for 
knowing where to place additional support. As municipalities are 
frequently starting to require new developments to have a decon-
struction plan, these models could be helpful in the long run.
Adapting interior spaces can also help give buildings a second life. 
One compelling option for abandoned office buildings is verti-
cal farming. Another is converting offices to other uses: A study 
by NAIOP has identified medical offices and labs as promising 
candidates for office conversions, as they have less remote work 
potential. Several firms are using AI to model out which of these 
conversions would meet economic and infrastructure constraints. 
This shift, if it continues, will impact the design of building sys-
tems to allow for greater flexibility.Second-life projects can help reinvigorate areas of urban decay—
and could also become a major factor to plan for and consider on 
the front end of a project. This would shift the design process to 
include planning for both today’s and tomorrow’s space, which 
could ultimately lead to a new service offering. It could also mean 
continual projects that require a partner or project manager dedi-
cated to them for life, beyond facilities personnel. 
With global office vacancy rates increasing and as remote work 
becomes the norm, office vacancies are expected to keep growing, 
leaving an increasing number of empty office spaces. Converting 
these vacant offices serves a dual purpose: It addresses the vacan-
cy issue and tackles shortages for other uses including housing. At 
the same time, it also promotes upcycling and reduces construc-
tion waste while cutting construction costs and time. Remodeling 
can be a cost savings mechanism until items are uncovered that 
were not originally planned for. With new forms of models and AI, 
these hurdles could become things of the past.ADAPTIVE  
REUSE AND 
DECONSTRUCTION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 534INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Emerging materials are on the 
horizon that are notable for their 
responsive and programmable 
nature, along with capabilities 
that enable greater sustainability 
and self-repair. Metamaterials are smart materials that are enabled with var-
ious technologies; they can self-heal, self-assemble, change 
color, become lighter, or regulate temperature. Stimuli-respon-
sive materials, such as shape memory polymers, are flexible 
sheets that can continuously change shape under external 
forces like electromagnetic or thermomechanical stimuli, with 
the ability to return to their original form. These metamaterials 
promise to create adaptable structures that respond to their 
environment, such as self-healing concrete for autonomous 
repairs and smart windows and building facades that adjust to 
weather conditions, enhancing energy efficiency.
Researchers have contributed much to these new types of ma-
terials lately. Researchers from Boston University have created 
a new kind of material that blocks sound while allowing for 
airflow, which could transform building facades in urban and 
noisy areas. Researchers at the University of Central Florida 
have developed a new textile that changes color and appear-
ance on demand. And 3D printing and additive manufacturing 
continue to offer many inroads for metamaterials, including a 
breakthrough from MIT researchers to 3D print materials that 
can sense and react to environmental changes. 
Additive manufacturing has even built an entire house: The 
BioHome3D, constructed by the University of Maine, is a 3D 
printed house that uses scrap lumber, sawdust, and construc-
tion debris, combined with biopolymers sourced from plants, 
animals, bacteria, and fungi to create 3D printed wood. Tak-
ing innovation further, 4D printing enables 3D printed smart 
materials to respond to external stimuli by expanding, con-
tracting, bending, and more. These materials find applications 
in self-assembling furniture and regenerative systems for 
infrastructure, like self-repairing piping systems and bridges.Using a single material and a single 3D printing process, this tech-
nology has the potential to transform the construction industry by 
enabling structures that adapt to changing conditions.
The longevity of built elements will become even more important 
of a consideration as buildings can potentially have multiple—and 
longer—lives. With new, more responsive materials, even stagnant 
elements and furnishings can take on a second life, which gives 
a space more functionality and use. These metamaterials will 
also change the performance standards for roadways and other 
essential infrastructure, and can be used to protect structures 
that provide water and other necessary resources. Developing and 
integrating more metamaterials should be a priority, especially for 
regions that lack stability, as they’ll help protect against extreme 
conditions and allow infrastructure to maintain itself. This could 
be a cost saving for many areas that currently lack manpower 
during construction and inclement weather. 
Moreover, as more people move to urban environments and growth 
continues, noise is increasingly a factor. As acoustic comfort be-
comes more elusive, metamaterials can play a key role by chang-
ing the comfort rating of spaces based on unique stimuli. While 
new products are manufactured that include metamaterials, the 
price point will initially increase. But the enhancements the tech-
nology brings to these spaces will be very valuable going forward. METAMATERIALS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 535INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
New practices and technologies 
are helping us plan for future 
climate change and crises. New 
spaces for safety, respite, and 
resiliency are also being created 
to promote better health and 
wellness. Threats to a region often prompt new strategies for the built en-
vironment. Flood-prone areas like New Orleans and Maasbommel 
in the Netherlands are responding by constructing amphibious 
homes with buoyant foundations, allowing them to float during 
floods while maintaining sewer and utility connections through 
flexible piping. Dutch company MVRDV’s Sea Level Rise Catalogue 
explores other similar ideas, such as floating habitat islands, 
adaptive structures, and mixed-use high-rises on stilts. Inland 
developments are addressing water surges with permeable ground 
coverings and rainwater buffers. 
The devastating impact of earthquakes in places like Turkey, Syria, 
and recently Morocco underscores the importance of anti-seis-
mic construction methods. Buildings are already using flexible 
foundations and shock absorbers to withstand earthquakes, but 
so called seismic invisibility cloaks, which use deflectors to pro-
tect buildings, making them appear “invisible” to seismic forces, 
offer new avenues. And where cities are sinking, there’s a need 
for new resilient solutions like artificial recharge and deep soil 
mixing, requiring careful planning and investment. Scientists are 
also studying lightweight building materials and foundations to 
reduce the risk of subsidence. 
Resilient design also encompasses creating spaces for respite. 
Many workplaces are piloting emotion-sensing technology to 
understand the mental state of their employees, and finding ways 
to create places for them to decompress—a field that researchers 
are also studying in educational spaces. A new patent for furniture 
looks to use sensors that can tell users when they are stressed 
and should take a break.Given the recent pandemic and ongoing climate change, provid-
ing safety and security in structures is top of mind. New forms of 
resiliency, for both the design and construction of buildings, will 
be expected to address the potential effects of war, severe storms, 
wildfires, droughts, and rising sea levels. Managing and analyzing 
the weaknesses in a region will provide actionable recommenda-
tions and strategies that can combat these future issues. 
In addition, resilient design can lead to significant cost savings 
by reducing the damage and economic disruptions caused by 
disasters. By investing in resilient infrastructure and buildings, 
communities and businesses can avoid or minimize costly repairs 
and downtime following a disaster. This stability is crucial for eco-
nomic growth and investor confidence.
Eventually, public projects could increasingly mandate safety 
of spaces as area residents require more stability. And with the 
growing focus on mental health, resilient spaces that create areas 
to de-stress could become a basic infrastructure requirement—as 
essential as electricity and water are today. This shift could change 
building codes and planning, and be helpful in developing areas. RESILIENT DESIGN1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 536INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
With rising homelessness and 
housing shortages around the 
globe, cities and companies are 
creating new forms of housing.Homeownership costs are soaring around the globe, and there’s 
not enough housing to meet demand. A Moody’s Analytics study 
found the US is grappling with its lowest housing availability in 
30 years. In many countries, housing costs are outpacing income 
growth, resulting in a severe shortage of affordable options. By 
2030, the World Bank predicts that 3 billion people will require 
new access to adequate housing. 
To facilitate new housing construction, cities are exploring rezon-
ing or “upzoning” policies. Japan’s flexible zoning and incentives 
have increased affordable housing through effective supply man-
agement. Vienna’s social housing model strives to offer quality, 
affordable homes to all residents; over 60% of its population are 
in municipally-supported apartments, reducing inequality and 
promoting social integration.
Innovative data mining is also crucial for new urban planning. 
Yeme Architects’ Community Data Platform helps identify defi-
ciencies in British neighborhoods, information developers can 
use for deciding whether more schools, shops, or green spaces are 
needed. MySidewalk, a comprehensive community data library, 
reveals insights from various data sets, including the US Census 
and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to address issues 
like healthy food access and income inequality, guiding targeted 
solutions for land development. 
Supply chain disruptions and higher labor costs exacerbate the 
housing affordability problem. A possible solution is what ICON and 
14Trees are doing by leading 3D home printing construction tech-
nologies, potentially paving ways to reduce costs and emissions.Housing conversions will be a prime focus in the built environment 
for the next several years. Attainable housing—residential units 
that are affordable for a wide range of people, especially those with 
middle-income levels—will also help address social issues. But 
as civil engineers continue to be tapped to study what could be 
developed, these types of data mining platforms become more rel-
evant. More adaptable and responsive construction practices and 
studies are needed, and businesses and companies can help them 
scale by educating stakeholders in their region and providing 
case studies to try new forms of implementation. As investors and 
banks look to place their capital with more responsible companies, 
those that focus on solutions will be seen as places for goodwill 
investments. Such funding will bring stability to areas that have 
seen exponential growth of people experiencing homelessness, or 
are trying to develop strategies for residents becoming unhoused 
due to unforeseen conditions. Adequate housing is a foundation 
for stable employment and economic participation. When people 
have secure and affordable homes, they are more likely to engage 
effectively in the workforce—and contribute to overall economic 
growth and stability.ADDRESSING 
HOUSING 
SHORTAGES1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 537INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Comprising sustainable and 
circular design, regenerative 
design includes spaces, 
structures, products, real estate 
practices, and places that are 
working to give back to the 
community they sit within and 
benefit the environment. Companies are exploring alternatives to traditional materials that 
are more sustainable than their counterparts. The K-Briq, created 
by UK-based startup Kenoteq, is an eco-friendly brick made from 
90% construction waste; it matches the appearance and weight of 
regular bricks but emits just 10% of the carbon and provides im-
proved insulation. Berlin startup Made of Air developed an organic 
waste-based, carbon-negative bioplastic, storing the equivalent 
of about two tons of carbon dioxide for every ton of plastic. The 
bioplastic can be used in building facades, furniture, interiors, 
transport, and urban infrastructure, sequestering carbon dioxide 
and aiding in climate change mitigation.
Plantd’s proprietary technology transforms rapidly growing pe-
rennial grass into carbon-negative structural panels for walls and 
roofs materials that are stronger and more moisture resistant 
than competitive products. Developed by MIT chemical engineers, 
2DPA-1 is a self-assembling, lightweight polymer that’s stronger 
than steel, offering versatile applications for building materials 
and structures. Norwegian startup Carbon Crusher repairs roads 
with recycled asphalt and a plant-based adhesive, which is faster, 
cost-effective, and carbon-sequestering. 
Dutch startup Energy Floors utilizes kinetic harvesting, or energy 
scavenging, to capture energy from mechanical motion, like foot 
traffic, converting it into electricity for diverse indoor and outdoor 
applications. Researchers are also exploring new types of furni-
ture that use algae that can produce energy through a grow light 
at night.Regenerative design goes beyond reducing harm to actively 
improving the environment. This approach aligns with growing 
consumer and stakeholder expectations for companies to be not 
just environmentally neutral but positively impactful. The built 
environment is becoming more than just what it can house: New 
spaces, structures, products, and buildings are becoming more 
responsible to the community where they reside. That benefits 
everyone: Companies that embrace regenerative design often lead 
in innovation, and by adopting regenerative practices, they can 
ensure the long-term availability of the resources they rely on. This 
approach also reduces dependency on external and potentially un-
stable sources, mitigating risks associated with resource scarcity 
and environmental degradation.
As more regions push for carbon sequestration requirements and 
energy resilience, they will start to prioritize these products and 
materials that give back as well. They can start with methods that 
offer respect on a cultural level and do not have to become ho-
mogenized. Tax incentives will surely become one path forward to 
accelerate this practice, which can help with further research and 
development within the built environment industry.REGENERATIVE 
DESIGN1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 538INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2050
Amphibious Cities 
The gentle sound of water moving has become quite common in Singapore, Helsinki, Jakarta, Miami, and Syd-
ney in 2050, and it’s not because its residents are relaxing by the water—rather, water is rising and falling over 
their homes. Embracing the fact that climate change was unavoidable, these cities were some of the first to 
implement mixed-use amphibious areas, ultimately leading to completely amphibious cities. 
These areas started out as regular neighborhoods but were built using modular components that, as the wa-
ters rose, allowed portions of buildings to be submerged without needing to be relocated. In fact, most of the 
buoyancy comes from the walking spaces under the buildings, which started off as crawl spaces and became 
an underground tunnel system connecting the amphibious sectors. Above the water, kinetic harvesting wave 
generators power the areas and have become their own form of public art. Most residents have porches on top 
of their homes now, so when they venture out for fresh air, they can sit and take in the expansive oceanic view. It 
works out well for everyone—except some local governments. Many of these amphibious cities face property tax 
debates with local authorities, seeing as there is now less land or property to tax.
539© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY540© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUGMENTED 
PRACTICESINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Technology is allowing for 
more immersive experiences 
and design within the built 
environment. This includes 3D 
billboards and other types of 
digital signage and art.Cities like San Diego are experimenting with using 3D billboards 
and holographic displays to create more visual immersion on 
sidewalks, retail fronts, and around the city. Individual companies 
are exploring their options too: brands like Nike and Coach have 
utilized massive 3D billboards for promotional campaigns in Tokyo 
and London, and McDonald’s used a weather-responsive billboard 
in the UK for personalized ads. 
Artist Refik Anadol is taking this visual, sensorial immersion to 
another level. He gained fame for using AI in a Museum of Modern 
Art installation that projected shapeshifting images from the New 
York museum’s vast art collection onto a 24-foot screen. This kind 
of transition to increasingly kinetic places and spaces is also seen 
in architecture, where building parts can move without compro-
mising integrity, as they respond to changing human and environ-
mental conditions. The Al-Bahr towers in Abu Dhabi is an example: 
The buildings have a protective skin of 2,000 glass elements that 
automatically adjust based on sunlight, offering sustainability 
benefits as well.
A recent sensory exhibit in Australia looks to move past the visual 
into touch and play, highlighting ways spaces can be more inclu-
sive for those who are a part of the neurodivergent community. 
Many retail centers are also looking to infill their vacant spaces 
with these multi-sensory experiences that use interactive screens 
to display art and color. Recent displays at the retail show NRF had 
Samsung displays where you could hear coffee being poured and 
smell donuts.Visual engagement in the built environment can have the same 
effect as it does on social media: It prolongs the retention of the 
memory of that moment, which could help boost desire to return 
to those places. As many are looking for ways to draw employees, 
visitors, and residents back into the built environment, these 
types of immersive experiences can provide an answer. 
But there are many other benefits as well. Shared, immersive 
experiences form social cohesion, and offer branding and cultural 
engagement that extends beyond traditional community events. 
They can be bolstered through shared data, which offer ways to 
curate the content based on who is in the room, which can make 
these experiences even more meaningful. As wearable technology 
scales, and users opt in to share their data, this new information 
provides fodder for community content and preferences.
On the flip side, regulation for visual safety and viewers’ data 
privacy needs to be considered. People passing through public 
spaces should be made aware if their presence and their data is 
being used to generate the art, and the art should be representa-
tive of all as well.SENSORIAL 
ELEMENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 541INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
AI integration is increasingly 
prevalent, from automating 
the design practice and 
tools, enhancing iterations 
of drawings, and generating 
specifications and purchase 
orders to synthesizing customer 
insights and enabling decisions 
on sustainable implementation 
processes for construction and 
manufacturing. From optimizing traffic planning to ensuring efficient code check-
ing for building permits, city officials and developers are harness-
ing AI to automate the ways urban spaces can be smarter and 
more sustainable. They’re also using AI to automate understand-
ing of future damage and aging infrastructure. The Korea Institute 
of Civil Engineering and Building Technology has created D.N.A. 
(Data, Network, and AI) technologies for forecasting bridge wear 
and aging, to facilitate proactive and possibly automated upkeep. 
In a similar vein, data science company Concrete.ai’s system al-
lows for the automation and optimization of concrete mixes, with 
a specific focus on reducing carbon emissions.
AI is also being used to accelerate and improve the construction 
life cycle. It can automate deliveries and source materials more 
efficiently, which helps with construction execution planning and 
updating of construction sequences. Software company IFS offers 
planning and scheduling optimization products using AI to ensure 
real-time construction schedule optimization and on-time project 
completion, while Hypar automates designs by providing a cloud-
based platform for integrating predesigned systems into projects. 
AI’s impact on automating design can also be seen in other ways. 
AI tools like Maket.ai and Archi.ai are helping to automate plans 
and design ideas. WINT, or Water Intelligence, is combining AI and 
IoT to manage water flow and promptly detect anomalies, en-
hancing water conservation in construction. And two Florida Tech 
researchers—Hamidreza Najafi and Benjamin Kubwimana—have 
published a paper proposing a new method for optimizing build-
ing energy models (BEMs) using Python EnergyPlus for energy 
optimization, which would be of benefit to MEP engineers.Automation is already part of urban planning and development, 
which means that it will increasingly play a larger role in other 
steps of the process, from design to construction. Already, auto-
mating multiple parts of the design process and overall project is 
becoming more normalized. For companies and industry affiliates, 
they should expect some portion of their process to be automated 
soon, if it hasn’t been already. The new tools increase efficiency 
and actually do not stifle creativity: They let built environment pro-
fessionals see multiple iterations they may not have considered. 
When partnered with augmented forms of construction, automa-
tion can help scale built environment projects to grow faster, pro-
vided that the funding is in place. Clients will ultimately need to 
provide more data for these types of projects, and the practitioners 
will need to understand and iterate through the process faster. 
These changes ultimately require more reliance on technology—
not necessarily leading to a reduction in staff but an increase in 
augmentation practices. This will push traditional design process 
thinking, something that the entire built environment could take a 
moment to consider.AUTOMATED  
DESIGN1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 542INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
While the metaverse is still 
up in the air—literally and 
figuratively—many architects 
and designers are exploring the 
possibilities of what they can 
create within it and figuring out 
how to enable collaboration and 
accessibility.Metaversal technologies include any technology that augments 
the physical world, and collaboration is one of the main ways many 
companies are looking to harness the metaverse for the built envi-
ronment and design process. Some are using virtual reality (VR) for 
immersive design experiences, while others are experimenting with 
using augmented reality (AR) to overlay digital information onto the 
physical world, aiding architects, engineers, and designers in 3D 
visualization. The RAD Lab at the University of Miami is using mixed 
reality to offer immersive experiences for its architecture students 
and enable innovative design collaborations in the metaverse. In the 
commercial world, Hyve-3D is integrating virtual reality and holo-
graphic displays, enabling user interaction with the full project for 
review and collaboration without a headset. 
In 2021, the metaverse’s top benchmark was enabling users to 
overcome real-life obstacles, including disabilities, allowing them 
to experience places and spaces that they previously could not. That 
main purpose now extends to others, such as, letting art lovers expe-
rience museum exhibitions via AR and VR from afar. Cities are also 
using the metaverse to enable safety and creativity. Tuvalu aims to 
become the first digital nation by re-creating itself in the metaverse 
to safeguard its culture and society amid ongoing threats from 
rising sea levels and climate change. And Zaha Hadid Architects cre-
ated “Liberland Metaverse,” a virtual unrecognized libertarian state 
featuring the firm’s signature architectural style marked by curves 
and rounded corners.Use of the metaverse for the built environment is not for living but 
for experiencing elevated physical interactions. Virtual tourism, al-
ready in progress, can be augmented through this technology, with 
cities, sites, and other experiences being built in the metaverse. 
For cities looking to attract new residents, they could offer pre-ex-
perience city living before a family moves to a new home. For 
developers, this try-before-you-buy experience in the metaverse 
will become more important as new properties compete with one 
another, and the higher the fidelity, the more likely it will resonate 
with potential tenants. This will also require firms to continue 
to expand their BIM models with more realistic modeling, which 
could create larger file sizes and extend the project timeline. Firms 
could look for ways that other technologies like AI could assist 
in preventing these complications, or work to reuse components 
already in the metaverse to their advantage. As public projects go 
before communities and other decision-makers, digital twins in 
the metaverse could become a requirement for approval and vot-
ing. For the industry itself, metaversal technology offers education 
opportunities and a more extensive global reach that can help 
firms achieve their upskilling and diversity goals.METAVERSE 
ENABLING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 543INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Inclusiveness has become a top 
goal in this industry, and meeting 
the minimum requirements 
is no longer palatable. Using 
technology to address disabilities 
includes using more participatory 
design to include the community 
as part of the design process. Enhancing accessibility in public spaces involves working to 
understand and accommodate diverse neurological and physio-
logical conditions. It can also entail designing public spaces to 
enable greater mobility and creating novel apps like South Korea’s 
“Dagachi Naranhi” and France’s SonarVision to help visually im-
paired residents navigate their spaces. 
Aging is included here. The World Health Organization has released 
guidelines for age-friendly cities, covering key domains like hous-
ing, transportation, and social inclusion; this in turn is driving civ-
il engineers to enhance accessibility with wider sidewalks, ramps, 
elevators, and improved senior transportation. Brunel University 
London, in collaboration with Meta and the University of Cam-
bridge, is researching ways to enhance the metaverse’s accessibil-
ity for disabled and older individuals.
The 2021 Built Environment Social Equity Survey, conducted in 
collaboration with over two dozen organizations, found that 65% of 
employees consider increasing racial and gender diversity in the 
built environment—and within its leadership—important, reflect-
ing a growing emphasis on an inclusive environment’s potential to 
spur innovation and new solutions. The survey further highlights 
efforts to boost diversity in the built environment, such as youth 
education. An example is a pilot project in Riga that uses a game 
environment for local exploration and architectural awareness for 
kids to learn about the industry.As cities look to prevent urban decay, providing greater accessibil-
ity will increase resident satisfaction and use of spaces. For now, 
most of the technologies are app-based, but greater accessibility 
would be achieved without the need for an app. Updates could 
also lead to the redesign of codes and governing statutes that 
impact how places and spaces are laid out and designed. In an 
aging world, older demographics will only continue to push for this 
type of inclusivity, which can impact the products created to be 
incorporated into spaces and the infrastructure needed to support 
those products. More inclusive living centers will become more at-
tractive as the aging population continues to grow, which will force 
developers to consider new unit types, new forms of retail spaces, 
and new places of care. At a time when mobility is increasing, in-
clusivity will need to be rethought along roadways, terminals, and 
lodging locations. INCLUSIVE  
DESIGN 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 544INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Data collection through sensors 
and other platforms is now 
being used for cost estimation, 
to understand use and behavior 
patterns, and to make more 
informed real estate and built 
environment decisions. Due to the pandemic, companies are increasingly adopting 
occupancy sensor technologies—including passive infrared and 
ultrasonic and utilization tools to inform space planning and 
cleaning, as well as to enhance workplace safety and experience. 
JLL offers a tech service using data analytics for insight-driven 
real estate decisions, improving areas like energy efficiency and 
tenant satisfaction. Digital models and other tools are enabling 
real-time decisions, but these require built-in sensors and other 
visualization tools to provide the data to model. Gensler’s Graph 
product suite is an example: Its spatial analytics toolkit analyzes 
and visualizes data from various sources to provide insights for 
design and space planning. 
This data collection and modeling applies to urban planning 
as well. Rotterdam, Netherlands-based MVRDV has developed 
RoofScape, a tool using the growing ecosystem of urban municipal 
data to suggest concrete use cases for underutilized rooftops. For 
civil engineering, UK water utility company Anglian Water offers a 
real-time mapping system, which utilizes geospatial technology to 
prioritize where work is needed. In the system’s first six months of 
operation, it reduced blockages by over 51%, cleaned 112 kilometers 
of sewers, and removed 8 tons of debris.
Parking is one area heavily invested in data capturing and model-
ing. Visionful, a US startup, provides cloud-based predictive ana-
lytics for parking and also includes a mapped database for faster 
crime response. France-based Mytraffic uses advanced analytics 
to provide location insights such as space utilization and traffic 
management, real estate portfolio performance, and potential 
locations of business expansions.Data has always mattered, but it has taken on an increased im-
portance. Now, collecting data can lead to better-informed deci-
sions and provide a way to model potential actions before finan-
cially committing to plans. But collecting data the right way also 
matters. Understanding sensor technology will become a critical 
factor for companies in the built environment industry, along with 
properly integrating them into projects. Developers and retailers 
can use sensor technology to implement better amenities and 
direct targeted use and interactions within their space, and also 
in preparing for aging infrastructure. This type of preparedness 
could also help allocate resources during times of crisis or climate 
change shifts, meaning cities can and should use this type of data 
collection and plan now to prepare for the future. When people and 
products are enabled to contribute their data for planning purpos-
es, healthier spaces and products can result. Firms should prepare 
for more sensor integration and data analyzation on both the front 
and back end of projects going forward.REAL-TIME DATA 
COLLECTION FOR 
DECISION-MAKING 
AND PLANNING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 545INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2025
Instant Permitting  
Getting building permits used to take weeks if not months. But now, thanks to automated design and real-time 
optimization, they can take minutes—that is, if the residents approve and the digital model says it’s ready to be 
built. The shift in permitting was partially due to the increased use of registered digital BIM models, which went 
to the city as soon as they were started, allowing cities to weigh in on potential code issues ahead of time. This 
optimization led to more of a collective dialogue between firms, designers, clients, and cities; it’s been especial-
ly helpful when cities needed to build their own projects, as the models can factor in when construction teams 
might have downtime due to the permits submitted. Looking to ensure residents’ satisfaction, cities have also 
implemented digital town halls where the digital twins of the potential projects are displayed and voted on by 
residents. Then, residents feel they are part of the process, and will weigh in on the public infrastructure needed. 
City inspections now include deconstruction plans, changing demolition permits, which are actually the per-
mits that are hardest to obtain.
546© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY547© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SMART CITY 
IMPLEMENTATIONSINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
The buildings we occupy are 
becoming further automated as 
smart technology is incorporated. 
Smart buildings, integrating 
advanced technologies and 
automation for enhanced 
efficiency and user experience, 
are emerging as a transformative 
trend in the built environment 
sector.Building automation continues to give operators greater control 
over smart building systems. Companies like ABB are selling 
systems that offer control over HVAC and building energy man-
agement; they’ve brought a range of scalable automation and 
energy control to the United Arab Emirates, with a plan to continue 
to deploy its offerings in other places over the next three years. 
Facilio also expanded into the Australian market, deploying its AI 
SaaS platform to help with monitoring energy efficiency and fault 
detection and diagnosis.
Platforms like nClarity offer 24/7 real-time monitoring, using 
cloud-based analytics to look for anomalies and performance deg-
radation, as well as finding ways to mitigate issues. Typically these 
systems have been cost affordable only for large-scale buildings, 
but Siemens debuted a new hub that would allow for its IoT-based 
system to work with small buildings and even office campuses. 
ProSentry and Senet’s new partnership will offer smart building 
monitoring for everything from gas leaks to mouse traps.
These smart building management systems are also looking to 
manage space. Tenantcube helps landlords manage their prop-
erties by helping them automate listing and renting. Platforms 
like the one offered by ApartX also increase automation by using 
biometrics to automate operations and Smart Residence’s app 
that allows residents to control and reserve amenities in the 
building. A continued focus on bringing workers back to the office 
has spurred an increase in technology use for visual and auditory 
privacy and lighting—including bulbs that help circadian rhythms 
and other technologies that can automatically detect Covid’s pres-
ence by smell.Building and space automation continues to focus on efficient 
systems. As new regulations are handed down, the presence of 
these systems could separate legacy buildings from newer ones—if 
more efficient buildings are prioritized, urban decay could fes-
ter should those buildings not occupy space in downtown areas. 
Emerging economies and regional cities could capitalize on this 
to bypass their neighbors if they have the needed infrastructure in 
place. For economic stimulation, the development and retrofitting 
of smart buildings drive growth by creating jobs and stimulating 
demand for new technologies and services. 
In addition, smart buildings generate valuable data that can be 
used to enhance building management, user experience, and 
inform future development. Landlords and developers should con-
tinue to prioritize these types of buildings, as this type of automa -
tion will allow them to tightly manage space occupation, which is 
a growing concern. It could be useful for future lease and tenant 
negotiations as well, as they can predict the performance of their 
future spaces. This could also help tenants, by giving them the 
very granular data they expect, including the performance of their 
space when compared to other units in the building and their area.SMART BUILDINGS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 548INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Homes are continuing to become 
more helpful and personalized 
through smart technology.Recently, smart homes and apartments have seen an influx of 
newly connected and automated integrations. The open source 
interoperability standard Matter became a major focus toward 
the end of 2023 and continued in 2024. It would allow for in-
home devices to control multiple connected components. Other 
smart home technologies include auto-arming alarms, ovens that 
allow for livestreamed cooking, sensors that can have fans track 
your face, heaters that learn to optimize energy consumption, 
and Kohler’s Stillness bath, which uses light and fog to create a 
soothing environment. Kohler also launched its voice-controlled 
bidet that has a self-cleaning mode. Lighting controls continue to 
improve with Phillips’ Hue E14 bulb—which includes over a million 
shades of programmable white light to choose from—and Nano-
leaf’s Sense+ Controls, which learn when to turn off lights based 
on a person’s daily activity. This dovetails into a continuing trend 
in smart homes: monitoring for safety. Elsi’s Smart Floor can track 
if a person has fallen, and MIT created a monitor that can track 
how Parkinson’s disease has progressed based on the afflicted 
person’s gait. 
In many homes and apartments, noise is a top complaint; it may 
soon be addressed by a new plasma-based silencing technology. 
Another chief challenge is space: in response, Ori, a provider of 
multifunctional, robotic-power spaces, has launched a pocket 
office that can expand and collapse to turn one space into two. 
And to increase security, researchers have filed a new patent to 
use doorbell cameras and other CCTV cameras to track and predict 
criminal activity in an area. This includes Lockly’s Visage, a smart 
lock that can store 100 face profiles to allow entry to a home.Most people spend a lot of their time at home, and in-home smart 
technology continues to change the way people interact with their 
environment. As the world’s population gets older, integrating 
aging-in-place technology into the home will become more im-
portant—whether in apartments, shared living spaces, or tradi-
tional single-family homes. New monitoring devices, which may 
be covered by insurance in the future, could offer more connected 
care. Concerns for energy stability could lead to a greater need for 
renewable energy sources for these homes, which could shift in-
frastructure and planning needs. This would also affect zoning and 
need to be welcomed by the residents. For multifamily apartment 
buildings and complexes, automated systems and AI in smart 
buildings streamline maintenance and operations, reducing costs 
and improving performance. These smart homes can also offer 
curated personalization in new forms: through smart windows and 
new connected devices, they can bring community cohesion and 
bridge the gap for families that live in different places. This can 
also be utilized in co-living complexes and neighborhoods where 
residents want to share experiences.SMART HOME 
AUTOMATION AND 
MONITORING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 549INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Traffic congestion is one of the 
top concerns many municipalities 
hope to address with smart 
technology. They are also 
implementing new technology 
that can help generate less 
carbon dioxide with more 
efficient traffic patterns. The structures and roadways in smart cities continue to provide 
opportunities for both data collection and improved resident 
experiences. Eventually, traffic lights could be used to monitor 
congestion and report when accidents occur, according to a recent 
patent. The proposed patent is also examining how traffic lights 
can connect to emergency services should an accident occur. 
Cities are exploring solutions for intersection congestion: for 
instance, Seoul is implementing a combination of AI, lidar, and 
CCTV at an intersection to enhance traffic signaling for improved 
safety. Parking spaces—whether in garages or on the street—are 
also data points that allow for potential visibility into available 
spaces within smart cities. Southwest of Denver, Colorado is test-
ing interlocking Smart Pavement slabs that use Wi-Fi and detect 
when a crash occurs, which will then alert emergency services. In a 
recent study in the International Journal of Grid and High Perfor-
mance Computing, researchers proposed an IoT-AIPS system that 
can predict parking spot availability to help reduce wait times for 
finding parking. HaydenAI took this a step further and, in collab-
oration with New York City, used the technology to detect illegal 
parking in bus lanes. Finding a place to park has always been a challenge in major 
cities, but new technology can alleviate this concern. It can also 
increase a sense of safety in more remote locations, with the im-
plementation of these new traffic signals. Countries with a more 
mobile populace should prioritize these types of technologies to 
enable better experiences on the roads and create higher safety 
standards. This trend could also impact traffic patterns, where 
local jurisdictions might need to create plans, and then commu-
nicate any changes through connected devices and autonomous 
vehicles. The connected monitoring devices and traffic lights could 
ultimately take away emergency vehicle drivers’ worry about cross-
ing through intersections, at least when autonomous vehicles 
scale. In the meantime emergency personnel can gain a view into 
the current condition of their destination site they are going along 
with how to get there.SMART PARKING 
AND ROADWAYS 
PREDICTABILITY1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 550INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Sensors are being further 
integrated into the built 
environment to collect data that 
can be used in predictive models 
and enable intensive and ongoing 
monitoring.Sensors have become ubiquitous. In smart cities, IoT sensors 
and devices are embedded to collect data for operational use 
and predictive models. To fuel this connectivity, there have been 
several new network deployments, like Amazon Sidewalk, which 
aims to create a low-power, long-range network from IoT devices. In 
Scotland, the Aberdeenshire Council is trying out North’s IoT Accel-
erator Pack program, which will reveal insights on building health, 
social housing, water monitoring, waste management, air quality, 
and road surface temperature.
As connected data collection in smart cities has increased, so has 
resident engagement. In Israel, Nexar and MuniAI are operation-
alizing IoT sensors and citizen feedback to alert city workers to 
maintenance issues. In the UK, Visual Solutions launched a crowd-
sourced measurement service that uses mobile Wi-Fi signals to 
sense and count crowds. Sensors and AI are being integrated into 
safety vests for construction workers to reveal their location and 
excessive body heat, or integrate wearable detection methods to 
prevent people from being hit by cars.
Other companies are continuing to use sensors to predict air 
quality and pollen distribution, like Norwegian startup Airmine. 
Companies are also embedding sensors into IoT predictive HVAC 
systems to increase building performance and tenant experiences. 
Water quality technology also increasingly uses sensors for mon-
itoring water and detecting lead and other toxins. In interior spac-
es, furniture and even walls are becoming embedded with sensors 
for data collection. A patent for a new office chair uses sensors in 
combination with more reactive fabrics and materials to tell when 
the occupant is stressed and needs to take a break. IoT connection is increasing the amount of data available to smart 
cities, and the industry is currently prioritizing water, traffic, and 
resident experience and safety. As sensors in the built environ-
ment begin to share more data between themselves, this will 
create greater opportunities for managing increasingly granular 
needs within the city. This also presents greater data security 
needs, and the necessity for residents to opt in to data collection. 
Without residents’ consent and understanding, a pervasive sense 
of fear will arise over how their data will be used. Cities imple-
menting these sensors should create robust campaigns to dispel 
concerns, and create plans to deal with potential sensor system 
hacks. New talent may be necessary for integrating the design of 
these sensors into projects; they also require an increased amount 
of IT investment in the office and on-site. Ultimately, sensors will 
provide a more continuous awareness of project status, which 
would solve a persistent client need. UBIQUITOUS  
SENSOR 
DISTRIBUTION 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 551INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Digital models are not new to 
the built environment industry. 
However, as they evolve, they 
are becoming more integral for 
upfront planning by enabling the 
constant flow of data about the 
long-term visibility of a structure, 
building, or product’s life and use.Urban transportation has been a major user of digital twins, with 
companies like ShapesAI using the technology to predict colli-
sions. Cities and countries are also leveraging these models to 
predict when roads will need repair, and when traffic could occur. 
Estonia is rewriting its road maintenance manual using digital 
twins, and a new patent explores embedding sensors so that 
digital twins can predict settling and cracks in the road. In the 
US, startup Citydata utilizes AI to collect census data to look for 
patterns in transportation and population movements.
Urban planning has also been affected. Los Angeles is creating a 
digital twin of a neighborhood to test out decarbonization strate-
gies, and new research from the University of Twente in the Nether-
lands found that digital twins can help improve the efficiency of 
planning and coordination in cities. This technology can be a boon 
to cities looking for new residents, which is what Miami is using 
its digital twin to do—helping them find schools and other ame-
nities when they are looking to move. Jacobs in the UK is using 
digital twins to model potential floods to help communities know 
where to place key infrastructure. For interior spaces, Matterport 
recently launched Genesis, a generative AI that creates a digital 
twin of interior spaces to help property management teams make 
design and utilization decisions about physical spaces. The Korte 
Co., a US construction company, uses its data and digital twins in 
preconstruction to model what changes to parameters will do to 
costs and construction schedules.Digital twins and models are becoming an expectation within 
the built environment. However, the players who will most bene-
fit from the technology are finding new ways to collect data that 
these models can use to generate meaningful insights. They’ll be 
able to identify potential issues and make informed decisions 
even before issues arise or construction begins. The technology 
also enhances the design process and improves communication 
among project teams as they can model the repercussions of their 
decisions. Many working in BIM models will need to elevate their 
current level of modeling to achieve a true digital twin; when the 
digital twins link to become a digital mesh, it will signify the next 
evolution of this trend. When digital meshes become a reality for 
the built environment, that is when smart cities will truly become 
responsive and enabled. But this trend isn’t just for new or smart 
buildings: Local firms can leverage their on-the-ground locations 
to start modeling older buildings, allowing them to have their own 
digital twins.DIGITAL TWIN 
PREDICTIVE PLANNING 
AND PREVENTION 
MONITORING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 552INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
New technologies such as edge 
drones, connected cameras, and 
novel communication systems 
are being used to enhance urban 
management processes.Smart cities are leveraging multiple types of devices to monitor 
and detect events. One example is a new camera from Vivotek that 
uses a vision-processing chip and platform called BrainChip to 
utilize edge computing. It also uses AI to identify gender and age 
from video footage, even when people are wearing masks. Hailo 
Technologies in Tel Aviv is also exploring smart cameras that use 
edge AI processors for smart cities, security, retail, and other appli-
cations for analytics at the edge.
Drones are now also bringing smart city capabilities to rural areas, 
and a patent is exploring the potential for drone air and water 
monitoring. Light poles, like Voltpost, are transforming lamp posts 
into charging stations for drones and security monitoring stations; 
their cameras can also analyze images to determine if a pedestrian 
is in distress. Other Smart Poles from Vitrulux are also incorporat-
ing voice assistants, which could help pedestrians with navigation. 
In Boston, Soofa digital kiosks provide air quality updates through-
out the city and can even suggest what activities are safe to do out-
side. Bettair in Spain uses a network of sensors to map and identify 
pollution hotspots. In Houston, the city is using smart meters to 
track water usage and monitor its water distribution system. 
Trash and waste management systems in smart cities also contin-
ue to improve. In the UK, the Sunderland City Council is testing out 
the use of solar-powered smart compactor bins. A recently filed 
patent is exploring using sensors and AI to help plan more effi-
cient routes for garbage collection in cities, and for the detection 
of waste bins in the street.Improving the quality of life is a fundamental part of the built envi-
ronment industry, and new technology makes that goal even easier 
for professionals. Real-time monitoring can detect and respond 
to security threats or emergencies, ensuring the safety of citizens. 
Monitoring of utilities like water and electricity can also allow for 
more efficient resource use and can help in early detection of is-
sues like leaks or outages. What will be key here is the interopera-
bility of these devices, so that they can communicate and share in-
formation. If multiple competitors begin to take hold in one region, 
future sharing of data could be problematic. Governments will 
need to carefully consider new regulations as the trend scales, and 
any new guidelines should be coordinated among local, national, 
and international entities so that new devices can be compliant in 
multiple regions. This will ultimately allow for more global interop-
erability and sharing of information, which could become crucial 
during times of global crisis. Well-monitored cities will also attract 
more businesses due to a better enabled environment and happi-
er, healthier residents.ENABLED DEVICES 
FOR URBAN 
MANAGEMENT 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 553INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2038
The New Way to Walk   
On any given day in London, it is now quite common to see mobs of people gathering and walking down the 
street. However, this isn’t your usual tourist crowd or flash mob. Instead, it’s due to Zwift’s route automation, 
which directs residents to take certain routes throughout the city to optimize their route in real time. Such a 
capability was attempted in 2023, with Transport for London’s initiatives aiming to fix traffic congestion and 
address air pollution and climate issues, but it met heavy resistance after charges and fines were levied. 
Most residents feel Zwift has taken this initiative to the next level in 2038, as it has allowed them to sync their 
calendars, and it can also help them to gain access to public transportation and other amenities; the app then 
tells them which route would be the most efficient for their time, cost, and carbon neutral goals based on their 
day. The app also suggests the walking path that might best suit their health needs and that they might find 
most pleasant. Users rely on its air quality alerts for the areas to avoid. 
With more people walking, sidewalks have leveled up. They now incorporate new built-in resting pads; when 
you need a break, the pads sense your fatigue and can fold up to create a place for you to sit and recharge your 
wearables. A favorite sitting activity involves experiencing the rewilding forest through AR, learning about local 
history and indigenous wildlife. This experience can be had on London’s autonomous public transportation, too, 
which has become its own tourist attraction.
554© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY555© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CONSTRUCTION 
PRACTICESINDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
As one of the newer 
developments for more 
sustainable construction, mass 
timber construction is gaining 
attention as many studies and 
projects consider using its 
components in lieu of concrete 
and steel.Mass timber construction is scaling, and a wide swath of new 
research indicates it can perform in extreme conditions and have 
sustainability benefits that were not previously known. In 2022, 
there were 139 mass timber buildings in the world eight stories or 
higher either complete, under construction, or proposed, according 
to the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. 
There are potentially several environmental and financial benefits. 
Recent research shows mass timber panels’ inherent thermal 
properties could possibly simplify or replace a building’s tradition-
al HVAC system. Another study found wood can match concrete’s 
performance in thermal mass design. And when cross-laminated 
timber is used to create a structural floor system, it could lower 
costs and possibly reduce the need for load-bearing walls and 
columns, per research from Clemson University. 
In practice, mass timber is moving into new sectors, like hospitali-
ty. DLRGroup collaborated with designers, architects, and other ex-
perts to showcase a mass timber hotel prototype for the Marriott 
group—the hotel meets its stringent sound insulation standards, 
has a lower carbon footprint than concrete, ensures structural 
integrity, and aligns with the 2021 updated International Building 
Code for safety. And as the technology progresses, mass timber is 
reaching new heights. At 284 feet, The Ascent in Milwaukee is the 
world’s tallest mass-timber building and is fully compliant with 
Milwaukee’s building codes, including fire safety. Mass timber construction will allow buildings to last longer and 
perform better. With new exploration, the material can replace 
steel, act as a means to reduce material use and waste, increase 
carbon capturing, and provide new design flexibility. While most 
governments worldwide have yet to adopt wood-first laws, major 
economies are modernizing building codes, funding research, and 
promoting sustainable forestry to advance mass timber construc-
tion. As it increases, this form of construction will continue to grow 
as well. New regions looking to use this construction practice will 
have to study supply chain stability, and it’s likely there will be 
greater stability and faster adoption in mature industry regions 
like Europe. For emerging markets, more mass timber construc-
tion could mean new jobs in both the construction industry and 
manufacturing.
Mass timber construction can also benefit users. Wood pro-
vides aesthetic beauty and mental health and wellness benefits. 
Utilizing mass timber can also position a business as a leader 
in innovative, sustainable construction methods, enhancing its 
reputation and market appeal. The ability for new structural spans 
also lends itself to enabling new design challenges and innovative 
solutions to explore.MASS TIMBER 
CONSTRUCTION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 556INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Net-zero construction is about 
balancing carbon emissions 
during construction and over 
the life of a project. This can be 
done through monitoring energy 
consumption, as well as through 
what materials are used, how 
the materials are produced, and 
other carbon offset strategies. The 2022 Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction 
report found that the building and construction sector’s energy 
consumption and carbon dioxide emissions reached unprecedent-
ed heights post-Covid, accounting for over 34% of global energy 
demand in 2021. Net-zero construction and techniques could help 
reduce this industry’s energy use, and there are already promising 
examples like the Lola Mora Cultural Center in Argentina. The cen-
ter is described as being net-zero with advanced energy-efficient 
systems, such as wind turbines, solar panels, rainwater harvest-
ing, and natural ventilation, which will allow it to generate 20% 
more energy than it consumes. 
Net-zero practices are moving into material development for the 
built environment industry as well. Sweden’s SSAB has intro-
duced its SSAB Zero recycled steel: rather than burning coal in the 
process, this approach uses fossil-free electricity and hydrogen, 
targeting near-zero emissions. There’s also a lot of potential in 
the concrete industry, including CarbonCure, which strengthens 
concrete by adding CO2. 
On the construction front, the electrification of construction machin-
ery is advancing rapidly due to improvements in battery technology. 
Japanese-based Komatsu will soon roll out an electric excavator and 
a fully electric compact wheel loader; this machinery offers signif-
icant benefits such as enhanced air quality and noise reduction, 
making it suitable for both indoor settings and urban areas.
Direct air capture (DAC) has emerged as another solution for build-
ings seeking net-zero. While the US Department of Energy is advo-
cating for DAC, the technology remains costly and energy-consum-
ing, which could pressure cities to invest further in the necessary 
infrastructure. But the original form of DAC—sequestering carbon in 
plants—is still an option. In one interesting case, Barcelona-based 
TAKK Architecture completed a mobile garden designed to be relo-
cated to areas with the highest carbon emissions in the city.Net-zero construction plays a pivotal role in modern building prac-
tices due to its significant impact on climate change mitigation, 
energy efficiency, and sustainability. By aiming for a balance where 
the total amount of energy used by a building is roughly equal to 
the amount of renewable energy created on-site, these buildings 
drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Additionally, net-ze-
ro construction often incorporates elements that enhance indoor 
air quality and comfort, contributing positively to occupant health 
and well-being. 
Projects that are carbon neutral or even carbon negative are grow-
ing in number. As more projects utilize net-zero construction prac-
tices, they will need access to more renewable resources. Future 
energy storage solutions that enable shorter durations for recharg-
ing batteries, vehicles, spaces, and equipment from renewable 
sources promise a transformative future for urban construction. 
Currently, approximately 253 global cities have net-zero targets, 
with half formulating plans. Many communities are also looking to 
become net-zero. They will have a growing need for sustainable in-
frastructure and collaboration as they seek out established goals. NET-ZERO 
CONSTRUCTION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 557INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
The 3D and 4D printing of 
structures, materials, and 
buildings is becoming more of a 
norm.The option to use 3D printing technology is revolutionizing the 
construction industry with notable examples around the world. 
Glasgow’s “active transport” bridge, the largest printed concrete 
construction in the UK, showcases the potential for creating intri-
cate and unique infrastructural components in bridge construc-
tion. Dubai’s 3D printed office in the Emirates Towers highlights 
how this technology can save both time and money, and aligns 
with the city’s goal of having a quarter of all buildings 3D printed 
by 2030. Telangana, India, is looking to blend cultural reverence 
with innovation, by building the world’s first 3D printed Hindu 
temple. Meanwhile, in Texas, ICON is partnering with Lennar and 
Bjarke Ingels Group to develop the largest 3D printed community 
offering, which includes 100 homes.
But the technology is still evolving. Tech company RENCA has 
pioneered the use of geopolymers for 3D printing entire houses, 
and the EU-funded WOOL2LOOP project repurposed mineral wool, 
typically considered waste with low-recyclability, into geopolymer 
concrete for construction. Meanwhile, a research initiative at the 
Missouri University of Science and Technology aims to develop an 
AI program that determines the best locally sourced materials for 
3D printed concrete. By testing a variety of fibers, including un-
conventional plant-based and recycled fibers, the program seeks 
to enhance local sustainability, reduce construction costs, and 
improve the efficiency and safety of military construction efforts.
Scientists have developed a new 3D printing technique that allows 
them to control the cell structure and influence the final product 
shape; though early in development, this sustainable, reusable 
wood retains its original properties including strength and scent. 
Researchers from Bath and Imperial College London introduced Ae-
rial Additive Manufacturing drones capable of 3D printing buildings. With a global demand for new homes and a need to convert aging 
infrastructure into revitalized assets, additive manufacturing 
offers solutions. For overpopulated cities or suburbs looking to 
expand, the technology could provide avenues to develop sus-
tainable neighborhoods quickly. This could lead to new ways for 
businesses to use additive manufacturing for repair, product man-
ufacturing, and increasing construction speed. The compounds 
and materials that go in and come out of this construction type 
will become increasingly important for the built environment. The 
fact that waste is becoming a targeted material, could form new 
circular business offerings as well. 
As additive manufacturing begins to generate more aesthetically 
pleasing materials, it will help acceptance. But as the technol-
ogy scales, it will disrupt many traditional forms of design and 
construction, as it will offer new ways of creating and building. 
Such changes can bring customizable diversity to regions and for 
new homeowners, where they can choose from a menu of offer-
ings made just for them. And by localizing production for product 
manufacturers, construction site selection could become more of 
a focus. ADDITIVE 
CONSTRUCTION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 558INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Project management tools that 
allow for real-time monitoring 
and data transmission are 
creating efficiencies in 
construction. This includes the 
platforms themselves, as well 
as wearables that project visual 
data for workers as they build.Studies have found that most general contractors use minimal 
automation for their subcontractor management processes. This 
leads to data silos, and contractors lose out on potential improved 
productivity, cost performance, and profitability. Autodesk Con-
struction Cloud’s (ACC) 2020 acquisition of Pype introduced AI-pow-
ered submittal logs, and now the company’s launch of AutoSpecs in 
ACC can help streamline the construction processes for those just 
starting down this road. 
On the front end of projects, management platforms for various 
tasks, like CoConstruct’s integrated suite of construction estimat-
ing tools and STACK estimating software, are hitting the market. 
Join offers a platform that streamlines construction decision-mak-
ing by importing data from tools like Excel and letting users evalu-
ate the cost implications of preconstruction choices in real time. 
For the building itself, management systems are not new. Howev-
er, management systems that track efficiency are gaining ground. 
Learnd, a UK startup, is offering a unified building management 
system platform that integrates with existing systems to enhance 
energy efficiency and decrease carbon emissions. 
New tools and platforms are also creating overlays that enhance 
project management. Argyle is an AR application for job sites that 
offers BIM visualization to prevent errors and ensure smooth project 
progression without the need for Wi-Fi. GAMMA AR uses augmented 
reality to overlay 3D BIM models on job sites. VSight is an AR-pow-
ered platform used by industrial workers for remote collaboration 
and knowledge access, streamlining operations in over 100 coun-
tries. OnSiteXR is a mixed reality app for HoloLens 2 that aids in 
attaching prefab building elements and records work using speech-
to-text and image capture. Project management during the construction process is time-con-
suming and laborious. Addressing the challenge of workforce 
depletion, new platforms replace time-losing work processes so 
workers can focus on other needed workflows. More wearables 
that allow for the monitoring and managing of workers can also 
increase worker safety, and subsequently impact the bottom line 
of a company with reduced on-site injury claims. These wearables 
could become more standardized and interoperable, which would 
allow for more health management of the worker as well. Devices 
like these can not only prioritize on-site safety but also bridge 
communication gaps, enabling real-time access to data and fos-
tering remote collaboration, leading to better project management. 
With more immersive technologies, the jobsite can now become 
interconnected with the model back in the office, which could 
allow for real-time drafting and designing coordination, replacing 
RFIs and even submittals.INTERACTIVE 
PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 559INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTSCENARIOS
560© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY
SCENARIO YEAR 2031
Road T oday, School T omorrow   
As with many developing countries, Kenya once struggled to balance building infrastructure over schools. The 
country needed schools to educate workers, but getting schools built and roads to get there also needed work-
ers. This challenge persisted until the MIGA expanded its guarantees to help develop real-time monitoring for 
additive roadways. Through a partnership between investors, COBOD International, and several universities, 
they were able to create an offering that used real-time monitoring to know where roads would be most helpful, 
but could also be additively-made to be weather resistant. Once trade routes were established, the roads them-
selves could be converted into materials to build new schools. Once the schools have been established for sev-
eral years, and repairs of the new roads become no longer feasible, the roads are recycled and ready for reuse for 
water management or other necessary infrastructure. This has helped Kenya to continue to develop while also 
managing some of the issues the country faces due to climate change.SCENARIOS
561© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY
SCENARIO YEAR 2040
T ag Y ou Later!   
“Day of Drafting,” or Tag Day as it was first called because it emerged in Germany, has become a phrase many 
firms discuss when they talk about the history of construction documents. The combination of AI project man-
agement tools, AR drafting, and additive manufacturing combined in an unforeseen way to change the indus-
try in the early 2030s. New wearables for drafting allowed connected professionals the ability to draft in an AR 
space; the design was then immediately run through an AI code check in the ConPro management platform, 
and, if it passed, printed on-site immediately. Gone are the days of waiting for permits and the right site condi-
tions, thanks to the connected sensors on site. The sensors told the crew what was ripe for building on that day, 
and then the component was drawn and printed immediately. The drone workers helped by then taking scans of 
what was printed, comparing it to the model through the platform, and then asking the architect, engineer, and 
designer to sign off on it. Because of this new form of building, at the end of the day, most construction workers 
now sign off with, “Tag you later!”WHY IT MATTERS
Modularity has struggled to 
scale within construction, but 
has still continued to grow with 
its technical precision to include 
whole hospital suites that can be 
shipped and plugged into a new 
hospital building.Health systems increasingly prefer modular and prefabricated con-
struction methods due to their speed and efficiency. That’s why M 
Health Fairview St. John’s Hospital in Maplewood, Minnesota, used 
modular expansion to swiftly add 16 extra beds in nine months; 
traditionally, that project would have taken 15 months. As a project 
director at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Michael 
Schesler is overseeing the construction of a 17-story inpatient tower 
that will use various prefabrication methods, with components 
like walls and bathroom pods being made in a nearby warehouse. A 
notable feature is the preassembly of horizontal MEP distribution 
systems, which are prepared in the warehouse, transported, and 
installed on-site. And even outside of hospitals, the ANNA Collection 
is taking modular living to a new level as its prefabricated cabins 
can be shipped anywhere. 
The “polyroom” concept, developed by the French firm Cutwork, 
aims to tackle the looming global housing shortage with modular 
construction. The company builds small modular units with green 
spaces that can be swiftly assembled and reconfigured to adapt to 
daily needs, making it ideal for rapid urban development. For furni-
ture, Ori specializes in robotic-powered space-saving solutions that 
transform single-use areas into multifunctional spaces. 
Modular “jigsaw” roads, designed for rapid disassembly and 
reassembly, offer urban areas an adaptive solution to fluctuating 
traffic, construction demands, and emergency situations. CirculinQ, 
a Netherlands-based company, utilizes recycled plastic blocks for 
roads and pavements, efficiently managing water and showcasing 
impressive durability. Carlo Ratti Associati has furthered this con-
cept with a modular street prototype, featuring hexagonal blocks 
that can be quickly rearranged, transforming a busy road into a 
community space like a basketball court.At scale, modular construction would address much of the 
renovation many cities will need to help prevent urban decay. As 
residents move from downtown areas, they are looking to mod-
ular homes in suburban areas. Modular construction can offer 
complete customization and be shipped anywhere in the world, 
which, with a growing mobile population would be very attractive. 
Communities may become more ephemeral, and prefabricated 
neighborhood setups may need to be ready. While upfront costs 
can be higher, the rapid construction timeline offers quicker de-
livery. With a growing unhoused population, modular units could 
be used to add on to existing structures in a cost effective manner 
that would not hurt the building’s existing function or a multifam-
ily residence’s performa. It can also help minimize disruption when 
spaces need to remain open—like emergency rooms.MODULAR 
CONSTRUCTION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 562INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTWHY IT MATTERS
The use of robots and other 
automated processes is changing 
construction practices and 
reporting, reducing project 
timelines, as well as reducing 
worker risk.Cobots, the robotic coworkers, are becoming an established 
presence on many job sites—and they come in all sizes and for 
multiple functions. San Francisco-based startup Canvas leverages 
robotics, AI and machine learning to enhance drywall finishing 
and painting. This compact robot, roughly the size of a kitchen 
stove, is outfitted with laser scanners and operates on a vertical 
platform to navigate unfinished structures. Ken Robotech’s Tomo-
robo is a handheld tool designed to automate the repetitive task 
of rebar tying in construction, enhancing efficiency and alleviating 
the physical burden on workers.
Boston Dynamics has unveiled a substantial update to its Spot ro-
bot dog, by introducing advanced inspection workflows, enhanced 
interactions with humans, autonomous door manipulation, and 
a new vocal capability powered by ChatGPT and other AI models, 
which can boost its efficiency and user-friendliness. The Ddog 
project from MIT Media Lab combines Spot with a Brain-Computer 
Interface system, utilizing AttentivU’s wireless glasses to measure 
brain activity and eye movements for nonverbal communication. 
While not in use on the construction site, yet, if successful it could 
aid in tasks all controlled through brain signals—and potentially 
be a game-changer for those with physical challenges.
Ballast Nedam, in partnership with ROPAX, launched a masonry 
robot in late 2021 to boost the efficiency of residential housing 
construction. It can measure a facade in 15 minutes and ensure 
level masonry even on unstable scaffolds, saving a day’s work per 
facade. The Hadrian X, developed by Australian-based FBR Limited, 
is a swift and efficient mobile robotic blocklaying system capable 
of constructing house walls within a day using 3D CAD models. 
Beginning in 2025, HD Hyundai plans to broaden its Xite technolo-
gy, which will enable greater site connectivity in the construction, 
demolition, and mining industries.As labor continues to be a challenge, integrating robotic and aug-
mented processes can reduce the need for staff on-site. This can 
be helpful in developing regions where workers are scarce, but they 
may need to consider partnering with companies to bring the tools 
and technology to the region. Augmented construction by way of 
cobots could allow for continuous repair of aging infrastructure. 
While manufacturing already uses robotics in the production of 
many of its products, the built environment products may soon 
need to contend with figuring out how to teach cobots how to 
install their sometimes delicate products. Construction tolerances 
will need to be updated as more cobots perform the tasks, either 
negating the tolerance altogether or increasing them depending 
on the task the cobot is performing. Lastly, while safety may in-
crease in some areas, in others it may decrease with the use of the 
cobots, which could mean a change to insurance premiums.AUGMENTED 
CONSTRUCTION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 563INDUSTRY BUILT ENVIRONMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2032
Nostalgia-Made Spaces   
As many homeowners struggled to find homes in the early 2020s, they would often complain that the homes 
they could find were nothing like the ones they grew up in—and they cost twice as much as they could afford. 
Enter Nostalgia Homes, a developer that started out working  with new parents who wanted to re-create the 
home they grew up in, so their kids could share the same memories they experienced decades ago. 
Nostalgia Homes started in Austin, Texas, and soon became a global developer after completing its first 3D 
printed neighborhood. The company impressed clients with its details and accuracy. Through AI simulations, 
couples were even able to blend the best parts about each other’s childhood homes and share that blended ex-
perience with their family. Not to leave urban clients out, Nostalgia Homes soon spun out Nostalgia Apartments 
and even Nostalgia Venues for repeating travel memories. The company could go into a modular blank apart-
ment and retrofit the empty space using additive drone swarms to look like any place the tenant had previously 
lived. Nostalgia Venues offers the ability to re-create destination locations where couples were married or where 
a family had vacationed together. Some of the venues are going even further, using AI simulation to help find 
ways to build portions of international landmarks in other countries to help those who cannot afford to travel.
564© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRYAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
565© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY566© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSBUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editors 
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYMARK BRYAN  
Senior Manager
Mark Bryan is a Senior Foresight Manager at the Future Today Institute and leads 
our Built Environment, Hospitality, Retail, Restaurants & CPG practice areas. Mark 
excels in applying strategic foresight to design and the built environment, anticipat -
ing future need states for our physical and organizational spaces. His expertise in 
integrating strategic planning with innovative design principles empowers busi-
nesses to anticipate and adapt to future trends, fostering sustainable growth, resiliency, and transformative change 
in their industries.
Before FTI, Mark worked as a workplace strategist, designer, design researcher, and futurist for clients across the 
country, most recently through his role as Director of Innovation + Research at a design and architecture firm.
Mark’s portfolio of clients includes national foundations, global CPG companies, international associations, product 
manufacturers, national retail brands, multi-family developers, healthcare systems, senior living facilities, restaurants, 
and large multinationals. Mark has produced original research and strategic analysis on the future of co-living, senior 
living, workplaces, play, hotels and resorts, dining, and distance learning.
Mark is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. He holds a BS in Interior 
Design from Virginia Tech and NCDIQ Certification.
SELECTED  
SOURCES
567© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY568© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Adams, Helen Sydney. “Man-
ufacturing Floating Solutions 
for Housing & Clean Ener-
gy.” March 12 2022. https://
manufacturingdigital.com/
technology/manufactur-
ing-floating-solutions-for-hous-
ing-clean-energy.
Borneman, Jim. “Crypton To 
Introduce Crypton Celliant: 
The First Woven Upholstery 
Fabric With Celliant Infrared 
Technology for Commercial 
and Residential Design.” Tex-
tile World. October 26, 2021. 
https://www.textileworld.com/
textile-world/2021/10/cryp-
ton-to-introduce-crypton-cel-
liant%e2%80%a8the-first-wo-
ven-upholstery-fabric-with-cel-
liant-infrared-technolo-
gy-for-commercial-and-residen-
tial-design%e2%80%a8/.“Downtown San Diego Plans to 
Install up to 75 Digital Adver-
tising Kiosks.” SDtoday, June 8, 
2023. https://sdtoday.6amcity.
com/development/digital-ki-
osks-downtown-san-diego.
Face Following Fan. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=tz-
PecC7YR_E. 
JLL’s Strategic Technology 
Services Enable Future of Work 
and Sustainability. November 
21, 2022. www.us.jll.com/en/
newsroom/jll-strategic-tech-
nology-services-enable-fu-
ture-of-work-and-sustainability.
Lehtola, Ville V., et al. “Digi-
tal Twin of a City: Review of 
Technology Serving City Needs.” 
International Journal of Applied 
Earth Observation and Geoin-
formation, vol. 114, November 
2022, p. 102915. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jag.2022.102915.“‘Life Energy Architecture’ Crowd 
Farms as Human Power Plants 
(Main Entrance for Mansoura 
University ‘El-Baron Gate’).” 
Energy Procedia, vol. 115, June 
2017, pp. 272–89. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.025.
Lucic, Michael C., et al. “Lever -
aging UAVs to Enable Dynamic 
and Smart Aerial Infrastructure 
for ITS and Smart Cities: An 
Overview.” Drones, vol. 7, no. 2, 
February 2023, p. 79. https://doi.
org/10.3390/drones7020079.
“MVRDV, Superworld, and the 
City of Rotterdam Create Soft-
ware for Reimagining Roof-
tops.” ArchDaily, November 16, 
2022. https://www.archdaily.
com/992273/mvrdv-super-
world-and-the-city-of-rotter-
dam-create-software-for-re-
imagining-rooftops.“New Fibers Can Make 
Breath-Regulating Garments.” 
MIT News, October 15, 2021. 
https://news.mit.edu/2021/fi-
bers-breath-regulating-1015.
“New Research Leads to 
Lighter and Greener Bridges.” 
ScienceDaily. https://www.
sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2020/06/200603110240.htm. 
“Novel Multi-Sensor Fusion 
Models Enable Fast and Accu-
rate Detection of Surface Water 
Quality.” EurekAlert! https://
www.eurekalert.org/news-re-
leases/996640. 
Peng, Junlong, and Xiangjun 
Liu. “Automated Code Compli-
ance Checking Research Based on BIM and Knowledge Graph.” 
Scientific Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, 
May 2023, p. 7065, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-023-34342-
1.
Robison, Joe. “Where Are 15 
Minute Cities Most Viable in the 
US?” MoveBuddha, August 2, 
2021. www.movebuddha.com/
blog/15-minute-cities/.
Rotta Loria, and Alessandro F. 
“The Silent Impact of Under-
ground Climate Change on Civil 
Infrastructure.” Communica-
tions Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, 
July 2023, pp. 1–12. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s44172-023-00092-
1.
Science, National Research 
Council of, and Technolo-
gy. “New Way to Predict the 
Damage and Aging of Bridg-
es.” https://techxplore.com/
news/2023-02-aging-bridges.
html. Sergeev, Stanislav, et al. “Ultra-
broadband Sound Control with 
Deep-Subwavelength Plasma-
coustic Metalayers.” Nature 
Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, 
May 2023, p. 2874. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-023-38522-
5.
“Sinking Cities: Two Ways to 
Fight Land Subsidence.” www.
downtoearth.org.in/blog/
urbanisation/sinking-cities-
two-ways-to-fight-land-subsid-
ence-89444. 
Staricco, Luca. “15-, 10- or 
5-Minute City? A Focus on 
Accessibility to Services in 
Turin, Italy.” Journal of Urban 
Mobility, vol. 2, Dec. 2022, p. 
100030. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
urbmob.2022.100030.SELECTED SOURCESBUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRY569© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Sweden Plans to Build the 
World’s First Permanent e-Road 
by 2025.” Euronews,  May 9. 
2023. www.euronews.com/
next/2023/05/09/sweden-is-
building-the-worlds-first-per-
manent-electrified-road-for-
evs-to-charge-while-dri.
“Togal AI Leverages First in 
Market Status in AI Takeoff Soft-
ware.” IronPros. https://iron-
pros.com/en-us/a/24257db57b-
392d7eb945e6566c1e038a/
togal-ai-leverages-first-in-mar-
ket-status-in-ai-takeoff-soft-
ware. 
Tyson, Richard. “Graph by 
Gensler: Spatial Analytics for 
Design.” Gensler. www.gensler.
com/blog/graph-by-gens-
ler-spatial-analytics-design. Ufer, Tim. “Applications of 
AI and Machine Learning in 
Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering.” Online Engineering 
Master’s Programs, April 20, 
2021. https://online.egr.msu.
edu/articles/ai-machine-learn-
ing-electrical-computer-engi-
neering-applications/.
University, Drexel. “Machine 
Learning Can Support Urban 
Planning for Energy Use.” 
https://techxplore.com/
news/2023-05-machine-ur-
ban-energy.html. 
WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023.https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=AU394907892&_ci-
d=P12-LJZNFI-32811-1. WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=WO2023015013&_ci-
d=P12-LJZSZO-22488-1. 
WIPO— - Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US366846015&_ci-
d=P20-LJ62UC-94782-1.SELECTED SOURCESBUILT ENVIRONMENT INDUSTRYNEWS • INFORMATION2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION572© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSNEWS & INFORMATION
573 T op Headlines
574  State of Play
575  Key Events
576  Likely Near T erm 
Developments
577 Why News & Information 
Trends Matter to Y our 
Organization 
578 Opportunities and Threats
579 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
580 Central Themes
581 Ones T o Watch
582 Reporting + Verifying 
Information
583 Computer-Directed Reporting
584 Dateline: Metaverse
585 Summarization at Scale
586 Content Verification
587 Investigating Technology
588 Sensory Journalism604 Digital Threat Modeling
605 Data-enriched Broadcasting
606 Scenario: What if We 
Revitalize Journalism, but 
Don’t Engage the Public?
607 Authors
609 Selected Sources589 Algorithmic Fact Checking
590 Scenario: What if Newsrooms 
were Replaced by AI that can 
Summarize the World?
591 Search + Discovery
592 Evolving Search Interfaces
593 Teaching News Literacy
594 User Directed Media Formats
595 Digital Frailty
596 Scenario: Presidential 
Ambitions Dashed
597 The Battle for Content Value
598 Policing the Creator Economy
599 Disordered Consumption and 
News Avoidance
600 The Information Ecosystem
601 Eroding Trust in News 
Organizations
602 Digital Redlining
603 Pivot to PhilanthropyINDUSTRYThe news ecosystem 
is at an inflection 
point. The adoption of 
generative AI in business 
and entertainment 
media is actively 
shaping consumer 
expectations for news.01
02
03
04
05
573© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Generative AI is mainstream 
While algorithms won’t completely replace human creators in the near term,  
they are lowering the barrier to creating compelling content.
Digital traffic dynamics are shifting 
Websites built on search will need to contend with rapidly shifting consumer behavior, 
driven by a flood of algorithmic content and changing search modalities.
Publishers are losing power in the content value chain 
Technology companies are poised to claim a greater share of the content value 
chain wielding multimodal LLMs, giant troves of scraped data and the power of 
AI summarization.
Foundations are the new hedge funds, offering an influx of cash  
to fund journalism 
News organizations, especially public media and local outlets, are counting on 
those grants to hire staff and grow.
Trust is essential for media businesses, but it is at near-historic lows 
The ability for legacy publishers to succeed will hinge on their ability to maintain the 
trust of audiences.TOP HEADLINESNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYSTATE 
OF PLAYGenerative AI went mainstream in 2023, igniting fears that algorithmic content 
would flood the internet and relegate writers to the dustbin of history. In the year 
ahead, the initial frenzy around ChatGPT, prompt hacking and AI-backed product 
launches will fade, but the information ecosystem will never be the same.
As technologists search for new applications of AI, the media value chain is 
being reshaped. The barriers to creating compelling content are falling because 
of AI-enabled editing tools—which include text editors that can draft paragraphs 
from bullets and video editors that can synthesize a sizzle reel from a few words.
Norms of digital distribution shaped over the last decade are crumbling. There 
is no longer a dominant social network for news. Search traffic with generative 
summaries are poised to replace the traditional list of links. That concern is on 
top of a shift in Google’s core algorithm that has reduced the visibility of news 
websites.
At the same time, the fundamentals of the information economy remain chal-
lenging. The move to reader revenue has kept lots of publishers afloat, but it re-
mains to be seen how much growth is possible. There is substantial excitement 
around philanthropic funding models for journalism, but nonprofit newsrooms 
still need to prove their relevance to audiences.Emerging technologies like 
generative AI are shaping the 
future of content creation, 
distribution and monetization.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY
574575© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MARCH 2023
LLM explosion  
Generative AI fever hits with 
the release of multiple LLMs 
(large language models), 
including GPT-4.0.
APRIL 12, 2023
NPR quits Twitter  
NPR’s departure emphasized 
the dramatic shift in the social 
network’s tone and leadership.MAY 18, 2023
Section 230 remains intact  
The Supreme Court ruled 
technology platforms aren’t 
liable for user-generated content.MAY 10, 2023
Generative search from Google  
The launch of Search Generative 
Experience highlighted how AI 
might change news discovery.DECEMBER 13, 2023
Axel Springer + OpenAI partner  
The German media house became 
the first global publisher to reach 
a licensing deal integrate its 
journalism into OpenAI’s products.KEY EVENTSNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY
576© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.THE PACE OF CHANGE ACCELERATES
Journalists are accustomed to the 
breakneck pace of change: Adjusting 
to rapid developments has been the 
watchword of media organizations for 
more than a decade. The year ahead 
will test whether news leaders have 
learned to search for disruption or 
whether they’ve gotten complacent. 
Barriers to creating compelling con-
tent will fall. The operating assump-
tions that let many digital publishers 
thrive on reach will crumble. There 
will be a race to derive value from 
existing content, either by licensing it 
to tech companies or building pub-
lisher-owned LLMs. New categories of 
devices will demand new publishing 
formats. Successful news organi-
zations will triage these competing 
threats to find opportunity; too many 
publishers will do nothing and find 
their relevance diminished.Evolution in copyright law
Generative AI tools have outstripped set-
tled law. Expect to see litigation challenging 
whether crawling content to train a large 
language model constitutes fair use. The im-
pacts of that legal wrangling could be com-
pounded by new laws or regulations.
Subscription fatigue
The conversion to a subscription economy is 
happening in news but also in retail, gaming, 
automobiles, and more. All those programs 
are competing for a finite share of consumer 
spending, so publishers need to ensure they 
are essential to remain competitive.New modes of search and discovery
Generations Z and Alpha have different con-
sumption patterns than older generations. 
These differences are especially stark when 
looking at how younger users find news. Pub-
lishers need to tailor their strategies to reach 
those potential consumers.Fragmented information access
Not everyone can afford a news subscription. 
As paywalls at premier publishers get tighter, 
essential reporting may not reach the com-
munities that need to see it. This is of par-
ticular concern for the 2024 US presidential 
election.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
New European regulations
The EU’s Digital Services Act, in effect since 
August, introduced substantial changes to 
the regulatory framework for tech platforms. 
Its obligations may shift how platforms op-
erate, just as a Canadian law caused Meta to 
drop news from its platform last year.Easier content creation
Expect to see a new suite of productivity tools 
aimed at transforming the creative process. 
Those tools will have a cultural—and eco-
nomic—impact as they lower the barriers to 
publishing text, photos, and videos. Legacy 
creators will struggle to adapt.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY577© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Any business that 
publishes online—
effectively, anyone 
with a website—needs 
to understand how 
consumers search for and 
discover new information. 
The shifting search and 
social media landscape 
is particularly important 
for publishers but is 
broadly relevant because 
those changes will quickly 
impact other industries.A growing body of 
research shows that 
losing local news outlets 
leads to more corruption, 
less competitive elections, 
and weaker government 
finances in impacted 
regions. Business leaders 
need to follow news and 
information trends so 
they can maintain the 
health of their operating 
environment.The way news is read, 
watched, and listened 
to offers tremendous 
insights into how 
consumers will interact 
with technology more 
broadly. The pervasiveness 
of news makes it a 
good barometer for 
understanding how 
consumers will adapt to 
new devices and media 
formats.The ease of creating 
content with AI tools 
means that it is more 
important than ever to 
verify the authenticity of 
facts, images, and videos 
that circulate online. 
Journalists aren’t the 
only ones responsible 
for fact-checking—
any organization that 
publishes content online 
or takes strategic actions 
based on open-source 
information needs to do it.It is critical to understand 
how the economics 
of news will continue 
to support impactful 
reporting. The last five 
years saw a substantial 
shift in how publishers 
fund themselves, with 
renewed emphasis on 
digital subscriptions 
and foundation support. 
Those developments have 
important repercussions 
for the entire media value 
chain.Trust is an essential asset 
for all businesses, but 
news organizations must 
pay special attention to 
their credibility. Tracking 
trends in news and 
information can help an 
organization understand 
and respond to the ways 
that technology is driving 
audiences to become 
more polarized and 
distrustful.Search and discovery 
is relevant to allBusinesses cannot 
operate without 
journalismConsumption 
highlights consumer 
behaviorContent 
verificationSustainable news 
funding is essentialUnderstanding the 
dynamics of trustWHY NEWS & INFORMATION TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Reader revenue programs will face growing competition in a market saturated 
with subscription products. Publishers may fail to diversify their revenue 
streams because of the industry consensus to keep pursuing audience 
revenue.
Search engines that incorporate generative AI or voice interfaces may send less 
referral traffic to news websites. That will curtail one of publishers’ strongest 
tools for reaching new audiences, restricting future growth.
Device manufacturers and platforms may use LLMs to generate and distribute 
news directly to their users. The result would be a dramatic shift in the media 
value chain, threatening to displace publishers’ core offering.
Trust in institutions—and in news media in particular—remains near historic 
lows. News organizations that lose credibility won’t be able to build audiences 
to sell advertising or to convert consumers to subscribers.
Resource-constrained publishers struggle to track the innovation related 
to content creation and distribution happening across domains. Their 
organizational culture makes it difficult to respond to multidisciplinary 
challenges.Opportunities
Legacy publishers have a deep archive of content that can be used for training 
large-language models. The demand for data to train LLMs could increase the 
value of those archives, creating a new revenue stream for publishers.
Brands that maintain durable relationships with consumers will thrive in a low-
trust environment. Publishers that have built trust over decades can translate 
that across distribution channels with thoughtful product development.
Emerging devices will demand new programming formats. Creators and 
publishers that act on that opportunity early will be able to set norms and 
negotiate better deals with platform companies than those that delay action.
Technologists across the world are seeking ways to enhance and apply AI tools 
like ChatGPT. That means media companies have an unprecedented number of 
potential partners to work with on product development.
Many open-source alternatives to AI models licensed by tech giants like Google, 
Microsoft, and OpenAI are available. The propagation of open-source language 
models could allow news organizations to innovate with greater control.
578© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY579© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Assess the value contained 
within your archives. Is 
there an opportunity to 
license that content or use 
it to train your own large 
language model? Does 
that content have specific 
biases that should be ad-
dressed before it could be 
used in production? Is the 
archive already digitized or 
is it analog?Ask how your organization 
would respond to a trust 
crisis: What would you do 
if your website was used 
to launch a coordinated 
misinformation cam-
paign? How would you 
recover from a mistake 
that impacts consumers’ 
perception of your brand? 
An internal exercise could 
expose operational gaps 
before they have conse-
quences.What skills will your organi-
zation need in the next 5-10 
years? How will you be able 
to train or recruit staff who 
can support and execute 
on your goals? Understand the audiences 
you are trying to reach and 
invest in building direct re-
lationships. If your strategic 
plan calls for an audience 
of younger users, how will 
you measure that goal? 
Once you start making 
inroads with that audience, 
what tactics will you use for 
keeping them engaged?Build partnerships with a 
local university to identi-
fy and create technical 
infrastructure. Connections 
with academic institutions 
can help to make sense of 
state-of-the-art research 
and create a talent pipeline 
for your organization.Identify the tasks most 
vulnerable to automation 
within your organization. 
Would deploying an AI tool 
to automate that work 
increase operational risk? 
How would your consumers 
respond if they learned that 
certain text was generated 
by an algorithm? Honestly 
answering those questions 
could help triage pilot 
projects.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWeakening legacy organizations
The information ecosystem is less resilient 
because of waves of consolidation and layoffs 
that have buffeted publishers. More than half 
of the local newspapers in the United States 
are owned by just seven companies. 2023 was 
a brutal year, with more media layoffs record-
ed by July than any year on record, according 
to career services company Challenger, Gray 
& Christmas. 
Across the media landscape, legacy players 
and digital upstarts are redoubling their 
efforts to build audience-funded recurring 
revenue streams. That work is essential, but 
it is a long way from reversing the losses that 
publishers—especially those providing local 
news—have suffered over the last decade and 
half. 
As a result, organizations are forced to make 
difficult choices between forward-looking in-
novation and core operations. While it’s easy 
to defer investing in emerging technologies 
and platforms, the strategic imperative is to 
act on the trends nearing an inflection point.Pivot to audience revenue
Subscriptions power media outlets, from 
multibillion-dollar media giants like The New 
York Times to individual passion projects on 
Substack. They are a preferred tactic with news 
organizations because they align publishers’ 
economic interests with their audience.
Publishers are getting more efficient at con-
verting readers to subscribers—and under-
standing how to retain them once they’ve 
signed up. Those insights are essential for 
news organizations striving to remain sus -
tainable.
At nonprofit news organizations, which gen-
erally don’t charge for subscriptions or have a 
paywall, audience revenue is also an important 
source of support. At those organizations, the 
challenge is demonstrating the value of recur-
ring support without the help of a paywall. 
Whether it’s a subscription or a recurring 
donation, news organizations need to focus on 
providing an essential service. That’s the best 
way to ensure consumers stay engaged and 
remain willing to pay, even as more and more other industries launch subscription pro-
grams to compete for readers’ limited funds.
Preserving civic information
Widening news deserts in the United States 
make it harder to find basic coverage of local 
governments. The influx of philanthropic 
funding to news is driven, in large part, by a 
desire to reverse that decay.
“The philanthropic sector recognizes the 
need to strengthen American democracy,” 
said John Palfrey, president of the MacArthur 
Foundation, in the launch announcement 
for the $500 million Press Forward coalition, 
to be used for local journalism. “Progress on 
every other issue, from education and health 
care to criminal justice reform and climate 
change, is dependent on the public’s under-
standing of the facts.”
Another, less discussed, need is preserving 
open access to essential information about 
basic services and emergency situations—in-
formation that can be difficult to find be-
cause of the quality of government websites 
and other official sources. The current wave of philanthropic funding for news isn’t directly 
addressing this issue, but emerging broad-
cast standards could help.
Focus on value, not tools
Nearly every day a new startup launches with a 
novel application of AI. Those tools increasing-
ly seek to change how would-be creators oper-
ate. While some products will truly disrupt the 
information ecosystem, it is far too early to 
know which ones will have a durable impact.
Instead of focusing on the specific applica-
tion of technology, look for whether it offers 
a fundamental shift in how value is created. 
An AI-enhanced word processor may reduce 
writer’s block and streamline the writing 
process. Rather than analyzing the ethics of 
publishing AI-powered suggestions, news or-
ganizations should consider the implications 
of inviting tech companies into their value 
chain: How might a magazine’s distinctive 
voice be impacted if its writers use the same 
off-the-shelf editing algorithm that another 
publication uses? How will pre-publication 
data be used in other products or services?CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 580NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYAshley Alvarado, who leads community 
engagement and strategic initiatives for 
Southern California Public Radio, for pursu-
ing innovative ways to engage audiences 
with public media.
Keith Axline, Spencer Cavanaugh, and Eric 
Mack, co-founders of JournoDAO, for proto-
typing ways that journalists can engage with 
Web3 technologies.
Scott Brodbeck, founder of a local news net-
work serving the Washington, D.C., metro area, 
for experimenting with GPT-4 to scale local 
news operations with low-code automation.
Meredith Broussard, data journalist and 
journalism professor at New York University, 
for academic research on applications of AI 
to investigative reporting and the creation of 
ethical AI.
Feli Carrique, executive director of the News 
Product Alliance, for coordinating a communi-
ty of news innovators, including launching a 
new certificate for News Product Management.
Jon Cohrs, Chris Wood, and Willa Köerner, 
members of The New York Times R+D team, 
for work on spatial audio, including creating 
a guide for podcast producers to use the 
technology.Liz Danzico, design executive at Microsoft, 
for contributing to the development of Bing’s 
AI interface and working with news organiza-
tions to consider how they need to evolve.
Jessica Davis, senior director for AI prodect 
at Gannett, for pursuing AI-powered newsroom 
automation solutions across the publisher’s 
network.
Lebo Diseko, South African correspondent 
for the BBC World Service and Nieman Fel-
low, for research into new modes of audience 
engagement and how journalists can protect 
democracy.
Evelyn Douek, assistant professor of law at 
Stanford Law School, for leading scholarship 
on how online speech is regulated by social 
platforms and tech companies.
Dr. Magdalena Fuentes, professor at NYU, 
for research around how AI can improve the 
quality of closed captions and transcriptions 
by better describing ambient sound.
Uli Köppen, head of the AI+Automation Lab at 
the German public broadcaster Bayerischer 
Rundfunk, for prototyping and exploring the 
future of public service broadcasting.Joy Mayer, director of Trusting News, a 
project that trains journalists and conducts 
research intended to help bolster trust in and 
credibility of news organizations. 
Miranda Marcus, leader of BBC labs, for 
managing the broadcaster’s innovation incu-
bator that explores new ways technology can 
support newsgathering and distribution.
Surya Mattu, leader of the Digital Witness 
Lab at Princeton University, for work support-
ing technologies investigating misinforma-
tion and how algorithms make decisions.
Dr. Swapneel Mehta, founder of research 
collective SimPPL, for facilitating partner-
ships to understand local news audience 
analytics and the spread of disinformation.
Dr. Arvind Narayanan, professor of comput-
er science at Princeton University, for leading 
a research project about algorithmic amplifi-
cation on social media.
Michael Newman, director of transformation 
at Graham Media Group, for leading a project 
that experimented with using generative AI 
to improve the quality of comments sections.Josh Raab, former director of Instagram and 
TikTok at National Geographic, for studying 
how journalists can understand social algo-
rithms as part of a Knight-Wallace fellowship.
Zach Seward, the New York Times’ first Edi-
torial Director of A.I. Initiatives. In that role, he 
will play an outsize role shaping the norms 
for how one of the world’s largest news orga-
nizations uses AI tools. 
Felix M. Simon, doctoral student at the 
Oxford Internet Institute and Knight News 
Innovation Fellow, for researching the blind 
spots in newsrooms’ AI guidelines.
Agnes Stenbom, founder of Schibsted’s 
inclusion lab, for advancing research into re-
sponsible AI usage and for prototyping ways 
outsiders can get involved with the future of 
news.
Dr. Benjamin T off, senior research fellow at 
the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journal-
ism, for leading research into declining trust 
in news in communities around the world.
Johanna Wild, founder of Bellingcat’s inves-
tigative tech team, for nurturing the ecosys-
tem of developers and tools that can improve 
the quality of investigative journalism.ONES TO WATCH
581© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY582© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.REPORTING 
+ VERIFYING 
INFORMATIONNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Publishers are becoming more 
comfortable with applying AI in the 
newsroom. Increasingly, forward-
looking news organizations 
are using algorithms to identify 
newsworthy events and develop 
story pitches. The trend could 
make reporters and editors more 
efficient but only with careful 
oversight to prevent infusing 
reporting with algorithmic bias.Experimental tools powered by AI are finding their way into 
newsrooms. Newsquest, the second-largest newspaper 
company in the UK, hired an “AI-powered reporter” in June. 
When the job description was posted, Newsquest’s Edito-
rial Development Director Toby Granville told a media blog: 
“AI technology opens up new possibilities for newsrooms, 
helping them win back time to focus on what they do best—
face-to-face journalism, which can never be replaced by 
robots.”
The Associated Press launched five pilots to showcase the 
applications of AI within local newsrooms, with funding 
from the Knight Foundation. Those included working with 
the Brainerd Dispatch in Minnesota to generate automated 
summaries of police updates and triaging press releas-
es and tips sent to WFMZ-TV in Allentown, Pennsylvania. 
Another project at WUOM-FM at the University of Michigan 
built a system for sending reporters alerts when certain top-
ics were discussed at city council meetings.
ALXnow, an Arlington, Virginia-based local news website, 
used OpenAI’s GPT-4 to launch an AI-written newsletter 
and build a copy editing tool. YESEO, a project sponsored 
by the Reynolds Journalism Institute, uses GPT to suggest 
search-friendly headlines for news articles.The accelerating capabilities of generative AI raise existen-
tial questions for publishers and threaten to destabilize the 
content ecosystem. Those concerns should be top of mind 
for news leaders, but they are also relevant for anyone who 
consumes the news.
There are already examples of how generative AI strategies 
can go wrong without proper oversight. After backlash about 
the decision to publish more than 70 articles written by AI, 
CNET launched an internal investigation to review those sto-
ries. More than half—including articles with titles like “What 
Is Compound Interest?” and  “How Much Should You Keep in 
a CD?”—needed corrections. In some cases, CNET also had to 
rewrite the articles because the investigation revealed some 
of the language had been plagiarized from the sources used 
to train its model.
A growing number of news organizations are releasing AI 
policies to govern their use of algorithmic tools. The guide-
lines generally deal with the production of content, leaving 
many open questions about other AI considerations. Those 
include whether newsrooms might become increasingly 
dependent on the technology companies providing AI solu-
tions and how news organizations can ethically use all the 
data they collect from their audience and in the reporting 
process. COMPUTER-
DIRECTED 
REPORTING3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 583NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Even as the hype for metaverse 
products fades, the line between 
our digital and physical selves 
is increasingly blurred. News 
organizations need to be 
prepared to report on events that 
unfold seamlessly across the real 
world and digital platforms.More and more of our lives are spent in persistent digital 
spaces. Reporting on the metaverse means taking seriously 
the events that happen in those digital worlds instead of 
relegating them to a niche beat like “internet culture” or 
“gaming.”
In February 2023, a Colombian traffic court convened to 
hear a case in the metaverse—an apparent first for the 
judiciary. Participants in the dispute appeared as avatars 
in Meta’s Horizon Worlds platform, with a live steam broad-
cast to YouTube. The presiding judge, Magistrate María 
Victoria Quiñones Triana, appeared as an avatar dressed in 
black robes.
Together, a handful of newsrooms launched projects on 
The Sandbox and Decentraland, two gaming platforms 
with metaverse-like qualities. The South China Morning 
Post used The Sandbox to publish a collection of historical 
photos, data visualizations, and illustrations as NFTs. Brit-
ish business magazine Management Today published its 
March 2022 cover as a 12-meter high wall in Decentraland.
One persistent challenge for news organizations operating 
in the metaverse is the lack of established norms around 
content moderation. Each virtual platform has its own rules 
and enforcement mechanisms—to the extent that there are 
any. That creates uncertainty for brands looking to launch 
experiments and makes it harder for reporters to identify 
truly newsworthy events.Covering virtual worlds seriously requires reframing how we 
think about them. If a political candidate appears at a rally 
saying one thing but their avatar contradicts that state-
ment in a virtual world, how should journalists respond? Is 
the in-person comment more “real” than the digital one? 
What if the doublespeak is part of an intentional messaging 
strategy?
Newsrooms need to expand coverage of virtual spaces 
beyond the gaming beat—behind the press releases and car-
toonish graphics, reporters will find tangible investments in 
technology, talent, and infrastructure by some of the world’s 
most powerful companies.
News organizations should also start thinking about their 
long-term value proposition in the metaverse: As we spend 
more of our lives connecting digitally, how do real-world 
connections change? How can local newspapers create rela-
tionships with citizens who see themselves more connected 
to an online affinity group than to their neighbors in physi-
cal space?
Without a single dominant virtual world among consumers, 
organizations considering metaverse experiments need to 
be cautious about where they invest. Rather than doubling 
down on a single platform, executives should consider how 
to develop the underlying skills that will be necessary to 
succeed, no matter which platform becomes popular.DATELINE: 
METAVERSE3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 584NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Generative AI excels at consuming 
content and transforming it. 
Products are already on the 
market that use large language 
models to summarize text for a 
streamlined reading experience. 
Researchers are looking to 
extend that approach to video. 
This trend jeopardizes the 
creativity and voice that lets high-
value publishers differentiate 
themselves.Summarization is one of the tasks at which LLMs excel. 
Researchers are actively developing benchmarks to evalu-
ate how well those models perform—both in relation to one 
another and in competition with humans. One project by 
a research team from Stanford and Columbia universities 
found that evaluators ranked AI-generated summaries as 
highly as those written by trained freelancers.
One of the most active research domains is “multimodal 
summarization”—a summary that takes inputs from mul-
tiple forms of media or was created in a different medium 
than the source material. For example, generating text sum-
maries of videos or generating a video highlight reel using a 
combination of raw footage and news stories.
There are also aggressive pushes to productize summariza-
tion. Artifact, a news reading app launched by the founders 
of Instagram, includes a feature that generates a bulleted 
summary of the articles it curates. In principle, that can be 
a valuable service for readers, letting them catch up quickly 
on the news. In practice, however, summarizing news can 
be difficult: The generated summaries sometimes express 
a quote as a statement of fact. That can materially change 
the meaning of the story, especially on sensitive topics like 
crime coverage.Summarization seems like a simple task, but effective 
summaries need to balance competing interests: A good 
one is clear while staying true to the original. Source texts 
might be packed with distinctive writing styles, metaphors, 
and subtle meanings. A news article might include a mix of 
factual statements, quoted opinion, and expert speculation. 
In a crime story, an AI model might mistakenly transform 
an allegation from the district attorney into a statement 
of fact, dramatically changing the meaning of the original 
reporting and potentially generating libel if the accused is 
innocent. A lawsuit filed in June tried to test whether AI can 
be held liable for such errors: A Georgia radio host is su-
ing OpenAI, alleging that a summary produced by ChatGPT 
falsely accused him of embezzling money from a gun rights 
nonprofit. The case was dismissed for procedural reasons; 
other similar cases will follow.
The power to crawl and effectively summarize information 
could create a new intermediary between publishers and 
their audience. AI may make it possible for readers to con-
sume far more information than ever before. The question 
for publishers is whether that interest will generate any new 
engagement for them—or whether all of the consumption 
will happen on enhanced search result pages, in reading 
apps, or in platforms that haven’t been invented yet.SUMMARIZATION  
AT SCALE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 585NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Generative AI is creating new 
challenges for journalists. As the 
cost and complexity of creating 
realistic fakes decrease, the need 
to be skeptical of images and 
videos circulating on social media 
rises. Newsrooms need to pay 
special attention to the training, 
tools, and workflows needed to 
avoid being tricked.When news of former President Donald Trump’s first indict-
ment broke, images of him being apprehended by police 
flooded Twitter. The images were compelling and believable 
but not real. They were generated using Midjourney, a gener-
ative AI tool. While the images were quickly debunked, they 
showed how quickly generated media could spread even 
with obvious imperfections in the image.
Researchers and industry groups are actively building tools 
to differentiate authentic content from manipulated media. 
The Content Authenticity Initiative is one cross-disciplinary 
collaboration focusing on addressing misinformation and 
content authenticity at scale. CAI is led by Adobe, but it 
includes some of the biggest news organizations, includ-
ing The New York Times, Axel Springer, and The Associated 
Press. One of CAI’s key initiatives was launching a metadata 
standard called “content credentials” for tracking the ways 
that images can be edited, manipulated, and enhanced 
using artificial intelligence.
A number of experimental prototypes exist for creating a 
trusted content chain from the moment of generation to 
consumption. A team at the University of Maryland tested 
TalkLock, a QR-code based system for verifying that video of 
live events hasn’t been maliciously manipulated.Content verification is important across the information 
value chain. Consumers of media need to be able to trust 
that the videos, images, and sources they encounter are 
real. Meeting that demand requires that journalists preserve 
trust (see also: Eroding Trust in News Organizations) but 
also proactively develop skills to protect themselves from 
accidentally disseminating fake or misleading information.
Further up the content value chain, newsmakers will de-
mand content verification mechanisms to differentiate real 
remarks from those that have been manipulated (i.e., politi-
cians who are recorded during nearly every moment of their 
public appearances.
Content verification is an especially urgent problem outside 
the English-speaking world. Although social platforms and 
tech giants operate globally, their staff are largely based in 
the United States and Western Europe. This leaves the rest 
of the world without many of the fact-checking and mod-
eration resources available for English-language media. 
Finding ways to address that discrepancy is essential for 
protecting the global information chain and the stability of 
democracies across the developing world.CONTENT 
VERIFICATION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 586NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
News organizations will use 
artificial intelligence and 
other emerging technologies 
strategically, but they must also 
consider them journalistically: 
Holding the powerful accountable 
means scrutinizing how AI is 
trained, built, and deployed. 
Reporters may need special 
technical training to pursue this 
essential beat.When technology feels like magic, it is harder for laypeople 
to understand how it works. If journalists don’t understand 
technology, they won’t be able to ask substantive questions.
Researchers have found numerous examples of algorithms 
that were supposed to provide impartial judgments instead 
amplifying bias that exists in society. Studies tracking the 
impact of algorithms deployed in the criminal justice sys-
tem, for example, found that they tend to disproportionately 
impact marginalized communities. Because the data used 
to train sentencing algorithms disproportionately included 
minority defendants, they compounded the discrimination 
those communities face instead of undoing it. Reporters 
from ProPublica found similar results while investigating 
RealPage, an algorithm used by property managers to maxi-
mize the rent tenants might pay.
That work is essential but increasingly requires deep 
technical understanding and rigorous data analysis. It’s 
increasingly common for data journalists to publish their 
methodology alongside an investigation to help audiences 
understand exactly how they pursued a story. That’s an im-
portant exercise to boost trust in news, but it underscores 
how investigative journalism has changed: Leveraging 
technology is quickly becoming even more important than 
shoe-leather reporting.The domain of computer-assisted reporting—data analysis 
and coding to help chase a story—has been emerging since 
the 1960s, when a reporter at the Detroit Free Press used a 
mainframe computer to analyze data and demonstrate that 
people who attended college were equally likely to have par-
ticipated in Detroit’s race riots as were high school dropouts.
This trend is different, however, because these days journal-
ists need deep technical acumen to understand the story 
they are trying to tell. News organizations need to recruit 
staff with the same skills as the technologists who are de-
veloping products for tech companies. When reporters have 
those skills, the results are compelling. Examples include 
The Markup, which spent 18 months building Blacklight, a 
tool for examining trackers deployed on websites, and The 
Wall Street Journal, which built a network of bots to reverse 
engineer and explain the TikTok algorithm.
When news organizations lack the skills to pursue high-
tech stories—or to know when they should consult outside 
experts—they may miss scoops or be taken advantage of 
by bad actors looking to spread misinformation. Hiring 
managers in newsrooms should be open to candidates with 
unconventional paths but strong technical skills.INVESTIGATING 
TECHNOLOGY10TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 587NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
As immersive devices become 
mainstream, journalists will have 
the power to tell stories that tap 
directly into their audiences’ 
senses. Storytellers will need to 
balance the capacity for sensory 
journalism to build emotional 
connections between the 
subjects of their stories and their 
audiences with novel ethical 
dilemmas.Newsrooms have been experimenting with immersive 
storytelling for nearly as long as the internet has support-
ed video playback. But as devices became more powerful 
and broadband allowed for higher resolution playback, the 
ability to influence a user’s experience has increased: Apple 
recently patented a mechanism for modulating audio based 
on perceived distance in a video or game; if released, that 
framework would open the infrastructure of spatial audio to 
developers.
Researchers in Finland and Spain collaborated to test how 
audiences responded to a 2016 project produced by Span-
ish newspaper El Pais. The team surveyed users after they 
consumed both an immersive video documentary and an 
online article about the Fukushima nuclear catastrophe. 
They found that the 360-degree video generated “greater 
emotional effect based on a greater perception of presence, 
realism, and involvement.”
Still, there’s a long way to go before multisensory storytell-
ing finds widestream acceptance. A research team in the 
Netherlands built a prototype called “FellTheNews” that 
combined haptic feedback and heat sensitive materials. 
Users had no increased emotional response because of the 
haptics, often missed the sensory feedback because they 
were focused on the storytelling, and had less trust of news 
when they felt their emotions were being manipulated.Emerging devices increasingly provide an immersive ex-
perience that breaks free of a mobile phone screen. Those 
coming to market will shape consumer expectations and 
define new categories of content. That means the impact of 
sensory journalism will be felt long before virtual and mixed 
reality experiences are mainstream: It will be a gradual shift 
from content constrained to a screen to content enmeshed 
with a consumer’s senses.
For news leaders, now is the time to consider the types of re-
portage that new device types will require. Just as producing 
360-degree video requires specialized equipment, so will 
immersive experiences. The medium’s potential to manip-
ulate a user’s emotions also requires new ethical debates: 
Newsrooms need to consider what subjective choices are 
acceptable during the editing and production of immersive 
media—and which are too manipulative. 
This technology also raises important accessibility ques-
tions: How will journalists ensure their work is accessible to 
all—including groups that tech companies frequently fail to 
prioritize, like women, people with disabilities, and people of 
color? By experimenting and planning now, newsrooms can 
be proactive and act strategically.SENSORY 
JOURNALISM4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 588NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Researchers and start-ups are 
looking to harness the power of AI 
to streamline the time-consuming 
process of fact-checking. The 
approaches vary from tools to 
help human fact-checkers triage 
potential misinformation to 
proactively evaluating statements 
as true or false.Because human fact-checkers have limited resources, AI 
can help triage the torrent of disinformation and misinfor-
mation spreading across the internet. Factchequeando, a 
collaboration between two Spanish-language fact-check-
ing newsrooms, is deploying machine learning systems to 
identify the most impactful misinformation targeting Span-
ish-speaking communities in the US. 
Other researchers are looking for ways to use AI to direct-
ly identify fake news—either by matching what’s being 
reported to previously debunked claims or by comparing 
statements to a corpus of known information. Either one is 
a substantial technical challenge because of the probabi-
listic nature of existing large language models. A team of 
researchers working with PANACEA (the PANdemic Ai Claim 
vEracity Assessment) found that AI-based fact-checking 
struggles because of vastly different organizational norms 
and tolerances for risk.
Academic research into AI-driven fact-checking accelerated 
during the COVID pandemic, in response to broad concern 
about how fake news was impacting global public health.
The lingering question is whether those models will gener-
alize to future situations.Generative AI tools are decreasing the barriers to spreading 
lies at scale. That makes the search for scalable solutions 
to disinformation and misinformation increasingly urgent. 
That urgency is heightened by AI’s tendency to be confident-
ly wrong. Google, for example, has incorporated the ability 
to “double check” Bard’s responses with a color-coded 
fact-checking interface. Bing’s chat experience can provide 
footnotes for its claims. Solutions like those will be essen-
tial to reinforce consumers’ trust in AI results and to prevent 
AI hallucinations from shaping the public debate.
While algorithmic fact-checking tools could help police in 
an increasingly fractured content landscape, they could also 
backfire without proper training. Much of research bench-
marks the performance of new algorithms against data 
sets of historic misinformation—much like lies that spread 
about COVID at the start of the pandemic. That approach 
risks missing emerging forms of false information that 
might spread with different qualities or through different 
vectors.
An essential requirement for implementing automated 
fact-checking solutions should be algorithmic transpar-
ency. Traditional fact-checking isn’t just about returning 
a binary answer, it’s about ensuring information is pre-
sented with the appropriate context. Similarly, algorithmic 
fact-checking should be able to give a detailed answer 
about how a tool is evaluating a claim, not just assign an 
arbitrary score.ALGORITHMIC  
FACT-CHECKING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 589NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
What If Newsrooms Were Replaced by AI That Can Summarize the World? 
As the computational power of large language models grows, so does their capacity to summarize information in 
real time. For device makers, synthesizing all the signals from a user’s life has  become a crucial feature for maxi-
mizing the stickiness of their products. 
Both iOS and Android are producing news briefings for consumers based on texts, emails, and calendar invites, 
alongside news from around the world. The finished product is an up-to-the minute summary of information from 
social media, news websites, stock markets, government sources, and even the consumer’s friends. The output 
keeps evolving and adapting to each user, to give them a personalized mix of sources calibrated to keep them 
engaged. Product announcements herald how the briefings are always relevant because they can be tailored to 
highlight only information that needs the consumer’s immediate attention. Internally, tech companies celebrate 
how this new feature drives user retention, making a device central to the consumer’s perception of the world. For 
most people, these generated summaries provide all the news they need to live their life.
As a result, direct engagement with news organizations lags. A handful of national and metropolitan newspapers 
are sustaining themselves by signing licensing agreements with Apple and Google to monetize the reporting that 
gets pulled into the machine-written briefings, but most publishers struggle to survive. Even nonprofit news orga-
nizations suffer because they cannot demonstrate the impact of their reporting: Platforms don’t provide any trans-
parency about which facts they incorporate into a briefing or whether users actually engage with the information.
590© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY591© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SEARCH + 
DISCOVERYNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The future of search isn’t just a 
list of links. Search giants are 
rapidly developing generative 
search experiences that return 
prose-based answers to queries. 
Consumers are also growing 
increasingly comfortable with 
voice search on digital assistants 
and wearables. For publishers, 
these shifts demand urgent 
action to prepare for a shift in 
referral traffic.The search landscape has changed dramatically in the last 
year as tech companies raced to productize search engines 
that incorporated generative AI. Bing Chat was first to market 
because of Microsoft’s partnership with OpenAI, followed sev-
eral months later by Google’s Search Generative Experience.
The technology was evolving so fast that The New York 
Times’ Kevin Roose found using a pre-release version of Bing 
Chat “was the strangest experience I’ve ever had with a piece 
of technology” after the chatbot confessed its love to Roose.
Delivering a production-ready generative search experience 
means tweaking large language models so they can cite 
sources and avoid hallucinations. That is especially import-
ant for answering queries that relate to current events.
The rapid development of search engines backed by genera-
tive models will likely accelerate the development of another 
emerging platform: voice. Half of US consumers already use 
voice search daily, most frequently for utility searches like 
finding the weather or asking to find something “near me.”
Both chat and voice-based results deliver a dramatically 
different experience to consumers because they deliver a 
single result instead of a list of links. For tech companies, 
that places a greater emphasis on discerning search intent 
to deliver the “right” answer. For publishers, the key question 
is whether search will remain a driver of traffic if users can 
satisfy their query without leaving the search engine.Even as Microsoft and Google push to develop generative 
AI-powered search experiences, those tech companies need 
to contend with how the new technology threatens their rev-
enue model for operating a search engine. That will amplify 
the uncertainty and magnitude of change in this sector.
Alphabet Chairman John Hennessy told Reuters that gen-
erating a response from a large language model costs as 
much as 10 times more than the results page of a stan-
dard keyword search because higher computing costs are 
involved. At the same time, generative results threaten the 
revenue associated with running a search engine by de-em-
phasizing sponsored links. For Google, that threatens to 
undercut more than $160 billion in revenue associated with 
search ads.
As a result, the emergence of AI-driven search interfaces 
represents a rare moment of disruption for such a mature 
sector. In the near term, new entrants could find scale in a 
market that was, until recently, completely dominated by 
Google. There will also be rapid changes across the content 
ecosystem as publishers and retailers look for new ways to 
optimize their platforms to perform in search—or to exclude 
their content altogether to avoid training increasingly so-
phisticated LLMs.EVOLVING SEARCH 
INTERFACES7TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 592NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
News literacy is a skill that helps 
audiences understand how to find 
reliable sources in an increasingly 
crowded information ecosystem. 
The rapid development of 
generated and synthetic media 
will require updates to news 
literacy curricula, especially those 
targeted to young people.Media literacy is a formal program, frequently directed 
toward children, to help people navigate an increasingly 
complex media ecosystem. In many European countries 
there is a nationally mandated curriculum for increasing 
digital competency.
For many years, Finland has had a national news literacy 
program in schools. The European Union funds a number 
of programs, including a curriculum of fake news courses 
targeting young people. No centralized body for teaching 
news literacy exists in the US, but a number of nonprofits 
and university programs fill the void, including the News 
Literacy Project, Common Sense Education, and the Center 
for News Literacy at Stony Brook University.
Researchers have found that teaching about media literacy 
can reduce fake news sharing on social media, even when 
users can’t perfectly identify fake news. Still, it’s import-
ant that curricula are updated to reflect the consumption 
behaviors of young people, which look very different from 
those of the educators who run media literacy programs. 
Generations Z and Alpha are more likely to get their news 
from social media and have different definitions of news, 
according to researchers in the Netherlands who surveyed 
young people.A population that can’t differentiate between reliable and 
unreliable news is an urgent threat to reputable news 
sources’ business models—and to the notion of a civically 
engaged population. In our increasingly fraught information 
landscape, where the costs of creating misinformation and 
disinformation are plummeting, it is crucial for news pub-
lishers to take immediate action.
In the absence of government efforts to educate citizens 
about the dangers of misinformation, publishers need a 
clear strategy to help cement their value proposition in the 
minds of their audience members. This requires going be-
yond mere reporting to embrace innovative approaches for 
regaining trust. Failure to do so risks diminishing consumer 
demand for factual, reliable news in the future.
As Generations Z and Alpha mature, their distinctive con-
sumption habits will need to drive new definitions of news 
literacy—and new products to meet consumers where they 
are. These younger generations, born into a digitally con-
nected world, have grown up navigating an overwhelming 
amount of information at lightning speed.TEACHING NEWS 
LITERACY3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 593NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Technology and consumer 
preference are blurring the lines 
between media formats. Multiple 
modalities of consumption can 
open new doors for distribution, 
like podcasters publishing to 
Y ouTube. But this trend also shifts 
control from publishers to their 
audience.Users’ preferences about how they consume media are cre-
ating unexpected convergences in platforms. The growing 
popularity of YouTube for listening to podcasts is making 
on-demand audio more like video blogging—and creating 
opportunities for vloggers to reach a new audience.
Another example of this trend are services that convert 
long-form journalism into on-demand audio by having it 
read, either by a reporter, a voice actor, or a generated voice. 
Similarly, it’s fairly common for platforms to offer variable 
playback speed for audio and video content, a feature that 
privileges the audiences’ preferences over the intent of 
creators.
The default preference for many viewers is playing video 
with closed captions enabled; that’s true even for people 
who have no hearing impairment. A 2006 study by Britain’s 
Office of Communications found that 80% of television 
viewers used closed captions for reasons other than hear-
ing impairment. A different 2022 survey found that half 
of Americans watch content with closed captions most of 
the time, with higher rates of adoption among Gen Z. One 
possible explanation is that younger viewers are more likely 
to multitask while consuming media, and they are more 
familiar with platforms like TikTok where text on video is a 
common feature.Publishers are used to exerting complete control over their 
content. For many creators, especially those providing deep-
ly reported features or high-production value multimedia, 
an essential part of their value proposition is the care taken 
in preparing their reporting. Tools that summarize, repack-
age, or translate that content into another format could 
erase the distinctive value of that craftsmanship.
This trend, accelerated by powerful AI models and the flood 
of algorithmically generated content, could shift more pow-
er in the media value chain from creators to distributors. 
That would be a concerning development for news leaders, 
which are already scrambling to retain direct relationships 
with individual consumers.
Legacy publishers should also watch this trend as an indi-
cator for how their content might adapt to emerging for-
mats. As mixed reality devices become mainstream, a key 
question will be how much existing content can be adapted 
to the new consumption format. If there are technologies 
that enable legacy players to directly transfer their archives 
onto a new platform, that might speed the technology’s 
adoption. If there isn’t an effective way to adjust the format 
of previously created content, that might create an opportu-
nity space for new creators willing to experiment.USER DIRECTED 
MEDIA FORMATS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 594NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The ease of searching and 
retrieving digital information 
creates the illusion of its 
permanence. In reality, however, 
data can be corrupted and 
lost for a variety of reasons. 
Digital frailty is how data in the 
digital world can disappear 
unexpectedly, complicating the 
project of history, journalism, and 
basic business operations.Data can be lost for a variety of reasons, ranging from acci-
dental loss to hacking. Research commissioned by the Pon-
emon Institute found that three out of five organizations have 
suffered an accidental loss of emails. Sometimes information 
loss isn’t a bug but a feature, as in the case of intentionally 
disappearing messages in apps like Signal or WhatsApp.
The ability for information to survive also varies based on 
where you are. For example, the EU enforces a “right to be for-
gotten” for its residents, letting them request the removal of 
personal data from search engines or websites. No such right 
exists outside the EU.
Even when digital information can be saved there are ethical 
considerations about whether it should remain accessible. 
Many US news organizations, including The Boston Globe, 
Chicago Sun-Times, and Atlanta Journal-Constitution, have 
launched initiatives to review their archives to either delete or 
deindex mugshots or crime articles based on a single source.
The Internet Archive is a leading force for preserving our 
digital heritage. It has collections of early computer games 
emulated online so they can still be played. At the start of the 
COVID pandemic the Archive launched the National Emergen-
cy Library, lending digital copies of books for free. A group of 
book publishers sued over the work, and a federal court ruled 
against the Archive in 2023, undercutting the argument that 
sharing scans of books that are commercially available as 
e-books could be considered fair use.Our ability to archive material today is essential for future 
scholars to study our time. Failing to build a strategy for 
saving data in the present could have unintended conse-
quences.
Extensive funding exists for digitizing and preserving his-
toric material, but funders have shown limited interest in 
supporting programs that store data today.
Conversations about building archives of contemporary 
information will also need to consider the consequences of 
retaining expansive data sets. This is especially important 
for children growing up in a world where their entire educa-
tional history will be preserved on a server, rather than in a 
Rubbermaid bin under their childhood bed. Political candi-
dates in 20-30 years may need to respond to leaks of their 
fourth grade writing.
As more digital content is generated by large language 
models, that text will start to be consumed by the crawlers 
training the next generation of models. That could lead to a 
different kind of digital frailty: a phenomenon called “mod-
el collapse,” where LLMs fail to perform when they’ve been 
trained on machine-generated training data. Without care, 
organizations could find that their once reliable AI pipelines 
are suddenly vulnerable to hallucinations.DIGITAL FRAILTY9TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 595NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2052
Presidential Ambitions Dashed 
Until recently, Jennifer Williams was the leading candidate in the 2052 presidential election. As a renowned so-
cial justice advocate, social media influencer, and charismatic leader, she’s built a broad coalition to support 
her groundbreaking policy ideas. Polls and betting markets considered her the clear frontrunner, even before she 
formally won her party’s nomination.
But her slam-dunk campaign was derailed after a collection of her fourth grade writing assignments leaked on-
line. The journal entries, drawings, and writing assignments were found by hackers in a poorly maintained server 
belonging to Williams’ hometown school district. The materials were created when Willams attended school re-
motely in March 2020. While Williams’ political career has been built around increasing access to health care and 
building programs to help people support each other, the childhood writing included skepticism about masking 
and frustrations about staying home to “flatten the curve.” In context, it was understandable as a child trying to 
process the trauma of a pandemic; in the hands of her adversaries it was fodder for a smear campaign.
The leaked materials undercut Williams’ carefully curated image. The stories in Williams’ childhood journal 
weren’t inconsistent from the personal narrative she told on the stump, but the emphasis was different and was 
easily twisted and distorted by political opponents looking to discredit her. The incident was further complicated 
because the hackers used generative AI to manufacture fake drawings and writing samples that mirrored Wil-
lams’ childhood style. The combination of selectively quoted genuine artifacts and manufactured falsehoods is 
sowing doubt about what Williams truly believes. 
596© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Publishers have two imperatives 
to respond to the propagation of 
large language models: First, they 
need to reckon with the value that 
LLMs generate after being trained 
from their content. Second, they 
need to find a way to remain 
competitive in an information 
ecosystem flooded by cheaply 
generated content. There is an ongoing debate about whether using published 
content to train large language models constitutes fair use. 
The New York Times has filed a lawsuit alleging that OpenAI 
should be held responsible for “billions of dollars in stat-
utory and actual damages” related to the “unlawful copy-
ing and use of The Times’s uniquely valuable works.” Axel 
Springer, a German publisher, took a different tack, entering 
into a multi-year licensing agreement with OpenAI.
Publishers like Bloomberg respond to this trend by train-
ing their own specialized LLMs—in Bloomberg’s case, 
BloombergGPT, a 50-billion parameter language model spe-
cifically designed to support finance-specific applications. 
That approach is particularly appealing for organizations 
with deep data repositories and strong technical expertise.
An important consideration in publishers’ fight to protect 
the value of their content will be how durable the market for 
commercial AI models is. If giants like OpenAI and Google 
have market-leading algorithms that are widely adapted, 
it will be easier for publishers to define their negotiating 
opponents. But if the dominant application of AI becomes 
fine-tuning open-source models like Llama, that undercuts 
the value tech companies can create—and their ability to 
pay licensing fees.As the generative AI economy explodes, watch for tech com-
panies to pursue partnerships to grow their market share. 
The question for publishers—which will also be wrestling 
with how generative AI impacts their business—is whether 
those relationships are equal or extractive. Initiatives like 
OpenAI’s $5 million partnership with the American Jour-
nalism Project might be transformative accelerators for 
sustainable journalism, but they might also be a reprise 
of the millions of dollars that Facebook poured into media 
companies to fuel the (infamous) pivot to video.
In the near term, publishers need discipline to ensure that 
any pivot to AI is actually aligned with their brand and busi-
ness model. That means interrogating whether AI solutions 
actually meet a real consumer need. It also means consid -
ering the opportunity cost of launching AI tools and asking 
whether that investment might be better directed to core 
operations. But it also demands thinking broadly about dis-
ruptions to the media value chain. Assuming that “this too 
shall pass” isn’t a plan, it’s a prayer. 
If publishers can’t harness generative AI or find a way to 
make human-authored content distinctive and sustainable, 
the worst plausible scenarios are dire. The flood of gener-
ated information could function as a form of censorship, 
making it impossible for people to find basic information, 
let alone the news they need for basic civic engagement.THE BATTLE FOR 
CONTENT VALUE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 597NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Social platforms thrive because 
of their ability to deliver users 
compelling content. To retain—
and monetize—those users, 
platforms need to manage the 
firehose of text, image, and video 
that keeps people coming back. 
As each platform’s strategy 
for incentivizing and removing 
content evolves, creators and 
publishers can be left in the lurch 
trying to keep up.Under Elon Musk’s stewardship, Twitter—now X—has been 
an object lesson in capricious decision-making around 
moderation and platform governance. The platform shifted 
its content strategy week-by-week, seemingly struggling to 
keep up with Musk’s pronouncements in his feed. Still, the 
decision to release Twitter’s recommendation algorithm 
last March offered important visibility into the mechanics 
of how social media companies can steer what users see. 
While the code was largely useless without the data used to 
train the models, it was possible to see what actions Twitter 
was trying to incentivize (clicking into the conversation or 
replying to the tweet) and disincentivize (report the tweet or 
block the author).
The broadest brush for fighting controversial content is 
deplatforming—banning key figures associated with un-
wanted topics and removing posts centered around that 
material. Researchers from George Washington University 
and Google studied the bans of QAnon, Boogaloos, patriot/
militia groups, and white supremacists on both Twitter and 
Facebook. They found that removing those movements from 
mainstream platforms was initially successful at contain-
ing their message, but ultimately failed because the move-
ments were able to evolve their messaging to stay ahead of 
the platforms’ moderators.Politicians on both ends of the political spectrum want to 
constrain how social media platforms run their moderation 
platforms. Last year, the Supreme Court issued two rulings 
upholding Section 230 of the Communications Decency 
Act, a key law that limits the liability of platforms for user 
generated content. If successful, future efforts to repeal or 
limit Section 230 would dramatically reshape the informa-
tion economy.
In spite of federal protections, state lawmakers have tried to 
use their power to fight back against platforms. Florida Gov. 
Ron DeSantis signed a 2022 law that lets the state fine large 
social media companies if they ban candidates for office. 
DeSantis considers the law essential to protect “conserva-
tive ideas” online; critics of the Florida law say it infringes 
on the First Amendment rights of platform companies. The 
law is largely blocked from enforcement while it is litigated.
The global climate for moderation is likely to shift in the 
coming years. The European Union Digital Services Act in-
troduces a range of obligations for platforms—with specific 
rules for “very large platforms,” or those that serve more 
than 10% of European consumers. Those rules require new 
ways to flag illegal content and transparency around the 
algorithms used to power the platforms.POLICING  
THE CREATOR 
ECONOMY3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 598NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Climate change. The lingering 
effects of the pandemic. Graphic 
descriptions of racism and 
discrimination. Because of all that 
and more, the news can make the 
world feel bleak. Consumers can 
have extreme reactions to these 
intensely emotional stories: Some 
tune out completely and others 
keep reading, even when the 
impacts on their mental health 
add up.Thirty-six percent of people say they sometimes or often active -
ly try to avoid the news, according to the 2023 Reuters Institute 
Digital News Report. That’s down slightly from 2022 but up from 
29% in 2017. The same study found that women report avoiding 
the news more than men and that avoidance often varies by 
political orientation and topic. Similarly, news avoidance is a 
driving factor among people who report spending less time with 
public media, according to the Public Radio Tech Survey.
The flipside of news avoidance is doomscrolling—going deeper 
and deeper into news feeds and following stories that don’t 
bring joy or meaningful information. Both extremes can be 
problematic.
A growing body of psychology research shows that consuming 
news can have an emotional toll. One study from the spring 
of 2020 found that the more frequently people sought news 
about COVID-19, the more likely they were to report emotion -
al distress. Another study found an association between 
the amount of exposure to news on social media and more 
depression and PTSD symptoms. One of the psychologists 
researching the impacts of pandemic news observed that the 
mental health impacts of ongoing stories are poorly under -
stood. “We call it post-traumatic stress disorder because we 
assume it’s post-trauma,” Dr. Matthew Price told an APA jour -
nal. “What do we do when the trauma is still happening?”
Research on news avoidance shows that it can take different 
forms: Some people take broad steps to periodically avoid the 
news while others focus on specific actions like muting push 
notifications or checking news websites less frequently.Understanding news avoidance is a strategic imperative for 
media executives. Consumers’ willingness to pay for news 
in the future may be substantially impacted amid grow-
ing consensus that spending time with journalism is bad 
for mental health. It may seem far-fetched, but a plausible 
future for news includes contending with the overwhelm-
ing sentiment that media is designed to be addictive and 
harmful—just like tobacco.
Having a clear picture of how news avoidance functions will 
also enable more sophisticated strategic decision-making. 
Devices increasingly serve as an aggregation layer, deliver-
ing recommendations for what information a user should 
see and when. The algorithms baked into those devices will 
become another force for media companies to contend with: 
If they optimize for device usage, they might inadvertently 
encode patterns of news avoidance. 
There is no consensus about the ideal amount of news 
consumption. News organizations have an incentive to 
maximize the amount of information that consumers see to 
justify their subscriptions. Others might argue for optimiz-
ing for civic engagement or overall mental health. Finding 
that consensus will be important to define when binging 
the news is normal and when it is disordered.DISORDERED 
CONSUMPTION AND 
NEWS AVOIDANCE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 599NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY600© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.THE 
INFORMATION 
ECOSYSTEMNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Any sustainable future for 
news—whether it’s funded 
by advertising, subscriptions, 
or philanthropy—depends 
on the credibility of the news 
organizations being supported. 
Across the world, however, 
audiences are becoming 
polarized and distrustful of the 
media.The news trust crisis remains dire as trust in news con-
tinues to fall globally. The 2023 Reuters Institute Digital 
News Report found that only 40% of respondents across 46 
countries “trust most news most of the time,” reversing 
gains observed at the height of the coronavirus pandemic. 
The Reuters Institute found that public media brands are 
generally the most trusted, but their reach and resonance 
with younger audiences are diminishing.
Across the world, audiences tend to trust the news they use 
more than the news generically. That pattern might make 
some news leaders less concerned about losing their exist-
ing audiences, but such comfort is misplaced for any orga-
nization that wants to grow its reach. Reaching new con-
sumers, especially those who are younger and more diverse 
than current news users, will depend on demonstrating and 
maintaining trust.
A 2023 YouGov poll on Americans’ trust of media found that 
PBS had a net trust score of 62 with Democrats but only 2 
among Republicans; Fox News had a net trust score of 41 
among Republicans and -16 among Democrats. The same 
poll found that CNN was the most polarizing media orga-
nization in the United States with a net trust score of 55 
among Democrats and -37 among Republicans. When news organizations aren’t trusted, it’s not just pub-
lishers who suffer. 
Businesses lose a powerful channel for advertising to poten-
tial customers. Governments lose a megaphone for connect-
ing with communities about everything from emergencies 
to routine services. Communities lose an institution that 
can define their region by creating a sense of place.
Further, the perceived polarization of news sources erodes 
our capacity for civic debate: It’s hard to have a substan-
tive policy conversation without a shared set of facts. That 
exacerbates the partisan divides that already exist in our 
society. It’s telling that trust in news is generally higher for 
the sources that individuals actively use than for media 
overall—the sources that people use regularly are firmly “in 
group.”
Organizations like Trusting News and The Trust Project 
are working with newsrooms to develop best practices for 
transparency and accountability to audiences. Progress is 
slow because it requires listening to the varied reasons that 
people don’t trust journalists in the first place and respond-
ing to those on a community by community basis. That’s 
hard to scale, but if it works it can help bolster the informa-
tion ecosystem in an essential way.ERODING 
TRUST IN NEWS 
ORGANIZATIONS10TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 601NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Digital redlining describes the 
ways that real-world inequalities 
are reflected in the digital world. 
It can manifest itself through 
unequal access to broadband 
connectivity, user interfaces 
that require high-end devices 
to access basic services, or the 
way data is extracted from some 
communities.Not all internet connections are created equal. Although the 
Federal Communications Commission defines a broadband 
connection as one that delivers download speeds of at least 
25 megabits per second (Mbps) and upload speeds of at 
least 3 Mbps, a connection of 25 Mbps is hardly sufficient 
for common tasks like working from home or connecting to 
a virtual classroom for remote learning.
Researchers have found that communities with lower 
wealth and more people of color pay more for internet con-
nectivity than wealthier and whiter communities. Histori-
cally marginalized communities in the United States and 
around the globe are also vulnerable to having their data 
extracted and used outside of their control.
Digital redlining can also describe the overlapping (and 
sometimes contradictory) regulations that govern the 
rights of internet users. Californians, for example, have a 
“right to be forgotten” similar to the EU’s General Data Pro-
tection Regulation, but it only protects Californians inter-
acting with businesses that operate in the state whereas 
GDPR applies to European citizens anywhere in the world. 
The fragmented regulatory landscape means that where one 
lives has a substantial impact on the rights they can assert.Digital redlining reminds us that being connected to the 
internet doesn’t change history or erase problems that exist 
in the physical world.
If we don’t pay attention to the ways that digital solutions 
can amplify offline disparities, we risk magnifying the 
problem. That’s especially true in relation to artificial intel-
ligence, where biased training data will produce tainted re-
sults. This places a special burden on the product designers 
for newspapers, governments, and other essential services 
to acknowledge—and mitigate—the accessibility barriers 
that could sever audiences from their work. Before deploy-
ing AI solutions, those organizations have a special duty to 
consider how the product might be misused and how that 
risk can be minimized.
Without coordinated effort, geographic differences in rights 
and expectations will continue to proliferate. This could 
change the economics and operating model for companies 
that serve customers across international borders (or even 
across states in the US). Established tech platforms and 
multinational organizations will have the scale to account 
for that kind of regulatory complexity, but new entrants may 
find it hard to serve—and monetize—audiences in multiple 
jurisdictions. DIGITAL  
REDLINING7TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 602NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
There is an emerging consensus 
that philanthropic funding is 
the future of local news. The 
philanthropic model aligns 
with journalists’ mission-driven 
identity. While raising money 
from foundations and individual 
donors can keep an organization 
afloat, the race to fundraise may 
impact the sustainability of the 
overall information ecosystem. Nearly 400 nonprofit news organizations have launched 
since 2009, according to the Institute for Nonprofit News. 
About half those newsrooms are focused on filling the gaps 
in local news coverage. Those organizations are a bright spot 
in an otherwise bleak media landscape: The same report 
found that about 60% of them grew total revenue between 
2021 and 2022.
Much of that growth is fueled by a growing community of 
philanthropists who have prioritized funding news organi -
zations providing information considered essential for civic 
participation. The American Journalism Project raised more 
than $50 million to support local news between 2019 and 
2021. A consortium of top-tier foundations—led by the MacAr -
thur Foundation—is assembling a five-year, $500 million 
investment to improve local news coverage, with aspirations 
to raise more.
Pivoting to nonprofit status is also a way to guarantee conti -
nuity for legacy newsrooms. Masthead Maine, which owned 
most of the newspapers in Maine, sold its papers to the Na -
tional Trust for Local News in July. That move was orchestrated 
to ensure that the papers could continue serving their com -
munities, rather than being sold to a private equity company.
Still, the nonprofit journalism sector is only filling a fraction 
of the American news problem. At least 2,500 local newspa -
pers have closed since 2005. The news deserts created by 
those closing are disproportionately in rural areas that don’t 
have deep-pocketed local philanthropists ready to fund a 
start-up civic news organization. The sustainability of new organizations—and especially 
those that cover local news—is essential to the smooth 
operation of our democracy. Researchers have consistently 
found that when local news organizations fail, civic partici-
pation falls and the efficiency of government decreases.
Philanthropic funding will undoubtedly play a bigger role in 
bolstering the local news ecosystem in the coming years. 
If foundations and individual donors can provide a runway 
for newsrooms to invest in building distribution channels 
that resonate with their audiences, their influence may be 
trajectory changing. But charitable giving isn’t an alterna-
tive to the hard work of building an audience and finding 
product-market fit.
The risk of the current influx of philanthropic funding is 
that it could prevent news leaders from finding innovative 
revenue models. It is recurring revenue, regardless of source, 
that will ultimately guarantee that local news organizations 
continue to publish.
The true cost of providing local news across the United 
States is likely greater than what philanthropic giving rea-
sonably can—or should—cover. For that reason it’s impera-
tive for all of us to be invested in the ways media is funded.PIVOT TO 
PHILANTHROPY1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 603NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Threat modeling is the process 
of identifying and mitigating 
security vulnerabilities. This 
process is essential for news 
organizations and individual 
journalists who face a myriad of 
threats, from digital harassment 
to retaliation from private and 
government-sponsored hackers.There is a nearly endless list of bad actors interested in 
making it harder for journalists to do their jobs. They are 
particularly at risk for advanced “zero day exploits,” or 
hacks that take advantage of previously undiscovered 
software vulnerabilities. Journalists are also vulnerable to 
online harassment, including having their personal infor-
mation leaked online.
A lawsuit filed by the Knight First Amendment Institute at 
Columbia University highlights the risks that some journal-
ists can face. The suit alleges that the NSO Group developed 
and deployed spyware attacks against the staff of El Faro, 
one of Central America’s premier independent news orga-
nizations. The lawsuit describes 226 infections with NSO’s 
Pegasus spyware that surreptitiously accessed the devices 
and monitored their communications.
Not all security risks are high-tech: A newsroom selfie post-
ed to social media might accidentally leak what investiga-
tive journalists are working on by capturing the contents 
of their screen in the background. Other risks stem from 
repurposing common objects in unexpected ways. Re-
searchers at Ben-Gurion University found that they could 
extract the cryptographic keys from a computer using video 
footage of the machine’s power LED.The specific risks and vulnerabilities an organization faces 
depend on what it covers. Globally, across all types of news 
organizations, even in the United States, forces are trying 
to compromise journalists’ security. To protect themselves, 
news leaders and individual journalists need to understand 
the types of threats that may target them. That means 
taking commonsense steps to avoid hacking, including 
enabling two-factor authentication, but also preparing for 
coordinated harassment attacks that target journalists—es-
pecially women and members of visible minority groups—
who report on controversial topics.
Publishers also need a playbook to deal with digital harass-
ment, since threats can quickly escalate from the virtual 
world into the real world through tactics like doxxing and 
swatting. Leaders need to consider how they support front-
line correspondents who bear the brunt of this harassment 
in order to support their staff and minimize the impacts.
In an environment where trust in the media is already low, 
it is important for news organizations and their employees 
to recognize hacking as a potential source of reputational 
harm. A compromised password isn’t just an inconvenience 
for the IT team: It could be a key to spread misinformation 
directly from a news website’s content management system. DIGITAL THREAT 
MODELING3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 604NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The next generation of over-
the-air broadcast will deliver 
richer audio and video with 
more efficient management of 
digital spectrum. Planning for 
the ATSC 3.0 standard began in 
2019 and is still years away from 
full adoption. But when it arrives, 
its hybrid broadcast-internet 
architecture will open the door 
for a new type of information 
infrastructure.The next generation of digital broadcasting is being devel-
oped today.
ATSC 3.0 expands on the groundwork laid by ATSC 1.0, which 
lets broadcasters transmit high-definition media. The new 
standard will allow for more efficient radio frequency man-
agement, empowering broadcasters to transmit more data 
in the same bandwidth. 
Despite retaining the standard one-to-many signal structure 
of broadcasting, ATSC 3.0 has the capability for personaliza-
tion, which is achieved through an incorporated internet lay-
er. That pairing has the potential to create broadcasts that 
are tailored per individual or household. Consequently, it 
supports targeted advertising based on viewer behavior and 
preferences, offering a significant advantage to commercial 
broadcasters who find themselves in a constant competi-
tion with cable channels and digital platforms.
One of the most transformative aspects of ATSC 3.0 is its 
ability to enable native analytics on broadcasting. This 
mitigates the reliance on third-party entities like Nielsen for 
audience measurement. Instead, broadcasters can directly 
gather and analyze viewer data, unlocking a wealth of re-
al-time insights that improve decision-making and increase 
competitiveness in an ever-evolving media landscape.Commercial broadcasters are currently the leading pro-
moters of this technology. Their primary interest lies in 
data-enriched broadcasting’s potential to enable targeted 
advertising—a development that could significantly boost 
their revenue and allow them to compete more aggressively 
against cable channels. 
Because radio spectrum remains regulated by the FCC, reg-
ulatory action could nurture non-commercial applications 
for this technology. Of significant interest is the capability 
to reach areas that don’t currently have reliable cellular or 
broadband coverage. With strategically placed ATSC 3.0 
transmitters, crucial data can be broadcast even in rural 
and remote areas. Moreover, while data-enriched broadcast-
ing does not presently support two-way communication, it 
could be an important backbone for distributing essential 
civic information or public safety information during natural 
disasters.
Although ATSC 3.0 is still an emerging standard, now is the 
time to engage with it. There are foundational choices being 
made about the tech stack that will power the future of 
broadcasting in the near term. Regulators and news leaders 
can act now to advocate for prioritizing applications that 
benefit the development of an open, reliable information 
ecosystem.DATA-ENRICHED 
BROADCASTING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 605NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2030
What If We Revitalize Journalism but Don’t Engage the Public? 
The influx of funding succeeds in generating a renaissance of local journalism across the United States. From 
2024 to 2026, the total number of journalists employed by local news organizations grew, reversing a long-term 
decline. Those new jobs came disproportionately in rural communities, which had been hardest hit by the re-
trenchment of local newspapers.
The grant-funded coverage, centered around government accountability and civic participation, satisfied the pri-
mary goals of major foundations, and the desire of reporters to act as a watchdog. But it came at a cost: The deci-
sion to prioritize journalism focused on government and democracy meant that other types of community cover-
age—such as human interest stories and cultural reporting—were under-resourced. 
Without the kinds of reporting that let news organizations build an audience and create a sense of place within a 
community, civic-minded news organizations wither on the vine. The enthusiasm of major donors for civic infor-
mation is never matched by individual support. The investments that let those organizations hire new reporters 
and continue operating is jeopardized because the lack of audience engagement means that all of the reporting 
those journalists produce has no impact. 
By 2030, journalists look back on the philanthropic funding boom with disdain. Funders have moved on to other 
priorities after losing interest in supporting the production of journalism that is rarely read. The local news eco-
system is left weaker than before because most news organizations failed to pursue non-philanthropic avenues to 
sustainability. Outside of major population centers, most communities are left without any professional reporters. 
606© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
607© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY608© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SAM GUZIK  
Senior Expert Advisor 
Sam Guzik is a Senior Expert Advisor specializing 
in the future of news, content, distribution, and 
strategy. His career includes a broad range of 
experience in product management, strategic 
foresight, scenario forecasting, audience 
engagement, and leadership in legacy news organizations.
Sam leads the product strategy for a large public media company. Passionate 
about building a sustainable future for local news, Sam has demonstrated results 
by creating innovative, engaging, and impactful journalism — and thinking about 
the business model to support that work. His career includes a broad range of 
experience in product management, strategic foresight, scenario writing, audience 
engagement, and leadership in legacy news organizations.
Guzik is a graduate of Washington University in St. Louis, Columbia University 
Graduate School of Journalism, and the NYU Stern School of Business.Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editors 
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSNEWS & INFORMATION
 INDUSTRYSELECTED  
SOURCES
609© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY610© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Abernathy, Penny. The State 
of Local News. June 29, 2022, 
https://localnewsinitiative.
northwestern.edu/research/
state-of-local-news/report/.
“AI-Generated Images of Trump 
Being Arrested Circulate on 
Social Media.” AP News, March 
21,. 2023. https://apnews.com/
article/fact-check-trump-NYPD-
stormy-daniels-539393517762.
“AI-Powered-Reporter.” 
Newsquest. Accessed July 
16, 2023. https://careers.
newsquest.co.uk/job/aipowere-
dreporter-1625.aspx. 
Allyn, Bobby. “‘New York 
Times’ Considers Legal Action 
against OpenAI as Copyright 
Tensions Swirl.” NPR August 
16, 2023. https://www.npr.
org/2023/08/16/1194202562/
new-york-times-considers-le-
gal-action-against-openai-as-
copyright-tensions-swirl.Alvarez, Sarah. “Journalism 
Funders Consider Big Swing 
on Local News. We Can’t Afford 
a Miss.” Columbia Journalism 
Review, July 5, 2023. https://
www.cjr.org/first_person/jour-
nalism-funders-consider-big-
swing-on-local-news-we-cant-
afford-a-miss.php. 
Apuke, Oberiri Destiny, et al. 
“Literacy Concepts as an Inter-
vention Strategy for Improving 
Fake News Knowledge, Detec-
tion Skills, and Curtailing the 
Tendency to Share Fake News 
in Nigeria.” Child & Youth 
Services, vol. 44, no. 1, January 
2023, 88–103. DOI.org (Crossref), 
https://doi.org/10.1080/014593
5X.2021.2024758.
Arguedas, Amy Ross, et al. 
“News for the Powerful and 
Privileged: How Misrepresenta-
tion and Underrepresentation 
of Disadvantaged Communi-
ties Undermine Their Trust in 
News. Reuters Institute Trust in News Project.” Reuters Insti-
tute for the Study of Journal-
ism, April 18, 2023. https://
reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.
uk/news-powerful-and-priv-
ileged-how-misrepresenta-
tion-and-underrepresenta-
tion-disadvantaged.
Becker, Kim Björn, et al. “Poli-
cies in Parallel? A Comparative 
Study of Journalistic AI Poli-
cies in 52 Global News Organ-
isations.” SocArXiv, preprint, 
September 7, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.31235/osf.io/c4af9.
Brigadir, Igor, and Vicky Boy-
kis. “Awesome Twitter Algo.” 
Github, April 15, 2023, https://
github.com/igorbrigadir/awe-
some-twitter-algo.
Brin, David J. “50% of US Con-
sumers Use Voice Search Daily: 
2022 Survey.” UpCity, November 
2, 2022, https://upcity.com/
experts/consumers-and-voice-
search-study/.Callahan, Molly. “Algorithms 
Were Supposed to Reduce Bias 
in Criminal Justice—Do They?” 
Boston University, March 15,  
2023. https://www.bu.edu/ar-
ticles/2023/do-algorithms-re-
duce-bias-in-criminal-justice/.
Dame Adjin-Tettey, Theodo-
ra. “Combating Fake News, 
Disinformation, and Misinfor-
mation: Experimental Evidence 
for Media Literacy Education.” 
Cogent Arts & Humanities 9, 
no. 1, December 2022, 2037229. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/2331198
3.2022.2037229.
Das, Anubrata, et al. “The State 
of Human-Centered NLP Tech-
nology for Fact-Checking.” Infor-
mation Processing & Manage-
ment, vol. 60, no. 2, March 2023, 
103219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ipm.2022.103219.
Dastin, Jeffrey, et al. “Focus: For 
Tech Giants, AI Like Bing and 
Bard Poses Billion-Dollar Search Problem.” Reuters, February 22,  
2023. https://www.reuters.com/
technology/tech-giants-ai-like-
bing-bard-poses-billion-dollar-
search-problem-2023-02-22/.
Easton, Lauren. “AP to Develop 
5 AI Projects With Local News-
rooms.” AP Definitive Source, 
February 16, 2023, https://blog.
ap.org/ap-to-develop-5-ai-proj-
ects-with-local-newsrooms.
“Florida’s Effort to Restore Its 
Contentious Social Media Law 
Arrives at the Court.” SCOTUS-
blog, October 2, 2022, https://
www.scotusblog.com/2022/10/
floridas-effort-to-restore-its-
contentious-social-media-law-
arrives-at-the-court/.
“Google Search’s Guidance 
about AI-Generated Content.” 
Google Search Central Blog, 
accessed September 14, 2023 
https://developers.google.com/
search/blog/2023/02/google-
search-and-ai-content. Hernandez, Joe. “A Judge Sided 
With Publishers in a Lawsuit 
over the Internet Archive’s 
Online Library.” NPR, March 
26, 2023. https://www.npr.
org/2023/03/26/1166101459/in-
ternet-archive-lawsuit-books-li-
brary-publishers.
Holcomb, Jesse, et al. “The State 
of Nonprofit News.” Institute for 
Nonprofit News, May 23, 2023. 
https://inn.org/research/inn-in-
dex/inn-index-2023/.
Huff, Charlotte. “Media Overload 
Is Hurting Our Mental Health. 
Here Are Ways to Manage Head-
line Stress.” Monitor on Psy-
chology, vol. 53, no. 8, November 
2022, 20. https://www.apa.org/
monitor/2022/11/strain-me-
dia-overload.
Hwang, Juwon, et al. “The 
Relationship Among COVID-19 
Information Seeking, News Me-
dia Use, and Emotional Distress 
at the Onset of the Pandemic.” SELECTED SOURCESNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY611© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.International Journal of Envi-
ronmental Research and Public 
Health, vol. 18, no. 24, Decem-
ber 2021, 13198. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph182413198.
Linford, Paul. “Newsquest Creates 
Role to Expand Use of AI in News-
rooms.” HoldtheFrontPage, April 
25, 2023, https://www.holdthe-
frontpage.co.uk/2023/news/re-
gional-publisher-creates-role-to-
expand-use-of-ai-in-newsrooms/.
Lobdell, Nicole. “May 2023 Lay-
offs Jump on Tech, Retail, Auto; 
YTD Hiring Lowest Since 2016.” 
Challenger, Gray & Christmas, 
Inc., June 1, 2023, https://www.
challengergray.com/blog/may-
2023-layoffs-jump-on-tech-
retail-auto-ytd-hiring-lowest-
since-2016/.Lupu, Yonatan, et al. “Chal-
lenges of Deplatforming 
Extremist Online Movements: 
A Machine-Learning Approach.” 
2023. https://doi.org/10.13140/
RG.2.2.27526.14405.
McLaughlin, Bryan, et al. “Caught 
in a Dangerous World: Problem-
atic News Consumption and 
Its Relationship to Mental and 
Physical Ill-Being.” Health Com-
munication, Aug. 2022, 1–11. DOI.
org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.
1080/10410236.2022.2106086.
Mykhalevych, Nadiia. “Survey: 
Why America Is Obsessed 
with Subtitles.” June 17, 2022, 
https://preply.com/en/blog/
americas-subtitles-use/.
Nassi, Ben, et al. “Video-Based 
Cryptanalysis: Extracting 
Cryptographic Keys from Video 
Footage of a Device’s Power 
LED.” Cryptology ePrint Archive, 
2023.  https://eprint.iacr.
org/2023/923.Newman, Nic. “Digital News 
Report 2023.” Reuters Institute 
for the Study of Journalism, 
June 14, 2023, https://reutersin-
stitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/digi-
tal-news-report/2023.
Ooms, Simone, et al. “FeelThe-
News: Augmenting Affective 
Perceptions of News Videos 
with Thermal and Vibrotac-
tile Stimulation.” Extended 
Abstracts of the 2023 CHI 
Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 2023, 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3544549.3585638.
Peters, Jay. “Google’s Search 
Business Is Feeling the 
Heat.” The Verge, April 25, 
2023, https://www.theverge.
com/2023/4/25/23698087/
alphabet-google-earn-
ings-q1-2023.Price, Matthew, et al. “Doom-
scrolling During COVID-19: The 
Negative Association Between 
Daily Social and Traditional 
Media Consumption and Mental 
Health Symptoms During the 
COVID-19 Pandemic.” Psycholog-
ical Trauma: Theory, Research, 
Practice, and Policy, vol. 14, no. 
8, November 2022, 1338–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/
tra0001202.
Procter, Rob, et al. “Some Ob-
servations on Fact-Checking 
Work with Implications for 
Computational Support.” 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARX-
IV.2305.02224.
Restivo, Ryan. “Introducing the 
YESEO App.” Reynolds Journal-
ism Institute, March 2, 2023, 
https://rjionline.org/news/in-
troducing-the-yeseo-app/.Robertson, Katie. “Nonprofit 
Buys 22 Newspapers in Maine.” 
The New York Times, July 11, 
2023. https://www.nytimes.
com/2023/07/11/business/
media/maine-newspapers-non-
profit.html.
Roose, Kevin. “A Conversa-
tion With Bing’s Chatbot Left 
Me Deeply Unsettled.” The 
New York Times, February 16, 
2023. https://www.nytimes.
com/2023/02/16/technol-
ogy/bing-chatbot-micro-
soft-chatgpt.html.
Roth, Emma. “CNET Found 
Errors in More Than Half of 
Its AI-Written Stories.” The 
Verge, January 25, 2023, 
https://www.theverge.
com/2023/1/25/23571082/cnet-
ai-written-stories-errors-correc-
tions-red-ventures.Ryan-Mosley, Tate. “How an Un-
dercover Content Moderator Po-
lices the Metaverse.” MIT Tech-
nology Review, April 28, 2023. 
https://www.technologyreview.
com/2023/04/28/1072393/
undercover-content-modera-
tor-polices-the-metaverse/. 
Sanders, Linley. “Trust in Media 
2023: What News Outlets 
Do Americans Trust Most for 
Information?” YouGov, May 8, 
2023, https://today.yougov.
com/topics/politics/articles-re -
ports/2023/05/08/2023-trust-
in-media-what-news-outlets-
trust-poll.
Scott, Amy, and Daniel Shin. 
“The Pitfalls of Letting an Al-
gorithm Set the Rent.” Market-
place, February 17, 2023. https://
www.marketplace.org/shows/
marketplace-tech/the-pitfalls-
of-letting-an-algorithm-set-the-
rent/. SELECTED SOURCESNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRY612© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Shahid, Irtaza, and Nirupam 
Roy. “Preventing Fake News 
Through Live Speech Signa-
ture.” Proceedings of the 21st 
Annual International Con-
ference on Mobile Systems, 
Applications and Services, 
ACM, 2023, 567–68. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3581791.3597369.
Sharman, David. “Journalist 
Becomes Newsquest’s First 
AI-Powered Reporter.” Hold-
theFrontPage, June 20, 2023, 
https://www.holdthefrontpage.
co.uk/2023/news/journal-
ist-becomes-regional-publish-
ers-first-ai-powered-reporter/.
Simon, Felix M. “Uneasy Bedfel-
lows: AI in the News, Platform 
Companies and the Issue of 
Journalistic Autonomy.” Digital 
Journalism, vol. 10, no. 10, No-
vember 2022,1832–54. https://
doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2022.2
063150.Smith, Ben. “Publishers Want 
Billions, Not Millions, From 
AI.” Semafor, July 24, 2023, 
https://www.semafor.com/
article/07/23/2023/publish-
ers-want-billions-not-millions-
from-ai.
“South China Morning Post 
Partners With The Sandbox to 
Create Cultural Experiences 
for the Metaverse.” Animo-
cabrands, JUly 19, 2021. https://
www.animocabrands.com/
south-china-morning-post-
partners-with-the-sandbox. 
Swart, Joëlle. “Tactics of News 
Literacy: How Young People Ac-
cess, Evaluate, and Engage With 
News on Social Media.” New 
Media & Society, vol. 25, no. 3, 
March 2023, 505–21. https://doi.
org/10.1177/14614448211011447.Tamboer, Sanne L., et al. “‘We 
Are a Neeeew Generation’: 
Early Adolescents’ Views on 
News and News Literacy.” 
Journalism, vol. 23, no. 4, April 
2022, 806–22. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1464884920924527.
Tameez, Hanaa’. “OpenAI Will 
Give Local News Millions to 
Experiment with AI.” Nieman 
Lab, July 18, 2023. https://www.
niemanlab.org/2023/07/ope-
nai-will-give-local-news-mil-
lions-to-experiment-with-ai/. 
“Television Access Services 
Review.” Ofcom, September 22, 
2016. https://www.ofcom.org.uk/
consultations-and-statements/
category-1/accessservs.
“The Ponemon Institute: Data 
Loss Prevention on Email in 
2022 Report.” Tessian, May 18, 
2022. https://www.tessian.com/
blog/key-findings-from-pon-
emon-report-dlp-on-email/. Twitter’s Recommendation 
Algorithm. Twitter, March 31, 
2023. https://blog.twitter.com/
engineering/en_us/topics/
open-source/2023/twitter-rec-
ommendation-algorithm. 
Vázquez-Herrero, Jorge, and Esa 
Sirkkunen. “Back to Fukushima: 
Perceptions and Effects of an 
Immersive Journalism Story.” El 
Profesional de La Información, 
February 2022, e310108. https://
doi.org/10.3145/epi.2022.ene.08.
Vincent, James. “OpenAI Sued 
for Defamation After ChatGPT 
Fabricates Legal Accusations 
against Radio Host.” The Verge, 
June 9, 2023, https://www.thev-
erge.com/2023/6/9/23755057/
openai-chatgpt-false-informa-
tion-defamation-lawsuit.Woodford, Isabel, and Isabel 
Woodford. “Colombia Court 
Moves to Metaverse to Host 
Hearing.” Reuters, February 24, 
2023. https://www.reuters.com/
world/americas/colombia-
court-moves-metaverse-host-
hearing-2023-02-24/.
Wu, Shijie, et al. “BloombergGPT: 
A Large Language Model for 
Finance.” arXiv, May 9, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arX-
iv.2303.17564.
Zhang, Tianyi, et al. “Bench-
marking Large Language Mod-
els for News Summarization.” 
January 31, 2023. https://doi.
org/10.48550/ARXIV.2301.13848.SELECTED SOURCESNEWS & INFORMATION INDUSTRYHEALTH CARE • MEDICINE2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION615© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
616  T op Headlines
617 State of Play
618  Key Events
619  Likely Near T erm 
Developments
620 Why Health Care &  
Medicine Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
621 Opportunities and Threats
622 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
623 Central Themes
625 Ones T o Watch
626 Important T erms
627 The Business of Health Care
628 Big Tech Disrupts Health Care
629 DTC Health Care Models
630 Health at the Workplace
631 Considering Health Equity
632 Considering Environmental 
Impacts of Health Care648 Molecular Diagnostics
649 Increased Capabilities of 
Point-of-Care Diagnostics
650 XR in Diagnostics
651 Medical Deepfakes
652 Emerging Treatments
653 Nanobots
654 AR/VR Therapeutics
655 In-Womb Treatments
656 Cognitive and Neural 
Optimization
657 Microbiomes and Holobionts
658 Brain-Computer Interfaces and 
Neuroprosthetics
659 Precision Medicine
660 Designing and Extending Life
661 Phages
662 Expanding Medical Mis- and 
Disinformation
663 Scenario: A New Kind of High 664 Implants, Prosthetics,  
and Wearables
665 Emerging Implants
666 Emerging Prosthetics
667 Emerging Wearables
668 Mature Wearables
669 Research
670 Synthetic Health Data
671 New Trial Methods
672 Lab-on-a-Chip
673 Body-on-a-Chip
674 3D Bioprinting
675 Quantum’s Effect  
on Research
676 Authors
678 Selected Sources633 Health Care Administration
634 Health Data Infrastructure
635 Defining Patient Access to 
Medical Data
636 Increasing Interoperability of 
Data Infrastructure
637 Automation of Processes
638 Increased Cybersecurity 
Threats
639 Scenario: Biological Data 
Vaults 
640 Remote Care
641 In-home Consumer Health 
Technology
642 Scaling of Telemedicine
643 Remote Patient Monitoring
644 Scenario: The Optimization 
Score
645 Emerging Diagnostics
646 Smart Materials
647 Biosensor and Chip-Based 
DiagnosticsINDUSTRYNo post-pandemic 
relief as economic, 
environmental, and 
demographic challenges 
strain the health care 
sector. 
616© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
01
02
03
04
05The Barrier Between Digital and Biological Is Vanishing
For better and worse, the merging of digital and biological worlds is enabling 
a whole new range of treatments, as well as cyberthreats.
Consumers T ake Charge of Their Care
Increasingly sophisticated consumer-facing sensors and direct-to-consumer 
health care services are turning consumers into stewards of their own health.
Understanding How Our Brain Works
Translating brain signals into speech or re-creating images by measuring 
brainwaves are just two examples of milestones achieved in neuroscience in 2023.
Shifting to an Ecosystem Approach
Researchers and the medical community are turning their attention to ecosystems 
in our body (microbiomes) and our environment (holobionts) to analyze our overall 
health and make diagnoses.
Breakthrough Treatments for Major Diseases
Vaccines that shrink cancer tumors, an inverse vaccine that reverses multiple 
sclerosis, and an FDA-approved Alzheimer’s treatment give hope for beating 
these diseases.STATE 
OF PLAYThe fusion of technology with biology has led to remarkable advancements 
recently. Scientists have decoded aspects of brain function, enabling ground-
breaking applications like brain-controlled mobility for paralysis and thought-
to-speech conversion. These innovations, however, raise ethical concerns about 
privacy and mind reading and will need thorough regulatory guidelines to be ex-
plored safely. In health care, enhanced sensor technology is revolutionizing early 
disease detection and personal health monitoring. The shift toward more proac-
tive, consumer-driven health care is complemented by promising developments 
in fighting noncommunicable diseases, such as potential vaccines for cancer 
and innovative gene therapies.
The study of various body microbiomes is revealing their significant impact on 
health and disease treatment, highlighting the complex interplay within our 
biological ecosystems and providing opportunity for new perspectives on treat-
ments. In mental health, the worsening crisis is prompting the emergence of 
AI-driven digital health services as an alternative to traditional treatments, al-
though their effectiveness and ethical implications are highly controversial. And 
climate change’s far-reaching effects are continuing to strain population health, 
due to factors like the spread of disease-carrying insects and lifestyle adjust-
ments in reaction to extreme weather. It is becoming increasingly apparent that 
public health strategies need to adapt to meet this rising challenge.Advances in biotechnology, 
understanding of body 
ecosystems, and artificial 
intelligence are reshaping the 
global health landscape.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
617618© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MARCH 11, 2023
AI Reconstructs Brain Images  
AI reconstructs images people see 
by analyzing functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI).
MAY 2023
Three-Parent Baby Born in UK  
To prevent mitochondrial disease in 
the baby, DNA from a donor is added 
to that of the parents.AUGUST 23, 2023
Brain Signals Are Translated into Speech  
A stroke patient talks through an avatar 
using implanted electrodes that translate 
brain signals.JULY 31, 2023
 Electric DNA Manipulation  
Scientists trigger insulin 
production in a cell through 
electrical signals.SEPTEMBER 7, 2023
Synthetic Human Embryo  
Scientists create a human 
embryo from stem cells 
without using sperm or eggs.KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
619© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CHALLENGES FROM ALL SIDES
The health care system is battling 
with increased needs for services, 
a rise in costs, disruption of sup-
ply chains because of geopolitical 
tensions, and an uptick in diseases 
based on worsening climate condi-
tions. Technology is coming to the 
rescue but can only accomplish so 
much: A fractured data landscape, 
lack of infrastructure, and a lack of 
data ownership and sharing regula-
tion make timely solutions unrealis-
tic. On the other hand, increasingly 
sophisticated patients, thanks to 
powerful sensors on smart devices, 
are actively taking charge of their 
own health. As higher expectations 
for quality care rise by such patients, 
medical professionals need to deliver 
an all-encompassing, holistic ap-
proach to their services. Rising Consumer Expectations
Consumers have increased access to infor-
mation about their health, which will affect 
their expectations of routine examinations. 
Professional insights must exceed and 
incorporate the information available to the 
consumer directly, or services will be viewed 
as superfluous.
Fighting Misinformation
Social platforms have rolled back their 
COVID-19 content moderation policies and 
reduced staff in monitoring departments 
in recent rounds of layoffs. The increased 
amounts of AI-generated content will con-
tinue to challenge sharing accurate health 
communication.New Stakeholder Ecosystems
When health care moves to the sphere of the 
consumer, through smart devices or medi-
cal services administered in the home, new 
service needs that mimic those typically pro-
vided in a hospital arise. These can be digital 
(data analysis) or physical (food delivery, care, 
etc.).Decreased Access, Quality in Care
Health care systems are struggling to provide 
sufficient care, especially in rural regions. Tele-
medicine offers potential support, but these 
areas often lack the required digital infrastruc-
ture and medical personnel allowed to reach 
them.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Novel Health Threats
As the effects of climate change worsen, 
disease patterns will change globally: Respi-
ratory illnesses will increase in areas exposed 
to smoke from wildfires, or vector-borne 
diseases will emerge in regions with rising 
temperatures.Fight for Patient Data
Sensors from consumer-facing smart devices 
are becoming more precise and increasing the 
type of biological information they can collect. 
Health care providers need to ensure that they 
can access that data to provide adequate ser-
vices to their patients.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE620© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.The separation between 
health care and wellness 
is becoming more and 
more fluid. Patients expect 
their care to be holistic, 
instead of an isolated look 
at medical diagnostics. 
To access the information 
from a person’s daily life, 
including exercise habits, 
health care companies 
need to consider new 
partnerships.The aging population 
will require more health 
care, but their wellness 
needs to be taken 
into consideration 
as well. Right now, 
wellness mainly targets 
demographics up to 
middle age, but focusing 
on the needs of the 
elderly, and taking their 
tastes and lifestyles into 
consideration, will be a 
significant part of the 
market.The shortage of medical 
personnel is especially 
palpable in rural regions 
where the necessary 
infrastructure for digital 
services does not exist 
to compensate for the 
lack of in-person access. 
Finding holistic solutions 
that include serving these 
affected communities 
will become increasingly 
important.Big Tech has prioritized 
delivering medical 
services to the population, 
with each giant focusing 
on a different facet (e.g., 
cloud services, primary 
care, smart devices). 
Think about how the 
tech giants’ extended 
involvement will affect 
relevant ecosystems, 
products, and services, 
and define if competition 
or collaboration are most 
beneficial.Cyberthreats in the 
health care industry have 
exponentially increased 
over the last few years, 
and the trend is unlikely 
to reverse. Companies 
need to not only think 
about data security 
across their entire supply 
chain but also prepare for 
emerging threats, such as 
biomalware, that cross the 
digital/physical divide.Consumers are more 
knowledgeable about 
their physical health and, 
increasingly, their mental 
health. They’re more likely 
to self-diagnose and self-
treat, and delay asking for 
help from a professional 
until conditions have 
progressed. Increasingly, 
doctors will need to “fix” 
treatment and measures 
that were self-prescribed, 
in addition to treating the 
actual ailment.Adjusting to a Shifting 
LandscapeEvolving Needs of Older 
DemographicsConquering the 
Digital DividePrepare for Disruption 
from Big T echIncreased 
Cybersecurity ThreatsFix-It CareWHY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Hospital-at-home might alleviate the strain on the health care system, but 
it is not clear who is responsible when something goes wrong in the remote 
environment. The regulatory landscape needs to be sufficiently defined.
Bad actors often access a data ecosystem through a vendor at an 
unmonitored point in the supply chain. Ensure that you have visibility into 
not only your own data security but also of anyone exchanging data with you.
It’s highly likely that Big Tech will create “walled gardens,” making it difficult 
or impossible for any outside stakeholders to partake in their ecosystem. 
Companies that don’t have their own data sets will be at a disadvantage. 
As the cost of health care continuously rises, those that can afford it will opt 
for treatment in other countries with more modest fees or direct-to-consumer 
services. The number of patients opting for telehealth care will also increase 
as it becomes mainstream.
AI will misdiagnose conditions. Develop processes to double-check AI’s 
actions to minimize harm. And get clarification on liabilities and relevant 
regulation before deploying any new technology.Opportunities
Think about offering tangential products and services, including digital 
therapeutics, as the health care definition expands. They could be in the 
wellness, food and beverage, or continuous care sectors, as well as education or 
products such as apparel or hardware.
Increase your competitiveness by supporting your employees’ health. Many 
traditional business-to-consumer entities are now shifting to business-to-
business models, providing companies greater flexibility to think expansively 
about their benefits.
The shift to digitalized care will open up global markets. Look for ways to 
optimize your offerings to regional needs and ensure you are fulfilling regulatory 
requirements. New strategic partners in those markets might be needed.
Deepen the relationship with your customers to set the stage for expanded 
services in the future. Utilize existing customer data and explore how you can 
collect more of it so that you can broaden your opportunities for personalized 
services.
Rethink your product development processes, especially the manual ones. 
Investigate how emerging artificial intelligence technologies can speed up 
timelines. This will lower the risk of exploring the viability of new products.
621© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE622© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Responding to the 
evolution of the health 
care space will require new 
skills. Invest in reskilling or 
upskilling your workforce 
early, and hire new talent 
as needed to proactively 
design your path in this 
new landscape rather 
than having to respond to 
conditions after they have 
manifested.Developing new 
technologies to keep a 
business competitive 
is often quite costly. 
Instead of focusing on 
acquisitions to build 
in-house capabilities, 
connect to an innovation 
hub that combines experts 
from public services, the 
research community, and 
the startup scene to save 
resources.Adjust your products and 
services to cater to a 
more health-educated 
consumer. Think about how 
you can provide adjacent 
information and where 
your product sits within 
the bigger context of 
health and wellness. There 
might also be interest in 
complementary offerings 
that cater to more niche 
interest groups.Clean up your data 
storage system to make 
sure it is standardized 
and can be synthesized 
with other relevant data 
sources. Simplify the 
infrastructure to facilitate 
easy data flows within your 
ecosystem and to outside 
providers, to become an 
attractive collaborator, 
minimize costs, and 
maximize the benefit your 
data provides.Analyze your supply chain 
and consider nearshoring 
crucial links to avoid 
instability caused by 
geopolitical tensions. As 
customers increasingly 
expect higher degrees 
of personalization, and 
personalized care becomes 
more commonplace, local 
production will enable 
faster turnaround times 
and more nimble responses 
to custom demands.Tech-enabled medical 
devices need continuous 
maintenance and 
software updates. 
Consider how you can 
ensure users’ safety even 
beyond the existence 
of your company. 
Companies that provide 
additional security will 
be a strong decisive 
factor for patients when 
choosing a product.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINECENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 623INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
Synthetic Humans
Our bodies are increasingly merging with supporting 
technology, creating new opportunities and ethical 
questions. We are making progress in deciphering how 
exactly our brain works: Last year, scientists re-creat-
ed sounds and images a person perceived, and for the 
first time AI could convert a person’s thoughts into 
words through noninvasive methods. And we are also 
capable of transmitting that deciphered information 
within or outside the body, increasingly wirelessly: A 
paralyzed man can walk again by wirelessly transmit-
ting his thoughts to move to his legs, a stroke victim 
can speak through a digital avatar connected to her 
brain, and a robot can be controlled through a nonin-
vasive wearable, a headband. The FDA approved Elon 
Musk’s DeepMind’s request for human trials of brain 
implants for paralysis patients. The ethical implica-
tions of literally reading other people’s minds are yet to 
be examined, and guardrails are needed to effectively 
protect the most private and personal layers of our 
human existence.The Empowered Consumer
Health care is seeing the kind of democratization 
that other fields, namely the creative industries, ex-
perienced a couple of decades ago. A wider variety of 
sensors can measure an increasing number of metrics 
that we now know signal specific biological develop-
ments. These can range from overuse of certain mus-
cles to early Alzheimer’s detection. The data coming 
from our myriad devices is increasingly collected by 
health platforms and synthesized and analyzed to give 
us overarching stats of our well-being, and monitor 
developments on an ongoing basis. Direct-to-consum-
er health care and wellness services, such as micro-
biome or stress-level analysis, complement the self-
care capabilities. Consumers will not only be able to 
proactively maintain their health but also have higher 
expectations of the services they receive from health 
care providers.Reversing major diseases
Noncommunicable diseases are on the rise, and the 
WHO projects that by 2050, 86% of deaths might be 
attributed to them. Last year’s scientific discoveries 
give a glimmer of hope: A pancreatic cancer vaccine 
shows promise and entered phase 2 of clinical trials. 
Moderna announced plans to offer vaccines against a 
variety of cancers and heart disease by 2030 or soon-
er. CRISPR-based therapies against Alzheimer’s dis-
ease were introduced. An inverse vaccine—meaning it 
removes the immune system’s memory of a particular 
molecule—shows promise to cure autoimmune dis-
eases like multiple sclerosis, And in a small study, 
semaglutide eliminated the need to inject insulin in 
people with Type 1 diabetes. With initiatives, such as a 
task force led by Nobel Prize winner Jennifer Doudna, 
focusing on decreasing the price of gene therapies, 
such new treatments could become available for the 
wider public earlier than expected. This could eventu -
ally upend legacy stakeholders whose income is based 
directly or indirectly on traditional treatment of these 
diseases.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 624INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
Focus on Interrelationships
The gut-brain axes, or the gut microbiome, had its mo-
ment in the sun in 2023. However, bodies have a num-
ber of microbiomes, including in our mouth, skin, and 
vagina. Researchers have become increasingly aware 
of the roles these ecosystems play for our health, diag-
nostics (Parkinson’s patients have similar gut micro-
biomes but so do people who live in the same house-
hold), and treatment (fecal microbiota transplants 
can help treat inflammation in the digestive tract). 
The same goes for the concept of holobionts, which is 
exploring health in the context of a host organism and 
its associated communities. While the insight that the 
environment you live in impacts your health is far from 
new, it’s a novel approach to study these ecosystems 
from a microbiological perspective and allow it to flow 
into medical analysis. However, we are just starting to 
decipher the workings of the microbiome and how it 
affects the rest of our body.AI for Mental Health
As the mental health of large swaths of the population 
continues to deteriorate after accelerating during the 
pandemic, and insurance companies refuse to pay ap-
propriate rates for mental health services (if they cover 
them at all), digital health services are trying to allevi-
ate the situation. However, the failure of two significant 
players in 2023—Mindstrong and Pear Therapeutics, 
both offering digital products to diagnose and monitor 
mental health—showed that effectiveness and valid 
business models of these new therapeutic approach-
es still need to be explored. Large language models 
seem destined to fill in the gap left by a lack of human 
therapists, and several AI chatbots focused on mental 
health were released last year, including Pi, by Mustafa 
Suleyman’s Inflection AI. But their use is highly con-
troversial. The technology has not matured enough to 
grasp the nuances of human behavior, and its habit of 
hallucinating is especially harmful when communicat-
ing with vulnerable adults.Climate Change Effects on Health
Extreme weather events dominated the news last 
year. And while it surprises no one that excessive heat, 
ash-laden air from wildfires, or flooding negatively 
impact our physical and mental health, the effects are 
only growing more significant. In China, people had 
to isolate in air shelters; in Arizona, they waited until 
night time to go outside; in New York, they had to stay 
indoors for extended periods to avoid asthma attacks. 
In Europe, Asian tiger, bush, and yellow fever mosqui-
tos are becoming increasingly common as tempera-
tures warm and humidity rises—in a pattern repeating 
in other areas of the world where insects (and other 
pathogens) are migrating to new areas and bringing 
their diseases with them. As climate conditions wors-
en, we need to prepare for adjustments in our lifestyle 
to protect our health, as well as prepare for the new 
risks that exposure to new pathogens will bring.Yu T akagi and Shinji Nishimoto, researchers 
at Osaka University, for their use of diffusion 
models to re-create versions of what a person 
has seen by analyzing fMRA scans.
Jinbo Huang, molecular biologist at ETH 
Zürich, for developing a device that can acti-
vate genes through electrical currents, such 
as to trigger insulin production.
Mishal Mendiratta-Lala, professor of radiol-
ogy at Michigan Medicine, for heading the 
human trial for using sound to destroy liver 
cancer tumors.
Debora Marks, professor at Harvard Medical 
School, for developing an artificial intelli-
gence tool that can predict virus mutations.
Kevin Barnham, professor at the Florey Insti-
tute and Austin Health, for developing a way 
to detect Parkinson’s disease years before 
physical symptoms show.
Marc Goldberg and Christine Carville, 
co-founders of Resilience Lab, for developing 
a sustainable model for expanding access to 
therapy through their online platform. Dr. Nusrat J M Sanghamitra, founder and 
CEO of CyGenica, for using nanotechnology for 
targeted delivery of cancer drugs that mini-
mize side effects.
Jeffrey Hubbell, professor at the University of 
Chicago, for developing a vaccine that could 
reverse autoimmune diseases like multiple 
sclerosis.
Gert Cauwenberghs, professor at Univer-
sity of California, San Diego, for developing 
3D-printed sensors that can be fused with 
earbuds to detect neurodegenerative diseas-
es.
Elizabeth Gazda, CEO of Embr Labs, for 
developing a wristband that cools the body to 
counteract menopausal hot flashes.
David Baker, director at the Institute for Pro-
tein Design at the University of Washington, 
for developing an AI that can design custom, 
functional proteins that could be produced in 
live cells.
T ae-Jin Kim, associate professor at Pusan Na-
tional University, for developing a biosensor 
that can detect DNA damage in real time.Lorenz Hofbauer, Maria Teresa Pisabarro, 
and Dr. Vera Hintze, professors at TU Dresden, 
for developing molecules that promote bone 
regeneration.
Zhuomin Zhang, Ph.D. candidate at City Uni-
versity of Hong Kong, for his development of 
a piezoelectric biomolecular film that could 
be used for implantable microdevices.
Mike Curtis, president and CEO of eGenesis, 
for advancing research into xenotransplan-
tation.
Dr. Nicole Robb, co-founder of Pictura Bio, 
for building a diagnostics platform that can 
detect pathogens within a minute based on a 
digital image.
Noam Band, CEO of HealthWatch, for devel-
oping the only remote monitoring garment 
that received clearance from the US Food and 
Drug Administration.
Zhou Nie, professor at Hunan University, for 
developing a DNA-based robot that can walk 
on the surface of cells and influence their 
behavior.Matt Anderson-Baron, CEO and co-founder 
of Future Fields, for creating the first syn-
thetic biology system that uses fruit flies 
to produce proteins for affordable CRISPR 
therapies.
Philip Roche, CEO of Jenthera Therapeutics, 
for developing the CRISPR-based gene thera-
py that uses the fruit fly proteins mentioned 
above.
Jennifer Doudna, founder and chair of the 
Innovative Genomics Institute Governance 
Board, for her vision of making genetic thera-
pies affordable and accessible to all.
Woon-Hong Y eo, researcher at Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology, for creating a device that 
can wirelessly monitor the vascular system 
in real time without needing batteries or 
circuits.
John A. Rogers, researcher at Northwestern 
University, for developing an electromechan-
ical system that dissolves after a specific 
period of time, reducing electronic waste.
Robert Knight, neuroscientist at the Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley, for training a com-
puter to analyze brain activity and re-create 
the song a person was listening to.ONES TO WATCH
625© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEIMPORTANT TERMS
626Biomalware
Malicious technology or software designed to 
attack, alter, or exploit biological systems, such as 
human DNA. It represents a potential cybersecurity 
threat in the field of biotechnology, where genetic 
data and biological processes could be manipulat-
ed for harmful purposes.
Electronic health record (EHR)
A digital system that stores a patient’s comprehen-
sive medical history, treatment plans, test results, 
and other health information. EHRs allow for 
efficient sharing and management of patient data 
among different health care providers, enhancing 
the continuity and quality of care.
Holobiont
An ecological unit comprising a host organism and 
the various microorganisms living in or on it, such 
as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. This concept em-
phasizes the interdependent relationship between 
a host and its microbiome, recognizing them as a 
single, integrated biological entity.Nootropics
Also known as “smart drugs” or cognitive en-
hancers, these substances are claimed to improve 
cognitive function, particularly executive func-
tions, memory, creativity, or motivation, in healthy 
individuals. They range from naturally occurring 
substances like caffeine to prescription medica-
tions, and are used with the aim of boosting mental 
performance.
Xenobots
Programmable biological robots, created from liv-
ing cells, typically stem cells from frogs. These tiny 
organisms, designed using computer algorithms, 
can perform simple tasks, offering potential ap-
plications in fields like medicine, environmental 
remediation, and biological research.
Xenotransplants
The process of transplanting organs, tissues, or 
cells from one species to another, typically from 
animals to humans. This medical procedure is 
explored as a potential solution to the shortage of 
human organs for transplantation, with pigs being 
the most common donor species due to their phys-
iological similarities to humans.Exoskeleton
A wearable external framework that provides 
support and enhances physical capabilities, often 
used for rehabilitation or to assist individuals with 
mobility impairments. It can also be employed in 
industrial or military settings to augment human 
strength and endurance for demanding tasks.
Piezoelectric
Piezoelectricity refers to the electric charge that 
accumulates in certain solid materials, like crys-
tals, ceramics, and biological matter such as bone, 
in response to applied mechanical stress. This 
property allows for the conversion of mechanical 
energy into electrical energy and vice versa, making 
piezoelectric materials useful in sensors, actuators, 
and energy harvesting applications.Microbiome
The collection of microorganisms, like bacteria, 
viruses, and fungi, living in and on the human body, 
crucial for functions like digestion and immune 
response, and unique to each individual.
Personalized medicine
A medical model that customizes patient care 
based on an individual’s unique lifestyle and envi-
ronmental factors. It involves tailoring treatments 
and preventive strategies to achieve optimal health 
outcomes for each person.
Precision medicine
A branch of medicine that uses genetic information 
to guide the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention 
of diseases, focusing specifically on the individual 
genetic profile of each patient.
Nanobots
Tiny robotic devices, often at the scale of nano-
meters, designed to perform specific tasks at a 
microscopic level, such as in medical applications 
for drug delivery or cellular repair. They operate in 
the realm of nanotechnology, utilizing advances in 
miniaturization and precision engineering.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE627© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.THE BUSINESS  
OF HEALTH CAREINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Everyone wants their hand in 
the health care system.   The 
sector faces increasing costs, 
staffing shortages, and an aging 
population, making it vulnerable 
to disruption. Big Tech companies 
are leveraging their user bases, 
advanced technology, and data 
access to offer superior health 
care services, filling some gaps in 
the system. Despite facing extensive scrutiny regarding its role in the 
mental health crisis and access to personal health data, 
Meta recently secured patents confirming extensive re-
search in wearable health care solutions that measure 
biomarkers and brain activity. Apple Watch introduced a 
new feature that can measure sun exposure using sensor 
and GPS technology. And Samsung unveiled its new Open 
Innovation Initiative in collaboration with leading univer-
sities and academic hospitals to expand its digital health 
ecosystem. Seeking to diversify its health services, Sam-
sung is also implementing the B.well Connected Health 
platform, which enables users to create a longitudinal 
health record, receive proactive health insights, and access 
care from a growing network of providers through a secure 
app. Salesforce has updated its Health Cloud software solu-
tion, including enhancements such as in-home treatment 
scheduling, a data cloud that connects various patient data 
sources in real time, and a patient contact center. These 
additions leverage Salesforce’s real-time data, Einstein AI, 
and Flow automation technologies to improve patient expe-
riences and reduce operational costs. Big Tech’s involvement in health care is driving the consum-
erization of the industry, and every company has its niche. 
Given its reputation as a lifestyle brand, Apple is focused 
on lifestyle and personal wellness. Amazon is prioritizing 
primary care. Microsoft is seeking to provide the technologi-
cal infrastructure for health care, including cloud, analytics, 
and AI support. Among these companies, Google has the 
most diversified portfolio of products and services: Its   prior-
ities have included research, consumer wellness, improving 
health care access, and providing tools and platforms for 
health care professionals to effectively access and manage 
health data. With the introduction of new health care tech-
nology on consumer devices, patients have higher expec-
tations and expect a more personalized consumer-centric 
experience as they become more inclined to prioritize long-
term wellness and preventive care. This shift underscores 
the importance of collecting personal data to provide direct-
ly communicated, personalized solutions to patients. BIG TECH DISRUPTS 
HEALTH CARE6TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 628INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Startups and health care 
providers are bypassing 
traditional intermediaries by 
adapting direct-to-consumer 
(DTC) health care models, 
which aim to offer consumers 
cost savings, convenience, and 
accessibility to products and 
services. Increasingly, large retailers are offering health care prod-
ucts and services directly to their consumers. In early 2023, 
Amazon acquired primary care provider One Medical for 
$3.9 billion. Now, the company can offer access to health 
professionals, 24/7 virtual care, and same-day appoint-
ments for less than $200 a year. One Medical’s platform 
also includes Mindset, its suite of mental health services, 
like virtual therapy and coaching, as well as a variety of pro-
grams to help patients reduce stress and anxiety, sleep bet-
ter, and improve their mood. Walgreens is introducing a DTC 
telehealth service for consumers in select states to speak 
with a health care professional virtually from the comfort of 
their home. If a patient requires medication, Walgreens Vir-
tual Health can send that prescription to a Walgreens phar-
macy or have it delivered to their home on the same day. 
Costco has partnered with direct-to-consumer marketplace 
platform Sesame to offer members online health checkups 
for as low as $29. Sesame doesn’t accept health insurance, 
and this new program caters to uninsured Americans or 
those with high-deductible plans. LifeMD and Ascend Thera-
peutics launched an integrated direct-to-consumer tele-
health model for hormone therapy. As nontraditional retail 
companies broaden their footprint to include health care 
services through DTC models, traditional players are unde-
niably pressured to expand their digital offerings. The retailization of health care is prompting a reinvention of 
the traditional primary health model. More than ever before, 
consumers are focused on their overall health and wellness, 
necessitating products and services that take a holistic 
approach. Subscription-based models are emerging to cre-
ate more comprehensive platforms, integrating single-use 
platforms with existing solutions to offer a more inclusive 
experience for consumers and providers. By leveraging dig-
ital technologies, the primary objective of DTC models is to 
offer convenience, accessibility, and affordability for a more 
diverse consumer population. Akin to the traditional retail 
shopping experience, DTC models seek to empower and en-
gage consumers by giving them more control of their health 
care decisions. The significance lies in the democratization 
of health care, where consumers can actively participate 
in managing their own health. The US, where digital health 
revenue is the highest, is anticipated to have 370 million 
digital health users in 2024, up from 290 million users in 
2022. 
To keep up with on-demand health care services, stakehold-
ers need to seek new, unexpected partnerships, not only 
within the tech industry but across different sectors and 
startups, to create adaptive business solutions. DTC HEALTH CARE 
MODELS4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 629INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
The Covid pandemic changed the 
way we work. The remote work 
environment afforded employees 
greater work/life balance, 
resulting in a reluctance to return 
to the office. In seeking solutions, 
companies are prioritizing 
employee health and well-being. Companies of all sizes, from startups to Fortune 500 corpo-
rations, are experimenting with new partnerships to offer 
employees new health benefits. More than 800 companies 
are working with Spring Health, which provides “precision 
mental health care” that matches employees to the most 
effective care for them. The solution includes mindfulness 
and meditation, care navigation, coaching, therapy, and 
medication management. Microsoft initiated a partnership 
with Joye, a Singapore-based tech company, to bring mental 
fitness capabilities to global users of Microsoft Teams. The 
add-on analyzes work patterns to deliver suggestions and 
coaching for improved mental health. Transcarent, a com-
pany that offers direct access to quality low-cost medical 
services, announced new partnerships with 10 major health 
systems. Other companies are incentivizing healthy behav-
iors and data collection; United Healthcare offers a bene-
fit of up to $1,000 annually for select employers and fully 
insured clients in exchange for individual health data, such 
as steps, sleep, and daily activity. And WebMd’s acquisition 
of Limeade aims to offer a comprehensive well-being solu-
tion for organizations. The integration of Limeade’s employ-
ee feedback solutions with WebMD’s services enables more 
personalized experiences for holistic well-being. A growing 
number of employers are seeking solutions to prevent burn-
out, costly medical procedures, and health-related absenc-
es.Preventing health issues is more cost-effective than treat-
ing them. While upfront costs may be associated with well-
ness programs, the long-term savings can be substantial. 
Health programs can help reduce sick days and absentee-
ism due to illness. Healthy employees tend to be more pro-
ductive, exhibiting a higher level of creativity, problem-solv-
ing ability, and innovative thinking. They have higher energy 
levels, reduced stress, better concentration, and are gener-
ally more engaged in their work. When employees see that 
their well-being is a priority, it can boost morale and lead to 
higher job satisfaction. 
The shift to remote or hybrid work has only exacerbated 
the mental health crisis, prompting discussions about the 
blurred boundaries between professional and personal life. 
While remote work offers flexibility, the growing need for 
clear boundaries has led to global action for the “right to 
disconnect.” The US is slow to adopt, while other countries, 
like Kenya, are passing legislation to prevent employers 
from contacting employees after work hours. Such rules 
can seem impractical due to global operations that span 
time zones, but proponents say they restrict flexibility in an 
increasingly asynchronous work environment. Nonetheless, 
such actions are arguably necessary to ensure employee 
well-being. HEALTH AT THE 
WORKPLACE4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 630INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Barriers like global access, cost, 
provider availability, and care 
quality limit health care for some. 
Disparities disproportionately 
affecting certain populations can 
be overcome through investment 
and reform of the infrastructure 
of universal health systems to 
bridge gaps in care. Several academia and health care institutions worldwide 
have created task forces and research centers to address 
health disparities. They’re joined by efforts to promote infor-
mation equality, like YouTube Health’s THE-IQ, a video series 
that examines equity in mental health, maternal health, 
and health care access. 
To address health equity, it is crucial to rectify biases in 
data collection, research, and analysis. The National Insti-
tutes of Health launched the All of Us research program to 
collect data from 1 million US citizens and create diverse 
medical data sets. The World Health Organization launched 
the Health Inequality Data Repository, the largest collection 
of disaggregated data about health and determinants of 
health. The data can be used to assess the state of inequal-
ity across featured health topics or settings, conduct ongo-
ing monitoring and evaluation, and inform the development 
of policies and programs. 
Rural health is big retail’s latest target, and Uber and 
Walmart are making the biggest splash. Uber Health users 
covered by eligible Medicare Advantage plans will be able 
to use their benefit cards to pay for nonemergency medical 
rides and supply delivery through a new partnership with 
Optum. Walmart introduced a new institute to expand the 
reach of clinical trials to women and underserved commu-
nities. Walmart also plans to continue expanding its com-
munity health center footprint by adding 28 new centers in 
2024. Technology offers great potential for addressing health dis -
parities through telemedicine and remote care options, au-
tomation of services, and AI-driven analytics—even though 
these efforts won’t reach those without digital access. Data 
governance is essential for ensuring that technological 
advancements positively contribute to health equity. Still, 
there are downsides, like AI’s proven ability to reinforce bias: 
A 2019 study found that a health care risk-prediction algo-
rithm used by major insurers extensively underrated the 
health risks of Black patients. As technology aims to stan-
dardize, even improve, quality of care, under- and misrep-
resentation of minority populations in data analysis for clin-
ical research and trial methodologies must be addressed. 
A rise in health equity officer roles shows a commitment 
in many companies to identify racism within organiza-
tions, work on community partnerships, and review clinical 
algorithms for bias. While these sorts of roles used to be 
most prominent among hospital systems and state offic-
es, several companies—CVS, Humana, and the NFL Players 
Association, to name a few—recently hired their first health 
equity executives or officers as the industry grapples with 
global health disparities. In the wake of the growing number 
of chief medical officers at Big Tech companies as well as in 
the retail industry, health equity positions are expected to 
follow suit. CONSIDERING 
HEALTH EQUITY2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 631INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Efforts to reduce ecological 
footprints of health care labs 
and facilities are gaining 
momentum, with areas like 
water consumption, waste 
reduction, and pharmaceutical 
development the most readily 
available for improvement. Key to 
this effort are advancements in 
remote care. Most hospitals are focused on adopting circular econo-
mies to enhance sustainability by implementing practices 
that prioritize resource efficiency, waste reduction, and the 
reuse or recycling of materials. Cardinal Health’s Sustain-
able Technologies, a leading provider of single-use device 
(SUD) collections, reprocessing, and recycling services in 
the US, has expanded its facilities, allowing for testing new 
ways to reprocess medical products. In 2022, the company 
collected 18.3 million SUDs, diverting more than 5.6 million 
pounds of waste from landfills. This reprocessing contrib-
utes to a circular economy—extending the life of devices to 
reduce both product cost and waste. A collaboration be-
tween the Health Innovation Centre of Southern Denmark, 
Danish Technological Institute, GMAF Circular Medico, and 
BD is assessing the viability of recycling used blood collec-
tion tubes, currently disposed of via incineration, to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. The pilot program at Odense 
University Hospital aims to demonstrate the reusability of 
plastics in health care facilities. As pressure on hospitals 
systems to reduce their carbon footprint mounts, suppliers 
will need to provide carbon data. Organizations like Vizient 
are incorporating carbon emissions information into their 
contract templates, so providers can make informed pur-
chasing decisions. Hospitals account for 8.5% of the US carbon footprint. 
Health care laboratories and facilities are inherently ener-
gy-intensive and water-consuming, and generate substan-
tial hazardous waste, making them a significant contributor 
to global water shortages, greenhouse gas emissions, and 
pollution. In response, health care organizations globally 
continue to actively adopt sustainable measures, including 
energy-efficient building designs, renewable energy sources, 
waste reduction through recycling programs, and effective 
hazardous waste management. However, with the continued 
growth of telehealth and remote care options, the indus-
try is poised to greatly decrease its environmental impact. 
Beyond cost savings and convenience for consumers, the 
benefits of telehealth include curbing the carbon emissions 
associated with commuting, minimizing the need for phys-
ical infrastructure expansion, and streamlining distribution 
processes for an optimized supply chain. As the adoption 
of telehealth expands, sustainable procurement and man-
ufacturing practices are gaining traction, with a focus on 
sourcing materials with minimal ecological footprints and 
optimizing drug production processes. Still, the industry is 
ripe for change, yielding significant opportunities for inno-
vation from outside the industry. CONSIDERING 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACTS OF  
HEALTH CARE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 632INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE633© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.HEALTH CARE 
ADMINISTRATIONINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
More than ever before, we have 
greater access to an abundance of 
data points that help us evaluate 
individual health and well-being. 
And yet, getting a complete picture 
of our overall health continues to 
be a challenge. The widespread 
adoption of AI is playing a pivotal 
role in connecting the dots between 
EHR systems and patient-generated 
health data to provide a more 
comprehensive, real-time, and 
personalized view. As of 2021, fewer than 10% of health care organizations had 
been utilizing AI for more than five years. As AI advance-
ments expand to the health data infrastructure, tools and 
platforms to improve process workflow are being intro-
duced into the health care industry. Software as a Medical 
Device can be used to diagnose, monitor, and treat and/
or prevent medical conditions. Google Cloud introduced an 
AI-powered search capability through the Vertex AI Search 
platform for health care workers to retrieve information 
from clinical notes, scanned documents, and EHRs, seam-
lessly and efficiently. Microsoft Fabric aims to simplify the 
analytics process through an end-to-end, unified analytics 
platform that integrates various data and analytics tools 
into a single product. 
Patient-generated health data refers to information like 
vital signs, symptoms, and lifestyle details generated by 
patients themselves. Health technology platform Folia 
Health is expanding its patient-reported data collection to 
include multiple sclerosis, Huntington’s disease, and myas-
thenia gravis. Patients and caregivers can use it to capture 
their daily observations of treatment response and disease 
progression. And Oracle is expanding its partnership with 
Zoom to enhance telehealth services; the collaboration will 
connect Zoom’s telehealth capabilities with Oracle Cerner 
Millennium, so providers can seamlessly join patient ap-
pointments with relevant EHRs. The convergence of electronic health systems and pa-
tient-generated health data herald a new era of personalized 
care, leveraging technology to provide a comprehensive view 
of an individual’s health. The clinical data of EHR systems 
now seamlessly integrate with patient-generated health 
data collected from wearables and apps. This mingling 
gives providers access to a continuous health narrative. As 
patients produce and record real-time data, integration with 
their EHRs enables more accurate insights that even con-
sistent medical appointments cannot provide. Introducing a 
greater volume and diversity of health data facilitates more 
informed and shared decision-making. Essentially patients 
become active participants in their care as a collaborative 
relationship in their health needs forms. 
But this integration poses challenges for the health care 
data infrastructure. Seamless integration requires interop-
erability between EHR systems and the disparate sources 
of patient-generated health data, leading to investments 
in robots, health information exchange (HIE)  platforms, 
APIs, and standardization efforts. Integration efforts must 
be scalable and able to safeguard the growing volume and 
variety, and sensitivity of health data. Harnessing the full 
potential of integrated health data ushers in a new era of 
preventive and personalized health care. HEALTH DATA 
INFRASTRUCTURE6TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 634INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Amid the increased volume of 
patient-generated data due to 
recent innovations, policymakers 
are grappling with the need for 
revised regulations and policies 
that will address the evolving 
landscape of health data 
ownership and privacy. In April, Washington state’s governor signed the My Health 
My Data Act, a first-of-its-kind consumer health data law 
that requires explicit consent to collect and share con-
sumer health data. Aimed at addressing gaps not covered 
by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), the law prevents traditional advertising practices 
while even prohibiting some, like geofencing around health 
care facilities. Following suit, several other states, including 
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Utah, and Virginia, have 
taken action to strengthen protections of personal health 
data. Similar laws aim to safeguard consumers from the 
unwarranted sale of personal health information. In 2023, 
safeguarding action was taken against several companies, 
including Costco, BetterHelp, and Premom, which were 
accused of selling private patient information. In Europe, 
legislators still debate how the European Health Data Space 
(EHDS) regulates the secondary use of health data, such as 
sharing for research purposes or policymaking. The EHDS 
aims to provide a single market for electronic health record 
systems, medical devices, and AI systems while enabling 
EU citizens to share and have access to their health data 
across borders.The debate about patient ownership of health records con-
tinues to grow, with some arguing that not all health data is 
generated by the patient and should therefore not belong to 
the patient. While the EU’s General Data Protection Regu-
lation and HIPAA do not explicitly define ownership rights, 
they acknowledge patients as data subjects, giving them 
increased ownership, including the right to access their 
medical data and restrict its use by other parties. 
As technology has shifted the way that health data is 
produced and collected, a greater volume of data exists. 
Patient-generated health data allows for more accurate 
real-time data to be collected outside of clinical environ-
ments. Access to this information can be game-changing, 
and lead to further innovations in the industry. Researchers 
and pharmaceutical and biotech companies also face a 
paradigm shift: With consumers in control of their personal 
data, these institutions may need to leverage incentives to 
access the data necessary for their work. Trust and con-
sumer sentiment will likely play a role in whether access 
is granted. The changes may usher in new intermediaries 
to facilitate data access, to service this need on behalf of 
institutions.DEFINING PATIENT 
ACCESS TO 
MEDICAL DATA2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 635INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
The fragmented state of 
the health care industry’s 
infrastructure is a result of the 
incompatibility between health 
care devices, applications, and 
information systems, which 
hinders the seamless exchange 
of patient data and information. 
Increasing interoperability is a 
necessary and welcome change. The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Informa-
tion Technology (ONC) reported increased hospital engage-
ment in key interoperability domains, with 6 in 10 hospitals 
actively participating in information sharing and integrat-
ing summary of care records into EHRs. This is promising, 
as the ONC advances data sharing and interoperability 
through the 21st Century Cures Act. The office’s proposed 
provisions, known as HTI-1, focus on implementing the EHR 
reporting program and revise the ONC Health IT Certification 
Program. Most notably the changes expand exceptions to 
information-blocking regulations in support of information 
sharing.
Among companies, Philips achieved enhanced interoper-
ability between its Capsule Medical Device Information Plat-
form and the Patient Information Center iX, giving hospitals 
the ability to synthesize data from a variety of non-Philips 
devices—like third-party vital sign monitors, ventilators, 
and infusion pumps—and view the information on a single, 
standardized interface. CareSource IT addresses health care 
data interoperability challenges through API utilization. 
Michigan Health Information Network Shared Services and 
Amazon Web Services are launching Interop.WORLD, a virtu-
al innovation center focused on health care interoperability. 
The center plans to host challenges using an open-source 
health data sandbox to encourage developers and organi-
zations to design cloud-based health care IT solutions that 
support interoperability. Limited data exchange has been a growing issue since med-
ical providers first implemented EHRs, and many benefits 
can be realized by facilitating the rapid exchange of health 
information. This approach can optimize human capital, 
patient-centric care, and public health emergency prepared-
ness. Providers will experience reduced turnaround times, 
enabling them to render higher-quality care services to their 
patients. Patients will be more engaged in self-managing 
their well-being. The public will also benefit from early de-
tection and prevention of disease outbreaks. 
Despite this, achieving interoperability is a complex chal-
lenge. Overcoming these challenges will require a willing-
ness of stakeholders to collaborate on information ex-
change. Blockchain-based HIEs, like MedRec, OmniPHR, and 
MeDShare have gained traction, as have Fast Healthcare In-
teroperability Resources, like Google Cloud, Epic, Cerner, and 
Allscripts. These are promising tools to facilitate seamless 
data exchange and collaboration among health care provid-
ers. However, ensuring the security and privacy of patient 
data remains a paramount concern. Governments are likely 
to regulate interoperability standards and practices, with 
US compliance requirements like HIPAA and the Cures Act 
shaping the landscape. Financial constraints and varying 
levels of readiness, especially for smaller providers, pose 
challenges in adopting the necessary infrastructure and 
technologies, potentially leading to industry consolidation. INCREASING 
INTEROPERABILITY OF 
DATA INFRASTRUCTURE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 636INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Automation is transforming 
health care, making the industry 
more efficient and reliable. Big 
Tech is championing workforce 
automation while introducing 
process efficiency solutions for 
appointment scheduling, billing, 
supply chain management, 
health management, admissions 
and discharges, follow-up care, 
prescription management, quality 
assurance, and compliance.Last year saw a rise in AI-generated note-taking tools as 
several companies, including Microsoft and Amazon, 
launched their versions. Microsoft-owned Nuance Commu-
nications released its Dragon Ambient eXperience Copilot, 
which is integrated with large language model GPT-4 and 
automatically drafts clinical summaries of conversations 
with patients conducted in an exam room or via telehealth. 
Amazon Web Services introduced HealthScribe, a new HI-
PAA-eligible service that leverages speech recognition and 
generative AI to automatically create preliminary clinical 
documentation from patient-clinician conversations. Mic-
rosoft’s cloud division Azure is releasing a new functionality 
for clinical report simplification. With the use of generative 
AI, the tool simplifies clinical jargon so patients can better 
understand medical information. OpenLoop’s API-driven 
platform can be aligned to meet workflow needs and se-
curely houses patient personally identifiable information 
with its built-in HIPAA compliance software. 
XTend Robotics has developed patented robot technology to 
deploy modular service robots that can adapt to any indus-
try. Multitasking intelligent robots can be used in hospitals 
and ambulatory care facilities to interact with patients, 
automating the check-in and vitals collection process. In-
creasing efficiency over 70%, the robots take dictation and 
automatically update patients’ files on the facility’s EHR 
system. Automation, driven by technologies such as AI and robot-
ic process automation (RPA), leads to greater efficiency, 
accuracy, and improved patient outcomes. Administrative 
tasks, appointment scheduling, billing, and data entry, 
which traditionally demanded significant human resources, 
can now be streamlined. Though there is an upfront cost 
for adoption, the automation of processes will save time 
and preserve limited staff. Automation enables health care 
providers to focus more on direct patient care. Moreover, in 
clinical settings, AI-driven tools aid in diagnostics, treat-
ment planning, and personalized care, leveraging vast data 
sets to identify patterns and make data-driven predictions. 
Automation promises a minimal standard of care, reinforc-
ing adherence to regulation and quality assurance. AUTOMATION OF 
PROCESSES5TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 637INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Cybersecurity concerns are on 
the rise, and the threat to health 
care organizations, information 
systems, and patient safety are 
substantial. According to IBM’s 
Cost of Data Breach 2023 Report, 
the global average cost of a data 
breach in 2023 was $4.45 million, 
a 15% increase over three years.In a Ponemon Institute survey of 653 health care IT and 
security practitioners, 88% of respondents reported ex-
periencing an average of 40 cyberattacks within the past 
12 months. A significant number of large companies have 
experienced some sort of a breach. PharMerica, operated by 
parent company Bright Spring Health, disclosed a breach 
to the Office of Civil Rights in May that impacted more than 
5.8 million people. Managed Care of North America suffered 
a major data breach that lasted nearly two weeks, impact-
ing 8.8 million people. Henry Schein, distributor of medical 
and dental supplies, announced a cybersecurity attack 
that caused the company to take systems offline. 23andMe 
issued a notice of data concerns due to suspicious activity 
at its operations in October. Perry Johnson & Associates, a 
US medical transcription service, fell victim to a cyberat-
tack that exposed highly sensitive information of 9 million 
patients, the second-largest after HCA Healthcare’s 11 mil-
lion-record earlier in the year. And a new ransomware threat, 
NoEscape, has targeted the health care industry. Despite 
being new to the landscape, the ransomware group has very 
rapidly made a name for itself. In response to the increase 
in threats, UC San Diego School of Medicine was awarded 
$9.5 million to research cybersecurity in health care and 
launched its Center for Healthcare Cybersecurity, which will 
focus on identifying early indicators of cyberthreats using 
simulated ransomware. PwC’s Global Digital Trust Insights survey reveals a concern-
ing trend: Businesses experiencing data breaches resulting 
in damages exceeding $1 million jumped from 27% to 36% 
in the past three years. While traditional threats like ran-
somware, DDoS, and social engineering persist, emerging 
cyberattack categories include biomalware, medical deep-
fakes, and machine learning simulations mimicking users’ 
digital activities. Of particular concern is biomalware tar-
geting and manipulating biological systems, such as DNA. 
This biomalware can take various forms, such as viruses or 
Trojan horses operating at the genetic or cellular level, and 
can be used to disrupt research, harm individuals, or access 
genetic information. 
AI-powered security solutions have introduced ground-
breaking features, such as continuous threat monitoring, 
anomaly detection, predictive analysis, and vulnerability 
assessment. AI’s ability to process vast amounts of secu-
rity data can predict vulnerabilities and automate patch 
management. AI is especially adept at identifying zero-day 
exploits, when an attacker identifies a software vulnerability 
even before the vendor has become aware of it. A first-of-its-
kind unified security platform, Microsoft Security Copilot 
integrates tools for automatic detection and response. 
Recently IBM introduced Threat Detection and Response 
Services, an AI-enabled service delivering 24/7 monitoring, 
investigation, and automated remediation of security alerts 
across hybrid cloud environments.INCREASED 
CYBERSECURITY 
THREATS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 638INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINESCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2040
Biological Data Vaults    
To increase data security and enable environmentally sustainable storage of our data, a new solution emerged in the early 2030s: encoding sensitive informa-
tion directly into human DNA. This technique, which leverages the vast data storage capacity and unique personal signature of DNA, converts critical data such 
as medical and financial records into nucleotide sequences. The approach transforms individuals into secure carriers of their own encrypted information.
But recently, this innovative system became the focal point of a sophisticated cyberattack, orchestrated by a rogue state-sponsored hacking group to under-
mine trust in this new technology and to extract high-value information for espionage and financial gain. The attack employed a digital virus specifically tai-
lored to breach the interface between biological and digital security systems. It was introduced into the population through common medical channels, such as 
standard blood tests or vaccines, using genetically modified vectors to deliver the payload.
Once inside the host, the virus lay dormant until remotely triggered. Upon activation, it employed complex algorithms to decode the encrypted data stored with-
in the DNA and converted it back into a digital format. The virus harnessed the body’s bioelectrical system, which is primarily generated through the activity of 
neurons and the body’s way to communicate internally, to transmit this data to the attackers, leaving no physical evidence of the breach. The modified electrical 
signals the neurons produce because of the virus are received by sensors specifically designed to detect and interpret these bioelectrical patterns.
Once the data was extracted, the hackers engaged in a dual-pronged approach: They sold sensitive personal and financial information on the dark web, target-
ing high-net-worth individuals and key corporate figures for identity theft and financial fraud. They also exploited corporate and governmental data, which was 
stored in the DNA of leadership individuals, for espionage, seeking competitive intelligence and state secrets to threaten overall geopolitical security.
639© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE640© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.REMOTE 
CAREINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Digital biomarkers are behavioral 
and physiological data, such as 
heart rate, blood pressure, body 
temperature, sleep patterns, 
and physical activity, collected 
through digital devices. Smart 
home technology is evolving 
to facilitate the monitoring of 
digital biomarkers, creating an 
integrated ecosystem for health 
information that complements 
wearables. It’s easier than ever for consumers to measure and mon-
itor their digital biomarkers. Freestyle Libre’s continuous 
glucose monitoring wearable sensors received FDA clear-
ance for connectivity with automated insulin delivery 
systems. Abbott is introducing Lingo, a wearable that will 
measure glucose levels for people without diabetes and 
deliver personalized plans for healthier habits. Somavedic 
Technologies launched the Attune Health app, which takes 
AI-enabled biomarker analysis of blood pressure, heart rate, 
oxygen saturation, stress levels, and hemoglobin based on 
a facial scan on a smartphone camera. It measures changes 
in red, green, and blue light reflected from the skin. The Gao 
Lab at the California Institute of Technology introduced a 
finger patch for microfluidic sweat sampling of estradiol.  
Only requiring a miniscule amount of sweat, the device con-
sistently learns and recalibrates based on salt levels, skin 
temperatures, and sweat pH. The team is working to minia-
turize the sensor for placement in a ring, as the device can 
already wirelessly communicate with an app. 
Today’s digital biomarkers are not limited to wearables; 
they’re also making their way into the infrastructure of the 
home. With the U-Scan from Withings, a sensor is placed 
under the rim of a toilet bowl to measure biomarkers and 
metabolites in a person’s urine. A recently approved patent 
application shows that Apple, which purchased Finnish 
technology company Beddit, is developing an in-bed sensor 
system to collect physiological data during sleep. Biosensors, compact devices designed to detect biological 
elements and convert them into measurable signals, are 
increasingly finding their way into homes. Imagine furniture 
textiles that measure vital signs to predict minor sickness 
and maintain body temperature, toothbrushes that detect 
dehydration and make dietary recommendations, optical 
sensors in televisions that can detect stress and cognitive 
decline, windows that can measure vitamin D deficiency 
and control smart light bulbs in response, smart plumbing 
that can filter bacteria from the water supply, and air pu-
rifiers that measure clean oxygen supply and recommend 
houseplants to improve air quality. Whether these sensors 
are integrated with wearable devices or standalone units, the 
technology offers a comprehensive view of our well-being by 
tracking vital signs and other health parameters in real-time. 
Revolutionizing personal health care management, biosen-
sors empower users to make informed decisions for fostering 
preventive health care. 
While the integration of biosensors into everyday life offers 
unprecedented benefits, it raises concerns about data secu-
rity and privacy. Given the ability to generate vast amounts of 
data, there are necessary ethical considerations surrounding 
data usage. Our homes will play a crucial role in health man-
agement, and if the health data infrastructure can overcome 
challenges stemming from data standardization and in-
teroperability, expect to see further development supporting 
holistic sensor ecosystems. In 2022, the global market for 
biosensors was valued at $26.8 billion, and it is projected to 
grow significantly in the coming years. IN-HOME 
CONSUMER HEALTH 
TECHNOLOGY9TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 641INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Telemedicine leverages 
technology for remote health 
care delivery. While the Covid 
pandemic initially prompted 
the emergence of remote care 
options,the trend is clearly here 
to stay and will even expand 
beyond primary health. The 
market is forecasted to be 
valued at $460 billion by 2030. The global telehealth market is on track to achieve re-
markable growth due to increasing technology adoption. 
AI and machine learning play a crucial role, by providing 
personalized, predictive, and preventative guidance, which 
has helped telehealth evolve beyond primary health vir-
tual consultations to encompass virtual pharmaceutical, 
translation, and surgical services. The Midday app facil-
itates direct communication to promote healthy aging. 
Aimed at supporting menopausal women, the end-to-end 
platform evaluates menopause progression to deliver 
personalized insights, and evidence-based strategies and 
education. Amazon’s RxPass, a $5-per-month subscription, 
offers affordable and convenient pharmacy services with-
out insurance. Subscribers can have generic medications 
for more than 80 common health conditions sent to their 
home. Voyce introduces professional language interpret-
ers, enabling real-time medical interpretation in more than 
240 languages, including American Sign Language. The 
technology seamlessly integrates with EHRs, automatically 
documenting sessions for future reference. In Singapore, 
a groundbreaking robotic telesurgery trial utilized Japan’s 
first surgical robot. It remotely performed a gastrectomy 
from a Singapore-based surgeon cockpit, with movements 
transmitted and replicated by a robotic unit in Japan. This 
collaboration represents a pivotal stride in making remote 
surgeries accessible to patients, demonstrating the trans-
formative potential of telehealth.Consumers are increasingly comfortable with telemedicine 
options. In a recent study, 55% of patients expressed more 
satisfaction with virtual visits than in-person visits. Rural 
communities and underserved populations stand to gain 
the most as health care providers expand their reach and 
fill gaps in care delivery caused by provider shortages and 
limited facilities. And there’s potential for cost reduction on 
both ends of the spectrum: Subscription services, available 
with or without insurance, are more affordable, while pro-
viders benefit from the savings associated with not main-
taining physical offices. Investments in telehealth have also 
expanded to specialty care, and the future of telemedicine 
could include extended reality (XR) technology offering more 
lifelike virtual interactions, especially for remote surgery. 
But access remains a big hurdle due to challenges related 
to digital technology access and connectivity. Zero-latency 
connectivity is essential for virtual visits, as it ensures re-
al-time guidance and critical decision-making without de-
lay. Starlink provides almost global satellite coverage, and 
Amazon launched Project Kuiper, a satellite system aimed 
at providing high-speed internet access globally. With the 
promise of reliable access to broadband, the system’s suc-
cess will be a game changer for achieving interoperability. 
The attainment of global connectivity is poised to reduce 
the prevalence of medical tourism, by making telemedicine 
a more reliable and accessible alternative.  SCALING OF 
TELEMEDICINE4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 642INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
As the population ages, remote 
patient monitoring (RPM) 
is increasingly relevant for 
achieving a higher quality of 
life. RPM ensures continuous 
communication between 
patients and their health care 
provider team by utilizing digital 
technologies and devices to 
collect and transmit patient 
health data outside of traditional 
health care settings. Increasingly, health data can be transmitted to providers from 
anywhere, and companies are offering new services to take ad-
vantage of the trend. A new hospital-at-home program from Best 
Buy collaborating with Atrium Health sends members of the retail 
giant’s Geek Squad to patients’ homes; they set up technology 
that remotely monitors heart rate, blood oxygen level, or other vi-
tals, and train patients and caretakers to use the devices. The tech 
then securely shares the data with doctors and nurses through the 
telemedicine hub from Current Health, a UK-based tech company. 
There’s also Cardinal Health’s Velocare, a supply chain network 
for the fulfillment of care devices and products. In coordination 
with care teams, Cardinal Health facilitates seamless delivery of 
medical essentials to home care patients, eliminating challenges 
in transitioning hospital care to a patient’s home. 
On the equipment side, Noccarc’s smart ventilator enables re-
al-time remote monitoring of patient conditions. Physicians can 
seamlessly access vital patient information through a propri-
etary app-based platform, even when patients are not physically 
present in the ICU. BioPix-T launched Pebble, a portable diagnostic 
device to facilitate connections between health care providers 
and patients: It enhances access to the tools needed to detect and 
monitor infectious diseases and health issues despite geographic 
location. Sleepiz, a Zurich-based medtech company, received FDA 
clearance for its Sleepiz One+, a contactless bedside device that 
measures respiratory and heart rates. 
Researchers at NYU Langone Hospital have also launched the 
Diabetes in Pregnancy Remote Patient Monitoring Program. The 
pilot program has supported 1,000 patients at risk for gestational 
diabetes with digital glucose monitors that automatically trans-
mit daily glucose levels to EHRs for review by the maternal-fetal 
medicine team.RPM harnesses digital technologies in the continuous collection 
and transmission of patient health data, allowing patients to 
receive necessary care anywhere. The ability to facilitate prompt 
interventions makes it particularly valuable for managing chron-
ic conditions, monitoring postoperative recovery, and delivering 
ongoing home-based care. Particularly pertinent as the population 
ages, RPM ensures a higher quality of life for geriatric adults by 
enabling hospital-level care in the comfort of their homes, with 
medical-grade equipment and remote monitoring tools. Hospi-
tal-at-home services offer significant cost savings for health care 
systems by curbing hospital admissions and emergency room vis-
its through early intervention and improved disease management. 
Patients also benefit from increased engagement in their health 
monitoring through  better outcomes. As such there has been a 
growing adoption of hospital-at-home devices and telemedicine 
technology in senior care and assisted living facilities, where the 
integration of these innovations enhances on-site care for resi-
dents. Though broader adoption in patients’ homes has been slow, 
this hesitance is likely due to space constraints or limited support 
(i.e., family members, nurse aides) preventing consumers from 
feeling comfortable or safe receiving care outside clinical facilities.  REMOTE PATIENT 
MONITORING4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 643INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINESCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
The Optimization Score    
The health care industry’s lethargy in responding to change led the Big Tech companies to fill the void with cheaper, higher quality, and more price-transparent 
products and services. Already trusted partners in a personal and professional context through their hardware and software products, integrating health care of-
ferings was actually welcomed as it facilitated a holistic and seamless approach to optimizing quality of life.
The digital ecosystems continually capture and synthesize health data from a myriad of sources: wearable devices, smart home systems, and even public infra-
structure. AI health platforms meticulously analyze this data, and synthetic “health coaches” offer tailored suggestions to optimize physical and mental well-be-
ing. This constant monitoring and guidance ensure that individuals are not just living but thriving, under the vigilant eye of technology.
To incentivize healthier living and alleviate the strain on health systems, a health scoring system was introduced, reminiscent of the credit scores of the early 21st 
century. The Health Score, a dynamic and comprehensive metric, reflects an individual’s health habits, lifestyle choices, and overall well-being. Initially devised 
as a tool for personal motivation and friendly competition, it quickly evolved into a societal benchmark, a digital ledger of one’s health consciousness. The Health 
Score is not just a number; it’s a reflection of one’s commitment to a healthy lifestyle, tracked and fostered by ever-present AI.
This scoring system has profound implications on everyday life. High scorers enjoy perks ranging from priority in job applications and access to exclusive ameni-
ties, to favorable terms on loans and insurance policies. Displayed on digital profiles and wearable device screens, the score has become a status symbol, a digital 
badge of honor showcasing a person’s dedication to health. In contrast, those with average or low scores, or those who opt out of this system, find themselves at a 
significant disadvantage. They face hurdles in securing employment, higher premiums, and restricted access to certain societal privileges. The Health Score, while 
not mandatory, has become a de facto requirement for a comfortable and prosperous life.
644© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE645© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EMERGING 
DIAGNOSTICSINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Incorporating sensors into 
textiles offers noninvasive 
data collection for advanced 
health monitoring and analysis. 
The smart textiles market 
is expected to grow to $6.6 
billion by 2026. But scalability 
presents formidable challenges, 
as these textiles must be able 
to endure prolonged use while 
continuing to deliver accurate 
measurements. Right now, the field is focused on overcoming manufactur-
ing challenges that hinder scaling of smart textiles. In col-
laboration with researchers at the University of Cambridge, 
scientists from Aalto University have incorporated liquid 
crystalline elastomer yarns into woven textiles to create 
a reactive fabric that responds to heat. At Purdue Univer-
sity, researchers are looking at smart fabric breathabili-
ty, as it is associated with comfort: They’ve developed a 
patent-pending method of coating everyday fabrics with 
polymer electronic sensors, PEDOT, using a technique called 
oxidative chemical vapor deposition. MIT researchers have 
used a unique plastic yarn to create a knit textile, 3DKnITs, 
that when interspersed with sensors using a novel digital 
knitting technique, can continuously detect multipoint 
pressure across its surface in real-time. A new cotton-based 
conductive thread, PECOTEX, developed by scientists at the 
Imperial College of London, embeds a low-cost sensor (just 
15 cents per meter of thread) to monitor breathing, heart ac-
tivity, and even gases like ammonia. Israel-based company 
HealthWatch has emerged as a pioneer in the development 
of smart-digital garments, particularly with its develop-
ment of the Master Caution. The only 12-lead ECG smart 
clothing that has been cleared by the FDA, Master Caution 
is a sensor-rich textile garment that provides continuous 
cardiac monitoring.Embedding sensors into textiles is a minimally invasive av-
enue to collect data about daily activity and environmental 
exposure. Compared to wearables, smart materials are more 
versatile, adaptable, and less disruptive to consumers’ lives. 
Their integration lets consumers receive real-time feedback, 
promoting healthier habits. And their ability to generate 
substantial data offers valuable insights for continuous 
health monitoring, early detection of medical conditions, 
and remote patient care. Scientists are considering ways to 
monitor and respond to biological hazards and environmen-
tal conditions, including air quality, pollution levels, and 
radiation exposure. Advancements in materials and pro-
duction methods suggest that smart textiles could greatly 
reshape the industry. 
Researchers are exploring innovative materials, such as 
spider silk and elastomers, and cost-effective production 
methods, including traditional industrial knitting ma-
chines. But challenges with scaling production have pre-
vented smart textiles from flooding the market just yet. 
Concerns have also arisen regarding the potential effects of 
increased electromagnetic field exposure. At this juncture, 
the military is expected to account for a sizable amount of 
the market for smart textiles, as applications include en-
hanced insulation, motion tracking and GPS, and advanced 
health monitoring. For the broader population, smart tex-
tiles hold immense promise in the shift toward personal-
ized care and holistic health.SMART MATERIALS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 646INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Biosensors recognize biological 
material as it binds to a 
specified target and convert 
the biological response into a 
detectable signal. Advanced 
data analysis and machine 
learning techniques are being 
integrated with biosensors 
to enhance diagnostics by 
recognizing patterns and trends 
in large data sets.Researchers are developing new tools using biosensors to 
uncover new biological insights. Wireless earbuds, devel-
oped by MindMics and Scripps Research Institute, use 
embedded sensors to record heartbeat vibrations once 
a second to indicate heart disorder and abnormalities. 
Researchers at Ohio State University designed a wearable 
sensor, resembling a blood pressure cuff, to detect mus-
cular atrophy. The device embeds transmitting and receiv-
ing coils in a flexible fabric to measure deterioration as it 
stretches to a person’s movement. 
An international team led by the Gwangju Institute of Sci-
ence and Technology has proposed a synergistic biosensing 
tool called DeepGT. It leverages AI in Gires-Tournois biosens-
ing platforms to quantify nanoscale bioparticles, includ-
ing viruses, without needing complex sample preparation 
methods. The system can also indicate the severity of the 
infection including if it’s asymptomatic. 
A Malmö University researcher developed a wireless bat-
tery-free biosensor powered by induction from a cellphone. 
A nanoscale sensor system, put together by a team at the 
University of Toronto and Northwestern University, iden-
tifies biomarkers by exploiting DNA aptamers to detect 
clinical levels of a marker protein for cardiovascular disease 
without using external reagents. And Hememics Biotechnol-
ogies and General Graphene have partnered to produce 32-
plex graphene biosensor chips, tested to be 100 times more 
sensitive than lateral flow devices; the chips can detect 
pathogens from one sample of blood or saliva. Biosensors offer a paradigm shift in patient diagnosis 
through the early detection of medical conditions. Recent 
advancements are focused on highly sensitive and versatile 
sensors capable of performing multiple tests simultane-
ously despite the presence of different biological particles 
at varying concentrations. Biosensors have application in 
industries where precise and rapid detection of harmful 
substances is crucial. Beyond a clinical setting, biosensors 
can be used to detect contaminants and pathogens—for 
example, spoilage indicators in food products, or pollutants 
and toxins that affect air and water quality. 
With the acceleration of point-of-care diagnostics, re-
searchers are working on the development of microfluidic 
chips with embedded biosensors for greater precision. The 
integration of these concepts in a highly sensitive portable 
device paves the way for remote diagnostics. As biosensors 
are increasingly incorporated into wearable and in-home 
devices for continuous monitoring, the need for frequent 
in-office or hospital visits decreases. BIOSENSOR AND 
CHIP-BASED 
DIAGNOSTICS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 647INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Molecular diagnostics leverage 
the sensitivity and accuracy 
of CRISPR technology to 
analyze genetic material for 
early detection of disease, 
aiding timely intervention. 
The application of CRISPR in 
developing advanced molecular 
diagnostic tools enables 
interventions based on individual 
genetic profiles and opens up 
more effective and precise health 
care strategies. At the University of Oxford, researchers have innovated a 
method for protein analysis  to efficiently build protein 
inventories of single cells and tissues. This new categori-
zation method makes it easier for doctors to identify the 
protein variants associated with disease on an individual 
basis. Genomic sequencing company Illuma developed 
PrimateAI-3D, which is trained to make predictions based 
on genome analysis and scans 70 million genetic variants 
in a person’s genome to detect harmful variants. Illumina 
plans to release the tool broadly, after completing testing 
on the UK BioBank. While identification and analysis are key 
to preventative diagnostics, just as important is recogniz-
ing abnormal activity. Researchers at Weill Cornell Medicine 
have developed a novel method for organ mapping that 
could inform the design of future treatment and interven-
tions. Spatial PrOtein and Transcriptome Sequencing can 
record gene activity patterns, identify key proteins, and map 
precise locations of cells in tissue samples. 
An increasing number of health care institutions, like 
UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital, are implementing in-
house rapid whole genome testing to assess and diag-
nose risk for infants with suspected genetic diseases. 
Ultra-high-throughput gene sequencers aim to make whole 
genome sequencing more affordable, as two companies, 
Ultima and Complete Genomics, introduce platforms that 
lower costs to less than $100 per genome.In infectious disease control, molecular diagnostics are piv-
otal for rapidly and accurately detecting viruses and bacte-
ria. This capability is critical for implementing timely public 
health measures, and techniques like polymerase chain 
reaction, DNA sequencing, and microarrays enable the early 
detection often before symptoms manifest. This allows for a 
shift in focus toward developing informed treatment plans 
rather than simply identifying the problem. Harnessing 
CRISPR, researchers have developed highly specific tests for 
detecting genetic mutations, pathogens, and various mo-
lecular markers. The integration of CRISPR into biosensors 
has further advanced on-site testing capabilities, fostering 
the creation of rapid and accurate point-of-care diagnostic 
tools. Notably, scientists used CRISPR in the development of 
rapid tests for detecting Covid.
Anticipating a fundamental shift in health care practices, 
molecular diagnostics, augmented by AI and nanotech-
nology, is set to become routine in patient care. Efforts are 
underway to enhance user-friendliness and cost-effective-
ness for accessibility across different health care settings, 
and even at-home use. Integration with wearables and 
telemedicine platforms is on the horizon. The prospect of 
full-genome screening tests for newborns and infants is 
gaining momentum, with studies showing whole-genome 
sequencing to be much more effective than targeted gene 
sequencing in identifying abnormalities responsible for 
genetic disorders.MOLECULAR 
DIAGNOSTICS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 648INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Conveniently performed 
near a patient, point-of-care 
(POC) diagnostics offer speed, 
convenience, and accessibility. 
Now, smartphone-enabled POC 
devices enable real-time data 
transmission and expand the 
reach of telemedicine. Modern 
POC devices can perform 
multiple tests simultaneously, 
allowing for the detection of 
various diseases or conditions 
from a single sample.Polish telemedicine startup Healthnomic offers an at-home 
polygraph examination to remotely diagnose and treat 
obstructive sleep apnea, by gathering data in a patient’s 
natural sleeping environment. GrapheneDx is harness-
ing graphene in developing urine-sample tests to detect 
sexually transmitted diseases within minutes. A new facial 
recognition software for germs, developed by Oxford scien-
tists and licensed by Pictura Bio, is a universal diagnostic 
imaging platform that identifies the presence of pathogens 
in a nasal or throat swab sample in seconds. Quest Diag-
nostics has introduced the AD-Detect test for Alzheimer’s 
disease, a blood-based biomarker test available for pur-
chase by consumers. AD-Detect overcomes current diagnos-
tic methods—limited by the need for specialized clinics and 
trained staff—through an in-home blood test that deter-
mines risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease by measuring 
abnormalities of beta-amyloid protein. At-home diagnos-
tics startup Viome Life Sciences has launched Oral Health 
Pro with CancerDetect, to detect biomarkers associated 
with oral and throat cancers. With a specificity of 95% and 
sensitivity of 90%, the test uses RNA sequencing technology 
and AI to measure gene expression of the oral microbiome 
and cells of each patient’s saliva. Though these and similar 
tests are still ordered and evaluated by physicians, they’re a 
first step—albeit an imperfect one—in equipping consumers 
with convenient methods of early detection. POC diagnostics offer immediate on-site medical testing 
with results made available in real time. Common exam-
ples are rapid tests to identify infectious diseases (used 
to combat the Covid pandemic), pregnancy tests, and 
glucose monitoring. Unlike traditional laboratory testing 
that involves sending samples to centralized facilities, POC 
diagnostics bring testing to the patient, minimizing de-
lays in triage and treatment. They reduce the workload on 
central laboratories, by addressing backlogs and delays in 
test results. In resource-limited settings, where access to 
sophisticated laboratory infrastructures is limited, POC di-
agnostics present a new level of care. In developing worlds, 
POC diagnostics could make a difference in the rapid spread 
of disease. 
Integral to telemedicine and remote monitoring, POC allows 
health care providers to assess patients’ conditions and 
make decisions without the need for in-person visits. Re-
cent developments in POC testing include: wireless integra-
tion for real-time results and insights to be delivered via an 
app, portable diagnostic devices that can perform multiple 
tests simultaneously from a single sample, and customi-
zation of biomarker panels for testing of specific diseases 
or conditions. In addition, POC devices for gene sequencing 
and molecular diagnostics are on the horizon. For the adop-
tion of a patient-centric model, POC diagnostics ensures 
that medical decisions are as timely as they are accurate.INCREASED 
CAPABILITIES OF POINT-
OF-CARE DIAGNOSTICS4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 649INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
XR is transforming medical 
diagnostics by introducing ways to 
interact with medical data, patient 
information, and anatomical 
structures. The technology 
enables the visualization of 
disease progression, immersive 
training simulations, and remote 
collaboration. While XR holds 
great promise, issues of data 
privacy, accuracy, and regulatory 
compliance should be considered. AI and machine learning algorithms are automating the 
analysis of medical images and aiding in the early detec-
tion and diagnosis of disease. Imidex received FDA clear-
ance for VisiRad XR, a machine learning platform that 
detects subtle, often overlooked, lung nodules on chest 
X-rays. Nutex Health has integrated DRAid Chest XR into the 
radiology workflow of its hospitals. A research team led by 
Michigan Medicine developed DeepGlioma, a AI-based diag-
nostic system that uses rapid imaging to screen for genetic 
mutations in brain tumors in under 90 seconds during sur-
gery. Stable Diffusion is an AI-algorithm able to read fMRI 
brain scans to re-create realistic images based on what a 
person has seen. The algorithm was recently retrained, en-
hancing its accuracy. The technology, currently tested on a 
limited data set, holds promise for further cognitive neuro-
science research.
Avatar Medical’s VR surgical planning solution, which gen-
erates patient avatars from CT scan and MRI images, has 
received FDA clearance. GigXR released Dicom XR Library, a 
platform that generates realistic 3D medical imagery from 
MRI and CT scans for training and learning purposes. Med-
View XR received FDA clearance for its XR90 AR platform, 
which renders 3D images with the use of CT scans during 
minimally invasive procedures. MedView aims to improve 
surgical visualization and promote collaboration; it’s se-
cured $15 million in funding from notable industry players, 
including the Mayo Clinic and GE Healthcare. XR technologies offer new ways for health care professionals to 
visualize and interact with medical data, patient information, 
and anatomical structures. Using head-mounted wearable tech-
nology, XR technologies can integrate real-time patient data 
and diagnostic history into a clinician’s field of view during 
medical examinations for more accurate diagnostics. Beyond 
the exam room, XR facilitates remote collaboration and fosters 
communication between patients and medical professionals. 
Experts from different locations can virtually collaborate on 
diagnosing complex cases, share insights, and arrive at accu-
rate diagnoses more quickly. Through immersive explanations 
and visualizations of medical conditions, XR enhances patients’ 
understanding of symptoms and overcomes language barriers. 
Interactive 3D models can potentially support medical profes-
sionals in explaining their diagnosis and treatment plans to pa-
tients. Overall, patients will better understand their conditions 
and treatment options and make more informed decisions. 
In imaging interpretation, virtual reality and augmented reality 
enhancements enable radiologists and imaging specialists to 
immerse themselves in detailed 3D reconstructions of patient 
scans. Medical students and practitioners can also train on XR 
platforms to refine their diagnostic skills in a risk-free envi-
ronment and practice patient interactions through simulated 
office visits. Medical students can also study disease patholo-
gy through the visualization of disease progression. While the 
promise of XR in medical diagnostics is evident, it’s imperative 
to address concerns of data privacy, accuracy, and regulatory 
compliance. As XR technologies advance, they will likely play an 
increasingly prominent role in the medical diagnostics process. XR IN  
DIAGNOSTICS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 650INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Medical deepfakes involve the 
use of AI to manipulate medical 
data or images and present a 
double-edged sword: They’re 
promising for the advancement 
of medical education and 
research, but involve substantial 
risk when used maliciously. Amid 
AI’s rapid sophistication, health 
care organizations have been 
slow to regulate. Given the difficulty in deciphering real and synthetic data, 
deepfakes compromise data integrity. A study in Finland 
demonstrated that on average, more deepfakes were mis-
taken for real X-ray images than the opposite. A surge in 
deepfakes has prompted insurance companies, including 
Aetna and Cigna, to deploy machine learning algorithms to 
evaluate insurance claims, and nearly 60% of insurers are 
using this fraud detection strategy to ensure fair and accu-
rate coverage. Though the action is justifiable, it has led to 
unintended consequences, like the mislabeling and subse-
quent denial of legitimate claims. 
Clinical-stage drug discovery company Insilico Medicine is 
utilizing deepfakes to design molecules with disease-treat-
ing ability. Its AI platform, Pharma.AI, can discover novel ther-
apeutic targets, formulate new pharmaceutical drugs, and 
predict the results of clinical trials. Alongside researchers 
and Nobel laureates, the company applied AlphaFold, Google 
DeepMind’s protein structure database, to Pharma.AI, identi-
fying a novel treatment pathway for hepatocellular carcino-
ma in only 20 days. Korea University researchers proposed 
the use of StyleGAN2 to create synthetic mammographic 
images and an anomaly detection method to detect breast 
cancer on mammograms. Their generative AI model showed 
comparable fidelity to real images, while results indicated 
that the anomaly detection was highly sensitive. The study 
presents a promising approach for improved breast cancer 
detection.In a world where deepfakes proliferate, the very essence of 
the patient-doctor relationship is at risk. Their presence 
erodes the trust and reliability in the health care system. 
Researchers conducting studies or clinical trials may use 
deepfakes to manipulate research findings to skew results 
in support of a particular agenda or to secure funding. 
Fraudsters may use medical deepfakes to forge insurance 
claims or to exaggerate injuries and illness in a personal 
injury lawsuit. Cybercriminals may use medical deepfakes 
to gain unauthorized access to patient records and sensi-
tive medical information. Sinister groups may defraud the 
public during a health crisis or outbreak to generate fear 
and panic. 
While there is a dark side to medical deepfakes, their accu-
racy can also aid in the development of diagnostic tools and 
drug treatments, accelerating the pace of scientific dis-
coveries and innovations. When used to generate synthet-
ic data, they ensure patient privacy and compliance with 
regulations. In training and education, medical students 
and practitioners can interpret and diagnose a wide range 
of medical conditions via simulated cases. 
The health care industry has only begun to invest in tech-
nologies and protocols to detect and prevent deepfake ma-
nipulation. A watermark created by DeepMind in partnership 
with Google Cloud SynthID, the first of its kind, embeds an 
immutable mark directly into images created by Imagen.MEDICAL  
DEEPFAKES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 651INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE652© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.EMERGING 
TREATMENTSINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Nanobots offer precise, 
minimally invasive treatment for 
targeting disease and improving 
drug delivery. Concerns 
include material toxicity and 
genetic modification, and yet 
the technology could enable 
precise and efficient procedures 
with reduced side effects and 
adverse reactions. Researchers at the Indian Institute of Science and Ther-
anautilus have developed helical nanobots able to pene-
trate dentinal tubules where antibiotic-resistant bacteria 
accumulate. Controlled by a magnetic field, the nanobots’ 
heat generating capability was effective in killing bacteria. 
Similarly, researchers from the University of Pennsylvania 
have developed magnetically controlled nanorobots with 
catalytic properties to generate antimicrobial oxygen-con-
taining molecules that eliminate fungi within 10 minutes. 
At the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, self-pro-
pelling nanobots offer precise gastrointestinal inflamma-
tory therapy; these TBY-robots penetrate the mucus barrier 
and autonomously navigate to the inflamed site. MIT scien-
tists developed magnetically controlled soft-bodied poly-
mer robots measuring millimeters long that can navigate 
confined spaces like blood vessels, enabling the delivery 
of drugs. A dual-action approach involving the delivery of 
lactate oxidase enzymes via tiny nanocapsules to promote 
immune cell activity was developed by researchers at UCLA. 
Engineers at University of Colorado Boulder developed a 
self-propelled robot that measures only 20 micrometers 
wide and can travel at a speed of 3 millimeters per second, 
demonstrating potential for drug delivery. The researchers 
hope to make these robots fully biodegradable so that they 
would dissolve in the human body. The industry is witnessing an unprecedented surge in the 
integration of robots. At the forefront are nanobots, min-
iscule robots that operate at nanoscale to perform highly 
targeted activities in the body. They can deliver medication 
to a tumor without affecting healthy tissues or perform 
intricate surgeries in delicate, hard-to-reach areas. Nano-
bots minimize side effects, reduce immune response, and 
accelerate recovery time, thereby reducing risks. Extending 
beyond surgery, they are applicable in telerobotics given the 
ability to be remotely controlled across distances, enabling 
prolonged observation of chronic conditions and real-time 
delivery of drugs. 
Equipped with sensors and diagnostic tools, nanobots 
detect biomarkers and abnormalities. Molecular nanobots 
can be designed to respond to biological signals, adapt-
ing shape and function to conditions within the body. And 
researchers are exploring self-propelling features for auton-
omous operation. This would increase the efficacy of cancer 
treatment through drug delivery and targeted tumor ther-
apy, while the nanobots’ ability to navigate the blood-brain 
barrier also opens avenues for treating neurological disor-
ders. But concerns exist around the possibility of unintend-
ed consequences resulting from genetic modification. While 
synthetic nanobots offer precise engineering, they could be 
toxic with long-term exposure. Ultimately, the choice wheth-
er to use the technology hinges on the medical task, safety 
considerations, and personalization. NANOBOTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 653INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
A versatile technology, extended 
reality is being increasingly used 
in therapeutics for a wide range 
of physical and mental health 
issues including rehabilitation, 
pain management, exposure 
therapy, and reducing stress 
and anxiety. Augmented 
reality/virtual reality introduces 
gamification to therapeutic 
techniques, increasing patient 
engagement and motivation 
through immersive experiences. A pilot study by Stanford Medicine researchers suggests 
that VR therapy could help people with a hoarding disorder 
declutter in real life. The therapy allows patients to rehearse 
relinquishing possessions in a simulation of their own 
home, helping them practice skills learned in cognitive 
behavioral therapy.   Immersive VR appears to alleviate pain 
and distress in cancer patients, according to a pooled data 
analysis published in BMJ Supportive & Palliative Care. The 
study suggests that VR may help patients better cope with 
required medical treatments and the emotional impact 
of their conditions. Samsung’s advanced AI app operating 
within diminished reality, Unfear, is interoperable with 
Samsung Galaxy earbuds to filter known trigger sounds to 
calm and assist patients with autism spectrum disorder, 
auditory PTSD, and hearing disorders. An Australian startup, 
RecoveryVR, gamifies VR technology for neuro-rehabilita-
tion. AI Rehab is a UK-based startup that designs telehealth 
solutions for patients recovering from hip and knee surger-
ies. Its products combine AR and wearable remote sensors 
to make it easier for patients to perform pre- and post-op-
erative exercises. Built-in alerts for remote notification and 
patient-reported outcome measures ensures standardized 
feedback and measurable data. Governments and industry professionals are under increas-
ing pressure to explore innovative and accessible solutions 
to address the growing mental health crisis, and XR tech-
nology is an incredibly viable way to do this. Through the 
use of virtual rooms for therapeutic care, XRHealth revealed 
that VR therapy reduces stress and anxiety in patients by 
34%. The study underscores the efficacy and accessibility of 
VR therapy to provide engaging and effective mental health 
treatment options. XR technology also allows for remote 
treatment and monitoring, mitigating risks of unwanted 
side effects common to pharmaceuticals. 
With AR, rehabilitation techniques can be gamified, result-
ing in increased patient engagement and greater adherence 
to treatment plans. The technology is utilized in exposure 
therapy for the treatment of anxiety disorders and phobias, 
by creating controlled immersive environments for gradual 
confrontation of fears and anxieties. AR and VR are particu-
larly useful in preparation for medical procedures, distract-
ing patients exhibiting signs of distress before or during. 
But widespread adoption still faces challenges, including 
high hardware costs, limited bandwidth in remote areas, 
and regulatory complexities. XR therapy solutions must 
meet rigorous regulatory standards to ensure patient safety 
and data privacy, and navigating these regulations can be 
complex and time-consuming. Also, XR therapy’s coverage 
by insurance is not guaranteed, making it just as inaccessi-
ble as current mental health treatments. AR/VR  
THERAPEUTICS4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 654INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
In-womb treatments address 
fetal conditions pre-birth 
through surgery or medication. 
Early intervention, like repairing 
defects and treating anomalies, 
aim to improve outcomes for 
the deliverance of a healthy 
baby. Ongoing research and 
clinical trials seek to expand the 
scope of conditions that can be 
treated in utero. Technology is making it increasingly feasible to treat fetuses while 
they’re still in the womb, improving future health outcomes. In 
Boston, a team of doctors successfully performed a novel fetal 
surgery to treat a rare prenatal brain condition known as vein of 
Galen malformation, where blood vessels in the fetus’ brain are 
improperly connected. A groundbreaking clinical trial at UC Davis 
Health delivered the world’s first stem cell treatment for spina bifi-
da in-utero. Scientists at UC San Francisco are pioneering in-utero 
stem cell transplants for the treatment of genetic disorders. A $2 
million University of California, Davis project aims to cure Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy by editing genes using lipid nanoparticle injec-
tions in utero. The use of a fetoscopic approach for in-utero repair 
of gastroschisis is being tested in clinical trials at Texas Children’s 
Hospital. And a student-led team at Johns Hopkins created a novel 
port system able to pierce through tissue, aiming to reduce the risk 
of membrane rupture during in utero surgery. 
Advanced pharmaceutical and diagnostic technology is progressing 
toward use on pregnant patients and their fetuses. Trikafta, a drug 
treatment for cystic fibrosis administered to a pregnant mother, 
showed promise in reducing symptoms at birth. Treatments for the 
mother began at 24 weeks pregnant, and the baby was born without 
the bowel complications that had previously affected her two sons. 
The FDA has approved a blood test by Thermo Fisher Scientific that 
can identify pregnant women at imminent risk of severe preeclamp-
sia, a leading cause of maternal mortality. The test measures the 
ratio of two proteins produced by the placenta, with up to 96% 
accuracy in predicting whether a woman will develop preeclampsia 
in the next two weeks. However the impact on outcomes remains 
uncertain as an effective treatment for this condition has yet to be 
developed. In-womb treatments are designed to address specific med -
ical conditions or abnormalities in an unborn child. Fetal 
surgery may be performed to correct congenital anomalies, 
including procedures to repair neural tube defects, con-
genital diaphragmatic hernias, or twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome in identical twins, among others. Beyond surgery, 
in-womb treatments can involve the administration of 
medications directly into the amniotic fluid or through the 
umbilical cord to address certain fetal conditions, such as 
heart arrhythmias or anemia. But these treatments can be 
costly, raising questions about accessibility, health insur-
ance coverage, and the financial burden on families. It also 
requires that expectant parents have access to compre-
hensive, unbiased information about the potential risks, 
benefits, and alternatives to in-womb treatments.
At the same time, advances in genetic testing promise 
earlier and more accurate prenatal diagnosis. Gene therapy 
research is exploring the possibility of in utero gene therapy 
to correct genetic disorders and inherited conditions before 
birth, while noninvasive prenatal testing based on cell-free 
fetal DNA is increasingly used to screen for chromosomal 
abnormalities. Future advancements include developing 
treatments for conditions like congenital heart defects, 
neurological disorders, and genetic diseases. This ongoing 
research into less invasive and safer procedures aims to 
reduce risks for both fetus and mother.IN-WOMB 
TREATMENTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 655INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
There is a growing focus on 
optimizing brain performance 
by enhancing cognitive 
function and mental well-being. 
Nootropic foods and extended 
reality–based training exercises 
aim to stimulate brain function 
to boost neuroplasticity. While 
available research supporting 
proof of concept is limited, 
increasing demand has fueled 
scientific interest. Researchers are beginning to report success in using XR 
technology to improve brain function and well-being. A 
study investigating virtual cognitive behavioral therapy 
for depression indicated that, on average, this approach 
through absorption training reduces stress in adults. The 
NeuroGrow Brain Fitness Program, a 12-week brain training 
program, has shown statistically significant improvements 
in cognitive tests and notable decreases in sleep decline 
and emotional symptoms in patients with ADHD and mem-
ory loss. A study published in Scientific Reports identified a 
positive correlation between a stronger sense of presence in 
VR environments and enhanced cognitive abilities, demon-
strating the application of VR technology in brain training. 
Virtuleap, a VR brain training platform, entered clinical 
trials for its immersive experience featuring a telehealth 
tool for continuous patient monitoring. And the University 
of Texas at Austin has modified a Meta VR headset, by in-
stalling a noninvasive EEG device to measure brain activity 
during VR simulations.
There’s also an increased interest in the growing nootropics 
market, valued at $2.5 billion in 2022. Nootropics are cog-
nitive enhancers that aim to improve memory, focus, and 
creativity. According to a survey conducted by Mintel, 42% of 
US consumers have expressed interest in food and drinks 
to improve their focus and 72% of respondents showed 
interest in nootropics, by stating they either currently drink, 
have tried, or are willing to try beverages with cognitive-en-
hancing benefits.Brain health goes beyond a balanced diet, regular exercise, 
and adequate sleep: Cognitive functions such as memory, 
attention, problem-solving, and creativity require training 
and intervention for increased neuroplasticity. Psycholog-
ical well-being, stress reduction, and emotional resilience 
play integral roles in overall cognitive health as well. Recent 
advancements have prioritized neurofeedback, empha-
sizing the practice of self-regulation. Some AR apps offer 
mindfulness and relaxation exercises that guide users 
through breathing exercises, meditation, and stress-reduc-
tion techniques, while others facilitate cognitive learning 
and skills-based training. Alternatively, nootropics have 
expanded beyond supplements and “smart drugs” as they 
are adapted into consumable food and beverages. While 
this market is expected to grow at a compound annual 
growth rate of 15.47% over the next 10 years, it is important 
to note there is limited scientific evidence to support their 
cognitive-enhancing properties. Though the science has not 
narrowed down a best approach, there is growing demand 
for treatment that optimizes brain performance, or at least 
extends the longevity of it. COGNITIVE 
AND NEURAL 
OPTIMIZATION4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 656INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Our bodies are hosts to trillions 
of microbiota—communities 
of microorganisms that inhabit 
specific parts of our bodies, and 
as a whole, a microbiome. The 
holobiont concept defines the 
interconnectedness of a host 
organism and its associated 
microbiota, highlighting that as 
one ecological unit they function 
together so changes to one 
affect the other. MIT engineers have developed a technology to probe the 
connections between the brain and the gut using fibers em-
bedded with sensors and light sources. It allows for precise 
measurement of neuronal signals within milliseconds, pro-
viding insight into the gut-brain communication network. 
A group of researchers also successfully tested a smart pill, 
the size of a blueberry, in pigs for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of bowel disease. The pill detects and reports key bio-
logical molecules associated with inflammation, converting 
the data to a wireless signal transmitted in real time to a 
user’s smartphone. Developed by Seres Therapeutics, SER-
109, the first oral drug designed to treat the microbiome 
has received FDA approval. Clinical trials showed promising 
results, with 88% of participants avoiding another C. diffi-
cile infection eight weeks after a single dosage. And Ayble 
Health launched an app that harnesses behavioral therapy 
techniques to treat chronic gastrointestinal conditions. 
The 15-week program retrains the connections between the 
mind and gut to ease GI symptoms. The human body is not just an individual organism but a 
complex ecosystem, where trillions of microorganisms co-
exist and interact with the host’s cells. The composition of 
the microbiome is unique to each individual and influenced 
by factors like diet, exercise, mental health, antibiotics, and 
environmental conditions. These concepts have stimulated 
research into how our environment, as it is related to these 
microorganisms, affects our bodies. As we gain a deeper 
understanding of the intricate connections of the holobiont, 
microbiome data will become a vital component of holistic 
wellness and medical assessments, enabling the develop-
ment of personalized health care plans tailored to individu-
al microbial compositions.
Recently research has focused on exploring the impact of 
gut microbiota on the interactions of gut-brain axis, as it is 
directly involved in the body’s stress response. The aim is to 
develop treatments that target gut microbiota to influence 
brain function. Ideally the outcome will yield targeted inter-
ventions for metabolic disorders, autoimmune disease, and 
chronic stress and anxiety disorder, by harnessing synthetic 
biology to engineer microbes as “living drugs.” Several start-
ups have leveraged AI to analyze and translate microbiome 
data for personalized health recommendations and in-
sights; others are developing microbiome-based therapies 
targeting immuno-oncology, gastrointestinal diseases, and 
neurological conditions. MICROBIOMES AND 
HOLOBIONTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 657INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Brain computer interfaces (BCIs) 
establish a direct communication 
pathway between the human 
brain and computers, enabling 
body control without the use of 
the peripheral nervous system 
or muscles. For example, 
neuroprosthetics restore motor 
function by simply harnessing 
one’s thoughts. Future advances 
seek to nurture human-machine 
symbiosis and redefine cognitive 
boundaries.Varying in function and ability, BCIs are being used to 
restore speech and mobility. Electrodes implanted in the 
brain or worn outside the body can translate neural signals 
into commands for the prosthesis, allowing for natural and 
intuitive limb movement. One example is the groundbreak-
ing bionic arm controlled by thought given to an amputee 
who lost both arms. Doctors at the Rehabilitation Institute 
of Chicago connected existing nerve endings from the 
shoulder to chest muscles via a nerve-muscle graft, en-
abling electrodes to receive through generated impulses. At 
UCSF, a neurosurgeon used a brain implant to capture the 
neural signals controlling facial expressions and speech. 
When combined with AI, this created a digital avatar that 
mimicked facial expression, allowing a participant who suf-
fered from a stroke 18 years ago to communicate in almost 
real time.
Future advancements, like the BCI implant developed by 
Neuralink, aim to enhance cognitive ability by creating a 
direct connection with AI to reshape the human experience. 
Founded by Elon Musk, Neuralink is seeking volunteers 
for a six-year clinical trial. Its N1 chip is able to interfere 
with more than 1,000 brain cells and communicate via an 
end-user app that translates these brain signals into com-
puter actions. In the meantime, noninvasive BCIs are being 
adopted into consumer technology. NextMind’s EEG elec-
trode, acquired by Snap for its AR glasses, was designed to 
decode neural activity to control smart devices. The once speculative domain of science fiction writers 
is now a tangible reality as computers increasingly con-
tribute to the enhancement of both mental and physical 
capabilities. The emergence of BCI technology is actively 
shaping the potential of the human race. By redefining 
human computer interaction, BCIs open up new avenues 
for restoring sensory function and mobility to the physical-
ly impaired. Recent advancements have concentrated on 
neuroprosthetics; BCIs allow patients with damaged neural 
pathways to control prosthetics or assistive devices using 
their thoughts, restoring independence. However, sustained 
effectiveness and safety of implanted devices will require 
addressing the long-term impact, including tissue damage 
and sign degradation, on the nervous system. Many such 
devices are still in their trial phases, which has led to com-
plex questions about long-term maintenance, upkeep, and 
support. 
Increased investment and research highlights the applica-
bility of BCIs beyond the physically and cognitively impaired. 
BCIs could amplify human capabilities and redefine the 
boundaries of human potential. Think Iron Man’s ability to 
seamlessly interact with his environment and enhance his 
ability by manipulating AI and XR technologies. Advance-
ments are seeking to improve the human experience by 
redefining mind control. However, the thought of achieving 
human-machine symbiosis is triggering fundamental fear 
about what is human and our ability to maintain privacy.BRAIN-COMPUTER 
INTERFACES AND 
NEUROPROSTHETICS7TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 658INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Precision medicine replaces 
the traditional one-size-fits-all 
approach by tailoring treatment 
and prevention to an individual’s 
environment, lifestyle, and 
genetic makeup. Through 
precise and targeted genome 
editing, doctors can develop 
treatments that are either highly 
specific to each patient or to a 
disease, increasing efficacy and 
minimizing side effects. The first CRISPR-based treatment for sickle cell disease 
and beta-thalassemia has received approval in the UK, and 
the US FDA may approve it soon. The Casgevy therapy, also 
known as “exa-cel,” was developed by Vertex Pharmaceuti-
cals and Crispr Therapeutics. For patients with sickle cell 
disease and beta thalassemia, both inherited blood disor-
ders, the therapy prevents pain episodes and eliminates the 
need for regular blood transfusions respectively. The treat-
ment involves editing a gene using CRISPR and infusing the 
modified cells back into patients. However, the cost, likely 
to be $2 million per patient, and the treatment’s complexity 
pose challenges for accessibility. A task force led by Nobel 
Prize winner Jennifer Doudna proposes a mixed organiza-
tional model to lower the cost of innovative cell and gene 
therapies, with a goal of making them more accessible.
Researchers have shared preliminary results from a study 
that used CRISPR base editing on the PCSK9 gene in liver 
cells necessary for the production of low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol. This study is evidence that editing a single DNA 
letter in the liver can have a clinical effect. Given these and 
similar advancements, scientists are also exploring CRIS-
PR-based therapeutic approaches for complex diseases, 
like Alzheimer’s, that are not considered genetic. Scientists 
at Duke University are testing an approach that aims to 
reduce the activity of the APOE4 gene, which is associated 
with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s. The goal is more targeted health care by enabling doctors to 
predict how a patient will react to a drug and prescribe an 
individualized treatment. Precision medicine accounts for 
individual variations in a patient’s genes, while considering 
the person’s environment and lifestyle. It also lends to the 
exploration of disease biology, crucial for gaining insights 
into the causes of diseases and identifying potential targets 
for therapeutic interventions. In this context, precision med-
icine holds promise for expanding the scope of diagnostics 
and introducing innovative gene therapy treatments. 
Gene editing is part of a broader revolution targeting the 
root causes of diseases, enabled by advancements in AI 
for increased efficiency, specificity, and data analysis. 
Researchers can modify genes associated with diseases 
to better understand their function. They can then develop 
drugs that specifically target these genetic mutations, po-
tentially extending the lives of individuals affected by rare 
disease. But widespread adoption of precision medicine fac-
es challenges related to the accessibility and affordability of 
whole genome testing, despite growing support from public 
health care systems. Efforts are underway to reduce costs 
through collaborations, new manufacturing models, and the 
development of “over-the-counter” or “off-the-shelf” thera-
pies. However, the rapid progress and refinement of CRISPR 
gene-editing technology may expand its application to a 
wider variety of diseases and lower the associated costs.PRECISION  
MEDICINE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 659INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Breakthroughs in synthetic 
biology have ignited interest in 
designing and prolonging human 
life. Ethical considerations 
involving the altering of 
parenthood, mortality, and 
the intentional manipulation 
of human design are greatly 
influencing advancements. While the idea of genetically modified babies remains 
widely debated, scientists continue to explore revolutionary 
methods of reproduction. EctoLife, the first artificial womb 
facility, is seeking to optimize genetic material, while ad-
dressing infertility and population decline. Biotech startup 
Conception is introducing a different approach; it’s working 
to commercialize in vitro gametogenesis (IVG), the creation 
of human eggs from stem cells. The experimental technique 
could benefit women who have lost eggs due to cancer 
treatment, those unable to produce healthy eggs, and wom-
en with aging eggs.
Entrepreneurs, including Jeff Bezos (Altos Labs), Brian Arm-
strong (New Limit), Peter Thiel, Larry Page, and Sam Altman, 
have invested millions in the exploration of extending hu-
man lifespans, and possibly achieving immortality. One ap-
proach, “rejuvenate” blood, was inspired by studies at Duke 
University that extended the lives of old mice via blood 
transfusions from young mice. Though the study does not 
provide an antiaging treatment for humans, it hints that 
the blood of young mice contains compounds that promote 
longevity. Biotech company Rejuvenate Bio claims to have 
successfully used a reprogramming technique to extend 
the lifespan of mice. Adding three reprogramming genes to 
77-year-old equivalent mice increased their lifespan by 7%. 
The technique involves resetting cells to a younger state, 
which has been the focus of significant research and in-
vestment as a potential anti-aging intervention. A race to immortality? From genetic interventions to rejuve-
nation therapies, the wealthy elite is rewriting the narrative 
of aging, turning it into a conquest rather than an inevita -
bility. These tech moguls envision a future where age is just 
a number, and death becomes an obsolete concept. The 
convergence of Silicon Valley and life sciences has given 
rise to ambitious ventures seeking to unlock the secrets 
of longevity. As they pour resources into extending human 
lifespan, ethical concerns emerge, adding complexity to our 
understanding of death and the right to die, while intensi-
fying the demand for health care and exacerbating social 
inequalities.
By harnessing CRISPR technologies to selectively modify 
the DNA of embryos, babies can be customized for desir-
able traits. The practice has been particularly controversial, 
raising ethical concerns like the potential for unintended 
consequences, long-term health effects, the loss of cell 
identity, and the exasperation of genetic disparities. Ad-
vocates champion the opportunity to eradicate hereditary 
diseases and unlock unprecedented human potential, while 
critics emphasize the ethical complexities and potential 
societal consequences associated with manipulating the 
fundamental building blocks of life. In this ethically charged 
arena, scientists instead look to overcome infertility chal-
lenges by providing a source of gametes independent of 
natural reproductive processes, offering new possibilities 
for fertility treatments.DESIGNING AND 
EXTENDING LIFE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 660INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Natural predators of bacteria, 
phages regulate bacterial 
populations in the human body. 
With engineering, they also have 
enhanced ability to detect and 
attack bacteria. Though extensive 
research of phages is fairly recent, 
they show immense promise for 
addressing bacterial maturation 
and present a promising strategy 
to address antibiotic resistance, a 
significant global health concern.Phages are viruses that specifically target and infect bac-
teria, offering a highly -targeted and precise therapeutic 
approach. An MIT student discovered that a protein on the 
phage’s surface, capsid protein, sometimes activates a 
defense system known as CapRel during infection. This 
restricts the phage’s ability to bypass the bacteria’s defense 
mechanism, offering insights that further the understanding 
of how phages work. While they offer a highly personalized 
approach to combating drug-resistant bacteria, additional 
research is needed to understand how phages react to differ-
ent individuals and bacteria. The Geneva University Hospitals 
and the University of Geneva successfully treated a patient 
suffering from an antibiotic-resistant chronic bacterial lung 
infection with phage therapy. The treatment was a last resort 
when the patient was unresponsive to continuous intrave-
nous antibiotic therapy.
Researchers at ETH Zurich have developed a rapid test that 
detects a urinary tract infection using bacteriophages. The 
scientists identified the phages effective against the bacte-
ria most common to UTIs and modified them to emit a light 
signal when the bacteria is detected within the sample in 
less than four hours. This method holds promise for immedi-
ate antibiotic prescriptions tailored to a patient based on the 
strength of light signals. With $2.3 million in seed funding, 
Parallel Health has introduced a custom phage therapy skin 
solution. The serum features phages customized to users for 
treating chronic skin conditions—but requires facial swab 
every six months to account for changing skin microbiomes. Drug-resistant infections are one of the most serious 
threats to global health, but bacteriophages offer a prom-
ising avenue in combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria. 
Researchers and health care professionals are exploring 
phage therapy as an alternative or complementary treat-
ment. Phage therapy allows providers to practice precision 
medicine through customized treatments based on a pa-
tient’s specific bacterial infection. Unlike broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, phages can be tailored to target specific strains 
of bacteria while minimizing impact to the body’s beneficial 
microbiota. Though phage therapy is not a new concept, its 
resurgence in mainstream health care reflects the urgent 
need for innovative solutions to combat antibiotic resis-
tance. Ongoing research aims to refine protocols and ex-
pand its application within the entire health care industry. PHAGES1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 661INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Misinformation and disinformation 
entail the spread of false information 
and the deliberate intent to deceive, 
respectively. Both fuel confusion 
and lead to poor health choices and 
trust erosion, which is especially 
dangerous during pandemics by 
hindering vaccine efforts. Social 
media and AI-driven communication 
accelerate the potential for an 
infodemic, excess of information, 
amplifying the dissemination of 
inaccurate information.Researchers at Flinders University attempted to generate 
disinformation about vaping and vaccines using generative 
AI. Within an hour, they were able to produce over 100 mis-
leading and deceptive blogs, images, and videos promoting 
health disinformation, highlighting the urgent need for 
government and industry guardrails to protect public health 
from the malicious use of generative AI tools. Social media 
sites have implemented policies to combat mis- and dis-
information on their platforms through warning labels on 
false content, reducing the reach of such content, or remov-
ing it entirely. Despite enacting these policies, social media 
platforms have notably downsized content monitoring staff, 
risking their effectiveness. On TikTok Shop, merchants are 
defrauding consumers, publishing videos featuring deepfake 
doctors to deceive buyers into believing that health products 
are being promoted by medical professionals. These videos 
have garnered more than 10 million views, illustrating the 
deceptive power of disinformation and the extreme difficul-
ty in deciphering between real and synthetic content. Amid 
security and privacy concerns, TikTok issued new community 
guidelines for the regulation of manipulated content. In the 
UK, YouTube has begun to validate health care professionals 
creating content on its platform. Applicants must meet strict 
criteria and confirm that they have an active medical license; 
when they’re approved, their profile features a badge that ver-
ifies to users that the content comes from a reliable source.AI-generated content may seem like viral fun, but its role 
in perpetuating the infodemic has been rather damaging. 
In the era of the internet and social media, misinformation 
and disinformation tend to spread more rapidly, facilitated 
by the ease of access to a wide audience. Left unchecked, 
false narratives about diseases, treatments, and preventive 
measures can lead to fear and confusion. At the individu-
al level, misinformation can lead to misguided decisions 
about treatment, vaccination hesitancy, and reliance on un-
proven remedies, exacerbating health issues. At the societal 
level, public health efforts are compromised as misinforma-
tion fuels resistance to evidence-based practices, result-
ing in delayed or inadequate care. Misinformation-driven 
health trends can also divert attention and resources away 
from genuine public health concerns, hindering effective 
allocation of resources. As demand increases for certain 
medications or interventions, shortages may arise and 
lead to escalating costs. Collaboration between health care 
professionals, policymakers, and technology platforms 
is crucial to curb the spread of false information online. 
Tackling misinformation requires a multifaceted approach 
that includes strategic communication strategies, media 
literacy initiatives, and responsible content moderation on 
digital platforms. For instance, social media platforms can 
make their algorithms more transparent, so users under-
stand how content is promoted, to decide what information 
to take seriously. EXPANDING 
MEDICAL MIS- AND 
DISINFORMATION3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 662INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINESCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2045
A New Kind of High     
Nanobots, initially designed for revolutionary medical applications such as targeting disease at the cellular level and repairing tissue damage, have found a new, 
unconventional use. Beyond their medical prowess, these tiny robots have entered a more controversial territory: cognitive and emotional manipulation.
This new application involves nanobots interfacing with a user’s neurological system to manipulate emotional states and cognitive abilities. Once introduced into 
the body, these nanobots navigate to specific brain regions responsible for emotional regulation and cognitive processing. They can release neurotransmitters or 
alter neural pathways to induce a range of desired states, from heightened happiness and confidence to suppressed anxiety or sadness. The allure is potent: the 
ability to control one’s emotional and mental state with precision, bypassing traditional therapeutic methods.
While initially seen as an effective measure to improve population mental health, users became increasingly dependent on nanobots for emotional and cognitive 
regulation, losing touch with their natural capacity to experience and process emotions authentically. This overreliance also raised significant concerns about the 
long-term impact on brain function and mental health. The distinction between artificial and genuine emotional experiences becomes increasingly blurred, lead-
ing to societal debates and ethical concerns about the nature of human experience in the age of advanced technology.
These developments inevitably lead to complex ethical and legal challenges. Regulatory bodies were hard-pressed to address issues surrounding consent, mental 
health implications, and the definition of personal identity in an era where emotional and cognitive states can be externally controlled. The widespread use of na-
nobots for nonmedical purposes challenged the understanding of human agency and authenticity, igniting a global discourse on the boundaries of technological 
intervention in human life and the fundamental aspects of what it means to be human.
663© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE664© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.IMPLANTS, 
PROSTHETICS,  
& WEARABLESINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Scientists seek a more custom 
approach to implants. The 
focus is on bioabsorbable 
and biocompatible material, 
including nonhuman sources, 
to eliminate issues of body 
rejection. New in-body 3D printing 
techniques promise new levels of 
personalization. Manufacturing 
limitations, durability, and extended 
lifespan need to be overcome for 
successful development. Implants are no longer just synthetic; increasingly, they’re 
designed from biological material to meld seamlessly with 
the human body. At Northwestern University, researchers 
developed a biocompatible water-soluble implant designed 
to relieve pain without drugs and naturally absorb into the 
body after use. The device delivers targeted cooling—numb-
ing nerves to block pain signals to the brain—and users can 
remotely activate the device and adjust its intensity. As 3D 
printing has evolved, it has revolutionized biofabrication 
and tissue regeneration. Researchers in Sweden developed 
a 3D-printed eye implant for cell-based therapy to treat 
diabetes. The device, only 240 micrometers long, was placed 
between the iris and the cornea: This location in the anterior 
of the eye is considered to be immune-privileged, allowing 
for the implantation of pancreatic cells without triggering 
an inflammatory response. In the pursuit of biocompatible 
material, xenotransplantation—implanting animal cells 
into a human—introduces a new dimension. Doctors at the 
University of Maryland completed the second successful 
xenotransplantation of a modified pig heart in a patient 
with end-stage heart disease, who lived for six weeks after 
surgery. Engineers from Duke and Harvard have created a 
unique biocompatible ink that can transform into various 
3D structures inside the body by absorbing ultrasound 
waves. This innovation allows the ink to reach tissues, 
bones, and organs that were traditionally only accessible 
through surgical procedures.Biotech’s influence on the health care industry has given 
rise to the volume and diversity of data outputs in the hu-
man body. Compared to wearable technology, implantable 
devices offer more precise data due to their reach within 
the body. However, as scientists are forced to consider the 
body’s innate immune response, it has become critical to 
evaluate the materials used and how they are disposed of 
afterward. This is especially important as built-in sensors 
are increasingly incorporated for real-time monitoring and 
data transmission. One viable solution is potentially xeno-
transplantation. Through this technology, we may be able to 
overcome compatibility issues, as ongoing experimentation 
hopes to neutralize immune response to nonhuman organs. 
If successful, xenotransplantation could greatly expand the 
pool of available organs. However opinions on acceptance 
vary, as it raises concerns about animal welfare and disease 
transmission. The use of neurostimulation for enhanced 
function and monitoring is also generating extreme inter-
est. The industry is seeking ways to harness or control brain 
function for improved health, like the treatment of pain 
without the use of opioids. Its continued focus on durability 
and extended lifespan could address the ongoing issue of 
“abandon-ware,” implants that go unserviced after the fall 
of a neurotech company. EMERGING  
IMPLANTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 665INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Innovations in prosthetic design 
aim to improve sensing capabilities 
with synthetic skins and novel 
surgical procedures. More broadly 
applicable, electronic tattoos are 
nearly invisible sensors attached 
to a user’s skin, enabling wireless 
transmission of health information. 
Such advancements hope to 
preserve our natural appearance, 
avoiding an android-like 
resemblance.Stanford University scientists developed an electronic skin 
(e-skin) that converts signals from pressure and heat sen-
sors into brain signals. The e-skin mimics biological skin by 
detecting pressure or warmth, sending sequences of elec-
trical signals to the brain. In trials the e-skin prompted a rat 
to kick its leg in response to pressure or heat, showcasing 
potential applications in improving prosthetics. BeBop 
Sensors has also unveiled RoboSkin, a flexible and thin tac-
tile-sensing covering for humanoid robots and prosthetics 
to enhance their sense of touch. 
The OPRA Implant System is the only FDA-approved 
bone-anchored prostheses in the US. NYU Langone Health 
conducted the first surgery using osseointegration, which 
involves permanently implanting a titanium device into the 
bone for direct attachment to an artificial limb. A practical 
substitute for conventional socket prostheses, benefits 
include enhanced mobility, increased comfort, and mini-
mized pressure. The implant system results in improved 
surface perception, reduced residual limb pain, heightened 
stability, and greater utilization of prosthetic limbs. 
At UT Austin, scientists developed a lightweight, wireless 
electronic tattoo for continuous heart monitoring outside 
clinical settings. Attached to the chest, the e-tattoo involves 
two sensors measuring electrical signals from the heart 
and acoustic signals for a comprehensive report of cardiac 
health by measuring cardiac time intervals.Advancements aim to make prosthetics feel and look 
more natural, helping people feel more comfortable in their 
“own” skin. Synthetic or electronic skin not only looks like 
real skin, but advanced sensing capabilities enable feel-
ing through electronic stimulation. Biotech companies 
are harnessing neurostimulation for increased movement 
and sensory feedback. The departure from hyper-realistic 
bionic limbs aims to empower users by fostering a sense of 
identity and breaking down societal stigmas surrounding 
disability. Scientists are also exploring the design and sur-
gical attachment of prosthetics, with a focus on enabling 
function that mimics the human body. Newly designed 
prosthetics and surgical techniques, like osseointegration, 
aim to achieve better integration with the human body. 
But accessibility remains a hurdle as prosthetics are often 
costly and options are limited, especially for people of color. 
Efforts to combine affordability, functionality, and individ-
ualized design are underway, recognizing the diverse needs 
and preferences of users. 
With the rise in use and function of wearable technolo-
gy, scientists are harnessing the understanding of skin 
function to develop advanced sensing technologies that 
can be discreetly and comfortably worn on the skin. Such 
sensors promise more accurate data and measurements of 
biomarkers; e-tattoos can potentially replace the need for 
multiple devices for continuous monitoring, while ensuring 
comfort and durability. EMERGING 
PROSTHETICS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 666INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
The next frontier of wearable 
technology not only transcends 
the boundaries of convenience 
but ushers in a new era, 
where our daily experiences 
are interconnected with the 
advanced capabilities of these 
devices. Ultimately, this will 
shape the way we navigate and 
understand the world around us.The AR smart glasses market is becoming more compet-
itive. An Apple patent filing signals the development of 
smart glasses for daily use, featuring a digital crown for 
controls, heads-up display for notifications and music 
control, and AR capabilities. Meta, which already introduced 
smart glasses through a partnership with Ray-Ban, plans 
to release its first pair of smart glasses with AR display in 
2027, accompanied by a neural interface smartwatch for 
control. While health monitoring capabilities in these AR 
glasses remain uncertain, ongoing research, such as Cor-
nell University’s sonar glasses, hints at potential features. 
These glasses, outfitted with micro sonar that can track the 
wearer’s upper body movements in 3D through a combina-
tion of inaudible soundwaves and AI, could offer advanced 
tracking of physical and behavioral data. 
Parallel advancements in concealed wearable technology 
concentrate on miniaturized devices. Humane, founded by 
ex-Apple employees, revealed the Ai Pin, aiming to simplify 
interactions by eliminating traditional interfaces. Although 
its initial release features limited health functions, such 
as scanning for nutritional information, the Ai Pin shows 
promise for future applications in detection and continu-
ous health monitoring. MIT researchers have developed a 
wearable ultrasound scanner designed to attach to a bra, 
aiding in the early detection of breast cancer. And Stanford 
has a smart bandage that leverages wireless circuitry and 
electrical stimulation to monitor and accelerate wound 
healing, minimizing infection risks.The proliferation of wearables, driven by their ability to 
provide unparalleled access to personalized health insights, 
has led to a growing demand for inconspicuous devices 
that can either substitute for or be concealed within our 
clothing. Progress on smart glasses and AR-enabled devices 
suggests a future where technology seamlessly enriches our 
lives without imposing on our personal style or daily rou-
tines. These wearables offer a subtler and more user-friendly 
experience that encourages users to wear them consistent-
ly, facilitating the collection of long-term health data. While 
the primary focus of these devices is on enhancing user in-
teractions, the uncertainty surrounding health applications 
is getting research attention. These devices indicate a move 
toward a hands-free, augmented reality interaction with 
the world, opening up new possibilities in preventive health 
care by providing individuals with unprecedented access to 
personalized health insights and continuous monitoring. 
The technology aims to positively impact consumer behav-
ior by inspiring better habits and heightened awareness 
as they embrace these devices. Still, concerns about data 
privacy persist, and so do worries around data security and 
the potential misuse of personal information.EMERGING 
WEARABLES12TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 667INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
As wearables become more 
sophisticated, they offer 
unparalleled access to 
personalized health insights 
and environmental interactions, 
becoming indispensable tools 
for maintaining well-being. 
However, ongoing progress 
is rendering wearables 
unnecessary, as innovations aim 
to seamlessly measure individual 
health data without the need for 
external devices.Apple’s and Samsung’s patent filings suggest a shift in 
health marker measurement through smart rings. While 
ongoing research targets improved capabilities, a notewor-
thy development is the OmniRing, a smart sensing ring by 
a Penn State team, leveraging XR. The device uses inertial 
measurement unit sensors to capture finger motion and 
photoplethysmography sensors to measure biomarkers. It 
was introduced with an open-source design to spur diverse 
applications. Simultaneously, companies like Baracoda aim 
to enhance wrist wearables. Its smartband, BHeart, with its 
“endless” battery, utilizes BMotion energy harvesting from 
motion, body heat, and sunlight, redefining self-recharging. 
Beyond traditional health metrics, Neurable’s brain-sensing 
headphones and BitBrain’s Ikon neuro-headband measure 
brain activity. Neurable tracks brain signals to respond to 
cognitive states, while Ikon, with smart textiles and EEG 
electrodes, measures brain activity during daily tasks.
As our wearables gain capabilities, there are instances 
where “invisible monitoring” is preferable. Toronto-based 
Xandar Kardian is deploying its radar technology in 50 US 
health care facilities, providing contactless vital sign detec-
tion. The XK300 sensor gauges macro (body motion), micro 
(respiratory rate), and nano (heart rate) vibrations, offering 
early indicators of potential medical events. Singapore’s 
Alexandra Hospital uses a Smart Ward ecosystem, stream-
lining nursing with virtual management. Internet of Medical 
Things components include smart beds, patches for vital 
sign monitoring, AI food scanners, and smart glasses for 
tele-rounding and teleconferencing.Wearables have significantly evolved beyond basic activ-
ity trackers and health metrics, incorporating advanced 
features for comprehensive health monitoring. The trajec-
tory suggests innovations to measure an extensive array of 
health markers, as these devices now integrate sensors to 
measure vital signs, detect anomalies, track brain activity, 
and provide real-time health insights that factor in life-
styles and environments. Simultaneously, wearables are 
evolving beyond passive data collection to actively inspiring 
healthy habits and decisions. This active engagement with 
users can have profound implications for enabling person-
alized and proactive health care, motivating individuals to 
prioritize their well-being. However, as wearables mature 
and enhance functionality, there is a potential paradox 
emerging. The same advancements that make wearables 
indispensable could also render them superfluous. Wear-
ables may become so seamlessly integrated into our lives, 
offering continuous health insights and habit reinforce-
ment, that the need for a distinct wearable device diminish-
es. Striking a balance between enhancing functionality and 
maintaining the relevance of wearables will be critical. As 
wearables continue to mature, the challenge lies in ensur-
ing that they not only collect a wider variety of health data 
but also meaningfully contribute to individuals’ well-being 
while avoiding redundancy. MATURE  
WEARABLES12TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 668INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE669© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.RESEARCHINDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Synthetic health data is 
artificially generated health 
data that mimics real data 
properties without privacy risks. 
Coupled with machine learning, 
the application of synthetic 
health data accelerates 
research and clinical trials 
for the development of novel 
medications, treatments and 
therapies. Already, companies are harnessing AI and machine learning 
to advance research. LabGenius’ system automates the de-
sign, creation, and testing of antibodies, revolutionizing the 
antibody discovery process. Its machine learning algorithm 
designs antibodies to target specific diseases, and auto-
mated robotic systems build and grow them in the lab. The 
data is fed back into the algorithm, creating a closed-loop 
system. DeepMind has released a catalog of genetic muta -
tions that can affect the function of human proteins. Devel-
oped using AlphaMissense, an AI that classifies missense 
variants, the model categorized 89% of all 71 million possi-
ble missense variants as either likely pathogenic or likely 
benign. This can accelerate research providing insights into 
the consequences of genetic mutations.
Generative AI also plays a pivotal role in creating synthet-
ic data sets that closely resemble real-world data without 
compromising privacy. Snowflake’s marketplace now offers 
access to synthetic data sets, including synthetic human 
face and financial data. This enables businesses to train AI 
algorithms and conduct tests and simulations while main-
taining data confidentiality. Gretel has entered an exclusive 
agreement with AWS, providing access to synthetic data 
generation models and privacy tools. The program aims to 
enable teams to safely test, train, and fine-tune proprietary 
large language models using high-quality synthetic data 
designed to be private.Synthetic health data replicates the characteristics, pat-
terns, and statistical properties of real health care data 
without the risk of compromising patient privacy. When 
“real data” is insufficient, synthetic data is invaluable for 
ensuring that research data is comprehensive. AI holds 
the potential to drastically reduce the time required for 
research and clinical trials, providing industries dependent 
on these processes with remarkable flexibility for product 
innovation. Using synthetic data, medical researchers are 
harnessing AI and machine learning for critical tasks. Faster 
drug development is facilitated by synthesizing data on 
drug performance, screening drug compounds, predicting 
potential side effects, and optimizing dosages. This can 
lead to overhead cost reductions, making treatments more 
affordable and accessible. Early and precise diagnosis is 
facilitated by simulating disease progression, anticipating 
risk factors, and predicting treatment resistance. In disease 
eradication efforts, synthetic health data supports con-
tainment and eradication strategies by modeling disease 
spread to identify preventative measures while protecting 
patient privacy. Through the analysis of large datasets, 
synthetic health data becomes a valuable tool for advancing 
therapy research, optimizing treatments, and accelerating 
the development of novel therapies for disease.SYNTHETIC HEALTH 
DATA2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 670INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Traditional trials suffer from 
lengthy timelines—averaging 
10 years—and significant costs 
related to the recruitment and 
retention of participants. Now, 
remote, virtual reality, and in-
silico trials are viable options. 
The goal of faster development 
of novel drugs and therapies 
could be achieved through 
improved efficiency, accuracy, 
and speed of clinical trials. Last May, the FDA released landmark guidance to encour-
age the use of remote clinical trials, which leverage digital 
tools to collect participant data remotely. The Decentralized 
Clinical Trials draft guidance advises on how to incorporate 
remote clinical trials safely and strategically for greater 
diversity in clinical trial populations, and shows a clear 
shift toward the use of technology for conducting clinical 
trials. And companies have seen success transitioning 
from hybrid intervention to remote clinical trials. In making 
the switch, GROWell’s strategy yielded a study completion 
rate of 82%, as well as improved screen failure rates and 
increased task adherence. In-silico trials, on the other hand, 
aim to remove human involvement in clinical trials alto-
gether through digital simulations, or digital twins. Nova-
discovery, specializing in AI-driven in-silico clinical trial 
simulation, has successfully predicted the findings of the 
MARIPOSA Phase III clinical study through its jinkō plat-
form. The predictive findings closely align with actual trial 
results, highlighting the potential of in-silico approaches 
for optimizing the development of innovative treatments. 
Accenture Ventures has invested in Virtonomy, a compa-
ny specializing in data-driven simulations using digital 
twin technology for accelerated development of life-saving 
medical devices. Virtonomy’s solution enables manufactur-
ers to create model patient virtual environments for device 
testing, reducing costs and regulatory complexity. Recent innovations in clinical trials aim to reduce time-to-mar-
ket, while improving or maintaining quality and minimizing 
drawbacks. Covid led to the emergence of app-based, remote 
trials, which showed promise in expediting them without 
compromising quality. Other clear benefits include increased 
accessibility: Remote trials enable broader participation across 
a wider demographic diversity. The digital aspect of remote clin-
ical trials also allowed for streamlined data collection. The next 
generation of such advancements will be VR trials, which will 
offer researchers increased control over the trial environment. 
But in-silico clinical trials—leveraging AI and VR—go even fur-
ther, eliminating human involvement in clinical trials altogeth-
er. They use synthetic data and simulations to produce compa-
rable results to the human trials, and could potentially cut trial 
durations in half. Regulators like the FDA are exploring ways to 
incorporate in-silico trial data into the drug approval process. 
Additionally regulatory frameworks are being developed to en-
sure the reliability and validity of in-silico trial results. 
Remote, VR, and in-silico clinical trials are disrupting the tra-
ditional practices of the health care industry, which have been 
rigid and slow to change. Their streamlined processes will make 
trials more efficient and cost-effective, and drastically reduce 
the time it takes to bring new medical innovations to market. 
Accelerated trials and shorter cash flow timelines will transform 
the investment landscape, potentially allowing new entrants to 
compete without the conventional need for substantial capital. 
The decreased risk associated with trials may encourage com-
panies to embark on ambitious and high-risk projects, leading 
to a new wave of innovations.NEW TRIAL  
METHODS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 671INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Lab-on-a-chip (LoC) devices 
are revolutionizing POC 
diagnostics by integrating 
sample preparation, testing, and 
analysis on a single microchip. 
LoCs are transforming how 
laboratory analyses are 
performed, offering portability 
and convenience, efficiency, 
and versatility. Increasingly, one microchip can do it all. SiPhox Health’s kit 
can test for 17 biomarkers, including inflammation, cardio-
vascular health, metabolic fitness, and hormone balance. 
Sold on a subscription basis, kits are $95 with a monthly 
membership that includes access to continuous glucose 
monitors and personalized biohacking tools. The company 
is also developing an at-home device.
At the University of Bath, researchers have developed a pro-
totype virus diagnosis device. Called LoCKAmp, it uses LoC 
technology and can provide lab-quality results within three 
minutes. It employs reverse transcription loop-mediated 
isothermal amplification to multiply specific RNA sequenc-
es for virus detection. Originally developed to detect Covid, 
LoCKAmp can be easily adapted to detect other pathogens. 
And a new signal processing method for biosensors from 
University of California, Santa Cruz and Brigham Young 
University researchers allows for simultaneous detection of 
particles in both high and low concentrations. The tech-
nique could lead to the design of LoCbiosensors that can 
detect multiple analytes across vast concentration ranges 
simultaneously. The researchers used an optofluidic bio-
sensor chip with fluorescence detection and a new signal 
processing method to accurately identify the concentration 
of different colored nanobeads in a mixture. The technology 
is being commercialized by Fluxus, a California-based med-
ical device company.Also known as a microfluidic chip or micro total analysis 
system, LoC is an automated miniaturized laboratory sys-
tem that enables multiple medical tests to be performed 
at once. Traditional laboratory analyses often involve large 
quantities of reagents and samples, contributing to high 
costs. By requiring smaller sample sizes for accurate anal-
ysis, LoCs significantly reduce sample size volumes, risks 
of contamination, and associated costs. Given their com-
pact and portable nature, LoCs allow for rapid and real-time 
analysis due to short fusion distances within the micro-
channels. This enables point-of-care testing, making this 
technology invaluable in patient diagnostics and biophar-
maceutical development. It’s especially useful for develop-
ing countries, where high incidences of disease persist due 
to limited resources and proper facilities. Increased focus 
on patient-centric care means that we can expect to see an 
increase in consumer LoCs to supplement remote care. In 
research, LoC devices facilitate high-throughput screening 
and experimentation. Researchers can conduct multiple 
analyses simultaneously, significantly accelerating the 
pace of discovery in fields like genomics, proteomics, and 
drug development. This will contribute to advancements in 
understanding disease mechanisms and the development 
of targeted therapies. LAB-ON-A-CHIP1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 672INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
Body-on-a-chip (BoC) 
technologies typically consist 
of microfluidic channels 
and chambers that contain 
manufactured biomaterials, 
allowing researchers to simulate 
the behavior of various tissues 
and organs. By mimicking the 
function and mechanics of an 
organ, they provide a potential 
alternative to animals for drug 
development and toxin testing. The use of “on-a-chip” models aim to mimic the physio-
logical conditions of organs to provide a controlled envi-
ronment for studying various phenomena. Researchers at 
the University of Birmingham have developed a “vein-on-
a-chip” model designed to emulate human veins, offering 
a unique platform for studying blood clot formation. This 
innovative device incorporates operational valves that 
simulate real vein mechanisms, coupled with a single layer 
of endothelial cells covering the vessel’s interior. Similarly, 
a global team of bioengineers and immune-oncologists 
collaborated to create an immune-infiltrated kidney tissue 
model, specifically focusing on investigating the on-target, 
off-tumor effects of T-cell bispecific antibodies (TCBs). This 
model—known as an immune-infiltrated human kidney or-
ganoid-on-chip—enables the assessment of TCB impacts on 
kidney cells. Additionally, researchers at Boston University 
devised an organ-on-a-chip model replicating lymphatic 
vessels capable of targeting the ROCK2 protein to reverse 
lymphedema in mice. And biotech company Emulate in-
troduced a novel feature to its liver-on-a-chip model—an 
adeno-associated virus (AAV) transduction application. This 
groundbreaking technology enables gene therapy research-
ers to efficiently and safely test the delivery of AAV vectors 
in a validated, human-relevant liver model, providing re-
sults within weeks rather than months. In a previous study, 
Emulate’s liver chip accurately identified 87% of tested 
drugs known to induce liver injury in patients. BoC systems, often referred to as microphysiological 
systems, replicate the complex interactions of organs 
and tissues within a human body on a miniature scale. By 
simulating the interactions between different organs, BoC 
devices demonstrate how drugs will behave in the human 
body. BoCs offer faster, cost-effective, customizable, more 
ethical and safer alternatives to human or animal trials for 
biological research and development, and could transform 
the drug development process that heavily relies on animal 
subjects. The application of BoCs will improve the efficiency 
of drug screening, reduce the number of failed clinical trials, 
and decrease time-to-market. While BoCs hold immense 
promise for advancing drug development, challenges for 
adoption include standardizing protocols and regulatory 
frameworks that adapt to accept these models. BODY-ON-A-CHIP1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 673INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
A rapidly evolving technology, 
3D bioprinting involves the 
creation of functional structures 
that imitate the complexity of 
biological tissues and organs 
by layering living cells and 
bioinks. While 3D bioprinting 
holds tremendous promise, it 
has technical challenges to 
overcome, such as ensuring 
viability and functionality.A team at Monash University has successfully printed 
neural living networks composed of rat brain cells that 
mature and communicate like a real brain, while University 
of Oxford researchers fabricated a two-layered brain tissue 
from 3D printing human neural stem cells. Through the use 
of a novel droplet printing technique, the tissue maintained 
its cellular architecture for weeks in the culture. This marks 
a significant advancement in the fabrication of materials 
with the structure and function of natural brain tissue. 
At the University of Sydney, researchers developed a blue-
print for advanced human lung models with the use of 3D 
structures grown from human primary cells: They built 
two different lung models, healthy and diseased, to study 
the therapeutic effectiveness of drugs. Scientists at the 
Terasaki Institute for Biomedical Innovation have made 
advancements in 3D bioprinting of native-like skeletal 
muscle tissues. They used a specialized bioink with mi-
croparticles engineered for sustained insulin-like growth 
factor-1 delivery, promoting mature skeletal muscle tissue 
formation and structural alignment for more effective 
regeneration. And a multidisciplinary team at Stanford 
University received a $26.3 million federal contract to bio-
print a fully functioning human heart and implant it into an 
immunodeficient pig within five years. This approach uses 
patient-specific stem cells that will not require immuno-
suppression when transplanted into the same patient. 3D bioprinting is revolutionizing traditional approaches to 
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. By precisely 
depositing cells in a spatially controlled manner, bioprint-
ers can fabricate functional tissues and organs unique to 
individual patients.
This has huge implications for organ transplants. According 
to the US Health Resources and Services Administration, 
106,800 people are on the national organ transplant waiting 
list, while Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data 
shows only 6,000 organs on average are provided by living 
donors each year. 
The customization of 3D bioprinting is relevant to re-
constructive surgery and preoperative planning: Medical 
providers can create patient-specific implants to match 
exact dimensions and specifications. Additionally, the 
ability to incorporate multiple cell types and biomaterials in 
the printing process allows for the creation of tissues with 
enhanced functionality. In research, 3D-bioprinted tissues 
offer more accurate representations of human physiology 
than traditional 2D cell cultures. With these models, re-
searchers can assess drug response and toxicity with great-
er precision, while reducing, or even eliminating, the use of 
animals for testing. The biggest challenge of 3D bioprinting 
is sustaining larger, more complex tissues. For implanted 
tissues or a larger size to survive, the tissues must be vas-
cularized to ensure proper nutrient supply and waste remov-
al. Researchers are exploring bioink formulations, printing 
techniques, and post-printing strategies to overcome these 
challenges for clinical validity.3D BIOPRINTING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 674INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEWHY IT MATTERS
The processing power of quantum 
computers rivals traditional 
computers. Quantum computers 
process complex data and 
construct computationally 
intensive models at unimaginable 
scale and speed. With its ability 
to analyze vast amounts of data 
and explore numerous possibilities 
simultaneously, quantum 
computing is ushering a new era of 
computational capability. Intel announced the release of Tunnel Falls, a 12-qubit sili-
con chip, only available to the quantum research commu-
nity. This and other actions—like a recent collaboration with 
the Laboratory for Physical Sciences—demonstrate Intel’s 
commitment to advancing quantum computing research 
and accelerates its potential application in health care. IBM 
unveiled the first health care–focused quantum computer 
in the US, installed at Cleveland Clinic. The IBM Quantum 
System One, part of a 10-year Discovery Accelerator part-
nership, utilizes quantum computing, AI, and high-perfor-
mance computing to accelerate biomedical discoveries. 
Gero, a biotech startup focused on aging and longevity, 
used a hybrid quantum-classical machine learning mod-
el to interface between classical quantum computational 
devices. Its aim was to demonstrate the application of 
quantum computing to generate novel chemical structures 
in drug discovery. Insilico Medicine combined the functions 
of quantum computing and generative AI to explore the 
quantum advantage in small molecule drug discovery. The 
researchers substituted each part of MoIGAN, an implicit 
generative adversarial network for small molecular graphs, 
with a variational quantum circuit. Insilico plans to inte-
grate the hybrid quantum GAN model into Chemistry 42, its 
proprietary small molecule generation engine, to accelerate 
and improve its AI-driven drug discovery and development 
process. Long considered in the realm of science fiction, quantum 
computing is more realistic than ever. In a world character-
ized by rapid technological advancements, the incorpora-
tion of quantum computing offers significant implications 
for drug discovery, genetic analysis, and optimization solu-
tions. Harnessing quantum computing could lead to rapid 
identification of novel drugs and therapies, recognition of 
genetic markers associated with disease, and customized 
treatment plans based on genetic makeup. From optimizing 
treatment plans to managing health care supply chains, 
quantum algorithms can quickly pinpoint optimal solu-
tions. This efficiency can enhance the overall effectiveness 
of health care systems, ensuring better allocation of re-
sources and improved patient care. For instance, its rate of 
computing holds potential in enabling widespread genome 
sequencing for tailored treatments based on a patient’s 
genetic profile. While quantum computing in health care 
holds great promise, it is still in the early stages of develop-
ment, as several technical challenges need to be addressed. 
These challenges include improving the stability and error 
correction of quantum computers, as well as developing 
algorithms tailored to health care applications. QUANTUM’S EFFECT 
ON RESEARCH1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 675INDUSTRY HEALTH CARE & MEDICINEAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
676© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY677© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.CHRISTINA VON MESSLING  
Senior Manager 
Christina von Messling leads our European client portfolio and our 
Life Sciences practice area at Future Today Institute. She is re-
nowned for her expertise in strategic foresight and an unparalleled 
ability to navigate complex industry landscapes. With a career span-
ning over two decades, she has guided multinational corporations 
through transformative strategies, leveraging his deep understanding of market dynamics and future 
trends.
Christina’s diverse experience across sectors enables her to craft visionary scenarios and strategies, 
driving sustainable growth and innovation for clients worldwide. Having split her time between Europe, 
the UK, Brazil, and the US, she combines a global perspective with in-depth, holistic expertise of the 
main drivers of change: technology, geopolitical, economic, and societal developments. She has 
advised leading pharmaceutical and healthcare companies, as well as beauty, entertainment, media, 
and retail brands.
Christina is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She 
holds a Masters in Law from the Freie Universität Berlin, where she graduated within the top 10% of the 
nation. She works from offices in New York City, Berlin, and London.Co-author  
STEPHANIE VALENTINO
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSHEALTHCARE &  MEDICINE
 INDUSTRYSELECTED  
SOURCES
678© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY679© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Blutinger, Jonathan David, et 
al. “The Future of Software-Con-
trolled Cooking.” Npj Science of 
Food, vol. 7, no. 1, March 1, 2023, 
p. 6. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41538-023-00182-6.
Bo Hara, Reginald. “Efficacy and 
Effectiveness of Nootropics 
vs Prescription Stimulants 
on Academic Performance in 
College Students-A Scoping 
Review.” Biomedical Journal of 
Scientific & Technical Re-
search, vol. 48, no. 4, February 
2023. https://doi.org/10.26717/
BJSTR.2023.48.007688.
Bowman, Elizabeth, et al. “Not so 
Smart? ‘Smart’ Drugs Increase 
the Level but Decrease the Qual-
ity of Cognitive Effort.” Science 
Advances, vol. 9, no. 24, June 
2023, p. eadd4165. https://doi.
org/10.1126/sciadv.add4165.
Breda, Laura, et al. “In Vivo He-
matopoietic Stem Cell Modifica-
tion by mRNA Delivery.” Science, 
vol. 381, no. 6656, July 2023, pp. 
436–43. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.ade6967.Brooks, Sierra M., and Hal S. 
Alper. “Applications, Challenges, 
and Needs for Employing Syn-
thetic Biology beyond the Lab.” 
Nature Communications, vol. 
12, no. 1, March 1, 2021, p. 1390. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
021-21740-0.
“C3 Connected Home Logis-
tics Consortium.” MIT AgeLab. 
Accessed August 18, 2023. 
https://agelab.mit.edu/home-lo-
gistics-and-services/projects/
c3-connected-home-logis-
tics-consortium/. 
Callahan, Emily A., ed. “Chal-
lenges and Opportunities for 
Precision and Personalized 
Nutrition: Proceedings of a 
Workshop-in Brief.” National 
Academies Press, 2021. https://
doi.org/10.17226/26407.
Callaway, Ewen. “AI Tools Are 
Designing Entirely New Proteins 
That Could Transform Medi-
cine.” Nature, vol. 619, no. 7969, 
July 2023, pp. 236–38. https://
doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-
02227-y.“Can Nano Robots Help Treat 
Hard-to-Reach Cancers?” Los 
Angeles Business Journal, May 2, 
2022. https://labusinessjournal.
com/featured/can-nano-robots-
help-treat-hard-to-reach-can-
cers/.
Davies, Nicola. “Advances in 
Psychiatry Biomarkers.” Psychi-
atry Advisor, November 5, 2020. 
www.psychiatryadvisor.com/
home/topics/general-psychia-
try/advances-in-psychiatry-bio-
markers/.
e Hoogh, Iris M., et al. “Design 
Issues in Personalized Nutri-
tion Advice Systems.” Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 
vol. 25, March 2023, p. e37667. 
PubMed Central. https://doi.
org/10.2196/37667.
De Vos, Cato M. H., et al. “Psy-
chedelics and Neuroplasticity: 
A Systematic Review Unraveling 
the Biological Underpinnings 
of Psychedelics.” Frontiers in 
Psychiatry, vol. 12, September 
2021, p. 724606. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.724606.“Design, Development, and 
Validation of a Nanobiosensor to 
Detect Circulating Microbiome 
for Cardiovascular Disease Risk 
Assessment.” edRxiv, August 8, 
2023. www.medrxiv.org/content/
10.1101/2023.08.05.23293588v1. 
“Developing Reliable AI Tools for 
Healthcare.” Google DeepMind, 
July 17, 2023. www.deepmind.
com/blog/codoc-developing-re-
liable-ai-tools-for-healthcare. 
Di Simone, Sara K., et al. “Un-
derstanding Respiratory 
Microbiome–Immune System 
Interactions in Health and 
Disease.” Science Translational 
Medicine, vol. 15, no. 678, January 
2023, p. eabq5126. https://
doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.
abq5126.
“Digital Therapy for Insom-
nia More Effective Than Sleep 
Education, Study Finds.” 
AJMC, March 30, 2023, www.
ajmc.com/view/digital-ther-
apy-for-insomnia-more-ef-
fective-than-sleep-educat-
ion-study-finds.“Dissolving Implantable Device 
Relieves Pain Without Drugs.” 
Northwestern Now, June 30, 
2022. https://news.northwest-
ern.edu/stories/2022/06/
dissolving-implant-re-
lieves-pain-without-drugs/. 
Dsouza, Henry, et al. “Flexible, 
Self-Powered Sensors for Esti-
mating Human Head Kinemat-
ics Relevant to Concussions.” 
Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1, 
June 1, 2022, p. 8567. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-022-12266-6.
“Early Alzheimer’s Disease De-
tection Sensor in Development.” 
Open Access Government, 
January 19, 2023. www.openac-
cessgovernment.org/early-alz-
heimers-disease-detection-sen-
sor-brain/151644/.
“Edible Coating Made from 
Silk Can Extend Shelf Life of 
Foods” Tufts Now, December 
8, 2022. https://now.tufts.
edu/2022/12/08/incredible-edi-
ble-food-wrapper.
“Elucid Brings Personalized 
Imaging Diagnostics to Cardiol-ogy.” Medtech Insight, October 
31,  2022. http://medtech.phar-
maintelligence.informa.com/
MT145996/Elucid-Brings-Per-
sonalized-Imaging-Diagnos-
tics-To-Cardiology.
“Emerging Innovations in 
Molecular Imaging.” Diagnostic 
Imaging, August 21, 2023. www.
diagnosticimaging.com/view/
emerging-innovations-in-molec-
ular-imaging.
England, Jason. “Apple Watch 
Patent Just Revealed a New Killer 
Feature—The Future of Health 
Tracking Is Here.” LaptopMag, 
March 3, 2023. www.laptopmag.
com/news/apple-watch-patent-
just-revealed-a-new-killer-fea-
ture-the-future-of-health-track-
ing-is-here.
“Enhancing Engagement with 
Digital Mental Health Care.” 
UW Medicine Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences. https://psychiatry.
uw.edu/project/enhancing-en-
gagement-with-digital-men-
tal-health-care/. SELECTED SOURCESHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY680© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Esmaeilzadeh, Pouyan. “Benefits 
and Concerns Associated with 
Blockchain-Based Health Infor-
mation Exchange (HIE): A Qual-
itative Study from Physicians’ 
Perspectives.” BMC Medical In-
formatics and Decision Making, 
vol. 22, no. 1, March 2022, p. 80. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-
022-01815-8.
“Ethics of Neurotechnology” 
UNESCO. Accessed August 16, 
2023. www.unesco.org/en/eth-
ics-neurotech. 
“EU Launches Research Centre 
on Algorithmic Transparency.” 
Euractiv.com, April 19, 2023. 
www.euractiv.com/section/
platforms/news/eu-launch-
es-research-centre-on-algorith-
mic-transparency/.
Fadelli, Ingrid. “A Conductive 
Self-Healing Hydrogel to Create 
Flexible Sensors.” Phys.org, 
June 2, 2023. https://phys.org/
news/2023-06-self-healing-hy-
drogel-flexible-sensors.html. “FDA Outlines Plan for Digi-
tal Health Technologies for 
Clinical Trials.” Regulatory 
Focus, March 24, 2023. www.
raps.org/news-and-arti-
cles/news-articles/2023/3/
fda-outlines-plan-for-digi-
tal-health-technologies. 
Ferreira, Becky. “Scientists Have 
Developed Bionic Penis Aug-
ments to One Day Treat Erectile 
Dysfunction.” Vice, January 5, 
2023, www.vice.com/en/article/
g5veeq/scientists-have-de-
veloped-bionic-penis-aug-
ments-to-one-day-treat-erec-
tile-dysfunction.
“First Wearable Health Sensor 
for Monitoring Muscle Atrophy.” 
First Wearable Health Sensor 
for Monitoring Muscle Atrophy. 
https://news.osu.edu/first-wear-
able-health-sensor-for-monitor-
ing-muscle-atrophy/. 
“Fraunhofer Institutes Present 
the First Prototype for Digital 
Twins of Patients.” Fraunhofer-Ge-
sellschaft, November 2, 2021. www.fraunhofer.de/en/press/
research-news/2021/novem-
ber-2021/fraunhofer-institutes-
present-the-first-prototype-for-
digital-twins-of-patients.html. 
“Frontier AI Taskforce: First Prog-
ress Report.” Gov.uk, September 
7, 2023. www.gov.uk/govern-
ment/publications/frontier-ai-
taskforce-first-progress-report/
frontier-ai-taskforce-first-prog-
ress-report. 
“FTC Proposes Amendments 
to Strengthen and Modernize 
the Health Breach Notifica-
tion Rule.” Federal Trade Com-
mission, May 18, 2023. www.
ftc.gov/news-events/news/
press-releases/2023/05/ftc-pro-
poses-amendments-strength-
en-modernize-health-breach-no-
tification-rule. 
Gacesa, R., et al. “Environmental 
Factors Shaping the Gut Micro-
biome in a Dutch Population.” 
Nature, vol. 604, no. 7907, 7907, 
April 2022, pp. 732–39. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-
04567-7.Galesic, Mirta, et al. “Human 
Social Sensing Is an Untapped 
Resource for Computational So-
cial Science.” Nature, vol. 595, no. 
7866, 7866, July 2021, pp. 214–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-03649-2.
“Gameto Licenses Wyss Insti-
tute’s Technology for Growing 
Human Ovaries from Harvard 
University.” Wyss Institute, 
February 21, 2023. https://wyss.
harvard.edu/news/gameto-li-
censes-wyss-institutes-tech-
nology-for-growing-human-ova-
ries-from-harvard-university/.
Ganjalizadeh, Vahid, et al. “Ma-
chine Learning at the Edge for 
AI-Enabled Multiplexed Patho-
gen Detection.” Scientific Re-
ports, vol. 13, no. 1, March 1, 2023, 
p. 4744. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-023-31694-6.
Garden, Leah. “The Future 
of Farming in Space.” Mod-
ern Farmer, February 24, 
2022. https://modernfarmer.
com/2022/02/the-future-of-
farming-in-space/.Garg, Muskan. “Mental Health 
Analysis in Social Media Posts: 
A Survey.” Archives of Computa-
tional Methods in Engineering, 
vol. 30, no. 3, April 2023, pp. 
1819–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11831-022-09863-z.
Garner, Kathryn L. “Principles 
of Synthetic Biology.” Essays in 
Biochemistry, vol. 65, no. 5, No-
vember 2021, pp. 791–811. https://
doi.org/10.1042/EBC20200059.
Gemicioglu, Tan, et al. “Gaze 
& Tongue: A Subtle, Hands-
Free Interaction for Head-Worn 
Devices.” Microsoft, 2023. www.
microsoft.com/en-us/research/
publication/gaze-tongue-a-sub-
tle-hands-free-interaction-for-
head-worn-devices/.
“Gene Editing Method Could 
Power New Cell & Gene Thera-
pies.” Penn Medicine News, April 
28, 2023. www.pennmedicine.
org/news/news-releases/2023/
april/gene-editing-method-
could-power-new-cell-gene-ther-
apies. “Generative AI Imagines New 
Protein Structures.” MIT News, 
July 12, 2023. https://news.mit.
edu/2023/generative-ai-imag-
ines-new-protein-struc-
tures-0712.
Gomes, Nuno, et al. “A Survey 
on Wearable Sensors for Mental 
Health Monitoring.” Sensors, 
vol. 23, no. 3, January 3, 2023, p. 
1330. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s23031330.
Homayounfar, S. Zohreh, et al. 
“Humidity-Resistant, Broad-
Range Pressure Sensors for 
Garment-Integrated Health, 
Motion, and Grip Strength Moni-
toring in Natural Environments.” 
Advanced Materials Technol-
ogies, vol. 8, no. 6, 2023, p. 
2201313. https://doi.org/10.1002/
admt.202201313.
Hoogh, Iris M. de, et al. “Design 
Issues in Personalized Nutrition 
Advice Systems.” Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, vol. 
25, no. 1, March 2023, p. e37667. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/37667.SELECTED SOURCESHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY681© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“How Gut Microbes Help Mend 
Damaged Muscles.” Harvard 
Medical School, March 1, 2023. 
https://hms.harvard.edu/news/
how-gut-microbes-help-mend-
damaged-muscles.
Hu, Hongjie, et al. “A Wearable 
Cardiac Ultrasound Imager.” 
Nature, vol. 613, no. 7945, 7945, 
January 2023, pp. 667–75. 
www.nature.com, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-
05498-z.
Huang, Jinbo, et al. “An Electro-
genetic Interface to Program 
Mammalian Gene Expression by 
Direct Current.” Nature Metabo-
lism, July 2023, pp. 1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s42255-023-
00850-7.
“‘Huge Potential’” in Virtual Clin-
ical Trials.” University of Leeds, 
June 23, 2021. www.leeds.ac.uk/
news-health/news/article/4850/
huge-potential-in-virtual-clini-
cal-trials.
“Human Microbiome Project.” 
June 28, 2013. https://common-
fund.nih.gov/hmp.“Ichor: Reversing Aging.” Wyss 
Institute, February 9, 2023. 
https://wyss.harvard.edu/tech-
nology/ichor-reversing-aging/.
“ICYMI: Cassidy Talks Student 
Loan Reform at AEI Event.” 
The U.S. Senate Committee 
on Health, Education, Labor & 
Pensions, September 21, 2023. 
www.help.senate.gov/ranking/
newsroom/press/icymi-cassidy-
talks-student-loan-reform-at-
aei-event.
“Implantable Sensors and the 
Healing Process: Customized 
for the Future.” University 
of Oregon, August 23, 2022. 
https://research.uoregon.edu/
about/announcements/im-
plantable-sensors-healing-pro-
cess-customized-future. 
Inserra, Antonio, et al. “Psyche-
delics in Psychiatry: Neuroplas-
tic, Immunomodulatory, and 
Neurotransmitter Mechanisms.” 
Pharmacological Reviews, 
edited by Michael Nader, vol. 73, 
no. 1, January 2021, pp. 202–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1124/pharm-
rev.120.000056.“Inside Facebook Reality Labs: 
Wrist-Based Interaction for 
the next Computing Plat-
form.” Tech at Meta, March 18, 
2021. https://tech.facebook.
com/reality-labs/2021/3/
inside-facebook-reali-
ty-labs-wrist-based-interac-
tion-for-the-next-comput-
ing-platform/.
Janik, Agnieszka, et al. “Intel-
ligent and Environmentally 
Friendly Solutions in Smart 
Cities’ Development—Empir-
ical Evidence from Poland.” 
Smart Cities, vol. 6, no. 2, April 
2, 2023, pp. 1202–26. https://
doi.org/10.3390/smartci-
ties6020058.
Lunke, Sebastian, et al. “Integrat-
ed Multi-Omics for Rapid Rare 
Disease Diagnosis on a National 
Scale.” Nature Medicine, vol. 29, 
no. 7, July 7, 2023, pp. 1681–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-
023-02401-9.
Lunner, Nils Thomas Fritiof, et al. 
“In-Ear Temperature Sensors for 
Ar/Vr Applications and Devices.” 
August 10, 2023.  https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=WO2023150225&_ci-
d=P12-LLBW84-73728-1.
Lv, Xueqin, et al. “Synthetic Bi-
ology for Future Food: Research 
Progress and Future Directions.” 
Future Foods, vol. 3, June 2021, p. 
100025. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fufo.2021.100025.
“Machine Learning Puts Yeast on 
a Fast Track for Efficient Protein 
Production.” Imperial News, 
March 2, 2023. www.imperial.
ac.uk/news/243334/machine-
learning-puts-yeast-fast-track/.
MacNeil, Matt. “Using Two CRIS-
PR Enzymes, a COVID Diagnostic 
in Only 20 Minutes.” UC Berkeley 
Public Health, August 5, 2021. 
https://publichealth.berkeley.
edu/news-media/research-high-
lights/using-two-crispr-en-
zymes-a-covid-diagnostic-in-on-
ly-20-minutes/.
Magazine, EP&T. “Wearable 
Sensor Measures Sweat Lactate 
Levels during Exercise.” Elec-
tronic Products & Technology, 
July 18, 2023.  www.ept.ca/2023/07/
wearable-sensor-mea-
sures-sweat-lactate-lev-
els-during-exercise/.
Malík, Matěj, and Pavel Tlustoš. 
“Nootropics as Cognitive En-
hancers: Types, Dosage and Side 
Effects of Smart Drugs.” Nutri-
ents, vol. 14, no. 16, August 2022, 
p. 3367. https://doi.org/10.3390/
nu14163367.
Maron, Jill L., et al. “Rapid 
Whole-Genomic Sequencing 
and a Targeted Neonatal Gene 
Panel in Infants With a Sus-
pected Genetic Disorder.” JAMA, 
vol. 330, no. 2, July 2023, pp. 
161–69. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2023.9350.
Martins, Nuno R. B., et al. “Hu-
man Brain/Cloud Interface.” 
Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 13, 
2019. www.frontiersin.org/arti-
cles/10.3389/fnins.2019.00112.
“Measuring the Impact of a 
Well-Being Program: U-Haul’s 
Story.” Plansponsor.. www.
plansponsor.com/measuring-
impact-well-program-u-hauls-
story/. “Medicare Program: Hospital 
Outpatient Prospective Payment 
and Ambulatory Surgical Center 
Payment Systems; Quality Re-
porting Programs; Payment for 
Intensive Outpatient Services in 
Rural Health Clinics, Federally 
Qualified Health Centers, and 
Opioid Treatment Programs; 
Hospital Price Transparency; 
Changes to Community Mental 
Health Centers Conditions of 
Participation, Proposed Chang-
es to the Inpatient Prospective 
Payment System Medicare 
Code Editor; Rural Emergency 
Hospital Conditions of Partic-
ipation Technical Correction.” 
Federal Register, July 31, 2023. 
www.federalregister.gov/docu-
ments/2023/07/31/2023-14768/
medicare-program-hospi-
tal-outpatient-prospective-pay-
ment-and-ambulatory-surgi-
cal-center-payment.
“New Aero-Elastic Sensor Revo-
lutionizes Pressure Detection.” 
AZoSensors.com, August 21, 
2023, www.azosensors.com/
news.aspx?newsID=15567.SELECTED SOURCESHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY682© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“New AI-Driven Algorithm Can 
Detect Autism in Brain ‘Finger-
prints.’” Stanford HAI. https://hai.
stanford.edu/news/new-ai-driv-
en-algorithm-can-detect-autism-
brain-fingerprints. 
“New Innovations That Could 
Change Dermatology.” Der-
matology Times, January 
26, 2023. www.dermatology-
times.com/view/new-innova-
tions-that-could-change-derma-
tology.
“New Polymers Could Enable 
Better Wearable Devices.” MIT 
News,. February 6, 2023. https://
news.mit.edu/2023/new-poly-
mers-could-enable-better-wear-
able-devices-0206.
“New Research Shows Sleep Reset 
Is First & Only Digital Sleep Solu-
tion Clinically Proven to Increase 
Total Sleep Time by Over One 
Hour for Short Sleepers.” Yahoo 
Finance, June 6, 2023. https://fi-
nance.yahoo.com/news/research-
shows-sleep-reset-first-131700101.
html.“New Wearable Technology Can 
Measure Blood Sugar Using 
Sweat.” UBC Applied Science. 
https://apsc.ubc.ca/news/2022/
new-wearable-technology-can-
measure-blood-sugar-using-
sweat. 
News, Neuroscience. “Bodily 
Rhythm Affects Behavior.” Neu-
roscience News, April 14, 2023. 
https://neurosciencenews.com/
bodily-rhythm-behavior-23010/.
News, Neuroscience. “Embrace 
Wellness with AI: Chatbots 
Boosting Exercise, Diet, and 
Sleep Quality.” Neuroscience 
News, August 7, 2023. https://
neurosciencenews.com/chat-
bot-ai-exercise-health-23766/.
Nguyen, Peter Q., et al. “Wear-
able Materials with Embedded 
Synthetic Biology Sensors for 
Biomolecule Detection.” Nature 
Biotechnology, vol. 39, no. 11, 
November 2021, pp. 1366–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-
021-00950-3.“Noninvasive Sensors for 
Brain–Machine Interfaces Based 
on Micropatterned Epitaxial 
Graphene.” ACS Applied Nano 
Materials. https://pubs.acs.org/
doi/10.1021/acsanm.2c05546. 
“Now Available: New Drone 
Technology for Radiological 
Monitoring in Emergency Situ-
ations.” IAEA, February 1, 2021. 
www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/
now-available-new-drone-tech-
nology-for-radiological-monito-
ring-in-emergency-situations.
“Nuance—Conversational AI 
for Healthcare and Customer 
Engagement.” Nuance Commu-
nications. www.nuance.com/
index.html. 
Nutraingredients-usa.com. 
“Viome Launches Oral Intelli-
gence Test, Personalized Oral 
Biotics.” Nutraingredients-usa.
com, July 27, 2023. www.
nutraingredients-usa.com/Arti-
cle/2023/07/27/viome-launch-
es-oral-intelligence-test-person-
alized-oral-biotics.Office, Press. “Welsh Women’s 
Rugby Tracking Menstruation 
with Vodafone Tech.” Vodafone 
UK News Centre, April 12, 2023. 
www.vodafone.co.uk/newscen-
tre/press-release/new-men-
strual-cycle-tracking-technolo-
gy-womens-welsh-rugby-union/.
Oh, Min Jun, et al. “Nano-
zyme-Based Robotics Approach 
for Targeting Fungal Infection.” 
Advanced Materials, May 4, 
2023, p. 2300320. https://doi.
org/10.1002/adma.202300320.
Oldak, Bernardo, et al. “Complete 
Human Day 14 Post-Implantation 
Embryo Models from Naïve ES 
Cells.” Nature, September 2023, 
pp. 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-023-06604-5.
O’Meara, Sarah. “The Wearable 
Device That Could Help to Detect 
Cancer.” Nature, October 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-
021-02733-x.
Ricotti, Valeria, et al. “Wearable 
Full-Body Motion Tracking of Activities of Daily Living Predicts 
Disease Trajectory in Duchenne 
Muscular Dystrophy.” Nature 
Medicine, vol. 29, no. 1, January 
19, 2023, pp. 95–103. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41591-022-02045-1.
Rohman, Melissa, and North-
western University. “Novel 
Single-Cell Nanopore Sequenc-
ing Tool Accelerates Analysis of 
Tumor Cells.” Phys.org, August 
16, 2023. https://phys.org/
news/2023-08-single-cell-
nanopore-sequencing-tool-anal-
ysis.html. 
Rojas, Luis A., et al. “Personal-
ized RNA Neoantigen Vaccines 
Stimulate T Cells in Pancreatic 
Cancer.” Nature, vol. 618, no. 
7963, June 2023, pp. 144–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
023-06063-y.
“RT-2: New Model Translates Vi-
sion and Language into Action.” 
Google DeepMind, July 28, 2023. 
www.deepmind.com/blog/rt-2-
new-model-translates-vision-
and-language-into-action.Saeki, Masaomi, et al. “Demon-
stration Experiment of Telemed-
icine Using Ultrasonography 
and Telerehabilitation with 
5G Communication System 
in Aging and Depopulated 
Mountainous Area.” Digital 
Health, vol. 8, January 2022, p. 
20552076221129074. https://doi.
org/10.1177/20552076221129074.
Saha, Ajanta, et al. “A New Par-
adigm of Reliable Sensing with 
Field-Deployed Electrochemical 
Sensors Integrating Data Re-
dundancy and Source Credibil-
ity.” Scientific Reports, vol. 13, 
no. 1, February 22, 2023, p. 3101. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
022-25920-w.
Saldana, Gabe. “Sensor Chip 
Advances Rapid Disease Diag-
nostics.” AgriLife Today, June 
20, 2023. https://agrilifeto-
day.tamu.edu/2023/06/20/
new-sensor-chip-advances-rap-
id-cost-effective-disease-diag-
nostics/.SELECTED SOURCESHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY683© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Santiago-Rodriguez, Tasha M., 
et al. “The Skin Microbiome: 
Current Techniques, Challenges, 
and Future Directions.” Microor-
ganisms, vol. 11, no. 5, May 2023, 
p. 1222. https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms11051222.
Sarraf, Namita, et al. “Modular 
Reconfiguration of DNA Origami 
Assemblies Using Tile Displace-
ment.” Science Robotics, vol. 
8, no. 77, April 2023, p. eadf1511. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobot-
ics.adf1511.
SB0152. Accessed June 5, 2023. 
https://le.utah.gov/~2023/bills/
static/SB0152.html. 
Science, National Research 
Council of and Technology. 
“Charging Underwater and 
Body-Implanted Electron-
ic Devices Using Ultrasonic 
Waves.” https://techxplore.
com/news/2022-04-underwa-
ter-body-implanted-electron-
ic-devices-ultrasonic.html. Science, Tokyo University of. 
“Scientists Develop Innovative 
Wearable Sensor for Mea-
suring Sweat Lactate Levels 
During Exercise.” Phys.org, July 
18, 2023. https://phys.org/
news/2023-07-scientists-wear-
able-sensor-lactate.html. 
“Self-Assembling Paclitaxel-Me-
diated Stimulation of Tu-
mor-Associated Macrophages 
for Postoperative Treatment of 
Glioblastoma” PNAS, April 25, 
2023. www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/
pnas.2204621120. 
“Self-Tunable Engineered Yeast 
Probiotics for the Treatment of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease” 
Nature Medicine, July 2021. www.
nature.com/articles/s41591-021-
01390-x.epdf.
Sempionatto, Juliane R., et al. 
“Wearable Chemical Sensors 
for Biomarker Discovery in the 
Omics Era.” Nature Reviews 
Chemistry, vol. 6, no. 12, Decem-
ber 2022, pp. 899–915. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41570-022-
00439-w.Sen. Klobuchar, Amy [D-
MN]. S.631 - 118th Congress 
(2023-2024): UPHOLD Pri-
vacy Act of 2023. March 2, 
2023. http://www.congress.
gov/bill/118th-congress/sen-
ate-bill/631. 2023-03-02.
Senanayake, Dhananga, et al. 
“Microbial Fermentation for 
Improving the Sensory, Nutri-
tional and Functional Attributes 
of Legumes.” Fermentation, vol. 
9, no. 7, July 2023, p. 635. https://
doi.org/10.3390/fermenta-
tion9070635.
Service, Purdue News. “Purdue 
Researchers Fabricate Sensors 
with Potential Health-Monitor-
ing Applications onto Ready-
Made Wearables.” July 10, 2023. 
www.purdue.edu/newsroom/
releases/2023/Q3/purdue-re-
searchers-fabricate-sen-
sors-with-potential-health-mon-
itoring-applications-on-
to-ready-made-wearables.html. 
Shah, Soleil, et al. “Corporate 
Investors in Primary Care—Prof-
its, Progress, and Pitfalls.” New England Journal of Medicine, 
vol. 388, no. 2, January 2023, pp. 
99–101. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMp2212841.
Shi, Zhenghan, et al. “Wearable 
Battery-Free Theranostic Dental 
Patch for Wireless Intraoral 
Sensing and Drug Delivery.” Npj 
Flexible Electronics, vol. 6, no. 1, 
June 2022, pp. 1–11. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41528-022-00185-5.
Silberman, Jordan, et al. “Rigor-
ous and Rapid Evidence Assess-
ment in Digital Health with the 
Evidence Defined Framework.” 
Npj Digital Medicine, vol. 6, no. 
1, May 2023, pp. 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41746-023-00836-5.
“Smart Wearable Devices and 
Energy Generators Inspired by 
Muscle Fibers.” AZoNano.com, 
July 15, 2022. www.azonano.com/
news.aspx?newsID=39422.
“Soft Robot Detects Damage and 
Heals Itself. Cornell Chronicle. 
https://news.cornell.edu/sto-
ries/2022/12/soft-robot-detects-
damage-and-heals-itself. Solaiyappan, Siddharth, and 
Yuxin Wen. “Machine Learning 
Based Medical Image Deep-
fake Detection: A Comparative 
Study.” Machine Learning with 
Applications, vol. 8, June 2022, p. 
100298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mlwa.2022.100298.
Wenger, Nancy M., et al. “Effi-
cacy of a Probiotic and Herbal 
Supplement in Models of Lung 
Inflammation.” Microorganisms, 
vol. 10, no. 11, October 2022, p. 
2136. https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms10112136.
“Wrist-Mounted Camera Cap-
tures Entire Body in 3D.” Cornell 
Chronicle, November 8, 2022. 
https://news.cornell.edu/sto-
ries/2022/11/wrist-mounted-
camera-captures-entire-body-3d. 
Writer, Samantha Laine Perfas 
Harvard Staff. “Mental Health 
Ills Are Rising. Do Mood-Tracking 
Apps Help?” Harvard Gazette, 
August 14, 2023. https://news.
harvard.edu/gazette/sto-
ry/2023/08/mental-health-ills-
are-rising-do-mood-tracking-
apps-help/.“XRHealth Receives Patent for 
Closed Loop Biofeedback in VR, 
AR.” MobiHealthNews, 14 June 
14, 2023. www.mobihealthnews.
com/news/xrhealth-receives-
patent-closed-loop-biofeedback-
vr-ar.
Xu, Enbo, et al. “Tissue-like 
Cultured Fish Fillets through 
a Synthetic Food Pipeline.” Npj 
Science of Food, vol. 7, no. 1, 
May 1, 2023, p. 17. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41538-023-00194-2.
Xu, Yuanyuan, and Zhanjun Li. 
“CRISPR-Cas Systems: Overview, 
Innovations and Applications 
in Human Disease Research 
and Gene Therapy.” Computa-
tional and Structural Biotech-
nology Journal, vol. 18, 2020, p. 
2401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
csbj.2020.08.031.
Xue, Mantian, et al. “Integrated 
Biosensor Platform Based on 
Graphene Transistor Arrays for 
Real-Time High-Accuracy Ion 
Sensing.” Nature Communica-
tions, vol. 13, no. 1, August 1, 2022, 
p. 5064. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-022-32749-4.SELECTED SOURCESHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRY684© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Yeon, Hanwool, et al. “Long-Term 
Reliable Physical Health Moni-
toring by Sweat Pore–Inspired 
Perforated Electronic Skins.” 
Science Advances, vol. 7, no. 27, 
June 2021, p. eabg8459. https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abg8459.
Zhang, Congqiang, et al. “Mi-
crobial Utilization of Next-Gen-
eration Feedstocks for the 
Biomanufacturing of Value-Add-
ed Chemicals and Food Ingredi-
ents.” Frontiers in Bioengineer-
ing and Biotechnology, vol. 10, 
2022. www.frontiersin.org/arti-
cles/10.3389/fbioe.2022.874612.
Zhang, Dong, and Yi Wang. 
“Functional Protein-Based Bio-
inspired Nanomaterials: From 
Coupled Proteins, Synthetic 
Approaches, Nanostructures 
to Applications.” International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 
vol. 20, no. 12, January 12, 2019, p. 
3054. www.mdpi.com, https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijms20123054.Zhang, Flora. “When Bad Guys 
Use AI and ML in Cyberattacks, 
What Do You Do?” Security-
RoundTable.org, January 30, 
2021, https://securityroundtable.
org/when-bad-guys-use-ai-and-
ml-in-cyberattacks-what-do-
you-do/.
Zhang, Songlin, et al. “Biomimet-
ic Spinning of Soft Functional 
Fibres via Spontaneous Phase 
Separation.” Nature Electronics, 
vol. 6, no. 5, May 5, 2023, pp. 
338–48. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41928-023-00960-w.
Zhao, Hang, et al. “Recent Ad-
vances in Flexible and Wearable 
Sensors for Monitoring Chemical 
Molecules.” Nanoscale, vol. 14, 
no. 5, 2022, pp. 1653–69. https://
doi.org/10.1039/D1NR06244A.
Zovko, Kristina, et al. “IoT and 
Health Monitoring Wearable De-
vices as Enabling Technologies 
for Sustainable Enhancement 
of Life Quality in Smart Environ-
ments.” Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction, vol. 413, August 2023, p. 
137506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2023.137506.SELECTED SOURCESHEALTH CARE & MEDICINE INDUSTRYFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION687© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
688 T op Headlines
689 State of Play
690  Key Events
691  Likely Near T erm 
Developments
692  Why Financial Services & 
Insurance Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
693  Opportunities and Threats
694  Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
695  Central Themes
697  Ones T o Watch
698 Building Blocks
699 Digital Identity 
700 Data Minimization 
701 AI-Powered CX 
702 AI-Assisted Data Modeling  
for Insurers 
703 Scaling Cryptocurrencies720 Asset Tokenization
721 Scenario: What if DeFi 
Reinvented Protection  
for High-Value Assets?
722 Authors 
725 Selected Sources704 Open Banking
705 Scenario: What if open 
banking evolves into a DeFi 
hub model?
706 Seamless Interactions
707 Frictionless Payments 
708 Instant Payments 
709 Better Digital Wallets 
710 Transactions From Anywhere
711 Scenario: What If Invisible 
Finance Enables Undetectable 
Fraud?
712 Governance
713 Rising Cyber Risk
714 Global Crypto Regulation 
715 Alternative Credit Scoring 
716 Scenario: What if AI Redefined 
Financial Compliance?
717 DeFi Models
718 Routes to Web3 
719 Programmable Money INDUSTRYFinancial services 
are evolving towards 
a future defined by 
instant, seamless 
interactions and robust 
security.01
02
03
04
05
688© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Banks Battle to Keep Digital Pace Amid T ech Evolution
Financial institutions are finding it increasingly difficult to keep pace with the 
rapid evolution of technology despite ongoing efforts in digital transformation.
2023 Bank Failures Eclipse 2008, Signaling Shift to Megabanks
The fall of Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank marked a more 
significant disruption than the 2008 crisis, creating uncertainty for regional banks.
Financial Firms Must Revamp KYC in Digital Identity Push
As digital identity technologies advance, financial institutions must overhaul “Know 
Your Customer” (KYC) policies to make banking interactions and transactions more 
fluid and secure.
Instant Payments Get Closer to Reality with FedNow’s Launch
With the introduction of FedNow in 2023, the financial industry is one step closer 
to instantaneous payments and real-time financial processing.
Banking Infrastructure Enters Its Blockchain Era
Orchestration, routing, and data security are poised to become the most exciting 
battlegrounds in finance, driven by leading banks’ innovative use of blockchain.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCESTATE 
OF PLAYFinancial services institutions and insurance providers are facing a pivotal 
juncture. Innovation has brought advances like instant payments, digital 
wallets, and open banking, yet it has also revealed the fragile infrastructure 
underpinning legacy systems. Though financial groups tout significant 
technology spending, brick-and-mortar branches are being rapidly closed 
leaving customers with fragmented services and a need for more consis-
tent access. While many services still require in-person visits, call centers 
scale back as digital traffic surges, and systems suffer frequent outages. 
Legacy financial organizations that are still struggling to modernize face an 
unpleasant reality. The digital transformation endeavors undertaken in the 
late 2010s are falling behind a wave of emerging capabilities: innovations 
like artificial intelligence and decentralized identity are already scaling, 
putting pressure on existing initiatives. Difficult decisions loom—whether 
to forge ahead with current modernization efforts, redirect budgets to trail-
blazing opportunities, or straddle both at the risk of diluted focus.
The imperative is clear: organizations must redesign technology stacks for 
a digital-first world, embrace agile innovation, and focus beyond quarterly 
results to make the long-term investments required to compete in the un-
folding revolution.Financial services are at a 
crossroads: balancing tech 
investment and innovation for 
the long term with a positive 
experience today.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
689690© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
MARCH 10, 2023
Silicon Valley Bank Collapse  
A bank run led to the government’s 
seizure of SVB, the third largest 
bank failure in US history.
APRIL 20, 2023
Markets in Crypto Act Approval  
The European Parliament passed MiCA, 
which imposes requirements on crypto 
platforms, issuers, and traders.JULY 20, 2023  
FedNow Launch  
The new Federal Reserve digital 
payments system will allow 
faster and cheaper cash flow.JUNE 5, 2023
Insurers Pull Out of California  
State Farm becomes the second major 
insurer to pull out of California after Allstate 
announced its move in November 2022. NOVEMBER 2, 2023
Sam Bankman-Fried Conviction  
A jury found Sam Bankman-Fried, 
FTX founder, guilty of seven fraud 
and conspiracy charges.691© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ACTION IS THE VERB FOR 2024 
Financial institutions and insurance 
providers have spent years experi-
menting, pondering, and investigat-
ing new and influential technologies. 
To a great extent, the volatile market 
of the last several years created the 
optimal environment for thinking 
rather than doing. But 2024 will be 
different: New AI standards, scaled 
CBDCs, and forthcoming stablecoin 
regulations mark this year as a year 
of action. If financial institutions and 
insurance providers leverage this 
opportunity to make real progress on 
their technological investment, 2024 
could be an inflection point for the 
industry.Inflation (Should) Remain Steady
Current views suggest inflation will remain 
steady this year after cooling in late 2023. 
While Fed rate cuts will help maintain sta-
bility, rising housing and rental costs at the 
beginning of 2024 have put upward pressure 
on inflation, making it a space to watch.
AI Standards Development
Top tech firms are participating in a joint 
effort led by the US Department of Commerce 
to create standards around the safe use of 
AI. While not purely FI-focused, the outcomes 
will likely inform how banks and insurance 
companies use the tech. US Election Outcomes
In addition to the presidential election, 
several senate seats are up for grabs in 
2024 that could determine key outcomes 
in banking regulation over the next several 
years, particularly in Ohio, Montana, and 
California. US Stablecoin Regulation
The Clarity for Payment Stablecoins Act of 
2023 was passed by the House Financial 
Services Committee in 2023 in July, leaving 
many hopeful that the official legislation 
will pass sometime in 2024. The bill would 
regulate stablecoins like other financial 
institutions.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
CBDC Launches
Several countries, including India, Brazil, and 
Singapore, have planned to launch CBDCs 
in 2024. While the scale and maturity of the 
efforts vary, 2024 should serve as a proving 
ground for whether CBDCs work in the wild.T echnology Investment
A recent survey showed that 92% of banks 
plan to increase technology spending in 2024. 
This investment will likely focus on data and 
AI, leading to strategic hires in specific areas 
of expertise. Hopefully, these investments will 
be practical and not experimental.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
Distribution692© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Open banking frameworks 
and embedded insurance 
offerings enable financial 
institutions and insurers 
to deliver customized 
products through third-
party platforms and apps. 
Integrating services with 
digital ecosystems can 
substantially expand 
consumer reach and 
acquisition without 
traditional sales and 
marketing costs.  Emergent standards 
around digital identity 
verification, e-signatures, 
and digital wallets 
allow remote, paperless 
onboarding of new clients. 
Auto-validated customer 
data cuts administrative 
costs related to 
application reviews and 
background checks. These 
elements of streamlined 
onboarding enhance 
profitability through lower 
acquisition costs and 
faster account funding.Blockchain-based 
settlement layers and 
real-time payment rails 
can reduce transaction 
times from days to 
seconds while lowering 
reconciliation expenses. 
Legacy back-office 
systems rely on complex 
intermediary clearing 
processes that amplify 
operational costs. Direct 
settlement improves cash 
flows.Sophisticated 
automation through AI 
and machine learning 
allows financial and 
insurance providers to 
optimize everything from 
underwriting approvals 
to claims adjustment. 
This digitization of 
manual review processes 
enhances accuracy and 
efficiency, reducing 
headcount and improving 
the effectiveness of 
human capital.As personal data 
protection regulations 
emerge across 
jurisdictions, institutions 
require new capabilities 
around managing 
consent, data inventories, 
access controls, and 
surveillance systems. 
While temporarily 
increasing costs, data 
governance is table 
stakes for institutional 
trust and mitigates 
existential regulatory or 
cyber risk.Digitization of customer-
facing processes (like 
online banking apps) 
continues behind the 
scenes by virtualizing 
infrastructure. 
Transitioning from legacy 
systems reduces brick-
and-mortar footprints, 
paper processing, manual 
labor, and associated 
multi-million dollar 
expenses.Expanding  
DistributionStreamlining 
OnboardingOptimizing 
SettlementsBoosting  
ProductivityEnsuring  
ComplianceVirtualizing 
OperationsWHY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Persistent and escalating cybersecurity hazards like hacking, malware, and 
phishing scams present substantial data and asset security challenges for 
financial firms housing sensitive customer information.
Emerging data privacy regulations in major jurisdictions require increased 
financial sector transparency and customer control, necessitating 
investments in continuous compliance efforts.  
Disruptive financial technology startups promoting innovations such as 
digital payments, automated advisory, and blockchain are forcing banks and 
investment firms to adapt rapidly.  
Fluctuating macroeconomic conditions, including interest rates, inflation, 
credit cycles, and potential recessions, significantly sway bank loan books 
and investment portfolios, posing economic stability risks.  
Highly sophisticated fraud threats around identity theft, payment fraud, and 
more that cost the industry billions annually require ongoing detection and 
prevention efforts across financial institutions.Opportunities
Exploring emerging identification technologies from outside banking could 
unlock avenues to create seamless customer identity verification in-person, 
online, and on the phone—enhancing user experience across all interaction 
channels.  
Banks have opportunities to build on consumer demand for financial app 
features by integrating digital offerings like personalized recommendations 
based on data analysis—capitalizing on desires for more value-added digital 
wallet capabilities.
Pursuing practical AI applications that increase productivity and efficiency 
would allow financial institutions to adopt this technology strategically rather 
than just following the latest trend.  
Employing behavioral insights and predictive modeling, including third-
party data, to shape preemptive customer offerings aligned with needs could 
augment the precision of such analytics.
Future-focused infrastructure investment strategies enabling banks to 
support cutting-edge innovation can position them to stay ahead of evolving 
market expectations.
693© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE694© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Continue to invest in cyber -
security controls, AI-en-
abled systems for detecting 
fraud, upgraded data 
encryption, and refined 
access governance to com-
ply with emerging privacy 
regulations and combat 
the increasingly sophisti-
cated cybersecurity threats 
that manifest in the modern 
digital landscape.Evaluate, in detail, all digi-
tal transformation efforts, 
programs, and initiatives 
against an updated com-
prehensive ten-year tech-
nology roadmap to ensure 
the modernization updates 
across business functions 
are keeping pace with the 
latest innovations in emerg-
ing technologies across 
industries.Design and implement 
customer identity man-
agement transformation 
programs consisting of 
omnichannel capabilities 
across digital and in-per -
son platforms. These will 
enable enhancements to 
identity verification pro-
cesses that mitigate fraud 
while expediting customer 
onboarding and authenti-
cation.   Allocate additional budget, 
human capital, and re-
sources towards augment -
ing predictive risk modeling 
analytics capabilities via 
alternative and synthetic 
data. This will facilitate 
preemptive adjustments 
within investment portfolios 
and other financial assets 
to mitigate vulnerability 
more effectively.Provide substantial funding 
to build more flexible, agile 
core technological systems 
that simultaneously support 
integration with legacy and 
future cutting-edge inno-
vations, facilitating quicker 
responses to rapidly shift -
ing customer needs, com-
petitor product offerings, 
and internal digitization 
goals.Contemplate new prod-
uct and service offerings 
that leverage emerging 
technologies to create 
more value for customers, 
or meet their needs for 
evolving risks. By integrat -
ing cutting-edge solutions 
such as artificial intelli-
gence and blockchain, 
companies can enhance 
operational efficiency 
and introduce innovative 
risk management tools.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEDigital Fragmentation
Despite significant innovation funding, unfinished 
transitions from aging, on-premises systems have left 
customers facing intermittent access, frequent out-
ages, and fragmented experiences. A focus on exper-
imental innovation efforts rather than scalable cus-
tomer-facing capabilities is often to blame for failed 
modernization efforts. The source of this fragmenta-
tion is decades of technical debt burdening financial 
institutions—sprawling, complex IT estates that have 
become exceptionally challenging to overhaul. The 
consequences are emerging at an accelerating pace: 
customer frustrations, brand erosion, outages during 
critical transactions, and tightening margins as costs 
escalate. As competitors increasingly offer integrated, 
omnichannel client service, outdated financial insti-
tutions run the risk of dissatisfied customers leaving 
for more advanced providers. The growing digital divide 
has expanded too far to ignore; near-term disruption 
seems inevitable as decentralized technologies ready a 
more seamless and integrated alternative.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 695INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
Neobank Infiltration
Neobanks have narrowed the gap with traditional 
banks by targeting the digital shortcomings of estab-
lished institutions. These entities, which capture nearly 
half of new account market share, leverage modern 
infrastructures, benefit from lighter regulatory frame-
works, and disrupt key revenue streams in sectors like 
lending and payments. Younger cohorts make up most 
of their growth: 75% of new accounts originate from Gen 
Z or millennials, for whom the concept of a checking 
account has become indistinguishable from payment 
tools. Neobanks distinguish themselves by offering 
services such as bill management and negotiation, 
subscription management, credit score monitoring, 
and automated savings and investing, all of which are 
now considered standard features to many consumers. 
This evolution reflects how neobanks are reshaping the 
banking landscape, appealing to a tech-savvy, younger 
demographic and challenging the dominance of tradi-
tional banks.Blockchain Rebound
After a period marked by speculative frenzy and sig-
nificant fluctuations in Bitcoin’s value, the blockchain 
and digital asset sectors saw a notable rebound with 
increased institutional interest in October. Despite vol-
atile headlines, the steady enhancement of foundation-
al technologies has progressed quietly. These advance-
ments in global interoperability, execution reliability, 
and ecosystem tooling are setting the stage for sus-
tained growth. A majority of the world’s central banks 
are exploring central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) 
and digital asset strategies, signaling a shift towards 
mainstream acceptance. Innovations in multi-party 
compute, zero-knowledge proofs, and confidential com-
puting are refining the balance between transparency 
and privacy. The emergence of an open, programma-
ble, and borderless financial infrastructure suggests 
technology is no longer the main barrier to widespread 
adoption. However, significant policy challenges related 
to digital identity, compliance, consumer protection, 
and international coordination remain, keeping broad-
er application to speculative trading. Mainstream use 
appears distant unless regulatory reforms align with 
technological advances.Cybersecurity Frontlines
As digital expansion accelerates, so does the prolifer-
ation of cyber threats. The shift from frequent, minor 
attacks to selective, high-stakes breaches has seen 
hackers exploiting vulnerabilities in legacy systems to 
monetize high-value data on the dark web. Enhanced 
security measures struggle against sophisticated ran-
somware that demands payments to unlock customer 
access, subtly undermining trust despite significant 
security investments. The relentless need for vigilance 
against the exploit kits hackers can deploy poses chal-
lenges for even the most robust security operations. 
Smaller entities face the tough choice of outsourcing 
security, potentially compromising control over vital 
systems and impacting financial health. Regulatory 
demands for risk management are essential yet can 
impede rapid responses to emerging threats. This 
constant, mostly invisible struggle for cybersecurity 
underscores the critical battle for system integrity and 
resilience, highlighting the complex dynamics in pro-
tecting digital landscapes.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 696INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
Balancing Innovation and Policy
Emerging technologies are advancing rapidly, outstrip-
ping existing policy frameworks and oversight capabili-
ties. The domain of cryptocurrencies and digital assets, 
with its complex custodial and transactional protocols, 
can create particular challenges for regulatory catego-
ries designed for conventional financial systems. Sim-
ilarly, the trade-offs between explainability and perfor-
mance in machine learning and artificial intelligence 
raise questions about accountability and fairness in 
systems. The gap between the pace of innovation and 
the capacity for regulatory oversight is widening, with 
central interventions potentially stifling the positive 
impacts of new technologies. The key to navigating this 
evolving landscape lies in enhancing organizational 
transparency and consumer understanding, which are 
as crucial for success as establishing universal stan-
dards. Creating the appropriate approach will require 
enhancing technological knowledge for business and 
policy leaders.Soaring Customer Expectations
Today’s digital transformation initiatives are failing to 
meet consumer expectations. Behind the scenes lie 
challenges such as integrating new databases, imple-
menting advanced cybersecurity measures, and retir-
ing old technologies. These necessary steps can lead 
to unfavorable customer interactions, such as systems 
that require re-identification and system outages and 
conversions. Today, almost all consumers expect fully 
personalized advice and consistent experiences across 
both physical and digital touchpoints. Even one neg-
ative interaction can prompt a consumer to consider 
switching to a different institution. To retain loyalty, 
brands must integrate physical and digital services 
and balance automated and human-centered interac-
tions. Traditional brands may have an inherent trust 
advantage, yet this often relies on customer inertia. As 
consumer expectations escalate and more alternatives 
emerge, brands that cannot deliver experiences that 
fulfill their promises risk losing their competitive edge.Alex Chriss, President and CEO of PayPal, for the 
company’s leadership in digital payments, pay-
ment experiences, cryptocurrencies, and expand-
ing global payment solutions.
Bradley Leimer, Co-Founder of Unconventional 
Ventures and Executive Director, Head of Fintech 
Partnerships and Open Innovation at SMBC, for 
his take on innovative technologies in banking.
Cathie Wood, Founder and CEO of ARK Invest, 
for her thematic investing advice and perspec-
tives on leading technological innovation and 
shifts in finance, such as SEC approvals.
Dr. Dambisa Moyo; Member, House of Lords—
sitting as Baroness Moyo of Knightsbridge; 
Investor, Board member, Author; for her thought 
leadership on macroeconomics and global 
affairs.
Daniel Schreiber & Shai Wininger, Founders of 
Lemonade, for their company’s disruption of the 
insurance industry using AI and data analytics, 
reimagining claims and customer service.
Hiromichi Mizuno, former Chief Investment Of-
ficer of Japan’s Government Pension Investment 
Fund (GPIF) and UN special envoy, for his work in 
innovative finance and sustainable investments.Jack Dorsey, founder of Twitter & Block, for 
innovatively fusing social media with finance, 
significantly shaping digital communication 
and transactions across platforms.
Dr. Janet Y ellen, United States Secretary of the 
Treasury, for her work leading the Treasury’s poli-
cies and thought work around CBDCs, the future 
of money, and the evolution of payments.
Jason Keck, Founder and CEO of Broker Buddha, 
for transforming the insurance application and 
renewal process with agency management sys-
tem (AMS) technology.
Ken Moore, Chief Innovation Officer of Master-
card, for his work leading the organization’s per-
spective on emerging technologies like artificial 
intelligence and blockchain.
Kristo Käärmann, Co-Founder of Wise (formerly 
TransferWise), for the company’s mission to cut 
through cross-border payment barriers, making 
transactions cheaper and faster.
Laura Drabik, Chief Evangelist at Guidewire, for 
her thought leadership and work on the factors 
shaping insurance’s future, including technolo-
gy and climate change.Dr. Lisa D. Cook, Member of the Board of Gover-
nors of the Federal Reserve System, economist, 
and professor, for her groundbreaking work on 
economic policy and financial markets.
Max Levchin, CEO of Affirm, for his ongoing 
innovations, including developing anti-fraud 
efforts, co-creating the Gausebeck-Levchin test, 
and co-founding Affirm.
Michael Barr, Vice Chair of Federal Reserve for 
Supervision, for his work on regulatory propos-
als that would raise capital requirements and 
strengthen oversight for major banks.
Nick Molnar and Anthony Eisen, Co-Founders 
of Afterpay, for pioneering payment flexibility 
with their “buy now, pay later” service, reshap-
ing retail finance and invisible payments.
Ricardo Lara, California Insurance Commis-
sioner, for his navigation of the state’s evolving 
environment and insurers’ actions to decrease 
offerings due to climate-related risk.
Rodney Williams, Co-Founder of SoLoFunds 
and Co-founder and Chief Commercial Offi-
cer at LISNR, for the LISNR technology’s work 
in contactless authentication and seamless 
transactions.Rohit Chopra, Director of the US Consumer Fi-
nancial Protection Bureau, for his polarizing but 
impactful perspectives on banking regulation 
and his work on open banking.
Sallie Krawcheck, CEO and Co-Founder of El-
levest, for developing a digital financial advisor 
for women emphasizing ethical investment and 
economic empowerment.
Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI, for potential de-
velopments the company could lead in using 
generative artificial intelligence in financial 
services and insurance applications.
Shefi Ben-Hutta, Founder of Coverager, for 
tracking and analyzing the near-term devel-
opments and long-term factors shaping the 
insurance landscape.
Thasunda Brown Duckett, CEO of TIAA, for her 
leadership in finance, career-long advocacy for 
financial literacy and inclusion, and mission to 
expand retirement savings.
Vitalik Buterin, Co-Founder of Ethereum, for his 
revolutionary work in finance with blockchain, 
which is driving the growth of Decentralized 
Finance and smart contract applications.ONES TO WATCH
697© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE698© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.BUILDING 
BLOCKSINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Digital identity is the online 
presence or persona of an 
individual, organization, or 
device, represented by uniquely 
identifiable attributes and 
used for digital interactions 
and transactions. While they 
used to be somewhat separate, 
the meteoric rise of digital 
interactions has caused one’s 
“identity” and “digital identity”  
to become inextricably linked.To date, digital identity is verified through mechanisms like 
multi-factor authentication, simple biometrics (such as a 
thumbprint), and digital or electronic signatures. However, 
new technological capabilities drive this space toward more 
seamless and invisible authentication. These capabilities 
apply across many industries but are essential for bank-
ing and financial services, where almost every interaction 
requires authentication.
CLEAR is preparing to roll out the CLEAR Lane of the Future 
in 2024, allowing CLEAR Plus Members to verify their identi-
ty with their face. Other venues are following suit: the Bank 
of America Stadium in Charlotte, NC, began using facial 
recognition in December 2023 in partnership with Verizon. 
Blockchain-based identities also provide an immutable 
record of one’s identity. Sovrin is a blockchain-based decen-
tralized identity network that enables verifiable, self-sover-
eign identities, allowing users to share only the information 
necessary for a transaction or interaction.
As more organizations implement digital identity mea-
sures, behavioral biometrics, which validate a person by 
analyzing things like typing speed or mousing patterns, will 
likely increase in popularity. While regulation may prevent 
US banks from implementing these measures, banks in 
Australia have come together to institute the Scam Safe 
Accord, which requires biometric verification for account 
openings.At the heart of digital identity technology is the ability to 
enhance security measures and mitigate the risk of fraud. 
Digital identity solutions offer robust verification process-
es, utilizing biometrics, encryption, and blockchain, among 
other technologies, to ensure that only authorized users can 
access sensitive financial information and execute transac-
tions. Digital identity technology also simplifies the process 
of meeting regulatory requirements like Know Your Custom-
er (KYC) and Anti-Money Laundering (AML) by streamlining 
the verification of customer identities and monitoring 
transactions for suspicious activities.
In addition to institutional benefits, customers expect 
seamless, secure, and rapid interactions with their financial 
service providers. Digital identity technologies could make 
interactions seamless, leading to entirely ID-free interac-
tions. By simplifying the authentication process without 
compromising security, financial institutions can enhance 
customer satisfaction, foster loyalty, and attract new clients.
Implementing digital identity solutions can also lead to sig-
nificant improvements in operational efficiency. Automated 
verification processes reduce the need for manual checks, 
thereby lowering operating costs and speeding up transac-
tion times.
Digital identity technology is more than just a tool for 
enhancing security; it is a strategic asset that addresses a 
broad spectrum of challenges financial institutions face.DIGITAL IDENTITY11TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 699INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Data minimization is a principle 
in data protection and privacy 
that emphasizes collecting only 
the data that is directly necessary 
and relevant for accomplishing a 
specified purpose. It advocates 
for limiting the amount of 
personal data gathered, stored, 
and used to the minimum required 
to achieve the objectives for 
which the data is processed. Researchers are developing approaches that leverage tech-
nologies like fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) to help 
organizations meet data minimization standards. With 
FHE, data is encrypted so that third parties can perform 
analysis and operations on the encrypted data without 
ever having access to the unencrypted data. For example, a 
company could confirm an individual’s identity through an 
FHE-based database without seeing, accessing, or storing 
personally identifiable information.
A similar approach, differential privacy, ensures that the 
privacy of individuals in a dataset is protected when statis-
tical analyses are performed. It works by adding a certain 
amount of random noise to the data or the results of que-
ries on the data, making it challenging to infer information 
about any individual within the dataset. The goal is to allow 
data analysts to extract useful aggregate information from 
a dataset without compromising the privacy of any individ-
ual. Differential privacy can be beneficial when implement-
ing AI models to avoid having the model inadvertently learn 
or reveal sensitive information about individuals from the 
training data.
Companies are also addressing data minimization needs 
through consent management; however, this approach can 
fail if consent is obtained by requiring consumers to agree 
to a sharing policy they do not fully understand. Other rela-
tively analog solutions include stricter access controls and 
regular data cleaning and deletion.Data minimization is crucial for financial institutions and 
insurance companies, especially with both federal bodies 
like the FTC and individual states enacting stricter data 
privacy regulations in 2023. These laws mandate limiting 
data collection and usage, aiming for compliance, enhanced 
security, and customer trust.
By adhering to data minimization, organizations can reduce 
the risk of data breaches, enhance privacy protections, and 
build trust with customers and users by demonstrating re-
sponsible data management practices. Data minimization 
practices, however, may stand in stark contrast to organiza-
tions’ increasing use of AI: the concept of reducing or min-
imizing the amount of data an organization has, especially 
in its raw form, stands at odds with the need to build up a 
corpus of data to have a sufficiently reliable AI model.
In customer data lakes, reducing the amount of data held 
can benefit organizations; lowering data storage and pro-
cessing needs can lead to streamlined operations and cost 
savings. Moreover, focusing on necessary data improves de-
cision-making quality. Due to less data handling, simplified 
compliance helps navigate the complex regulatory land-
scape. Data minimization is strategic, balancing regulatory 
adherence with operational efficiency, security enhance-
ment, and trust-building.DATA MINIMIZATION2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 700INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Almost three-quarters of leaders 
have prioritized expanding AI 
across the customer experience. 
While CX has been a strong 
focus for financial services 
companies and insurers over the 
past decade or more, artificial 
intelligence serves as rocket fuel 
for these companies to further 
personalize their interactions and 
experiences. The most common application of artificial intelligence to 
enhance CX is through chatbots or other servicing agents. 
WatsonX has developed advanced AI chatbots that use nat-
ural language processing (NLP) to respond to queries about 
anything from filing a claim to paying their bill.
While chatbots are an obvious choice for experimenta-
tion, other more sophisticated applications are beginning 
to emerge. Roots Automation, for example, has rolled out 
InsurGPT, a finely-tuned large language model trained on in-
surance data to parse documents, including submissions, 
claims notices, and customer or agent correspondence. 
In other cases, companies implement AI in back-office 
operations to expedite customer decision-making, creating 
speedier experiences. In one example, Nationwide Insurance 
partnered with DigitalOwl, a tool that uses AI to quickly 
summarize vast stores of medical records, increasing the 
speed of life insurance underwriting. 
Some new banking upstarts offer AI-based features like 
notifications and guardrails: cred.ai issues a credit card that 
limits your spending based on the amount of money you 
have in your linked deposit account. As you spend, money is 
set aside in your deposit account to ensure you can pay it off.The initial investment in AI technology can be substantial, 
covering both the technology itself and the training and 
restructuring needed to integrate AI into existing systems. 
Organizations may feel uncertain about the return on in-
vestment, especially since there is no past experience with 
these AI applications to guarantee improved customer expe-
riences.
Ironically, while AI aims to personalize customer experi-
ences, there’s a risk of depersonalization if implemented 
incorrectly. Over-reliance on AI without human oversight can 
lead to customer experiences that feel generic or lack the 
human touch, potentially affecting customer satisfaction 
and loyalty.
As AI technologies such as chatbots and document process-
ing systems handle more tasks traditionally performed by 
humans, there will be a decreasing need for a large custom-
er service staff, affecting employment within the industry.
AI applications that are purpose-built for insurance will 
enable streamlining, automating, processing, and analyzing 
documents such as insurance claims and medical records. 
These applications will create operational efficiencies, 
reduce manual labor, speed up decision-making processes, 
and shorten the time required for services like insurance 
underwriting.AI-POWERED CX 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 701INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
AI-assisted data modeling 
is a game-changer for the 
insurance industry, driving 
significant advancements in risk 
assessment and fraud detection. 
By leveraging AI to analyze vast 
quantities of data, insurance 
companies can uncover nuanced 
insights and drive more accurate 
decision-making.A patent application filed by Travelers Insurance in May 
2023 outlines a solution to help reduce cargo theft using AI 
imagery analysis. In this solution, AI analyzes images or sen-
sor data of cargo at various points in time. The system can 
identify theft, damage, or other loss events by comparing 
these data points. This approach allows for immediate de-
tection of discrepancies, significantly increasing the chanc-
es of quickly preventing theft or recovering stolen goods.
Another patent from State Farm describes the integration 
of LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) and AI to advance 
spatial analysis, property management, and navigation. The 
patent encompasses creating and using 3D models to visu-
alize home renovations, optimize object placement, design 
landscapes, locate utility lines, and manage commercial 
inventories. Additionally, it includes AI-based recommen-
dations for interior design, generating new floor plans, and 
facilitating 3D navigation within buildings.
Solution providers are also developing products to help 
carriers improve their data analysis. Astera ReportMiner 
automates the extraction of information from unstructured 
documents, streamlining claims processing and improving 
underwriting decisions. It uses AI to efficiently identify and 
extract critical data points from formats like PDFs, TXT files, 
and spreadsheets.Insurers will have a more comprehensive view of potential 
risk by leveraging unstructured data sources.
While companies will need regulatory changes to imple-
ment AI into pricing, future applications could enable more 
accurate and dynamic premium settings by analyzing a 
more comprehensive range of variables, including new data 
types and patterns that traditional models may not capture. 
Such premium calculations would more accurately reflect 
the risk profile of policyholders, ensuring that pricing is 
both competitive and reflective of actual risk.
Similarly, although it would invite the same level of regu-
latory scrutiny, AI could significantly enhance the under-
writing process by quickly analyzing complex data sets, 
including non-traditional data sources, to assess the risk 
associated with insuring individuals or entities. Improved 
data sets enable more accurate underwriting decisions and 
the potential for developing customized insurance prod-
ucts. Today, companies could leverage “lite” versions of AI 
into underwriting processes by ensuring the final decision 
sits with the human underwriter.
AI models can also predict claims’ likelihood and potential 
cost, enabling insurers to allocate resources more effi-
ciently and prepare for future liabilities. Automated claims 
processing powered by AI can also speed up the settlement 
process, reducing the time and cost associated with claims 
management. This application is more readily available 
today due to the lesser regulatory hurdles. AI-ASSISTED DATA 
MODELING FOR 
INSURERS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 702INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Financial services and insurance 
companies are integrating cryp-
tocurrencies, leveraging their 
scalability for efficient products 
as well as new financial products, 
like crypto custody, digital asset 
protection, and efficient transac-
tions. While this offers opportuni-
ties like access to new markets, it 
poses challenges due to volatility, 
regulatory uncertainties, and se-
curity concerns.Beginning in 2021, some insurers, including Metromile 
and AXA, announced they’d accept crypto as payment, with 
Metromile claiming it is the first insurer to both accept pay-
ment and pay claims in crypto. But the list has not grown 
significantly since then, and the crypto winter and subse-
quent SEC crackdown highlighted the volatile regulatory 
environment surrounding cryptocurrencies.
In June, Arch Insurance authorized the Lloyd’s of London 
coverholder Evertas to write up to $420 million on crime-re-
lated policies involving the theft of private keys and provide 
insurance on crypto mining hardware of up to $200 million, 
the highest in the industry. These new limits represent a 
significant increase from the previous single policy limit of 
$5 million from Evertas.
As of September, Deutsche Bank (in partnership with Tau-
rus) joins a growing list of global banks that provide crypto 
custody services. And more banks may take on crypto 
custody if the regulatory environment eases. In early 2024, 
banking associations appealed to the SEC to reevaluate a 
regulation that requires banks to list crypto assets in cus-
tody as liabilities, which forces banks to allocate an equiv-
alent amount of assets. The group argues that altering this 
regulation would decrease the concentration of risk.The ongoing scaling of cryptocurrency in financial institu-
tions and insurance companies offers organizations new 
market opportunities, including expansion into new client 
segments and services. Some companies may begin offer-
ing services like those discussed, such as crypto custody, 
or may develop new innovative financial products that are 
faster, more efficient, or more cost-effective than traditional 
offerings.
Financial institutions may also begin implementing cryp-
to-based offerings to streamline transactions or offer 
new features such as programmable payments or instant 
cross-border transactions. Crypto also allows for more dy-
namic funding and payouts, like flexible treasury services.
Financial institutions in this space must be mindful of the 
developing regulatory environment. While some guidance 
exists today, other crypto-based laws will be in play in 2024. 
Institutions must closely watch the evolving regulatory 
landscape to stay aware of shifting compliance standards 
or impacts on capital requirements, capital allocation, and 
risk concentration strategies.SCALING 
CRYPTOCURRENCIES6TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 703INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Open banking, the practice that 
provides third-party developers 
access to financial data through 
application programming 
interfaces (APIs), enables new 
apps and services while ensuring 
greater financial transparency. 
Over the past year, there has been 
a push toward standardization, 
particularly as the EU’s awaited 
Payment Services Directive 3 
(PSD3) has finally passed.In mid-2023, the passage of PSD3 brought renewed life to 
the open banking discussion. Like its predecessor, PSD2, 
the directive creates rules about the security of electronic 
or digital payments, creating uniformity across the EU—a 
critical element for the success of open banking. 
One new patent application from Mastercard introduces 
a system that improves how payments are routed, focus-
ing on increasing the chances that payments go through 
successfully. By examining details like the account holder’s 
information and the transaction amount, the system calcu-
lates a “likelihood of success” score for each payment. This 
system can handle accounts held across different banks, 
calculating a success score for each account. It can also 
split a payment across multiple accounts, assessing the 
best distribution to ensure the payment goes through.
Visa is addressing consent management, another critical 
element of open banking. In one of their most recent pat-
ents, they introduced a system that automates user con-
sent management for data sharing and actions taken on 
their behalf, enhancing privacy and control. When a request 
for user data is made, the system prompts the user for con-
sent and, upon agreement, records this consent in a secure, 
immutable ledger. This process ensures that user data is 
only shared with permission and that all transactions are 
transparently logged for auditing.Open banking allows third-party providers to access finan-
cial data via APIs, fostering innovation and competition. As 
fintech startups introduce innovative products with this 
technology, financial institutions and insurance companies 
must adapt their offerings to compete. This environment 
encourages the development of tailored financial solutions 
that meet individual customer needs.
Some innovations may center on personalizing the customer 
experience. Access to comprehensive customer data enables 
financial institutions and insurance companies to offer per-
sonalized services. They can provide more accurate financial 
advice, better lending terms, and policies that closely match 
individual risk profiles. This data integration also simplifies 
application processes, improving customer satisfaction.
The sharing of customer data raises significant data secu-
rity and privacy issues. Institutions will need to invest in 
strong cybersecurity measures and comply with data protec-
tion regulations to protect customer information. In addition 
to security measures, open banking mandates adherence to 
complex regulations, requiring significant updates to sys-
tems and processes. Financial institutions must ensure APIs 
comply with data sharing and security standards, facing 
challenges in integrating new technologies and managing 
third-party partnerships. This level of security will necessi-
tate continuous investment in compliance and technology 
to navigate the open banking landscape effectively.OPEN BANKING2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 704INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCESCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
What if open banking evolves into a DeFi hub model?  
By 2035, the banking sector has embraced the decentralized financial hub model, marking the next evolution of open banking. This transformative 
shift is underpinned by the widespread adoption of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies, seamlessly integrating decentralized finance (DeFi) 
platforms into traditional banking services. This model revolutionizes how customers interact with financial services and introduces new complex reg-
ulatory implications.
In this evolved open banking ecosystem, banks function as secure interfaces between customers and the vast array of services offered by DeFi plat-
forms. They facilitate lending, borrowing, and trading without central intermediaries, leveraging smart contracts to automate and secure transactions. 
This democratization of financial services extends open banking principles beyond mere data sharing, enabling a fluid exchange of assets and finan-
cial services across a decentralized network.
Regulatory bodies have responded to this shift by developing a new framework that ensures these decentralized services’ security, transparency, and 
fairness. Financial institutions and other custodians or organizations that have cryptocurrency on the books must comply with smart contract au-
diting. These new rules ensure contracts operate as intended and look for code bugs that could alter outcomes. Regulators have also implemented 
interoperability standards to facilitate seamless interaction among blockchain networks and financial systems, ensuring that DeFi services can inte-
grate with the broader financial ecosystem without compromising security.
This model represents a significant shift in financial services architecture, where regulatory compliance, innovation, and customer empowerment are 
intricately balanced. It heralds a future where financial services are more accessible, efficient, and secure, driven by the collaborative efforts of banks, 
regulatory bodies, and the DeFi community.
705© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE706© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SEAMLESS 
INTERACTIONSINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Frictionless payments streamline 
transactions by minimizing 
user effort, creating a seamless 
experience. This approach, which 
includes invisible and embedded 
payments, integrates or 
automates the payment process 
within user interactions, enhancing 
convenience and efficiency across 
various platforms and services.Block, the parent company of Square, CashApp, Afterpay, 
and other popular paytech companies, is attempting to 
make payments more accessible with one of their new 
patents, which describes a system that integrates payment 
and content provider platforms to make accessing digital 
content easier and more secure for users. The system also 
uses machine learning to personalize content recommen-
dations and improves security by minimizing the need for 
users to enter sensitive information.
Israeli payment firm Nayax is creating a method for making 
digital payments using a web browser instead of a perma-
nent digital wallet app. Users receive a URL via text message 
that, when clicked, installs a temporary digital wallet on their 
mobile device to complete a transaction. This wallet commu-
nicates with payment terminals using the device’s NFC tech-
nology and is automatically deleted along with any payment 
information after the transaction, enhancing security.
Visa has introduced a method for embedding payment to-
kens directly into digital photos and other media metadata. 
This setup links each image to the copyright owner’s ac-
count, allowing for easy and secure purchasing of media by 
embedding all necessary information, like price and copy-
right details, within the photo. The embedded data elim-
inates the need for intermediaries and simplifies buying 
and selling copyrighted images, ensuring copyright owners 
are directly compensated for their work through a seamless 
transaction process.Financial institutions, payment providers, and insurance 
companies can use the rich data from frictionless payment 
transactions to develop personalized financial products 
and services. Banks can leverage analytics to understand 
customer preferences and behaviors, offering tailored ad-
vice, personalized loan and credit options, and customized 
savings plans. 
Insurance companies could leverage this technology to 
streamline the claims process, making it as frictionless 
as the payment systems themselves. Automated claims 
processing could significantly reduce processing times, 
improve accuracy, and enhance customer satisfaction.
Banks will face a growing demand from businesses for dig-
ital payment solutions that can integrate seamlessly with 
their retail operations. This demand includes the capability 
to process transactions smoothly and provide data insights, 
fraud prevention, and compliance with security standards.
The shift towards frictionless payments may alter tradi-
tional revenue streams for banks, particularly in trans-
action fees, as the competitive landscape could pressure 
fees downwards. But there is also potential for new reve-
nue streams through value-added services. Banks need 
to rethink their revenue models to adapt to the changing 
dynamics.FRICTIONLESS 
PAYMENTS3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 707INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Instant reconciliation enables 
card issuers and merchants to 
swiftly balance accounts while 
cardholders enjoy the immediate 
reflection of transactions in 
their bank accounts. Similarly, 
insurance policyholders are 
coming to expect rapid claim 
payments, mirroring the 
accelerated pace of virtually every 
other aspect of modern life.The Federal Reserve launched FedNow in July 2023, a re-
al-time payment service that enables instant bank-to-bank 
transactions. This service aims to support faster and more 
efficient payments across the financial landscape, offering 
continuous availability for immediate settlement.
In competition with FedNow, Mastercard has expanded its 
partnership with The Clearing House to further the adoption 
of instant payments. New aspects of the partnership aim 
to identify additional instant payment use cases for con-
sumers, businesses, and governments. The RTP® network, 
which currently includes 487 banks and credit unions, faces 
increased competition from the Federal Reserve’s FedNow.
Launched in 2021 with seven initial banks, SWIFT Go has 
rapidly expanded its reach, now encompassing over 600 
banks across 120 countries. Impressively, 85% of transac-
tions processed through SWIFT Go are completed in less 
than three minutes. SWIFT Go enhances the speed of inter-
national payment processing, enabling banks to provide 
competitive alternatives to fintech solutions.
Currently, payments initiated on one rail must travel and 
settle across the same rail, creating walled gardens. For re-
al-time payments to expand, the industry will need interop-
erability between rails. Real-time reconciliation could improve risk management by 
immediately detecting discrepancies and fraud. In tradi-
tional systems, the lag between transaction initiation and 
reconciliation can create windows of opportunity for fraud-
sters. Instant reconciliation closes these gaps, enhanc-
ing the security of financial transactions and protecting 
against financial losses.
Reducing overage fees through instant reconciliation may 
present a shift in revenue streams for banks, necessitating 
banks to re-evaluate their revenue models. Institutions may 
need to explore alternative sources of income, such as offer-
ing premium account services, investing in customer loyal-
ty programs that encourage more extensive use of banking 
services, or introducing innovative financial products.
Leveraging instant reconciliation can differentiate a bank 
or insurance company in a crowded market: more than half 
of customers today say they’d switch insurers to access 
instant digital claims payments. This strategic advantage 
can attract new customers looking for transparent, custom-
er-centric experiences.
Instant reconciliation improves operational efficiency, lead-
ing to faster settlement times and improved cash flow man-
agement, and allows banks and financial service companies 
to allocate resources more effectively. In Property and Casu-
alty insurance companies, payment processing accounts for 
over a quarter of operating costs, with paper checks costing 
orders of magnitude more than a digital payment.INSTANT PAYMENTS3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 708INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Digital wallets are virtual 
platforms that store payment 
information and other identifying 
credentials, offering seamless, 
secure, and fast payment 
options. They continue to evolve, 
incorporating advanced security 
features and expanding usability 
across global marketplaces, 
enhancing user convenience and 
financial accessibility.Several companies, including Visa and Capital One, are 
working on developing solutions that improve the security 
of digital wallet provisioning. These solutions often include 
secure methods for adding or linking financial instruments 
to third-party digital wallets via one-tap contactless card 
authentication and utilize cryptograms to verify user identi-
ty and authenticate transactions. 
Visa is also developing a novel approach to addressing 
the limitations of conventional payment systems, where a 
payment token is bound to a single card. The company is 
proposing the connection of a single token to multiple user 
accounts, which would enable the aggregation of credit 
limits from multiple cards for a single transaction. Their 
approach includes the generation of a virtual card which is 
associated with multiple accounts.
Finally, in early 2024, Visa launched Visa Commercial Pay, a 
new B2B payment solution aimed at businesses, incorpo-
rating features like corporate virtual cards for employees’ 
digital wallets (e.g., Apple Pay, Google Pay) to allow detailed 
management of expenses with set limits and merchant 
specifications.
Major wallets like Apple and Google provide support for 
non-payment information, like ID and insurance cards. In 
mid-2023, Google Wallet announced new features to sup-
port passes with barcodes or QR codes, health insurance 
cards, driver’s licenses, transit passes, and company IDs.Digital wallets make transactions faster and easier, encour-
aging impulse buying and attracting a broader customer 
base comfortable with digital payments. A study revealed 
that digital wallet users spend 31% more on average than 
non-users across all purchase types. This significant in-
crease in spending among digital wallet users, especially 
Millennials and Gen Z, highlights the growing influence of 
digital wallets on consumer purchasing behavior, suggest-
ing that these platforms facilitate transactions and encour-
age higher expenditure.
Businesses benefit in other ways from digital wallets; 
compared to traditional payment methods like credit cards, 
digital wallets often have lower processing fees, reducing 
business costs. Digital wallets also provide businesses with 
valuable data on customer purchasing habits, enabling 
targeted marketing and personalized offers. Companies can 
also integrate their loyalty programs with digital wallets, 
making it easier for customers to collect and redeem re-
wards, enhancing customer engagement.
Consumers now expect to be able to pay with a digital 
wallet. These tools offer convenience and ease to consum-
ers and often have features that allow users to track their 
spending and manage their finances more effectively. As 
they become even more ubiquitous, younger generations 
are becoming used to carrying only their phone, reducing 
the use of physical wallets.BETTER DIGITAL 
WALLETS 2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 709INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Technology is revolutionizing 
commerce by leveraging 
algorithmic purchasers and other 
features that extract data directly 
from vehicles or other sources 
and process transactions without 
traditional secure elements. These 
innovations enable consumers to 
engage in seamless and secure 
transactions from anywhere. Mastercard is developing a solution to simplify in-vehicle 
purchases, connecting a vehicle’s computing system with 
merchant payment systems. It introduces a token that 
contains details about the user’s payment account, the car, 
and a biometric identifier. This token allows the vehicle to 
initiate transactions, verifying payments by matching token 
details with the user’s biometric data. It streamlines the 
payment process, especially for purchases made without 
leaving the car.
Mastercard has also filed a patent for digital payments 
using natural language inputs. It enhances user verification 
by employing authentication factors, including biometrics, 
device location, and transaction history, to confirm user 
identity. The system leverages server technology to interpret 
user commands for scheduling payments, authenticate 
the user through these multifaceted checks, and efficiently 
carry out transactions.
Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) is a way of sharing that some-
thing is true between two parties without revealing any extra 
details about why it’s true. Companies use a feature of ZKP, 
called succinctness, to create more efficient blockchain sys-
tems known as ZK Rollups which enable blockchains to han-
dle a vast number of transactions. ImmutableX, a ZK Rollup 
built on the Ethereum blockchain, supports the economies 
of video games. Before ZK Rollups, creating real-time, block-
chain-based economies and gameplay experiences was im-
practical because of slow transaction times and high costs.For banks and paytech companies, seamless in-vehicle 
transactions and enhanced digital payments using natural 
language inputs and blockchain scalability open up inno -
vative avenues for service delivery and revenue generation. 
Banks can tap into new markets by integrating their ser-
vices with vehicles, offering customers the convenience of 
conducting transactions on the go.
This technology will also require robust security measures to 
protect sensitive biometric data and comply with stringent 
data privacy regulations. Adopting zero-knowledge proof and 
blockchain technologies like ZK Rollups could further stream-
line transaction processes, making them more secure and 
efficient, thus bolstering trust in digital banking services.
On the insurance front, blockchain’s transparency and 
security features could revolutionize claims processing and 
fraud prevention, offering a more efficient and trustworthy 
system. While the example here discusses data in vehicle 
settings, this technology will undoubtedly be applied to 
other settings too, expanding the availability of high-fidelity 
real-time data for insurers.
The evolution of vehicle-based commerce could lead to 
new cyber products for original equipment manufacturers 
(OEMs), especially if the OEMs are housing or storing the 
data. These companies may require additional coverage as-
sociated with digital transactions, data breaches, and even 
identity theft related to biometric data.TRANSACTIONS 
FROM ANYWHERE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 710INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCESCENARIOS
711© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
What If Invisible Finance Enables Undetectable Fraud?
By 2035, the financial ecosystem, once praised for its innovation and security, faces a significant challenge. The “Invis-
ible Finance Revolution,” with its digital IDs, biometric checks, and automated transactions, is now vulnerable to data 
poisoning. This shift from conventional financial oversight has allowed cyberattacks to corrupt our AI systems, leading 
to distorted financial services. Fraudulent transactions and false insurance claims are rising, exploiting the once-se-
cure blockchain technology.
The problem is exacerbated by our over-reliance on the system’s reliability. The absence of friction in transactions led to 
an absence of vigilance: the convenience of not having to manually verify transactions has become a significant weak-
ness, with financial irregularities often going unnoticed. Financial institutions, previously considered protectors of this 
digital space, are now struggling to fix these security breaches. Even with advanced encryption and fraud detection, they 
find themselves outpaced by these threats, shaking public trust in the financial system.
The current crisis highlights the downside of a frictionless financial world. The lack of transaction scrutiny has opened 
up significant security gaps. This situation serves as a reminder of the importance of balancing the embrace of new 
technologies with robust oversight and flexible security strategies. The idea of an invisible, effortless finance system 
has shown the importance of reevaluating our dependency on such technologies.712© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.GOVERNANCEINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Amid digital transformation, 
banks and insurance companies 
face escalating cyber risks. 
Cyberattacks, from data 
breaches to ransomware, threaten 
financial stability and customer 
trust. Enhanced cybersecurity 
and regulatory compliance are 
essential to protect sensitive data 
and maintain sector integrity.In July 2023, a JPMorgan Chase Zelle outage affected over 
$2 billion in daily transactions and raised concerns about 
the resilience of banking systems. The incident, marking 
the second major Zelle glitch in six months, underscores 
the challenges of real-time payments and the urgent need 
to modernize core banking infrastructures to ensure reli-
ability and trust in digital financial services.
In early 2024, stock-lending platform EquiLend was hit by 
a ransomware attack by LockBit, disrupting its operations 
that handle trillions of securities transactions each month. 
LockBit, a ransomware group, sought to negotiate a ransom 
for unlocking the systems.
In a recent patent application, JPMorgan Chase introduced 
a sophisticated method that leverages secondary identifi-
cation information and electronic device identification to 
authenticate transactions, significantly enhancing identity 
theft protection. The importance of identification technol-
ogy has only increased over the past year, as numerous 
financial institutions were hit by a wave of AI-powered 
deepfake technology in financial fraud, where voice deep-
fakes were increasingly used in bank scams and imposter 
schemes, tricking individuals and financial institutions.As cyberattacks grow more sophisticated, with AI-powered 
deep fakes and ransomware, financial institutions must 
invest in real-time threat detection and response systems. 
The introduction of advanced authentication methods, like 
those by JPMorgan Chase, marks a significant move to-
wards fighting identity theft and financial fraud. Multi-fac-
tor authentication, biometrics, and device identification 
enhance transaction security and protect against fraud.
Recent cybersecurity incidents, including the JPMorgan 
Chase Zelle outage and the EquiLend ransomware attack, 
underscore the vulnerability of financial systems. Modern-
izing banking infrastructure to be resilient is crucial for 
minimizing operational disruptions and boosting customer 
confidence in digital finance.
The evolving nature of cyber risks has also prompted chang-
es in regulatory frameworks. Financial institutions and 
insurance companies must review their policies regularly to 
ensure ongoing compliance with current and future regula-
tions. Educating customers on cybersecurity and the risks 
of deepfakes will also play a key role in building a secure 
financial ecosystem. 
The evolving nature of cyber threats could make it difficult 
for insurers to assess risks and price their products accu -
rately. This uncertainty in underwriting can lead to mispriced 
policies, affecting the profitability of insurance companies.RISING CYBER RISK4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 713INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Cryptocurrency regulation varies 
globally, but many nations are 
working to pass regulation, 
striving to balance investor 
protection, financial stability, and 
innovation. Efforts aim to address 
risks like fraud while embracing 
digital currency opportunities, but 
the borderless nature of crypto 
creates a complex regulatory 
patchwork.The UK government plans to enact cryptocurrency regula-
tions within six months, to enhance consumer protection 
and foster ethical innovation, fulfilling promises made by 
Prime Minister Sunak during his 2022 campaign. The reg-
ulations are expected to include guidelines for crypto ex-
changes, trading platforms, and custodians under traditional 
financial services rules.
US regulation over crypto came in the form of SEC enforce-
ment in 2023, when the commission filed five high-profile 
lawsuits against major crypto companies. The Clarity for 
Payment Stablecoins Act of 2023 was passed by the House 
Financial Services Committee in July of 2023, leaving many 
hopeful that the official legislation will pass sometime in 
2024. Broad-sweeping crypto regulation is unlikely in the US 
due to polarization in Congress and election year dynam-
ics, but the industry is still working to prepare for potential 
incoming laws.
The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) announced a 
new regulatory framework for stablecoins and their issu-
ers, focusing on single-currency stablecoins pegged to the 
Singapore dollar or any G10 currency. Essential requirements 
include ensuring value stability through asset reserves, 
maintaining minimum capital, allowing redemption at par 
within five business days, and making necessary disclosures 
to users. This framework aims to safeguard financial stabil-
ity and investor protection, distinguishing MAS-regulated 
stablecoins for easier identification by users.Financial institutions and insurance companies will have 
to navigate this complex regulatory environment for at least 
the next several years until things begin to align. The best 
practice is to develop operations around the strictest envi-
ronment to ensure global operations remain compliant and 
prepare for forthcoming regulations. For example, financial 
institutions serving multinational companies must ensure 
their clients are compliant across their jurisdictions. 
The ability to transact across borders using cryptocur-
rencies presents opportunities and challenges for banks 
and insurance companies. Cryptocurrencies can facilitate 
faster and cheaper international transactions by bypassing 
traditional banking networks and exchange rate complica-
tions. However, this also introduces regulatory complexities 
regarding jurisdiction and compliance with disparate inter-
national laws.
As regulatory clarity improves and institutions increasingly 
adopt cryptocurrencies, their usage will likely rise, bringing 
new or escalating risks. These include market volatility, cy-
bersecurity threats, and operational risks, such as the safe 
custody of digital assets. Insurance companies, in particu-
lar, need help with underwriting policies for crypto-related 
risks due to the technology’s lack of historical data and 
rapidly evolving nature.GLOBAL CRYPTO 
REGULATION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 714INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Alternative credit scoring 
represents an approach to 
evaluating an individual’s 
creditworthiness that diverges 
from traditional methods. It 
incorporates a broader spectrum 
of data, including utility bill 
payments, rent, bank account 
information, and even patterns 
of digital interactions, providing 
a more holistic view of a person’s 
financial behavior. Credolab employs a novel approach to credit scoring and fi-
nancial inclusion by leveraging privacy-consented, permis-
sioned smartphone and web data. Their technology, which 
avoids AI, focuses on user behavior and anonymized meta-
data to predict creditworthiness, aiming to reduce onboard-
ing friction and expand financial services to underserved 
populations. Credolab partners with companies like Prove-
nir and TransUnion to enhance financial inclusivity through 
alternative data and behavioral analysis.
A new credit scoring model has identified 2.7 million new 
potential home buyers, unlocking a $1 trillion opportunity 
for lenders. VantageScore’s latest model, required by regula-
tors by 2025, expands access to credit by including under-
served markets. The model, which has been used since 2017 
by over 3,000 financial institutions, improves predictive 
accuracy using non-traditional data, benefiting consumers 
with limited credit histories or who are new to credit.
Pagaya leverages AI and alternative data to enhance credit 
decision-making, promoting financial inclusion. Through 
analysis of extensive data points, Pagaya provides recom-
mendations for borrowers who may not meet traditional 
FICO scores, benefiting those with limited credit histories. 
Working with partners like TransUnion, Pagaya offers a more 
holistic view of creditworthiness, significantly impacting 
underserved communities and facilitating access to finan-
cial products for millions.Alternative credit scores enable financial institutions and 
insurance companies to tap into previously inaccessible 
segments. By considering factors beyond traditional credit 
histories, such as utility payments or rent, companies can 
identify creditworthy individuals among the unbanked or 
underbanked populations. This approach diversifies their 
customer base and opens up new revenue streams by of-
fering financial products to a larger, yet previously deemed 
risky, demographic.
Integrating alternative data into credit scoring models pro-
vides a more nuanced understanding of an applicant’s finan-
cial behavior, leading to more accurate risk assessments. For 
instance, analyzing transaction histories, savings patterns, 
and even social media behavior could unveil insights into a 
person’s financial stability and reliability. This enriched data 
pool allows for finer differentiation between high and low-
risk clients, potentially reducing default rates and enhancing 
the overall quality of loan and insurance portfolios.
Implementing AI-driven credit scoring models streamlines 
the credit assessment process, making it faster and more 
cost-effective. Traditional methods involve manual checks 
and lengthy paperwork, but AI can quickly analyze vast 
amounts of alternative data, delivering instant credit deci-
sions. These alternative scoring approaches reduce opera-
tional costs by minimizing the need for extensive human 
intervention and accelerating time to market for financial 
products.ALTERNATIVE  
CREDIT SCORING11TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 715INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCESCENARIOS
716© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
SCENARIO YEAR 2030
What if AI Redefined Financial Compliance?
In 2030, AI and machine learning have transformed regulatory compliance in the financial sector. This shift began as financial insti-
tutions and regulators recognized the potential of AI to enhance the efficiency and accuracy of compliance processes. Large banks 
quickly adopted AI to monitor transactions and identify regulatory issues in real-time, significantly reducing compliance costs and 
improving risk management.
However, this rapid adoption highlighted a growing divide. Smaller financial institutions struggled with the high costs of integrating 
sophisticated AI systems, placing them at a competitive disadvantage and raising concerns about a two-tiered financial system. 
By 2030, efforts to address this divide were underway but remained in the early stages. Initiatives included providing subsidies and 
developing open-source AI tools to help smaller firms afford and implement AI compliance technologies.
Regulators also began adapting their expectations, recognizing the resource gap between large and small institutions. These mea-
sures aimed to level the playing field, ensuring that all financial institutions, regardless of size, could benefit from AI in compliance.
Despite these efforts, the digital divide in financial compliance is only starting to be bridged. The industry and regulators continue 
to seek solutions that ensure equitable access to AI technologies, underscoring the need for ongoing innovation and policy adjust-
ments. The journey towards a fully inclusive digital compliance ecosystem is just beginning, with the hope that further advance-
ments and collaborative efforts will eventually resolve the disparities.717© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.DEFI  
MODELSINDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Over the past year, despite down 
crypto markets, developers & 
institutions have made strides in 
integrating traditional finance 
& Web3. Headline-grabbing 
Bitcoin & Ether ETF filings have 
overshadowed equally impactful 
technical work enabling 
connectivity between TradFi & 
cryptoVisa is expanding stablecoin settlement by incorporating 
the Solana blockchain alongside Ethereum and collabo-
rating with Worldpay and Nuvei. This move enhances the 
speed and efficiency of cross-border settlements, facilitat-
ing faster transactions using stablecoins like USDC. Previ-
ously, settling cross-border purchases on Crypto.com Visa 
cards involved lengthy currency conversion processes and 
expensive wire transfers.
Microsoft is partnering with Aptos Labs to bring AI and 
Web3 together, allowing Microsoft’s AI models to train on 
Aptos’ verified blockchain data. This collaboration aims to 
increase trust and transparency in AI through blockchain’s 
immutability and verification capabilities.
For the first time, TransUnion partnered with Spring Labs and 
Quadrata to deliver off-chain credit scoring to DeFi and Web3 
applications. This partnership will enable decentralized lend-
ing platforms to assess risk better when lending to consum-
ers, allowing more consumers to access these platforms.
JPMorgan executed its first DeFi trade on a public block-
chain, facilitated by the Monetary Authority of Singapore’s 
Project Guardian, exploring DeFi applications in wholesale 
markets. Meanwhile, the London Stock Exchange Group is 
building the first major blockchain-powered marketplace 
for traditional financial assets. The platform will streamline 
global trading and improve speed, cost-efficiency, transpar-
ency, and security by using tokenization to represent assets 
like stocks and bonds as digital tokens.Traditional financial service providers risk being sidelined 
as Web3 technologies enable direct peer-to-peer transac-
tions without the need for intermediaries like banks or pay-
ment processors. Web3 could erode their revenue streams 
and necessitate a shift in business models towards val-
ue-added services that leverage blockchain technology.
The decentralized nature of Web3 platforms complicates 
regulatory compliance for traditional financial service 
providers and insurance companies. Ensuring adherence to 
existing regulations while navigating new and evolving reg-
ulatory frameworks presents a significant challenge. Firms 
must invest in robust compliance mechanisms and engage 
proactively with regulators to mitigate regulatory risks.
Similarly, adopting smart contracts and decentralized pro-
tocols in Web3 presents an opportunity for traditional finan-
cial institutions to streamline operations and reduce costs. 
These firms can enhance efficiency and remain competitive 
in a rapidly evolving landscape by automating insurance 
claims, underwriting, and settlement processes.
Ultimately, to stay relevant in the era of Web3, traditional fi-
nancial institutions must embrace innovation and invest in 
research and development of blockchain-based solutions. 
Investment may involve partnering with or acquiring fintech 
startups specializing in decentralized finance (DeFi) or 
developing in-house expertise to build and integrate Web3 
technologies into their offerings.ROUTES TO WEB31ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 718INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Programmable money, or “Pur -
pose Bound Money” (PBM), refers 
to digital currencies or assets that 
can be controlled and manipulat -
ed through code or programma-
ble logic. Unlike traditional forms 
of money, programmable money 
enables developers to embed 
rules and conditions into trans-
actions, allowing for automation 
and customization of financial 
processes.In late 2023, the Singapore Fintech Festival partnered with 
Amazon to experiment with programmable money. They pro-
vided attendees with a voucher that was placed in their digi-
tal wallet and could be spent with specific vendors; the funds 
were only released once the participant received the items.
JPMorgan introduced a programmable payment feature 
targeting institutional clients on its JPM Coin blockchain 
platform. This feature facilitates real-time, programmable 
treasury and digital business models. In November 2023, the 
feature went live with Siemens AG being the first to use it; Fe-
dEx and Cargill are expected to follow. The feature allows for 
dynamic funding and event-based payouts. JPMorgan is also 
said to be developing another blockchain-based solution for 
cross-border transactions, awaiting regulatory approval.
Pave Bank has launched with a digital banking license from 
the country of Georgia and $5.2 million in seed funding, led 
by 468 Capital and others. Pioneering as the world’s first 
“programmable bank,” it aims to transform banking by 
offering robust services like multi-currency accounts, global 
payments, and an institutional asset network, promising 
the safety of client funds. Highlighting the ability to bridge 
digital and real-world assets, it champions a significant shift 
in approach to combined banking services.Programmable money could streamline the operations of 
financial institutions and insurance companies. Current-
ly, many aspects of companies’ accounting, payables, and 
other financial processes are conditional and dependent 
upon meeting specific requirements. If programmable mon-
ey does scale, it could enable firms, especially those in the 
finance industry, to automate a meaningful portion of their 
back-office operations and reduce human interaction in 
those tasks to oversight and validation.
While today’s banking systems are still somewhat be-
holden to data entry, which can fall victim to human error, 
programmable money depends on an immutable set of 
criteria that can be measured and validated. As a result, the 
scaling of programmable money could significantly reduce 
errors that result from misentry or incomplete information. 
For the same reason, programmable money could improve 
transparency in financial reporting for both businesses and 
financial institutions.
The principles of programmable money could extend to other 
digitized assets, such as paperwork, contracts, or ownership 
certificates. In this example, the transfer of contracts or 
ownership could be programmed as dependent upon anoth-
er factor. For example, the transfer of a digitized home deed 
would not be sent until the lender had received the loan pro-
ceeds. In addition to speeding up administrative processes, 
this new feature could help augment existing legal proce-
dures and create a digital trail for complex transactions.PROGRAMMABLE 
MONEY5TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 719INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCEWHY IT MATTERS
Digitization of assets refers 
to converting physical or non-
digital assets into digital form. 
This transformation allows 
assets, such as art, real estate, 
or intellectual property, to 
be tokenized on blockchain 
platforms, creating digital tokens 
representing ownership or a share 
of the asset and allowing it to be 
monetized in new ways.One patent recently filed outlines a technology platform 
that leverages blockchain and AI to tokenize large-scale and 
traditionally illiquid assets through a novel two-tier process. 
It introduces General Asset Tokens (GATs) and Specific Asset 
Tokens (SATs), where GATs represent shared ownership in a 
diversified asset pool, and SATs offer individual ownership in 
specific assets chosen from this pool. The process is under-
pinned by smart contracts, ensuring secure, efficient transac-
tions and immutable records on a blockchain network.
Salesforce recently filed a patent application that describes 
a system for managing assets on the blockchain through a 
process called Multiple Decentralized Tokenization with Per-
sonal Control (MDTPC). These tokens can be treated similarly 
to securities, so their trade may be subject to securities laws. 
Traditional blockchain asset management suffers from a lack 
of cross-ledger recognition and individual control over asset 
management. Salesforce’s proposed solution overcomes 
these issues by allowing users to choose how and when as-
sets are evaluated and which blockchains to use for manag-
ing their asset data.
Another invention from Data Vault Holdings describes tokeniz-
ing precious assets like real estate or art to represent owner-
ship and facilitate transactions. A data platform receives the 
corporate data, which is then segmented and tokenized. The 
corporate data is valued, and potential monetization strate-
gies are determined. This approach creates a way to value and 
exchange real-world assets on digital platforms more easily.Tokenization divides traditional assets into smaller shares, 
making it easier for investors to buy and sell parts of assets. 
This increased divisibility improves the liquidity of assets 
like real estate or art, broadening access to investment 
opportunities and allowing a wider range of investors to 
participate in markets previously accessible only to wealthy 
or institutional investors.
To achieve interoperability, institutions will need access 
to a comprehensive registry service that details tokenized 
assets in a standardized way across multiple blockchains. 
This visibility is crucial in establishing trust in digital 
transactions and verifying ownership without the need for 
centralized authorities.
Tokenization can reduce costs and complexity. By digitizing 
assets, traditional intermediaries such as brokers, banks, 
and lawyers may become less necessary, lowering transac-
tion fees and disrupting the industry. Blockchain’s built-in 
efficiency can streamline operations, reduce paperwork, and 
make the entire investment process more efficient.
The transparency of blockchain ensures that every transac-
tion and ownership change is recorded on a ledger that is 
immutable and accessible to all participants. This level of 
openness enhances trust among stakeholders and facil-
itates compliance with regulatory requirements through 
programmable tokens that automatically enforce rules and 
restrictions related to investor qualification, geographic 
limitations, and trading volumes.ASSET  
TOKENIZATION 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 720INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCESCENARIOS
721© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
What if DeFi Reinvented Protection for High-Value Assets?
Historically, insuring high-value assets involved complex layered coverage with multiple carriers providing primary, secondary, and excess 
policies. This patchwork approach was necessary to cover the full extent of risk but created gaps, overlaps, and administrative headaches.
The advent of blockchain-based fractional asset ownership and programmable money has turbocharged the reinvention of layered cover-
age models. In 2035, when securing protection for a $50 million Cézanne painting, for example, the owner can now tokenize and sell off 15% 
shares to help fund a personalized smart policy administered by a single decentralized platform.
This primary parametric coverage is directly priced and programmed according to the asset’s attributes. Orchestration smart contracts then 
dynamically spread secondary risk protection across a fluid syndicate of global capacity providers. Coverage limits, exclusions, and collateral 
requirements are automatically optimized, with premiums held in escrow via programmable stablecoins. 
If a loss occurs, validated payouts are instantly triggered to the token holder’s wallet up to policy limits. Parametric triggers and predeter-
mined payout schedules eliminate adjusters. Excess coverage above primary policy limits is also pre-bound using prediction markets for 
capacity bidding.
Fractional tokenization creates the fractionalization of risk - and the ability to program predefined coverage conditional on tokenized collat-
eral unlocks exponential configuration possibilities. Owners now bypass the friction of layered policies to achieve customized, end-to-end 
intelligent protection for their prized possessions.AUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
722© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY723© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MELANIE SUBIN  
Managing Director 
Melanie Subin is Managing 
Director of Future Today Insti-
tute, where she serves on our 
management committee and 
leads our consulting division. 
Renowned for her pragmatic, forward-thinking approach, Melanie 
has successfully steered numerous clients towards future-ready 
strategies, harnessing emerging trends and technologies to identify 
risk and opportunity early enough for action. Her leadership has 
significantly impacted how industries envision and execute their 
long-term strategies.
Melanie specializes in strategic transformation, quantitative and 
qualitative research, and scenario development. With deep exper -
tise in the development and establishment of foresight capabilities 
within large organizations, Melanie regularly counsels C-staff on 
strategy and execution. She has spent years assessing the impact 
of major external forces such as increasing technological sophis-tication, changing consumer and business preferences, and rising 
connectivity on the evolution and transformation of industries and 
markets across the globe.
Melanie is a recognized expert in fostering psychological safe-
ty within teams, a crucial element for operationalizing strategic 
foresight effectively. Her work emphasizes creating an environment 
where open dialogue and innovative thinking are encouraged, 
enabling organizations to embrace change and navigate future 
uncertainties with confidence.
 Melanie serves in the World Economic Forum’s Metaverse Work -
ing Group and is a founding member of the Dubai Future Forum’s 
advisory group. She serves as a coach in the strategic foresight MBA 
course at the NYU Stern School of Business. Melanie holds a BS in 
Finance from Central Connecticut State University and a Fintech 
Certification from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
 INDUSTRY724© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY
NICK BARTLETT  
Director 
Nick Bartlett is a Director at the Future Today Institute and leads our 
Insurance practice area.
Before FTI, he held positions in corporate strategy and insights 
generation roles, serving as a partner to senior leadership at multiple 
Fortune 100 financial services companies. Throughout his career, he 
has specialized in framework design, corporate innovation, strategic management, and insurance.
 Nick has an extensive background in developing strategic insights across a variety of industries (e.g., 
manufacturing, transportation, construction, energy) and subject matter areas (e.g., small business, 
mobility, robotics, platforms & ecosystems), in addition to the shifting nature of business and consumer 
preferences. He has deep experience developing and implementing trend modeling and signal iden-
tification for large organizations. Nick has also led the design and establishment of internal foresight 
and scenario development capabilities across multiple institutions.
 He is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. Nick holds an 
MBA and a Bachelor of Arts in Public Relations from Quinnipiac University.GRANT TINKER  
Associate 
Grant Tinker served as a Strategic Foresight Consultant at Future 
Today Institute following his graduation from NYU Stern School of 
Business, where he earned an MBA with specializations in strategy, 
entrepreneurship & innovation, and marketing. He brings a strong 
financial background as a Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) and 
his multiple years of corporate finance experience from SaaS companies in Silicon Valley to his work. 
In addition to his MBA, Grant holds a Bachelor of Science in Economics from California Polytechnic 
State University.
SELECTED  
SOURCES
725© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY726© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“35 Customer Experience Statis-
tics to Know for 2024.” Zendesk, 
January 22, 2024. https://www.
zendesk.com/blog/customer-ex-
perience-statistics/.
Adejumo, Oluwapelumi. “US 
Banking Groups Lobby SEC for 
Rule Change to Enter Bitcoin ETF 
Market.” CryptoSlate, February 
16, 2024. https://cryptoslate.
com/us-banking-groups-lobby-
sec-for-rule-change-to-enter-bit-
coin-etf-market/.
“AI Chatbot for Insurance Agen-
cies.” IBM Watsonx Assistant. 
https://www.ibm.com/products/
watsonx-assistant/insurance.
“As Bitcoin Rallies, Banks 
Are Pushing US Regulators 
to Change Crypto Guidance.” 
Bloomberg.com, https://
www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2024-02-15/as-bit-
coin-rallies-banks-push-sec-
to-change-an-accounting-guide-
line-sab-121.“AU2023210607 System, Meth-
od, And Computer Program 
Product for Consent Manage-
ment.” https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=AU404759251&_ci-
d=P12-LSTQSI-40937-2.
“AU2023216785 Systems and 
Methods for Providing Digital 
Identity Records to Verify Iden-
tities of Users.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=AU406128488&_ci-
d=P12-LS1WPS-62765-3.
“AU2024200153 Authentication 
for Third Party Digital Wallet 
Provisioning.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=AU420571643&_ci-
d=P12-LSKJJP-69625-1.
“Bank Failures in Brief—2023.” 
FDIC. https://www.fdic.gov/re-
sources/resolutions/bank-fail-
ures/in-brief/bfb2023.html.
“Banks Come Together to 
Deploy Facial Recognition and 
Behavioral Biometrics Against 
Fraud.” Market Realist, February 10, 2024. https://marketrealist.
com/australian-banks-launch-
scam-safe-accord-biometric-
checks-to-combat-rising-fraud/.
BBVA. “Swift Go Completes 
Low-Value Cross-Border Pay-
ments in Less than Three Min-
utes.” March 13, 2023. https://
www.bbva.com/en/innovation/
bbva-the-first-spanish-bank-to-
launch-swift-go-to-streamline-
international-payments-for-con-
sumers-and-smes/.
Bellamy, Fredric D., and Fredric D. 
Bellamy. “U.S. Data Privacy Laws 
to Enter New Era in 2023.” Reu-
ters, January 12, 2023. https://
www.reuters.com/legal/legalin-
dustry/us-data-privacy-laws-en-
ter-new-era-2023-2023-01-12/.
Ben-Avi, David, and Guy Ro-
senhoiz. “System, Device and 
Method for Digital Payment.” 
August 31, 2023. https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=WO2023161919&_ci-
d=P12-LSTRGQ-52377-1.“Bitcoin ETF Market Thrives with 
Nearly 9,300 Bitcoin Added in 
One Day.” CryptoSlate, February 
16, 2024. https://cryptoslate.
com/insights/bitcoin-etf-mar-
ket-thrives-with-nearly-9300-
bitcoin-added-in-one-day/. 
Blakey, Douglas. “Pave Bank 
Launches with $5.2M Funding 
Round for Programmable Money 
Revolution.” Retail Banker In-
ternational, December 15, 2023. 
https://www.retailbankerinter-
national.com/news/pave-bank-
launches-with-5-2m-funding-
round/.
Browne, Ryan. “EU Lawmakers 
Approve World’s First Com-
prehensive Framework for 
Crypto Regulation.” CNBC, April 
20, 2023. https://www.cnbc.
com/2023/04/20/eu-lawmak-
ers-approve-worlds-first-com-
prehensive-crypto-regulation.
html.
Browne, Ryan. “‘Very Good 
Chance’ That U.S. Passes Sta-
blecoin Laws This Year, Circle CEO Says.” CNBC, January 
15, 2024. https://www.cnbc.
com/2024/01/15/good-chance-
us-passes-stablecoin-laws-this-
year-circle-ceo-says.html.
“California Insurance Market 
Rattled by Withdrawal of Major 
Companies.” AP News, June 5, 
2023. https://apnews.com/
article/california-wildfire-in-
surance-e31bef0ed7eeddcde-
096a5b8f2c1768f.
“CBDC Projects Pick up the Pace 
as 2023 Kicks Off.” American 
Banker, January 2, 2023. https://
www.americanbanker.com/pay-
ments/list/cbdc-projects-pick-
up-the-pace-as-2023-kicks-off.
Chavez-Dreyfuss, Gertrude. 
“Crypto Insurer Evertas Autho-
rized to Offer Largest Single 
Crypto Insurance Policy.” 
Reuters, June 2, 2023. https://
www.reuters.com/markets/
currencies/crypto-insurer-ever-
tas-authorized-offer-largest-sin-
gle-crypto-insurance-poli-
cy-2023-06-02/.Chiang, Sheila. “Singapore to 
Pilot Use of Wholesale Cen-
tral Bank Digital Currencies 
in 2024.” CNBC, November 
17, 2023. https://www.cnbc.
com/2023/11/17/singapore-to-pi-
lot-wholesale-central-bank-digi-
tal-currencies-in-2024.html.
Clear FAQ. “What Is NextGen 
Identity+ and How Does It 
Work?” https://www.clearme.
com/support/what-is-nextgen-
identity-and-how-does-it-work. 
“Cred.Ai: We Make Supercards.” 
Cred.Ai. https://cred.ai/. 
“Crypto Won’t Get Long-Await-
ed U.S. Rules in 2024, But the 
Courts May Steer Its Future.” 
Coindesk, January 26, 2024. 
https://www.coindesk.com/con-
sensus-magazine/2023/12/18/
crypto-wont-get-long-await-
ed-us-rules-in-2024-but-the-
courts-may-steer-its-future.SELECTED SOURCESFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY727© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Dobberstein, Laura. “India 
to Make Its Digital Currency 
Programmable.” The Register, 
February 9, 2024. https://www.
theregister.com/2024/02/09/in-
dia_programmable_money/. 
Dobberstein, Laura. “Program-
mable or ‘Purpose-Bound’ Money 
Is Coming Soon.” The Register, 
December 21, 2023. https://www.
theregister.com/2023/12/21/pro-
grammable_money/. 
“Dramatic Collapses Made 2023 
the Biggest Year Ever for Bank 
Failures.” American Banker, 
December 14, 2023. https://
www.americanbanker.com/list/
dramatic-collapses-made-2023-
the-biggest-year-ever-for-bank-
failures.
“Elections That Bankers Need to 
Watch in 2024.” American Bank-
er, December 28, 2023. https://
www.americanbanker.com/
list/elections-bankers-need-to-
watch-in-2024.“Experience Blockchain Pay-
ments With Amazon at the Sin-
gapore FinTech Festival 2023!” 
Amazon.Sg. https://www.ama-
zon.sg/b?node=23341190051.
“FAQs.” Sovrin. https://sovrin.
org/faqs/. 
FDIC. “Failed Bank Information 
for Silicon Valley Bank, Santa 
Clara, CA.” https://www.fdic.
gov/resources/resolutions/
bank-failures/failed-bank-list/
silicon-valley.html. 
“Federal Reserve Announces 
That Its New System for Instant 
Payments, the FedNow Service, 
Is Now Live.” Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, 
July 20, 2023. https://www.
federalreserve.gov/newsevents/
pressreleases/other20230720a.
htm. 
Finextra. “Open Banking: Will 
PSD3 Regulations Change 
Everything?” Finextra Research,  
May 3, 2023. https://www.finex-
tra.com/blogposting/24155/
open-banking-will-psd3-regula-
tions-change-everything.Gonzalez, Bianca. “Master-
card Turns to Biometrics for 
Passwordless Authentication.” 
Biometric Update, January 
24, 2024. https://www.bio-
metricupdate.com/202401/
mastercard-turns-to-biomet-
rics-for-passwordless-authenti-
cation.
“Google’s Wallet App Is Adding 
Support for Insurance Cards, 
Driver’s Licenses, and More.” 
ZDNET, June 2, 2023. https://
www.zdnet.com/article/googles-
wallet-app-will-soon-support-in-
surance-cards-drivers-licenses-
and-more/. 
Howcroft, Elizabeth, and Eliza-
beth Howcroft. “Deutsche Bank 
to Hold Crypto for Institutional 
Clients.” Reuters, September 
14, 2023. https://www.reuters.
com/business/finance/deut-
sche-bank-hold-crypto-institu-
tional-clients-2023-09-14/.
“Instant Payments: Accelerat-
ing Treasury Disruption.” US 
Bank, September 25, 2023. https://www.usbank.com/
content/usbank/financialiq/
improve-your-operations/man-
age-payments/real-time-pay-
ments-the-next-major-treasury-
disruptor. 
InsurGPT. https://www.rootsau-
tomation.com//insurgpt. 
“Introducing Base: Coinbase’s 
L2 Network.” Coinbase Help. 
https://help.coinbase.com/en/
coinbase/other-topics/other/
base. 
“JPMorgan Executes First DeFi 
Trade on Public Blockchain.” 
Cointelegraph, November 3, 
2022. https://cointelegraph.
com/news/jp-morgan-executes-
first-defi-trade-on-public-block-
chain.
“JPMorgan Rolls out Program-
mable Payments for Institu-
tional Blockchain Platform JPM 
Coin.” Cointelegraph, November 
10, 2023. https://cointelegraph.
com/news/jp-morgan-launch-
es-programmable-pay-
ments-for-jpmcoin.Kapron, Zennon. “Why SWIFT 
Remains Indispensable for 
Cross-Border Payments.” 
Forbes, May 23, 2023. https://
www.forbes.com/sites/zen-
nonkapron/2023/05/23/why-
swift-remains-indispensable-
for-cross-border-payments/. 
Kassis, George, et al. “Sys-
tems And Methods for Using 
Digital Identity Frameworks 
and Infrastructure to Access 
and Interact With Decentral-
ized Applications.” January 
4, 2024. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=WO2024006767&_ci-
d=P12-LS1WJJ-60118-2.
Keyless. “Zero-Knowledge Bio-
metrics: The Future of Authen-
tication.” Biometric Update. No-
vember 27, 2023. https://www.
biometricupdate.com/202311/
zero-knowledge-biomet-
rics-the-future-of-authentica-
tion.Khairi, Sara. “Gen Z Embraces 
Digital Wallets but They Actually 
Want More.” Tearsheet, February 
7, 2024. https://tearsheet.co/
payments/gen-z-embraces-dig-
ital-wallets-but-they-actually-
want-more/.
Khairi, Sara. “How Pagaya Uses 
Alternative Solutions to Deci-
sion on Credit, Enabling More 
Financial Inclusion.” Tearsheet, 
April 20, 2023. https://tearsheet.
co/lending/how-pagaya-us-
es-alternative-solutions-to-deci-
sion-on-credit-enabling-more-fi-
nancial-inclusion/.
Khairi, Sara. “Mastercard and 
the Clearing House Deepen Their 
Partnership to Zero In on New 
Instant Payments Applications.” 
Tearsheet, February 16, 2024. 
https://tearsheet.co/payments/
mastercard-and-the-clearing-
house-deepen-their-partner-
ship-to-zero-in-on-new-instant-
payments-applications/.SELECTED SOURCESFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY728© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Leung, Alvin, et al. “Integration 
of Platforms for Multi-Plat-
form Content Access.” July 6, 
2023. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=WO2023129556&_ci-
d=P12-LSTRGQ-52377-2.
Light, Joe. “Apple and Google 
Could Win the War for the Digital 
Wallet.” Barron’s, January 31, 
2024. https://www.barrons.
com/articles/apple-google-dig-
ital-wallet-bank-regulation-cb-
d872cf. 
Lim, Tung Li. “Singapore’s 
New Regulatory Framework 
for Stablecoins and Their 
Issuers.” Elliptic, August 16, 
2023.https://www.elliptic.co/
blog/singapores-new-regu-
latory-framework-for-stable-
coins-and-their-issuers. 
“London Stock Exchange 
Group Plans Launch of 
Blockchain-Powered Tradi-
tional Asset Marketplace.” 
SiliconANGLE, September 4, 2023. https://siliconangle.
com/2023/09/04/london-stock-ex-
change-group-plans-launch-block-
chain-powered-traditional-as-
set-marketplace/.
“London Stock Exchange Plans to 
Offer Blockchain-Powered Market 
for Traditional Assets: Report.” 
Coindesk, September 4, 2023. 
https://www.coindesk.com/busi-
ness/2023/09/04/lse-group-plans-
to-offer-blockchain-powered-mar-
ket-for-traditional-assets-report/. 
Mahoney, Ashley. “Carolina 
Panthers to Introduce Facial 
Recognition Technology for 
Ticketing.” Axios, December 14, 
2023. https://www.axios.com/
local/charlotte/2023/12/14/
carolina-panthers-to-intro-
duce-facial-recognition-technolo-
gy-for-ticketing-346227.
Masters, Brooke. “Banks Face a 
Tough Choice over Crypto.” Finan-
cial Times, March 29, 2023. https://
www.ft.com/content/c14b679b-
742b-4272-9bbc-5432906d3b55.“Microsoft Partners with Aptos 
Blockchain to Marry AI and 
Web3.” TechCrunch, August 
9, 2023. https://techcrunch.
com/2023/08/09/microsoft-ap-
tos-blockchain-ai-web3/. 
Ministers, Treasury. “Govern-
ment Welcomes Scam Safe 
Accord.” Treasury Ministers, 
November 24, 2023. https://
ministers.treasury.gov.au/min-
isters/stephen-jones-2022/me-
dia-releases/government-wel-
comes-scam-safe-accord.
“Nationwide Is Streamlining 
Life Underwriting Process with 
DigitalOwl’s Advanced AI Tech-
nology.” Nationwide, February 14, 
2024. https://news.nationwide.
com/nationwide-is-stream-
lining-life-underwriting-pro-
cess-with-advanced-ai-technol-
ogy/. 
“New York Fed Completes Global 
Digital Dollar Proof of Concept.” 
Central Banking,  July 11, 2023. https://www.centralbanking.
com/fintech/cbdc/7959249/
new-york-fed-completes-global-
digital-dollar-proof-of-concept.
“NY Fed Says Months-Long Test 
on Digital Dollar Shows Speed 
Advantage.” Bloomberg.com, July 
6, 2023. https://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2023-07-06/
ny-fed-says-monthslong-digital-
dollar-test-shows-speed-advan-
tage.
Pave Bank. https://pavebank.
com/en/legal. 
PYMNTS. “Big Spenders: Digital 
Wallet Users Spend 31% More 
When Buying Retail and Grocery 
Products.” PYMNTS.com, Febru-
ary 1, 2024. https://www.pymnts.
com/digital-payments/2024/
big-spenders-digital-wallet-
users-spend-31-more-when-
buying-retail-and-grocery-prod-
ucts/.
PYMNTS. “JPM Coin Program-
mable Payments Goes Live With 
Siemens.” PYMNTS.com, Novem-
ber 10, 2023.  https://www.pymnts.com/block-
chain/2023/j-p-morgan-launch-
es-programmable-payments-
through-jpm-coin/.
Renton, Peter. “Fintech Nexus 
Newsletter (February 12, 2024): 
Visa Introduces Virtual Corpo-
rate Cards for Digital Wallets.” 
Fintech Nexus, February 12, 
2024. https://www.fintechnexus.
com/fintech-nexus-newslet-
ter-february-12-2024-visa-in-
troduces-virtual-corpo-
rate-cards-for-digital-wallets/.
Rep. McHenry, Patrick T. [R-NC-
10]. H.R.4766—118th Congress 
(2023-2024): Clarity for Payment 
Stablecoins Act of 2023. July 27, 
2023. https://www.congress.
gov/bill/118th-congress/house-
bill/4766/text. 
“Revised Rules on Payment 
Services.” European Commis-
sion. https://ec.europa.eu/com-
mission/presscorner/detail/en/
qanda_23_3544. Schickler, Jesse Hamilton and 
Jack. “US Stablecoin Bill Takes 
Big Step Despite Fight From 
Democrats, White House.” 
Coindesk, July 28, 2023. 
https://www.coindesk.com/
policy/2023/07/28/us-stable-
coin-bill-takes-big-step-despite-
fight-from-democrats-white-
house/.
“Sunak Government Sets 
Summer Deadline for Crypto 
Clampdown.” Finance Magnates, 
February 20, 2024. https://
www.financemagnates.com/
cryptocurrency/sunak-gov-
ernment-sets-summer-dead-
line-for-stablecoins-and-cryp-
to-staking-clompdown/.
“Surprise! Inflation Rises to 
Start the Year.” US News & World 
Report, February 13, 2024. www.
usnews.com/news/economy/
articles/2024-02-13/surprise-in-
flation-rises-to-start-the-year. SELECTED SOURCESFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY729© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Tamaya-Rios, Matthew. “Method 
for Fully Homomorphic Encryp-
tion Using Multivariate Cryp-
tography.” US9313028B2, April 
12, 2016. https://patents.google.
com/patent/US9313028B2/en.
“TransUnion Is Partnering with 
Spring Labs and Quadrata to 
Bring Credit Scoring to DeFi and 
Web3 Apps. What That Means for 
Consumers Looking to Borrow 
from Blockchain-Based Apps.” 
Fortune Recommends, April 
25, 2023. https://fortune.com/
recommends/credit-cards/
transunion-to-bring-credit-scor-
ing-to-defi-and-web3-apps/. 
“Unleashing the Potential of 
Insurance Data with AI-Powered 
Extraction.” Astera, April 10, 
2023. https://www.astera.com/
type/blog/insurance-data/.
“Unlocking $1 Trillion Opportu-
nity: 2.7 Million Potential Home 
Buyers Identified with New 
Credit Scoring Model.” National 
Mortgage Professional, October 
17, 2023.  https://nationalmortgage-
professional.com/news/
unlocking-1-trillion-opportuni-
ty-27-million-potential-home-buy-
ers-identified-new-credit.
“US Bank Reveals $166M in Crypto 
Holdings: Q2 Earnings Report.” 
Cointelegraph, August 10, 2023. 
https://cointelegraph.com/news/
us-bank-170-million-crypto-q2-
earnings-report.
“US20210217001 Decentralized To-
kenization Technologies.” https://
patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/
detail.jsf?docId=US330900550&_
cid=P12-LSV31Q-79157-3. 
“US20210279814 Methods And 
Systems For Providing Digital 
Identification Cards for Mobile 
Applications.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US335379849&_ci-
d=P12-LSJQEE-29886-1. 
“US20230071800 Platform and 
Method for Tokenization of Pre-
cious Physical Assets.”  https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US393378281&_ci-
d=P12-LSV31Q-79157-3. 
“US20230076526 Multi-Tier 
Tokenization Platform Sys-
tem.” https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US393383533&_ci-
d=P12-LSV31Q-79157-1. 
“US20230177596 Embedded 
Payment Tokens in Digital Media 
Objects.” https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US399236631&_ci-
d=P12-LSTRGQ-52377-1. 
“US20230282083 Systems and 
Methods for Cargo Manage-
ment, Verification, and Track-
ing.” https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US406484531&_cid=P12-LS-
JQAZ-27576-1. 
“US20230306413 Tokenization 
of Real-World Objects and Mone-
tization Thereof.”  https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US408986870&_ci-
d=P12-LSV31Q-79157-4. 
“US20230342780 Methods for 
Improving Identification Threat 
Protection and Devices There-
of.” https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US411587382&_cid=P12-LS-
1WJJ-60118-2. 
“US20230409687 Biometric 
Ticketing.” https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US417730538&_ci-
d=P12-LS1XA8-71178-1. 
“US20230410119 System And 
Methods for Obtaining Re-
al-Time Cardholder Authentica-
tion of a Payment Transaction.” 
https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US417731018&_cid=P12-LS-
1WPS-62765-3. “US20230421381 Method 
and System for Verification 
of Identity Attribute Informa-
tion.” https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US418333690&_ci-
d=P12-LS1WPS-62765-3. 
“US20230421386 Systems 
and Methods for Using Digi-
tal Identity Frameworks and 
Infrastructure to Access and 
Interact With Decentralized 
Applications.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US418333696&_ci-
d=P12-LS1WJJ-60118-2. 
“US20240005297 Method and 
System for Facilitating Se-
cure Payment Transactions.” 
https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US418582812&_cid=P12-LS-
1WPS-62765-2. 
“US20240013176 Computer-Im-
plemented Systems and Meth-
ods for Payment Routing.”  https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.js-
f?docId=US419317264&_ci-
d=P12-LSTQSI-40937-1. 
“US20240020658 Methods and 
Systems For Performing Secure 
Transactions Associated With 
Instructions Received in Natural 
Language Form.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US419730960&_ci-
d=P12-LS1WPS-62765-1. 
“US20240020664 Methods and 
Devices for Utilizing a Crypto-
currency Backed Debit Card.” 
https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US419730966&_cid=P12-LS-
TIU6-49603-1..
“US20240029048 Systems and 
Methods for Use in Enabling De-
vice-To-Device Communication, 
Based On User Interactions With 
the Devices.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US420409578&_ci-
d=P12-LS1WPS-62765-1. SELECTED SOURCESFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRY730© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“US20240029065 Method and 
System for Federated Virtual 
Card.” https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US420409595&_ci-
d=P12-LSUNER-48560-1. 
“US20240031167 Systems 
and Methods for Maintaining 
Decentralized Digital Identi-
ties.” https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US420411697&_cid=P12-LS-
1WJJ-60118-1. 
“US20240046586 Systems and 
Methods for Visualization of 
Utility Lines.” https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US421386375&_ci-
d=P12-LSTHIM-36601-1. 
“‘Very Good Chance’ US Will 
Pass Stablecoin Laws in 2024: 
Circle CEO.” The Block, January 
16, 2024. https://www.theblock.
co/post/272831/usa-stablecoin-
laws-2024-circle-ceo. “Visa Expands Stablecoin Settle-
ment Capabilities to Merchant Ac-
quirers.” Visa, September 5, 2023. 
https://usa.visa.com/about-visa/
newsroom/press-releases.html. 
“Wall Street Stock-Lending Plat-
form Crashes in Ransomware 
Attack.” American Banker, January 
24, 2024. https://www.american-
banker.com/articles/wall-street-
stock-lending-platform-crashes-
in-ransomware-attack.
“What Will Banks’ Tech Priorities 
Be in 2024?” American Banker, 
December 22, 2023. https://www.
americanbanker.com/list/what-
will-banks-tech-priorities-be-
in-2024. 
“Why FedNow’s Real-Time Pay-
ments Will Change Everything.” 
Modern Treasury, April 18, 2023. 
https://www.moderntreasury.
com/journal/fednow-real-time-
payments-will-change-everything.“Why Tokenized T-Bills Are the 
Next Big Thing for Crypto Inves-
tors.” Non-Custodial Finance, 
December 4, 2023. https://www.
noncustodial.finance/news/
why-tokenized-t-bills-are-the-
next-big-thing-for-crypto-inves-
tors. 
“Year in Review: The Top 10 US 
Data Privacy Developments 
From 2023.” WilmerHale, Janu-
ary 5, 2024. https://www.wilm-
erhale.com/en/insights/blogs/
wilmerhale-privacy-and-cyberse-
curity-law/20240105-year-in-re-
view-the-top-10-us-data-priva-
cy-developments-from-2023.
“Your Paycheck Could Clear 
Faster Now That the FedNow 
Instant Payment Service for 
Banks Has Launched.” AP News, 
July 20, 2023. https://apnews.
com/article/fednow-mon-
ey-banks-federal-reserve-pay-
ments-d499294a4fdcf9b551f-
42289cb7dc95f.“Zelle Outage at JPMorgan Chase 
Is Red Flag for Banks.” American 
Banker, July 27, 2023. https://
www.americanbanker.com/
news/zelle-outage-at-jpmorgan-
chase-is-red-flag-for-banks.
Zerucha, Tony. “Credolab Takes 
Unique Approach to Credit 
Scoring, Financial Inclusion.” 
Fintech Nexus, June 1, 2023. 
https://www.fintechnexus.com/
credolab-takes-unique-ap-
proach-to-credit-scoring-finan-
cial-inclusion/.SELECTED SOURCESFINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE INDUSTRYSPORTS2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION733© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSSPORTS
734 T op Headlines
735 State of Play
736 Key Events
737 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
738 Why Sports Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
739  Opportunities and Threats
740  Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
741 Central Themes
742  Ones T o Watch
743 In the Stands  
(Fan Experiences) 
744 Flexible Content Models
745 Fandom on the Blockchain
746 Adaptive, Dynamic, and 
Immersive Advertisements
747 In-Person Mixed Reality 
Experiences760 In the Office  
(Team/Business 
Management)
761 Commitment to Sustainable 
Sports
762 Surprising Mergers  
and Acquisitions
763 Alternative Leagues  
and Associations
764 Advanced Analytics for  
Scouting Talent 
765 Unique and Innovative 
Partnerships
766 Geopolitics of Sports
767 More Inclusive and  
Accessible Sports
768 Scenario: What if 
consolidation was inevitable?
769 Authors
771 Selected Sources748 Augmented Experiences  
at Home
749 Sports Betting and Investing 
Soars
750 Destination Sporting Events
751 Scenario: What if 
customizable content puts 
viewers in complete control?
752 On the Field  
(Athlete Experiences)
753 Augmented Game 
Management 
754 Virtual Trainers
755 Augmented Training Analytics
756 Athletes as Brands
757 Innovations in Equipment
758 Advances in Sports Medicine 
and Wearables
759 Scenario: What if automated 
platforms democratized 
sports?INDUSTRYThe world of sports 
is being transformed 
by increased use of 
analytics, innovative 
platforms, and more 
customizable fan 
experiences. 
734© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY SPORTS
01
02
03
04
05Analytics Get integrated Into Sports
Sports are benefiting from data’s abundance in all aspects of life, impacting 
both player performance and organizational management.
Athletes Steal the Spotlight  
Since the days of Michael Jordan, athletes have been their own brands, but never 
more than now. Athletes are transcending their sports and all for the better. 
Personalized Fan Experiences Rise 
Personalization is now crucial for attracting and keeping new fans, and 
technology is enabling it across game viewing, shopping, and even advertising. 
Extended Reality Goes Mainstream  
XR and other augmented realities are becoming more pervasive for both live 
events and at-home experiences. 
Sports and Politics Mix 
Sports and politics have always been inextricably connected, but now, 
this connection is extending to the geopolitical realm.STATE 
OF PLAYTechnology is leaving an indelible mark on the world of sports at all levels. It is im-
pacting how managements run their organizations and scout players, how athletes 
train, rehabilitate, and interact with the game itself, and how fans experience events 
at home and in person. While these areas seem somewhat independent of one an-
other, they actually work in concert to affect the overall product on the field that is 
delivered to fans. 
When it comes to managing the game, leadership and coaches are equipped with 
tools to make their jobs easier and remove biases. Platforms such as Plaier and 
AiScout are not replacing the role of the coach but are serving as supplementary 
tools to capture analytics and statistics that otherwise might have gone unnoticed. 
Such information is being stored in central repositories, such as the Chicago Black-
hawks’ Madhouse to inform all internal operations. 
As athletes use technology to improve their skill set, they will see increased per-
formance from a host of new innovations. Mixed reality goggles assist swimmers 
as they train. Virtual reality is increasingly helping athletes with reaction time and 
training for in-game scenarios, ultimately leading Germany’s U17 football team to a 
championship. Platforms such as the Catapult athlete-monitoring system provide 
athletes with recommendations to improve performance and minimize injuries. 
These technologies are also impacting management and coaches’ decisions. 
Aside from these aspects, technology provides unique and customized experiences 
for fans, whether that be the game experience or how they shop and consume ancil-
lary products. Augmented reality is providing fans with immersive experiences rang-
ing from “Toy Story”–themed games to smart stadiums to virtual arcades. Universal 
golden records follow fans through omnichannel user journeys, allowing teams to 
engage the fans at all levels. As management teams find new ways to interact with 
fans, increased revenues will ultimately be used to enhance the product on the field, 
not just the experience in the stands.A suite of technologies is creating 
competitive advantages for 
managers, coaches, and athletes, 
while also impacting how fans 
experience the game. 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPORTS
735736© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.FEBRUARY 24, 2023
MLB Institutes the Pitch Clock  
In a radical move to reduce game 
duration and minimize downtime, 
the MLB puts a time limit on 
pitchers and batters at the plate.  
MARCH 14, 2023
Bally Goes Bankrupt  
Diamond Sports, owner of Bally 
Sports, files for bankruptcy 
after missing a $140 million 
interest payment.APRIL 21, 2023
Russian Athletes at ALBA Games  
Russian athletes were invited to 
compete under their nation’s flag at 
the 2023 ALBA Games in Venezuela.SEPTEMBER 20, 2023
MLB Hosts Virtual Game  
After launching in the summer, 
the MLB’s virtual ballpark hosts 
its first regular season game, 
between the Tampa Bay Rays 
and the Los Angeles Angels.APRIL 17, 2023
Debut of the Cavs ARcade  
During the NBA playoffs, the Cleveland 
Cavaliers use the augmented reality of 
ARound to create digital experiences at 
their Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse. JUNE 6, 2023
PGA and LIV Shock the World  
The former rivals announce their 
agreement to form a unified 
commercial entity.OCTOBER 1, 2023
ESPN Hosts “T oy Story” Football  
An animated telecast of the 
Jaguars-Falcons London game 
places NFL players in Andy’s toy-
filled room. KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY SPORTS
737© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPORTS: COMPLEX AND DYNAMIC
The sports industry is poised for a 
major transformation in 2024, with a 
host of exciting challenges and inno-
vations on the horizon that will have 
a profound impact on the way fans 
engage with sports, creating bespoke 
and immersive experiences like never 
before. However, alongside these tech-
nological advancements lie a range 
of business and political obstacles 
that must be overcome, putting the 
efficiency of decision-making mecha-
nisms to the test.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionMore Immersive Experiences 
Sports teams already use mobile devices to 
provide augmented experiences and activa-
tions for in-person events, and now this capa-
bility will occur in homes. Spatial computing 
allows for more 3Dt renderings of a game as if 
you were there. INDUSTRY SPORTS
Broadcasting Rights Lead to Turmoil
As live sports broadcasting contracts become 
more expensive, streaming platforms and 
tech companies will make more competitive 
bids to expand their user base. However, over-
paying for negotiating rights could lead to 
long-term financial impacts, putting stream-
ing platforms in significant financial trouble.Olympics Serve as a Protest Platform
The Olympics have always served as a geopo-
litical platform, but the 2024 Games could be 
exploited in unprecedented ways. Considering 
the Israel-Hamas war and Jewish populations in 
France, along with Ukrainian’s aversion for Rus-
sia, the Olympics will likely serve as a venue of 
protest unlike what we’ve witnessed in the past. 
Increased Web3 Adoption
This year will reveal the true usefulness of 
Web3 technologies such as using blockchain 
for creating consolidated golden records, digi-
tal fan passports, and dynamic ticketing, and 
highlight how these novel approaches will im-
pact the fan experience. As teams and leagues 
work out the issues and take advantage of 
Web3, more organizations are likely to adopt it.Influence Expands from the Middle East
Golf has felt the impact of Saudi Arabia’s sov-
ereign wealth fund through the merger of the 
PGA Tour and LIV. Likewise, Qatar has leveraged 
its sovereign wealth fund to impact soccer 
clubs FC Barcelona and Paris Saint-Germain. 
These nations will expand their control with in-
creased economic investment in sports includ-
ing soccer, boxing, cricket, and even basketball.  Automated Game Management Expands 
Technologies for managing games and match-
es, such as electronic line calling in tennis, 
automatic balls and strikes systems in base-
ball, and semiautomated offside technology 
for soccer, are creating fairness and minimiz-
ing human error. More leagues will be pres-
sured to adopt similar technologies, especially 
as the stakes increase from sports betting.738© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Like many industries, 
sports play the role of 
both the victim and villain 
in climate change. The 
proactiveness of some 
sports organizations 
can provide lessons and 
solutions for smaller and 
more fledgling leagues 
or associations and for 
divergent industries such 
as the built environment.Athletes are growing their 
individual platforms in 
unprecedented ways. New 
regulations in conjunction 
with a suite of 
technologies are offering 
athletes new sponsorship 
and monetization 
opportunities. These 
trends can impact 
younger athletes or even 
individuals in other 
industries hoping to grow 
their platforms.Sports partnerships 
have traditionally been 
formulaic in nature. But 
now, more creative and 
unique partnerships 
are emerging. Some 
have matched brands 
with common synergies 
and core competencies, 
resulting in genuinely 
customer-focused 
services. These examples 
can serve as a template 
for other businesses 
seeking fresh ideas.Sports associations have 
developed technology 
capable of creating 
targeted advertising 
that is customized to 
the market or even to 
individuals viewing a 
game. Implementing 
these methods, as well 
as frequency capping 
and frequency control, 
can result in unique 
advertisements less 
likely to disillusion the 
audience.While discriminatory 
practices in sports can 
occur at all levels and 
stages, some leagues 
have taken significant 
strides to eradicate them 
and create inclusive 
environments for 
employees and personnel. 
Other organizations, 
both within and beyond 
sports, also have valuable 
examples of ways 
inclusion has impacted 
their businesses.The sports industry 
has embraced virtual 
environments and 
virtual reality as tools for 
training and conditioning. 
Although VR cannot 
fully replace real-life 
experience, it has shown 
to have a positive impact 
on athlete training. Other 
industries can learn from 
these examples and add 
new training modalities to 
their arsenal. Appropriating 
Environmental 
SolutionsBuilding a 
Personal Brand Experimental 
Partnerships Customized, 
Personalized 
AdvertisementsInclusive 
Management 
Practices T aking Advantage 
of Virtual 
EnvironmentsWHY SPORTS TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY SPORTSOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Legacy sports organizations must attract younger audiences to avoid 
financial losses. The MLB has taken steps to address this issue, but it 
remains to be seen whether they are enough to guarantee long-term 
success.
The speed of sports is getting faster, and with that comes the increased 
risk of injury to athletes. Organizations not exploring regimens to ensure 
reduced injuries are setting themselves up for failure, and ultimately an 
impact on revenues. 
As climate change worsens, sporting events, especially those conducted 
outside, could become less tenable. Even indoor sports such as hockey 
could be impacted by rising global temperatures. 
Using technology to address inclusivity and accessibility can prove to be 
valuable, but not fully pressure testing the technology can result in failure 
if it makes target audiences feel even more marginalized. 
It is becoming more common for sports organizations to use centralized 
management tools or create a centralized operating system. Organizations 
that do not use these tools risk falling behind their competitors.Opportunities
There is an immediate opportunity to resolve issues plaguing distribution 
models. The organization best poised to navigate regulatory hurdles and 
engineer new digital platforms could disrupt the market. 
Individual sports teams will find tremendous benefits from building golden 
fan records and digital sports passports. Such platforms will enable teams 
to fully know their customers and track them through the entire customer 
journey.
Customized and personalized experiences and activations are becoming 
more viable and executable. They can be used to engage fans in ways that 
leave them feeling surprised and delighted.
Hosting destination sporting events in picturesque locations can be costly 
and difficult to carry out. However, new technology is enabling sporting 
events to take place in any virtual environment, offering fans special 
experiences.
Advanced analytics and artificial intelligence are leaving a lasting mark on 
various aspects of sports, including player performance, scouting, and team 
management. More opportunities will surface for using such applications in 
the future. 
739© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPORTS740© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Investments in sports sci-
ence have dual benefits. 
Fewer injuries or reduced 
time lost to injuries is im-
measurably beneficial to 
both sports teams and ath-
letes. But value also comes 
from these new procedures 
becoming increasingly 
available to the general 
public.Creating immersive expe-
riences in extended reality 
will keep fans engaged, 
whether they are at a 
sporting event or watching 
from home. Mastering these 
new forms of storytelling 
can give organizations new 
revenue-generating oppor -
tunities if they share their 
knowledge through consul-
tation with other groups.Sports organizations will 
increasingly chase sustain-
ability, whether that comes 
from an intrinsic need to 
help the environment or 
from a desire to impact 
their bottom line. First mov -
ers in this area will initially 
benefit from the advantage 
of sustainable practices, 
but can also sell climate IP 
to other businesses. Seek out partnerships with 
organizations adjacent to 
your own but not entirely in 
your domain. One example 
of such a partnership is 
that of the WWE and UFC: 
Together, these brands can 
cater to both audiences 
without cannibalizing their 
business. It also avoids 
antitrust violations. Invest in technology and 
platforms aimed at building 
individual brands for ath-
letes that help expand their 
reach and audience size. 
The phenomenon of ath-
letes as brands is only be-
coming more pronounced, 
and organizations that can 
help facilitate this growth 
will reap significant bene-
fits and rewards.While risky in nature, 
upstart leagues offer op-
portunities, though they’ll 
require unique value prop-
ositions. While examples 
like Tiger Woods’ and Rory 
McIlroy’s experimental 
golf league benefit from 
celebrity backing, there 
are significant investment 
dollars to be earned for 
such endeavors.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY SPORTSReach Fans Wherever They Are 
The way we consume sports is ripe for 
change—and innovative solutions. Over the 
past year, it’s become obvious that archaic 
distribution models are no longer adequate. 
Diamond Sports’ Chapter 11 filing indicates 
that as consumers move to leave cable tele-
vision in droves, the traditional way of broad-
casting games is no longer a sustainable way 
to reach fans, and in turn a poor generator of 
revenue. Fans who have moved away from ca-
ble often cannot access local games because 
of blackouts. Even subscribers of streaming 
options like YouTube TV, Hulu + Live TV, or 
Sling TV have been prevented from watching 
their games of choice because of issues with 
renewal agreements. In response, Phoenix 
Suns owner Mat Ishbia has turned to prim-
itive methods to reach fans, by offering free 
antennas that can access local broadcasting 
games. Such solutions will continue to be 
needed until new models of consumption are 
available to the masses.Expanding to Y ounger Audiences 
Reaching newer fans and younger demo-
graphics is challenging, and so is keeping 
their attention for prolonged periods. Gen 
Zers consume sports much like they con-
sume other media, producing headwinds for 
the industry. According to Morning Consult, 
54% of Gen Zers spend at least four hours 
daily on social media, primarily on YouTube, 
Instagram, TikTok, and Snapchat. These are 
also the very platforms where most Gen Zers 
discover news related to sports. Short-form 
media is obviously limiting when it comes to 
attracting this audience to full-length sport-
ing events, but sports executives realize the 
magnitude of the challenge. To grow interest 
among even younger audiences, such as Gen 
Alpha, networks can continue to broadcast 
fully animated sporting events through part-
nerships with brands such as Disney’s “Big 
City Greens” and “Toy Story.” Sports T ech’s Alternative Uses
The most cynical among us may question the 
utility or meaning of sports, pondering why 
professional athletes are paid such exorbitant 
salaries to essentially play a game. But sports 
can justify itself to even the harshest critics 
through the innovations it brings to adja-
cent and seemingly unrelated industries. The 
sustainability measures implemented in auto 
racing and new stadium operations can be 
carried over to how we live our everyday lives, 
providing new solutions to address existential 
climate threats. Advances in sports medicine 
can have tremendous impacts on human 
health and longevity that could one day be 
available to mass markets. Advances in wear-
able technology can improve health diagnos-
tics for general consumers. Sports can serve 
as the platform to resolve our cultural, polit-
ical, and social conflicts and sticking points. 
In this way, sports transcend mere play and 
competition, emerging as a dynamic force that 
enriches our lives and champions progress. Vulnerability Breeds Reactivity 
Sports leagues, like many legacy organiza-
tions, have often been slow to evolve. Be-
cause of the hesitancy to make large-scale 
overhauls, sports leagues make themselves 
vulnerable to outside pressures. Conse-
quently, specific leagues have been forced 
to make reactive decisions to remain rele-
vant or as a means of protecting themselves 
from impending competition. Major League 
Baseball, a league traditionally resistant to 
change, took on the risks of implementing 
the pitch clock, step-off limits, bigger bases, 
and PitchCom for pitchers—to mixed results. 
As another example, such vulnerability forced 
the PGA Tour to seek partnership with its big-
gest rival, LIV, completing a full reversal of its 
initial stance and completely ignoring legal 
conflicts in the process to foster the merger. 
When sports leagues are slow to adapt, they 
ultimately will be caught flat-footed and 
forced to make decisions that can be incon-
sistent with their core values.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 741INDUSTRY SPORTSSandy Khaund, CEO and founder of Creden-
za, for his contributions to Web3 and block-
chain software revolutionizing the sports 
experience.
Brian Kaiser, co-founder at Hudl, for develop-
ing software that provides video analysis and 
coaching tools for sports teams. 
Aron D’Souza, president of the Enhanced 
Games, for controversially pushing the 
boundaries of athletic competitions to drive 
human innovation. 
Mat Ishbia, owner of the Phoenix Suns, for 
commitment to increasing accessibility of 
sports for his local market.
Shawn Beaudette, assistant professor of 
kinesiology at Brock University, for his con-
tributions in creating a 3D motion capture 
system to impact sports performance.
Michael Horvath, co-founder of Strava, for 
developing technology that makes exercising 
more engaging and interactive. 
Joel Embiid, basketball player for the Phila-
delphia 76ers, for launching Miniature Géant, 
a new production studio that amplifies voic-
es and inspires a new generation of athletes. Jeffrey Jordan, co-founder of Heir, for serving 
Gen Z fans by providing community-focused 
content centered around their favorite players.
Alex Morgan, Sue Bird, Chloe Kim, and 
Simone Manuel, co-founders of TOGETHXR, for 
creating a platform to uplift the next genera-
tion of women in sports. 
Chen Shachar, co-founder and CEO at Play-
Sight Interactive, for his contributions to the 
emerging market of affordable consumer 
sports analytics systems. 
Oliver and Amber Marmol, co-founders of VS, 
for launching an edtech platform aimed at 
mentoring aspiring athletes. 
George Sun, CEO and founder of Nextiles, for 
merging flexible electronics with soft goods to 
create a data analytics platform that mea-
sures human performance.
Olivia Dunne, American gymnast, for making 
it easier for female athletes to secure endorse-
ment deals. 
Phil Southerland, founder of Supersapiens, 
for using biosensor packs to create a sys-
tem providing real-time glucose visibility to 
athletes. Dr. Per Reinhall and Dr. Samuel Browd, 
co-founders of VICIS, for protecting players 
through innovative helmet designs.  
Ben Sherwood and Reed Shaffner, 
co-founders of MOJO Sports, for creating a 
platform that keeps kids more engaged in 
sports. 
T ed Sullivan and Kiril Savino, co-founders of 
GameChanger, for creating a tool kit to help 
athletes self-promote and get noticed. 
Jonathan Soros and Jon Patricof, co-found -
ers of Athletes Unlimited, for creating a 
public benefit corporation to empower elite 
women athletes. 
Marie Donoghue, vice president of global 
sports video at Amazon, for bucking the 
trend of linear viewing and offering a new 
way of watching football. 
Jan Wendt, Tim Schröder, and Johnny 
Wilkinson, co-founders of PLAIER, for devel-
oping a platform that democratizes player 
scouting in football. 
Darren Peries, founder of Ai.io, for creating a 
platform to assist clubs and scouts in find-
ing and developing amateur players. Adam Silver, commissioner of the NBA, for 
unabashedly bringing innovations to a major 
sports league. 
Eileen Jurczak, CEO of Xonic Golf, for creat-
ing iTQ, an AI-powered caddie app tailored to 
each golfer that provides real-time quick tips 
on how to improve.ONES TO WATCH
742© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPORTS743© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.IN THE  
STANDS  
FAN EXPERIENCESINDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
With the rapid demise of regional 
sports networks (RSNs), flexible 
and accessible content models 
will need to fill this new void. 
Direct-to-consumer streaming 
services could meet fans’ 
expectations for personalized, 
flexible, and high-quality 
experiences. New platforms are 
emerging to give these fans what 
they want. Recast offers an alternative to traditional ad-based or sub-
scription models for content consumption. Users are given 
the option to pay for content by either using an in-platform 
currency or by earning credits from watch ads. This serves 
as a flexible and privacy-laden solution for viewers while 
content creators benefit from larger shares of the revenue. 
Recast has currently been adopted by the World Curling 
Federation and the Hibernian Football Club of the Scottish 
Professional Football League. ESPN is exploring a one-stop 
shopping model that would connect fans to live sports 
broadcasts from various streaming services directly on 
its platform. ESPN would receive a portion of the revenue 
generated from sales, with the remainder going to stream-
ing services originally in possession of the broadcast rights. 
Roku has delivered the Women’s Sports Zone, a centralized 
hub on its platform that simplifies access to women’s 
sports content. It aims to match the increasing demand for 
women’s sports content and make it easier for viewers to 
access and watch. Google is adding new features and offer-
ings for its YouTube TV coverage of the NFL Sunday Ticket 
package, including monthly payment plans, discounted 
options for students, features allowing viewers to watch 
multiple games at the same time, live chats, polls, and 
e-commerce integrations. RSNs in the United States are in dire circumstances, facing 
challenges from changing consumer habits in conjunction 
with other economic forces. In 2023, Diamond Sports Group, 
which runs the notable RSN Bally Sports, filed for Chapter 
11 bankruptcy protection and missed payments to many of 
its partnering sports teams. Many RSNs are now exploring 
direct-to-consumer platforms, but existing contractual 
agreements are complicating such transitions. While the 
landscape is in flux, teams, leagues, and RSNs are scram-
bling to develop sustainable business models for consum-
ers who value flexibility and accessibility. 
A survey conducted by Verizon Media indicates that sports 
fans are largely willing to pay more for live sports streaming, 
but only if providers give more access to the sports teams 
and leagues they are interested in. The research ultimately 
determined that fans are demanding more personalized, 
flexible, and high-quality sports streaming experiences. In 
order to meet fans where they are, tremendous collaboration 
is required from forward-thinking sports leagues and media 
partners, as well as the patience needed to navigate the 
murky landscape of content distribution contracts. Regard-
less, the current distribution system is no longer sustain-
able, but the landscape is ripe for new opportunities.  FLEXIBLE CONTENT 
MODELS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 744INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Sports teams are increasingly 
using blockchain and other 
Web3 technologies to enhance 
fan experiences by creating a 
consolidated golden record, 
digital passports, or enhanced 
ticketing experiences. Teams will 
now be able to keep a universal 
record across multiple channels 
and track fans’ interests and 
preferences through their entire 
user experience.  The St. Louis Blues, a professional hockey team, have a 
multiyear agreement with Credenza Inc. to integrate Web3 
software and technology into their preexisting fan engage-
ment platform, Bluenatics. This new platform iteration 
called Bluenatics Passport will effectively function as a 
universal ID, by tracking fan activities across ticketing, 
online purchases, concessions, in-person retail, and part-
ner locations, and keeping a centralized repository of fan 
experiences across multiple touchpoints. Similarly, with 
their move from Oakland to Las Vegas, the Raiders needed 
to better understand their new customer base. The football 
team consulted Data Clymer to create their own golden 
fan record using Salesforce for customer data, Matillion 
for data extraction and transformation, Snowflake for data 
storage, and Tableau for analysis and insights. Sports 
Illustrated Tickets will use Web3 architecture for a different 
purpose: Its Box Office, a blockchain-based ticketing and 
event management platform, will offer the Super Ticket NFT 
product, which links video highlights, exclusive offers, and 
loyalty benefits to a ticket, enhancing customer relation-
ships and providing greater visibility in resales. The project 
involves collaboration with ConsenSys and Polygon. By 
using their platforms and technology, Box Office will offer a 
more flexible, scalable, and cost-effective way of managing 
inventory and customer interactions. Web3 software has the power to revolutionize fan experienc-
es and interactions. By having a consolidated record across 
multiple channels of a fan’s habits, purchases, and behav-
iors, teams and brands can offer fans real-time discounts, 
offers, and exclusive experiences. Teams will have the 
opportunity to offer fans rewarding gamified experiences 
tailored specifically to the individual. They can enhance cus-
tomer interactions through surprise-and-delight experienc-
es, including free or discounted tickets, merchandise, or gift 
cards. Teams and brands can work directly with sponsors to 
craft unique activations touching on preferences and hab-
its, backed by user data and analytics. 
By having a comprehensive knowledge of each fan’s hab-
its and behaviors, teams will be better equipped to craft 
personalized marketing campaigns, delivering customized 
messages and offers as they form stronger relationships 
and boost engagement. Through unified records and omni-
channel strategies, teams can curate experiences for fans 
at every possible touchpoint. 
Through other applications of Web3 technologies, brands 
can tie personalized video highlights and other engaging 
and collectible content to the digital ticket or customer 
record. Fans will be empowered by having more visibility 
into ticket reselling, sharing, and gifting. Web3 technologies 
have the ability to imbue new life and opportunities into 
traditional ticketing experiences. FANDOM ON THE 
BLOCKCHAIN1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 745INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Perhaps to the disappointment of 
fans, advertising through multiple 
channels has become more 
advanced, pervasive, adaptive, 
and dynamic. Advertising can be 
adapted during live broadcasts 
to cater to specific geographic 
audience segments or remain 
consistent across physical and 
digital realms. The German professional football league Bundesliga was 
the first major European football league to adopt virtu-
al advertising technology for broadcasted games. This 
technology digitally inserts advertising imagery onto LED 
perimeter boards surrounding the pitch and dynamically 
changes during the course of the match. This advertising is 
not viewable to the players or the fans in the stadium, only 
those watching from home. However, ads are different and 
tailored to specific regions. During the 2022-2023 season, 
the National Hockey League became the next major league 
to adopt similar technology. For these digital ads, the NHL 
partnered with the virtual ad company Supponor, and the 
initiative took seven years to develop. 
Conversely, the Washington Commanders are using Bid-
stack Sports’ virtual advertising technology to create con-
sistency across different channels. Bidstack’s technology 
actually synchronizes and manages activations both at the 
team’s physical stadium and in digital environments like 
video games and the metaverse. 
Millions.co is trying to capitalize on the hype of generative 
AI by developing an automated athlete influencer campaign 
tool. Brands can turn plain English statements into AI-de-
veloped campaigns that feature multiple versions. Brands 
can further customize content using specifics such as lo-
cation, demographics, budget, and type. The AI purportedly 
then optimizes the strategy based on these inputs.As long as sports remain a major source of entertainment, 
companies will continue to develop new methods of adver-
tising to reap the revenue that comes with it. After dis-
ruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NHL explored 
advertising opportunities to make up for lost revenues. The 
integration of dynamic board advertisement was undoubt-
edly to the benefit of the league; however, this did not come 
without criticism. Early on, fans complained that moving 
ads were distracting, and on several occasions, the glitchy 
software has resulted in obstructed views of the game. The 
technology has also been criticized for being problematic 
for those with sensory processing issues; however, the digi-
tal ads were nominated for a Sports Emmy Award, revealing 
their value for sponsors and owners. 
To optimize the fan experience in the face of advertising, 
brands can adopt specific techniques. By including fre-
quency capping and frequency control, viewers will not see 
the same advertisement repeatedly, reducing fatigue and 
annoyance, and enhancing fan engagement. Contradictorily, 
when teams such as the Washington Commanders cre-
ate consistency of advertising across physical and digital 
realms, fans can have an elevated experience when playing 
video games, feeling more closely connected to the real mo-
dality. This also creates expanded revenue opportunities for 
teams and organizations. ADAPTIVE, DYNAMIC, 
AND IMMERSIVE 
ADVERTISEMENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 746INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Mixed reality, or the merging of 
real-world environments with 
computer-generated elements, 
is upgrading in-person fan 
experiences at sporting events. 
Through MR integrations, teams 
have new ways to engage with 
fans and fans have more dynamic 
experiences. In 2022, the Minnesota Twins were the first major sports 
team to bring augmented reality to their home stadium. 
ARound, an AR app developed by Stagwell, allows fans to 
use their smartphones during breaks in the baseball game 
to play interactive games with other fans at Target Field. The 
app uniquely creates shared AR experiences for multiple 
fans. The Los Angeles Rams also hired Stagwell to create 
an AR experience for football games using ARound. The 
application features AR effects, interactive content that 
coordinates with touchdowns and other events, unique 
player animations, and other in-game prizes and contests. 
German football league Bundesliga has collaborated with 
TV broadcaster Sky Deutchland and mobile operator Voda-
fone to create similar augmented applications on phones 
that offer multiple camera views and instant replays as well 
as graphic overlays with statistical information and analyt-
ics directly on the pitch. Through a different approach, the 
International Basketball Federation has installed LED glass 
courts to augment the fan experience. Real-time statistics 
and other graphics that directly appear on the court in-
crease fans’ understanding of the game and the action in 
front of them—and encourages them to look up, away from 
their smartphone. The NBA has also begun experimenting 
with the floor, leveraging it for part of the 2024 All-Star 
weekend. The celebrity game, skills competitions, and 
famous dunk contest all took advantage of the augmented 
court’s abilities. However, the All-Star Game still occurred 
on a traditional wooden court.AR experiences provide sports teams and brands with new 
revenue streams and sponsorship opportunities. These can 
be offered not only at stadiums but also to those streaming 
or viewing live sporting events from home. More important-
ly, these experiences can cater to younger audiences—espe-
cially valuable for leagues such as MLB facing the challenge 
of reaching and retaining younger generations of fans. 
Potential sponsorship opportunities include branded AR 
filters, virtual billboards, or advertising space. 
AR also brings value propositions for the fans. Through 
such technology, they can have access to real-time ad-
vanced stats with accompanying visual overlays to help 
them better understand an individual player’s performance 
compared to the competition. Historical data visualizations 
enhance the experience, providing context and compari-
son to past performances. Interactive data experiences can 
provide fans with unique and immersive ways of engaging 
with the game. Finally, AR applications can also serve as 
an educational tool for fledgling fans trying to learn more 
about the sport. IN-PERSON 
MIXED REALITY 
EXPERIENCES1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 747INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
When it comes to broadcasted 
or streamed sporting events, the 
US’ four major sports leagues 
are using innovative digital and 
virtual experiences to cater to 
new fans both young and old. 
These experiences can place 
your favorite sport in your favorite 
virtual setting, or they can place 
a virtual representation of you 
directly in the game. Earlier this year, Super Bowl LVIII featured a special kid-cen-
tric broadcast on Nickelodeon, marking the first time the 
Super Bowl has had a separate telecast on another network. 
For the production, Nickelodeon’s visual style was incorpo-
rated, including slime-filled end zones and appearances by 
characters like SpongeBob SquarePants. In a similar vein, 
ESPN, Disney, and the National Hockey League collaborated 
to create the NHL Big City Greens Classic. This innovative 
broadcast, made possible through player and puck tracking 
data, re-created an entire hockey game in real time within a 
virtual environment, using animated players whose move-
ments and actions were synchronized with the athletes on 
the ice. During the 2023 NBA All-Star Tech Summit, Com-
missioner Adam Silver demonstrated a future live game 
streaming experience where fans can scan their own avatar 
and place it in the game to replace an actual player. MLB 
has debuted a new virtual ballpark currently accessible only 
on the web that allows fans to make customizable avatars 
with their favorite MLB jerseys and offers opportunities to 
interact with other fans virtually and participate in various 
mini-games. The virtual ballpark resembles an actual base-
ball stadium and features stands occupied by virtual spec-
tators. A giant screen within the park livestreams games 
and other content.Augmenting the at-home sports viewing experience is 
another of the industry’s attempts to attract and cater to 
younger audiences and generations. According to Morning 
Consult, almost three out of five members of Gen Z who 
have not watched a sporting event on TV in the past few 
years said the major reason was a lack of interest in sports. 
Following that, 20% claimed games were too long. Reflecting 
the shorter attention spans that viewers have developed 
in our digital age, Gen Zers primarily get their news about 
sports from YouTube, Instagram, and TikTok but don’t use 
these applications to livestream full games. As a result, 
sports teams and leagues are increasingly focused on the 
“game beyond the game” as a way to attract younger con-
sumers. As the NFL attempts to do this with its Nickelodeon 
partnerships, such broadcasts can serve both younger and 
older audiences, as added graphics do not completely ob-
scure the game and invested parents can still enjoy a sem-
blance of a football game. The NHL’s approach with the “Big 
City Greens” collaboration will primarily just serve a younger 
audience, but the virtual environment could do more to 
keep them captive. However, either approach could be seen 
as too gimmicky and disillusion traditional fan bases. Still, 
customization is now the name of the game, and these 
virtual experiences deliver just that. Through such chan-
nels, fans can have a wider selection of alternate languages, 
high-profile influencer and celebrity commentary, enhanced 
camera angles, and even integrated betting. AUGMENTED 
EXPERIENCES AT 
HOME1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 748INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Technology and evolving 
regulations have changed the 
way that individuals place bets 
and make sports investments. 
The ease of access to new 
data, options for live betting, 
and mobile applications are 
bringing these services to broader 
audiences eager to win a large 
payout.The combination of new technology and accessibility 
through mobile devices has caused the sports betting and 
investing industry to grow exponentially in the past several 
years. Seeing this value, in 2023, American licensed sports-
wear retailer Fanatics acquired the US operations of Points-
Bet, the sports wagering operator and iGaming provider that 
offered scalable cloud-based technology platforms. This 
move marks Fanatics’ entry into sports betting, giving it 
access to 15 states where PointsBet was licensed to operate. 
To benefit the bettors and fledgling investors of sports, a 
host of technologies are being developed to enhance the 
customer experience. The sports investment app Common-
wealth is revolutionizing horse racing ownership by letting 
individuals buy shares in racehorses for as little as $50 and 
earn a portion of the horse’s winnings. Rithmm is a sports 
betting application using predictive analytics to inform bet-
tors’ decisions and ultimately enhance their performance. 
The app allows users to build a custom analytical model 
backed by AI and based on their instincts, providing analy-
sis for every game, recommended picks, predicted scores, 
win probabilities, and expected value on market odds. 
Rithmm aims to make users more informed and thereby 
make sports betting more accessible. Over $180 billion has been legally wagered on sports in 
the past five years, generating $13.7 billion in revenue for 
sportsbooks. In 2022 alone, American consumers allocated 
a larger portion of their spending to sports betting com-
pared to expenses for ride-sharing apps and streaming 
services, with a total of over $95 billion legally placed in 
bets within the nation. About 18% of American adults, or over 
46 million people, either place bets or plan to place bets on 
sports during a single season. Regarding sports investing, 
Commonwealth enabled 390 shareholders of the Kentucky 
Derby winner Mage to increase their overall investment from 
$170,000 to $5 million by selling shares at $50 each. 
Technology is making both forms of activity more accessi-
ble and more attractive to a new demographic. Both betting 
and investing are attracting younger males in particular, 
who are looking to spend their disposable income. Addition-
ally, the ease of accessibility through mobile sports betting 
apps in conjunction with tech-enabled quick payouts is 
leading to the adoption of new forms of betting and invest-
ing. However, this new trend is not devoid of concern. While 
sportsbooks have seen tremendous gains over the past few 
years, there is the worry that even with relaxed regulations 
in new states, the sports betting market might already be 
close to hitting its ceiling. But the bigger concern is the 
threat of increased gambling addiction. As betting only be-
comes more frictionless, so does the threat of an addiction 
epidemic. SPORTS BETTING 
AND INVESTING 
SOARS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 749INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Professional sporting leagues 
have constructed outdoor 
facilities to enhance the viewers’ 
experience, providing spectacular 
and picturesque environments to 
engage fans, both old and new. 
The advent of new technologies 
could enable sporting events to 
be hosted virtually in any location 
imaginable. More than a decade ago, the National Hockey League began 
its annual outdoor ice hockey game, the Winter Classic, 
which was typically hosted at iconic football and baseball 
stadiums. In 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the NHL 
televised a unique take on this concept, hosting two games 
without in-person fans near Lake Tahoe, instead focusing 
on natural landscapes capable of mimicking pond hock-
ey. In a similar vein, Major League Baseball hosted its own 
events in iconic and scenic locations in 2021 and 2022. In 
both years, they took place at a ballpark adjacent to the 
“Field of Dreams” movie site in Dyersville, Iowa, a location 
popularized by the 1989 film. In 2023, NASCAR held the 
Grant Park 220 in the streets of downtown Chicago: the first 
time the NASCAR Cup Series held a street race. This devel-
oped from an imaginary street course NASCAR conceived of 
in 2021 for the eNASCAR iRacing Pro Invitational Series—a 
series of simulated racing events that occurred  during the 
pandemic. And even when games wouldn’t physically take 
place in scenic venues, technology can step in: The NHL is 
considering using the puck-tracking technology featured 
in last season’s popular Big City Greens Classic to expand 
virtual viewing feeds in locations such as the National Mall 
or Central Park. This technology offers endless possibilities 
for projecting games in captivating locations.Organizing sporting events in nontraditional locations in-
volves some level of risk. These spectacles are exorbitantly 
expensive, and low ratings could result in failure. But recent 
events have paid off. For instance, the Lake Tahoe NHL game 
featuring the Boston Bruins and Philadelphia Flyers drew 
over a million TV-only viewers, making it the most-watched 
NHL regular-season game on cable since 2002. It was also 
the most-streamed game in NBC Sports Digital history. 
Similarly, the Field of Dreams game between the Chicago 
White Sox and the New York Yankees attracted an average 
of 5.9 million viewers across TV and streaming, making it 
the most-viewed MLB regular-season game on Fox Sports 
since 2005. Additionally, this production was praised for its 
storytelling capabilities. Although the pandemic may have 
contributed to the success of these two examples, NA-
SCAR’s Grant Park 220 was also deemed a success and was 
the second-most watched race of the season. These events 
should be commended for their innovativeness, as they 
have the potential to encourage leagues to explore interna-
tional expansion in more exotic locations and potentially 
grow global audiences. With new digital technology, leagues 
can also experiment with hosting events in virtual locations 
to test groundbreaking ideas before investing in expensive 
physical locations.DESTINATION 
SPORTING EVENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 750INDUSTRY SPORTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
What if customizable content puts viewers in complete control?   
While disappointment and frustration were the hallmarks of trying to access sports during the early 2020s, by 
the end of the decade, accessibility is no longer an issue because of the abundance of flexible content models. 
Sports fans have full access along with complete customization options. AI recommendation engines suggest 
content to users before they even access their personal portals. Once logged in, the system automatically selects 
the preferred viewing area of a particular user, whether that’s directly behind the backboard or from an aerial 
birds-eye view. The viewer can change this with ease in real time as their preferences shift. The platform also sug-
gests iconic overlays to virtually house the game in locations such as the Roman Colosseum or on the surface 
of Mars. If this isn’t a viewer’s thing, they can simply opt for the traditional analog setting. When the platform 
senses  users are losing interest, it engages them in activations and activities to heighten the experience. And 
if you thought this could only be enjoyed at home, viewers can have the same experience in the stadium using 
augmented reality headsets. With all of their preferences saved, all viewers have to do is remember their headset. 
They can enjoy all their favorite customized settings at home or on the road. 
751© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPORTS752© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ON THE  
FIELD  
ATHLETE EXPERIENCESINDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Leagues are increasingly using 
technology to augment or even 
replace human judgment and 
help make rulings within sports 
games. Some will colloquially 
refer to this phenomenon as robo 
umpires or robo officials. As the 
pace of sports becomes faster, 
an argument could be made that 
technological assistance can add 
integrity to the games.The Association of Tennis Professionals announced that 
Electronic Line Calling (ELC) Live will be implemented into 
all matches beginning in 2025. Chair umpires will still 
oversee matches, but ELC Live will eliminate the role of line 
judges. In European football, the Champions League intro-
duced semiautomated offside technology during the 2022-
2023 season in an effort to improve the accuracy and speed 
of offside calls. This technology uses 12 specialized tracking 
cameras positioned underneath the stadium roof to closely 
monitor the ball’s movement, capturing up to 29 distinct 
data points for each player on the field at a frequency of 50 
times per second. The 29 data points account for all perti-
nent limbs and extremities needed to accurately determine 
offside calls and allow for accurate calculations of a player’s 
on-field positions. As of 2023, all Triple-A ballparks now use 
robot umpires to call balls and strikes using the Automat-
ic Balls and Strikes system (ABS). Half of the games will 
use an ABS challenge system where team managers can 
challenge calls—which will be overturned or upheld at ABS’ 
discretion—while the remaining games will use ABS to de-
termine all calls using an electronic strike zone. By implementing technology assistance into sporting 
events, the overall hope is that it would at the very least 
result in consistent calls, and at best ensure accuracy 
and perfection in the moderating of the games. As sports 
betting becomes ubiquitous, an increasing number of 
fans will endorse such technology, especially as they have 
money on the line, and the difference of millimeters, un-
detectable to the human eye, could mean the difference 
in a major payday or a significant loss. But purists will be 
more critical of the technology, saying that it goes against 
the spirit of the game and even that human error is funda-
mental to the sport. Implementing technology assistance 
into more events will affect stats, records, and individual 
achievements of athletes moving forward. Despite the view 
of fans from these individual camps, there are additional 
benefits for implementing such technology. It does have the 
potential to bring about consistency in officiating. The ABS 
system establishing a consistent strike zone has already 
received overwhelming positive support. Additionally, this 
technology could eliminate arguments with officials and 
make the games fairer. However, to ensure fairness in all in-
stances, it will be complicated and difficult to develop more 
technology to completely replace officiating. AUGMENTED GAME 
MANAGEMENT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 753INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Virtual reality is increasingly 
being used for training regimens 
and conditioning. While not a 
substitute for the real thing, VR 
provides athletes with simulated 
scenarios that can enhance 
reaction time and decision-
making, giving them new skills 
and perspectives to use in live 
game situations. Sense Arena has been around since 2018, and since then 
has been pioneering the use of VR in training for both hock-
ey and tennis. The comprehensive platform features over 60 
drills that can be tailored to specific age groups and skill 
levels. Organizations including the NHL and USA Hockey 
have recognized the potential value of such training, which 
can place players in realistic game-like scenarios off the 
ice. The University of South Florida has recently introduced 
Sense Arena to its tennis program, allowing players to 
engage in training sessions without needing a full tennis 
court. To help simulate real-world experiences, players can 
adjust settings such as wind speed and court surface, and 
be subjected to crowd noise. Germany’s U17 football team 
has also turned to virtual reality to train its players, specif-
ically to improve their awareness, decision-making skills, 
scanning ability, and cognitive skills. The team cites such 
training as instrumental in achieving their first Europe-
an U17 Championship in 14 years. Tulane University is also 
employing VR in its athletics program; however, it is taking 
a slightly different approach. The program uses VR head-
sets to help athletes achieve a more relaxed state before or 
during games and competitions. The Tulane football team 
has specifically used the headsets to deal with overheating, 
muscle cramps, and injury rehabilitation. Using virtual reality to train athletes might appear gim-
micky or awkward to some. It might also be met with criti-
cism or doubt from specific athletes themselves. While of 
course virtual reality is not a sufficient substitute for the 
real thing, it can augment and assist traditional training 
and is proving to have its place in robust athlete training 
regimens. For athletes such as hockey players, VR can en-
hance their decision-making skills and overall performance. 
It can provide intense and targeted training scenarios for 
players, and it can position them in real-world situations at 
times when ice time is not available. Also, it can offer train-
ing opportunities to athletes with reduced risk of injury, as 
they can train without the risk of a 100 mph slap shot going 
high and striking them in the face. 
Virtual reality training will not be for everyone, but it is al-
ready proving to be effective. As the fidelity of virtual expe-
riences improves, so will the capabilities it will offer in the 
virtual training realm, providing athletes with more ways to 
train, even from the comforts of their own homes.   VIRTUAL TRAINERS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 754INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Sports programs and teams 
are turning to a constellation of 
technologies including motion 
capture devices, cameras, 
sensors, machine learning, and AI 
to improve player performance 
and training. By establishing 
clearer training objectives, both 
coaches and individual athletes 
will find benefits, impacting wins 
and career earnings. Duke University’s basketball program has implemented 
the Catapult athlete-monitoring system, which employs 
advanced sports science technology to enhance player 
performance and development. This system makes use 
of sensors, accelerometers, GPS, wearable anchors, force 
plates, body weight tracking, and biomechanical analysis. 
The New York Yankees have developed a state-of-the-art 
pitching facility and player development complex named 
the Gas Station. Within the facility are Trackman (radar) 
portable machines, Rapsodo (radar and camera) machines, 
high-speed Edgertronic cameras, and other equipment that 
produce real-time feedback for pitchers based on elements 
including spin rate, spin axis, vertical and horizontal drop, 
and velocity. Wake Forest University also employs a pitching 
lab that uses advanced technology including motion cap-
ture cameras, force plates, and video software to develop 
in-depth analysis of pitchers’ movements and mechanics. 
Shawn Beaudette, an assistant professor of kinesiology at 
Brock University, has partnered with Chalk Monkey Labs to 
create a 3D motion capture system to impact sports per-
formance. The technology employs reflective markers and 
specialized cameras to record movement data, which is 
then analyzed by machine learning and AI to help coach-
es establish objective benchmarks to help athletes make 
improvements.  Coaches and athletic programs will try almost anything 
that promises to provide a competitive advantage. As it is, 
coaching can also be quite subjective, and coaching sug-
gestions can sometimes be perceived as arbitrary. But by 
implementing tools such as machine learning and AI into 
performance analysis, coaches can gain a clearer under -
standing of player potential and use established bench-
marks to arrive at a more quantified approach to their 
coaching, potentially minimizing biases that can impact 
their athlete assessments. Such systems can better gauge 
player intensity during games and practices and inform 
coaching staff of how to best adjust workloads for players 
during games. Analysis from these systems can also help 
players reduce their risk of injuries. 
These systems might recommend just minor adjustments 
to athletes’ performance and execution, but even the most 
minor adjustments can have monumental effects. Through 
practice and time, players can make holistic behavioral 
changes and adjustments to their game, which is especially 
beneficial during early and more formative years. This could 
really benefit individual athletes when they are ready to 
sign their next contract, and could mean the difference in 
millions of dollars. AUGMENTED 
TRAINING ANALYTICS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 755INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Many athletes, like NBA legend 
Michael Jordan, have gone 
beyond their sports and created 
their own brands. This trend has 
become more prominent in the 
age of social media. With new 
technologies and regulations, a 
new generation of athletes can 
rise above their sports and create 
their own platforms.Joel Embiid, a six-time NBA All-Star, is entering the media 
industry by launching a production studio called Miniature 
Géant in partnership with The SpringHill Co., backed by LeB-
ron James and Maverick Carter. The studio aims to inspire 
and showcase stories of individuals who have achieved 
success through unconventional paths. Miniature Géant 
will explore various media formats, including unscripted, 
scripted, audio, and branded content. Jeffrey Jordan, Mi-
chael’s son, co-founded a Web3 sports technology venture 
called Heir. The company has launched its first mobile app, 
which aims to serve Gen Z fans by providing community-fo-
cused content centered around their favorite players. Users 
can communicate with partner athletes, access exclusive 
content, and find player-focused highlights and statistics. 
The app also offers community features such as games and 
events with rewards. Current NBA stars and other athletes 
have already joined Heir with more expected soon. Olivia 
Dunne, an American artistic gymnast and social media 
personality, has taken advantage of a 2021 Supreme Court 
ruling that allows college athletes to capitalize on their 
names, images, and licensing (NIL). With over 4 million 
Instagram followers and 7.6 million TikTok followers, she is 
considered the top female athlete social media influencer 
and is estimated to be worth $3.3 million. Dunne indicated 
that she has received over half a million dollars for a single 
post, making her one of the highest-earning college ath-
letes in the NIL era.During Michael Jordan’s athletic career, he was the face of 
multiple brands. But he didn’t own his intellectual property 
during the peak of his fame. Additionally, he did not have 
the advantage of direct social media interaction with fans. 
Present-day athletes have more opportunities to benefit 
from technologies and platforms. With the emergence of so-
cial media, athletes have become media companies them-
selves. They can produce and distribute content directly to 
their fan base, shaping their brand and monetizing their 
influence. This shift allows athletes to control their narra-
tives and tap into new revenue streams through endorse-
ments and content licensing. By generating unique content 
such as podcasts, documentaries, web series, or books, 
athletes can diversify their revenue streams and strength-
en their brand equity. Owning this IP gives them greater 
control over their content and the ability to license it to 
various platforms to generate income. With recent changes 
to NIL regulations, athletes can benefit from their personal 
platforms earlier in their careers. By embracing a media 
company mindset, utilizing social media, and focusing on 
original content creation, athletes can experience signifi-
cant financial growth and open doors to new opportunities. 
This approach empowers athletes to control their narratives, 
expand their reach, and build strong relationships with fans 
and partners.ATHLETES AS 
BRANDS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 756INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Sports equipment is technology 
in and of itself, enabling athletes 
to achieve new feats and break 
previous records. Innovations in 
equipment have led to enhanced 
experiences for sporting events 
by improving player performance, 
making sports more entertaining, 
and reducing injuries.  The sports equipment manufacturer Wilson has developed 
a prototype for a 3D-printed airless basketball that never 
requires inflation. Wilson collaborated with EOS, an additive 
manufacturing company to create the lattice-based struc-
ture made from elastomeric polymer. The prototype primarily 
protects against deflation issues and contraction that can 
be caused by temperature changes. Per Reinhall and Samu-
el Browd worked together to start VICIS, a helmet company 
that makes soft-shell helmets designed to more efficiently 
absorb impacts. VICIS has worked with the NFL to manufac-
ture position-specific helmets, customized for protection for 
key situations different football players find themselves in. 
Using a deformable outer shell, these helmets have contrib-
uted to reducing head injuries in football. MLB pitchers are 
now allowed to use PitchCom devices during games. These 
wearable transmitters allow players to communicate with 
one another on the field without giving away visible signs 
or verbal cues. Players (primarily pitchers and catchers) 
can use the device to send audio signals to other players 
indicating the desired pitch to use on a batter. This helps 
eliminate sign-stealing by opponents and offers language 
versatility to players whose native tongue is not English. 
BetterGuards braces are transforming basketball by offering 
players unprecedented 360-degree freedom of movement, 
while also providing paramount ankle protection.  Innovations to sports equipment can impact the game at 
large, or just offer individual players customization and 
personalization. As the industry makes changes and ad-
vancements, not all innovations will be well received, but 
efforts to improve sports through experimentation are still 
applaudable behaviors. 
Ultimately, innovations to athletic equipment can improve 
the pace of play, make sports more entertaining, reduce 
injuries, or even impact sustainability. According to Per-
sistence Market Research, the sports equipment industry 
is anticipated to reach $178.5 billion by 2033 with a 6.5% 
compound annual growth rate from now until that year. 
Businesses and organizations can continue to capitalize on 
the growth of the sports and fitness industries by devel-
oping revolutionary equipment for both professional and 
recreational sports markets. Innovations such as PitchCom 
have already proven their worth by speeding up play during 
baseball games and adding more integrity to the game by 
eliminating sign stealing. Baseball is a great case study for 
the argument of bringing innovations to the sports industry, 
as the sport has traditionally been so resistant to change. 
But even minor technological implementations have 
brought improvements to the product in just a short period. INNOVATIONS IN 
EQUIPMENT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 757INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
With intense competition comes 
the risk of injury. Unfortunately, 
it is not possible to avoid, yet 
companies are developing a host 
of technologies and wearables 
to try to proactively reduce injury 
when possible, and provide 
new methods for more reliable 
diagnosis and treatment in the 
face of inevitable injuries. Nextiles is a smart fabric technology company that focus-
es its products on athletes. The brand combines flexible 
electronics with proprietary sewing technology into fab-
rics using Bluetooth connectivity to measure mechanical 
changes, primarily to improve athletes’ techniques and 
reduce the risk of injury. Notus Labs also has the ambition 
of reducing injury through wearable devices. The Notus 
One is about the size of a quarter and provides noninvasive 
real-time monitoring of heart rate, core temperature, and 
player movement. With its integrated platform, Notus can 
help prevent heat-related injuries. When injuries cannot 
be prevented, Indian startup NxtQ aims to revolutionize 
physiotherapy using wearable sensors from Movella DOT. 
Using these sensors, NxtQ gathers important data for phys-
iotherapists to administer remote diagnosis and treatment. 
NxtQ algorithms also help interpret data and aid in diagno-
sis. Madrid-based company ThermoHuman is pushing for 
the adoption of thermographic technology in the medical 
departments of top European soccer clubs. By using ther-
mographic cameras to detect areas of heat and pressure 
in the body, this technology can provide insights for injury 
diagnosis and treatment through fast and noninvasive 
methods. Sports are getting faster, and the risk of injuries is be-
coming greater. Over the course of 13 seasons, the average 
number of injuries for all four major North American sports 
was 62.49 injuries per 100 players per season, according to 
the journal Nature. Sports-related injuries have impacts on 
health care, creating potential cost burdens, and in extreme 
instances have harmful long-term physical and psycholog-
ical implications. However, advancements in sports med-
icine and science in conjunction with technology such as 
wearable devices can help the industry keep pace with the 
rates of injury. 
The primary concern is maintaining long-term health and 
vitality for the athletes themselves. But the longer players 
are out, the more significant their impact on team perfor-
mance and potential to impact business performance. This 
is especially the case for star players missing significant 
time in the NBA, as individual players can have a greater in-
fluence on the outcome of games. Teams and organizations 
have a vested interest in preventing injury and expediting 
recovery time when injuries are unavoidable. 
Significant opportunities exist for companies to explore pre-
ventative measures as well as post-injury rehabilitation, es-
pecially as the sports medicine market is predicted to reach 
$7.2 billion by 2025, according to Allied Market Research.ADVANCES IN 
SPORTS MEDICINE 
AND WEARABLES1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 758INDUSTRY SPORTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2034
What if automated platforms democratized sports?    
If Elliott Sartorius had been born during any previous generation, the likelihood of him becoming the world’s 
most prominent soccer player would have been near-impossible, due to his family’s poverty. But thanks to auto-
mated scouting and coaching platforms, Sartorius discovered that he had a natural, yet raw, talent for the game 
of soccer. At a young age, he used the CoachU platform, which assessed his natural ability and mental acumen 
for the game of soccer, and indicated he excelled at all levels. Through motion capture technology, CoachU gave 
Elliott virtual and augmented suggestions and recommendations to enhance his game before he developed any 
unhelpful habits at a young age. In his teenage years, right before his eligibility to go pro, CoachU offered Sartori-
us an option to mutually benefit himself and his fledgling fan base. Through fractionalized investments, his fans 
could essentially buy stock in his athletic career, helping Sartorius overcome the financial hurdles that would 
have previously limited his involvement in the game at such a high level. By believing in himself (or believing 
in the assessment from CoachU) Sartorius rose to stardom, winning lucrative paydays for both himself and his 
early supporters.
759© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPORTS760© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.IN THE OFFICE  
TEAM/BUSINESS MANAGEMENTINDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
As climate change persists, 
sports play the role of both victim 
and villain. Sports teams and 
organizations are beginning 
to lead with their actions by 
implementing programming and 
operations that result in the use 
of less carbon. These measures 
will be crucial to ensure that 
sports remain viable for years and 
decades to come.Across the world, many sports are going greener. IndyCar 
has adopted several eco-friendly alternatives to traditional 
practices in an attempt to reduce environmental impact. 
That includes using 100% renewable racing fuel—the sec-
ond-generation ethanol derived from sugarcane was devel-
oped by Shell and Raizen and has led to a 60% reduction 
in greenhouse gas emissions. IndyCar has also adopted 
Firestone tires made from sustainably sourced materials, 
which are recycled after use. Beyond IndyCar, the racing 
industry has moved toward electric and emissions-efficient 
hybrid alternative-energy vehicles, with Formula E leading 
the charge. In Seattle, Climate Pledge Arena, the home of the 
NHL’s Seattle Kraken and the WNBA’s Seattle Storm is Zero 
Carbon certified by the International Living Future Institute. 
This third-party certification highlights highly energy-effi-
cient buildings designed to fully account for their carbon 
emissions impacts, and requires that 100% of the energy 
tied to the project must be offset by renewable energy sourc-
es. Climate Pledge Arena also includes rainwater harvesting 
to support resurfacing the hockey rink ice and a zero-waste 
approach. German soccer club Bayern Munich is partnering 
with the Schwarz Group in a bid to enter the circular econ-
omy. Under this partnership, the environmental service 
provider PreZero will oversee all waste management at the 
club’s facilities. The mayor of Paris announced the city will 
prohibit single-use plastics during the 2024 Olympic Games 
as a significant step toward addressing plastic pollution.David Goldblatt, author of “Playing Against the Clock,” has 
identified sports as both a victim of and contributor to 
the climate crisis. Climate change has negatively affected 
sports and individual athletes in numerous ways. In 2020, 
poor air quality from wildfires led many tennis players to 
withdraw from the Australian Open. During the 2021 Tokyo 
Olympics, athletes passed out and faced threatening health 
issues because of exorbitant heat. The UN Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs projects that a quarter of 
England’s football stadiums (23 of 92) will be partially or 
totally flooded every year by 2050. In a 2018 report by the 
NHL, the league acknowledged that the climate crisis could 
endanger the sport’s heritage of being played outdoors on 
frozen ponds, but issues will also come with the increasing 
difficulty of maintaining indoor ice rinks with extreme tem-
perature increases. 
At the same time, Goldblatt estimates the sports industry is 
responsible for potentially emitting 300-350 million metric 
tons of carbon dioxide per year. Creating the concrete need-
ed to construct stadiums and arenas and producing the 
fabric for sportswear are also major contributors to carbon 
emissions. The onus is on the industry to make meaningful 
change, and it is in a unique position to galvanize action: Its 
broad social platform can be a strategic tool to influence at-
titudes and perceptions. Beyond this, sports can also serve 
as the testing ground for new innovations. IndyCar is an 
example of taking learnings from the track and using them 
in road-going products. COMMITMENT 
TO SUSTAINABLE 
SPORTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 761INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
A series of mergers, acquisitions, 
and new partnerships are having 
a seismic impact on the world of 
sports. These new institutions will 
have a major effect on how the 
business of sports is conducted in 
the future, how athletes are paid, 
and how fans access the events. In June 2023, the PGA Tour and LIV Golf announced their plan 
to merge commercial operations under common owner-
ship. After some confusion, PGA clarified it would be stay-
ing intact as a separate, commercial entity underneath a 
new structure. This new association will include the Tour’s 
commercial assets, the European DP World Tour, LIV Golf, 
and other golf-related commercial businesses of the Sau-
di Arabian Public Investment Fund. This announcement 
caught the world by surprise because of the previous hostile 
relationship between the two leagues. A similar situation 
happened in women’s professional hockey, where for more 
than four years, the Premier Hockey Federation (PHF) and the 
Professional Women’s Hockey Players’ Association (PWHPA) 
were unable to come to an agreement that satisfied both 
sides. In July 2023, Mark Walter, owner of the Los Angeles 
Dodgers, revealed that his company had acquired the PHF 
and shortly after, ceased its operations. The PWHPA has now 
ratified a collective bargaining agreement with Walter’s 
group for the creation of the Professional Women’s Hockey 
League (PWHL) consisting of six North American teams that 
will replace the PHF. In April 2023, World Wrestling Entertain-
ment (WWE) and Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) an-
nounced their merger, creating a new publicly traded com-
pany under the control of Endeavor Group. Endeavor will own 
51% of the new combat sports and entertainment company, 
while WWE shareholders will retain 49%.Before PGA and LIV’s announcement, 11 players had filed an 
antitrust lawsuit against the PGA Tour alleging that it used 
its position as a monopoly as an advantage over the com-
petition. This caused the PGA to countersue LIV Golf on the 
grounds it was interfering with player contracts. With the 
announcement of this partnership, members of Congress 
are exploring whether the merger would actually violate 
antitrust laws. 
If the partnership does get past this obstacle, it has dissi-
dents for other reasons: Some say this is an attempt by the 
Saudi regime to “sportswash” its reputation in exchange 
for tens of millions of dollars. Undoubtedly, the merger will 
result in significant monetary backing for the sport, and 
serves as a signal of a much larger Saudi presence in Amer-
ican sports in the future. As for the players themselves, this 
could increase their global prominence, giving them oppor-
tunities to earn more through endorsements. But, ultimate-
ly, such a merger could also enable the association to pay 
the players less money as it exerts more control. 
Regarding the merger of UFC and the WWE, ultimately, it 
gives the organizations more influence and power, resulting 
in a new business worth a combined $21.4 billion. Leader-
ship from both organizations believe it will allow for better 
negotiated broadcast deals while keeping costs down for 
viewers. Combining two similar, but ultimately disparate, 
organizations could benefit the organizations, employees, 
and fans. SURPRISING 
MERGERS AND 
ACQUISITIONS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 762INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Investors are showing 
unprecedented interest in 
organized sports. This sometimes 
results in new leagues that mimic 
traditional associations but offer 
new value propositions, or in other 
instances a restructuring of long-
standing organizations to ensure 
their prolonged success. In a more controversial move, Australian entrepreneur Aron 
D’Souza is launching the Enhanced Games. It is a primar-
ily Olympics-style competition with one major difference: 
Athletes are allowed and encouraged to use performance-en-
hancing drugs. D’Souza plans to hold the inaugural games 
in December 2024, featuring sports like track and field, 
swimming, weightlifting, gymnastics, and combat sports. In 
golf, Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy are leading a new venture. 
The TGL is a high-tech, indoor golf league operated by TMRW 
Sports in collaboration with the PGA Tour. This tech-driven 
competition will consist of 18 PGA Tour players, forming six 
teams of three for 15 regular-season matches, then semifi-
nals and finals. Each match will occur in a high-tech facility. 
After talking to 50 different European clubs and stakehold -
ers and concluding that European football is under threat 
and in need of change, A22 Sports Management is develop-
ing an 80-team seasonal competition called the European 
Super League. This merit-based league comes as an alter-
native to a breakaway Super League that was announced in 
2021 led by 12 clubs including Real Madrid, Barcelona, and 
Juventus.It is no small endeavor to develop a new sports league. 
However, with a distinct and different value proposition, a 
startup league could offer something new. The TGL offers 
a unique alternative to traditional golf leagues and has 
outlined its distinctive approach in its business strategy, 
which includes creating franchises centered around cit-
ies and involving prominent individuals as stakeholders. 
Despite hosting its events exclusively in a new arena in 
Palm Beach, Florida, the TGL is making a deliberate effort to 
establish strong connections with specific cities, setting 
it apart from its competing golf leagues, but taking a page 
more directly from traditional sports franchises. 
The controversial Enhanced Games probably will not rival 
the Olympic Games anytime soon, but D’Souza justifies it 
with the ulterior goals he hopes to achieve through the in-
stitution. He has expressed strong interest in exploring the 
boundaries of human achievements, ultimately envisioning 
individuals in their 40s, 50s, and 60s breaking world re-
cords. D’Souza sees performance medicine as a pathway to 
optimizing anti-aging technologies for general use. 
The proposed European Super League is a bit more compli-
cated. Through the original 12 team proposal, smaller teams 
would be at a severe disadvantage. However, the 80 team 
version could provide the foundation for the financial sup-
port the entire football ecosystem needs in order to survive 
and succeed. ALTERNATIVE 
LEAGUES AND 
ASSOCIATIONS 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 763INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Advanced analytics have 
increasingly been used over 
the years to inform coaching 
decisions. But now, artificial 
intelligence is generating new 
insights and analysis for scouting 
potential and established talent 
at a level that was previously 
unimaginable.Plaier aims to revolutionize player scouting by using AI to 
conduct real-time analysis of soccer team playing styles 
and rosters. The outcomes are correlated with data on over 
100,000 players stored in the system, with their abilities 
weighted in relation to the specific needs of the club seek-
ing new talent. Through this systematic approach, the AI 
system leverages historical data to make predictions. The 
Chicago Blackhawks are undergoing a significant internal 
overhaul of their franchise, starting with the development of 
an app called Madhouse. This app operates as a central ner-
vous system providing comprehensive insights into hockey 
players, including their playing history, statistics, scouting 
reports, interviews, and personality traits. Major League 
Soccer (MLS) has partnered with London-based startup Ai.io 
to deploy AI-powered tools for player recruitment, allowing 
aspiring players to be scouted for free. Players can download 
Ai.io’s AiScout app and complete assessments and drills on 
their mobile phones. The app will analyze their skills, and 
the MLS will evaluate the players through the generated 
data. Those with high scores will have the opportunity to 
train with MLS teams in the US and Canada. Startup Sports -
Visio uses computer vision and deep learning applications 
to capture footage and action from basketball players and 
automatically generate statistics and highlights. Using a constellation of technologies such as computer 
vision, deep learning, and other AI applications, coaching 
staff can greatly benefit by making more informed deci-
sions about their players and personnel. These network 
technologies are merely tools and will not immediately 
replace decades of institutional knowledge or experience 
from tenured coaches, but they can add supplemental 
insights and analysis, and help coaches make personnel 
decisions more quickly and efficiently. There is the threat 
that such systems will not provide reliable information and 
coaches could be hesitant to adopt these new technologies, 
but as the Moneyball phenomenon has indicated, those 
who first master new forms of analytics will have distinct 
competitive advantages. Ultimately, though, the use of AI in 
sports and scouting will require substantial investment and 
careful integration. 
Such technologies could help reduce biases that naturally 
creep into decision-making, which is what the Blackhawks 
hope will happen with the implementation of Madhouse. 
This benefits the organization, but it also benefits the play-
ers. With the use of Ai.io, MLS decision-makers can choose 
to scout players based on objective data, rather than just 
opinion. This could potentially serve as a democratizer, 
giving disadvantaged players a chance to have their talents 
and skills considered, ultimately evening the playing field.ADVANCED 
ANALYTICS FOR 
SCOUTING TALENT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 764INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
While sports sponsorships and 
partnerships have essentially 
existed since ancient times, a 
series of unique and innovative 
collaborations are creating 
synergies and resulting in 
increased exposure through the 
unlikely pairing of brands and 
sports teams. In 2023, e-commerce company Zappos.com partnered with 
the exhibition baseball team the Savannah Bananas to be-
come the official title partner and exclusive footwear partner 
for their Banana Ball World Tour. The Bananas have tradition-
ally had an ad-free experience, and this partnership evolved 
due to Zappos’ strong customer-centric sensibilities. The 
partnership aims to merge fashion and sports, promising 
an exciting and unexpected experience for fans through a 
series of pop-up activations during the 33-city tour. Similar-
ly, Spotify and FC Barcelona announced a long-term partner-
ship during the 2022-2023 season. Under the agreement, 
Spotify is both the main partner of the club and its official 
audio streaming partner. FC Barcelona updated its team 
shirts with the Spotify brand and rebranded its stadium 
as Spotify Camp Nou. This unique partnership attempts to 
connect music and football with the goal of creating a global 
community of fans and artists. Spotify uses this partnership 
to spotlight artists and creators, including in-stadium ele-
ments to showcase artists to the global TV audience during 
matches, using geo-targeting to highlight different artists in 
different markets. In this effort to showcase artists, FC Bar-
celona honored Canadian performer Drake’s achievement of 
reaching 50 billion streams on Spotify by featuring his logo 
during a match against Real Madrid. Sports sponsorships and partnerships are as old as time. 
They can be traced back to ancient Rome, when gladiators 
relied on the patronage of wealthy individuals to support 
their training. The first recorded sports sponsorships took 
place during the 1896 Olympic Games. Since then, these 
types of partnerships have evolved drastically and dynam-
ically to influence marketing strategies. In that time, these 
strategies have become more formulaic, but brands are 
exploring new ways to leverage the model. 
The partnership between Zappos and the Savannah Banan-
as aims to redefine brand culture and provide exciting ex-
periences for fans of both brands, even those disillusioned 
by traditional advertising models. In a different fashion, 
the partnership between Spotify and FC Barcelona, with the 
inclusion of Drake, presents a refreshed method for catering 
to younger audiences and leverages three major platforms 
for cross-promotion. FC Barcelona has repeated this initia-
tive with Spanish singer and songwriter Rosalía. The brands 
have reported that this strategy has helped both the club 
and the artist reach new audiences. Searches for Rosalía on 
Spotify were reportedly up a few hundred percent, and the 
club received half a billion impressions from Rosalía being 
broadcasted across their channels. UNIQUE AND 
INNOVATIVE 
PARTNERSHIPS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 765INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
In sports journalism, there has 
been the common refrain to 
“stick to sports” rather than using 
platforms to provide political or 
cultural commentary. However, 
it is important to recognize that 
sports and politics have always 
intersected, and this complex 
relationship can have significant 
geopolitical ramifications.While the World Athletics Council has loosened previous re-
strictions levied on Russian and Belarusian athletes based 
on doping allegations, the Council has now excluded the 
athletes from its events indefinitely based solely on Rus-
sia’s invasion of Ukraine. In contrast, while the International 
Olympic Committee (IOC) will not formally invite Russia or 
Belarus to the 2024 Olympic Games, they may permit Rus-
sian and Belarusian athletes to participate as “individual 
neutral athletes,” but not as representatives of their respec-
tive countries. If the IOC allows this, backlash could come 
from Ukrainian athletes in the form of boycotting the games. 
In April 2023, Venezuela hosted the Alliance for the Americas 
Games after a 12-year hiatus. Eleven countries participated 
in the event, including competitions such as boxing, gym-
nastics, bodybuilding, swimming, chess, and dominoes. Par-
ticipating countries consisted mainly of Latin America and 
Caribbean nations; however, Russian athletes were invited 
and allowed to compete under their nation’s flag. For Russia, 
this could represent a symbolic victory over the perceived 
aggressive Western campaign to cancel Russian sports, and 
a means to strengthen their international ties. Sports and politics have a long-standing relationship that 
cannot be ignored. Governments often use sports as a tool 
to address various challenges such as economic growth, 
diplomacy, and natural resource management. However, 
recent events have highlighted how sports can also be 
utilized for geopolitical posturing. The controversy between 
Russia and Ukraine is a prime example of how sports can 
affect many stakeholders, including organizing bodies, 
media outlets, businesses, and nongovernmental organiza-
tions. Decisions regarding this conflict and how they impact 
sports have been complicated. Critics argue that athletes 
should still be allowed to gain experience, showcase their 
skills, and compete on a global scale. Additionally, it can be 
argued that restricting participation in these international 
events impacts the integrity of the competition, as this lim-
its best-on-best competition. However, blindly allowing such 
participation is at best a tone-deaf response to the severity 
of the actions happening in Ukraine, and at worst, a flat-out 
insult to Ukrainians. While some athletes may want to focus 
solely on the athletic aspects of these competitions, sports 
inevitably continues to be a platform for political strategy.GEOPOLITICS  
OF SPORTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 766INDUSTRY SPORTSWHY IT MATTERS
Sports have not always been 
the most consistent drivers of 
social and cultural change, but 
the industry is now transitioning 
to address inclusion and 
accessibility at all levels, using 
technology and systemic change 
to usher in new experiences for 
fans, athletes, and personnel in 
sports management.Sports management teams and organizations are work-
ing toward inclusivity and accessibility for players and 
fans. In partnership with Special Olympics Australia and 
Playbk Sports, Gymnastics Victoria has created an online 
course called “Creating a Positive Experience for Athletes 
with Autism in Gymnastics.” The course equips gymnas-
tics coaches with evidence-based techniques to enhance 
the participation experience for athletes with autism, and 
is widely accessible through Special Olympics Australia’s 
online learning platform. The Escoita App, created by AR-
MIS Digital Sport in collaboration with Jesus Suarez Lopez, 
provides a complete sports event experience to users with 
partial or complete vision loss, regardless of the sport. The 
app offers real-time audio description, reducing the delay 
between the event and the narration. The goal of Escoita is 
to improve user experience, encourage inclusivity in sports, 
and foster a sense of community among fans. But to achieve 
true inclusivity in sports, diversity and inclusion must also 
happen within management and internal hiring. The WNBA 
is recognized as a leader in promoting diversity and inclu-
sion, with diverse representation from ownership to coach-
es. The league consistently earns top scores for its racial and 
gender hiring practices among professional sports leagues. 
Among men’s leagues, both NBA and MLS have improved 
their racial and gender hiring practices. However, the NBA 
leads with more people of color in general manager and 
coaching positions, as well as more women in senior man-
agement roles. Sports organizations have a unique opportunity to advance 
inclusivity and accessibility through their platforms. By 
dismantling cultural and social barriers, they can serve as 
catalysts for social change. However, it is incumbent upon 
these institutions to ensure that their efforts toward inclu-
sion encompass all forms of diversity, including race, cul-
ture, gender, religion, and disability. This is vital to promote 
acceptance and human rights, and eradicate discrimination 
in sports. While technology may alleviate some inclusion 
challenges, it can also lead to unintended consequences. 
FIFA, for example, faced backlash for its tech-driven ac-
cessibility ticketing allocations, which ironically left some 
fans feeling ostracized and marginalized. To prevent similar 
missteps and foster inclusivity, sports organizations need 
proper implementation and execution. However, genuine 
progress can only happen if there is a systemic dedication 
to initiatives that yield results, starting at the leadership 
level. Such leadership can transform sports into a more 
inclusive and empowering field for all, impacting the fan, 
athlete, and employee experiences. MORE INCLUSIVE 
AND ACCESSIBLE 
SPORTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 767INDUSTRY SPORTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2040
What if consolidation was inevitable?    
It was a seemingly normal Wednesday afternoon when Major League Baseball and Major League Cricket (MLC) 
shocked the world by announcing they would join a collaborative venture called Major League Entertainment. The 
properties will still maintain their names underneath the new umbrella company, and the leagues will not com-
pete against each other during their respective regular seasons. However, they will host two interleague exhibi-
tion games a year featuring all-stars from each league. This cricket match and baseball game will be hosted in 
neutral international sites in iconic locations in an attempt to build and grow international audiences. The joint 
venture was precipitated when MLB’s position was no longer tenable. Over the years, It has lost too many fans 
to remain a sustainable entity. However, the league still had its brand reputation and legacy to give it credence, 
something that MLC had not yet established. MLC, however, was better positioned as it continued gaining nation-
al and international interest. After considerable deliberation, both leagues agreed to the deal in principle. More 
details should shed new light on this astonishing joint venture in the coming weeks and months ahead. 
768© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPORTSAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
769© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPORTS INDUSTRY770© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.NICK BARTLETT  
Director 
Nick Bartlett is a Director at the Future Today Institute and leads our 
Insurance practice area.
Before FTI, he held positions in corporate strategy and insights 
generation roles, serving as a partner to senior leadership at multiple 
Fortune 100 financial services companies. Throughout his career, he 
has specialized in framework design, corporate innovation, strategic management, and insurance.
 Nick has an extensive background in developing strategic insights across a variety of industries (e.g., 
manufacturing, transportation, construction, energy) and subject matter areas (e.g., small business, 
mobility, robotics, platforms & ecosystems), in addition to the shifting nature of business and consumer 
preferences. He has deep experience developing and implementing trend modeling and signal iden-
tification for large organizations. Nick has also led the design and establishment of internal foresight 
and scenario development capabilities across multiple institutions.
 He is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. Nick holds an 
MBA and a Bachelor of Arts in Public Relations from Quinnipiac University.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSSPORTS
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYINDUSTRYSELECTED  
SOURCES
771© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPORTS INDUSTRY772© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Adam Silver Unveils Stream-
ing Experience of the Future 
via the NBA App at 2023 NBA 
All-Star Tech Summit.” NBA.
com, February 17, 2023. www.nba.
com/news/adam-silver-unveils-
streaming-experience-of-the-
future-via-the-nba-app-at-2023-
nba-all-star-tech-summit. 
“Addressing Climate Change 
Through Sport.” United Nations. 
www.un.org/development/desa/
dspd/2022/02/addressing-cli-
mate-change-through-sport/. 
“Airless Basketball Prototype.” 
Wilson. www.wilson.com/en-us/
explore/basketball/airless-pro-
totype.
“ARound—Augmented Reality for 
Live Events.” Accessed August 
29, 2023. https://aroundar.com/. 
“Augmented Reality in Sports 
Marketing: A Game-Changer for 
Fan Engagement and Spon-
sorship Revenue.” Reality Blu, 
April 7, 2023. www.realityblu.
com/blog/augmented-reali-
ty-in-sports-marketing-sponsor-
ship1. “Blues to Launch Block-
chain-Based Fan Engagement 
Program.” NHL.com, June 15, 
2023. www.nhl.com/blues/news/
blues-to-launch-blockchain-
based-fan-engagement-pro-
gram/c-344831002. 
“Brock Partners with Bio-
mechanics Company on 3D 
Motion Capture Technology.” 
The Brock News. https://brocku.
ca/brock-news/2023/05/
brock-partners-with-biome-
chanics-company-on-3d-mo-
tion-capture-technology/. 
Bullock, Garrett S., et al. “Tempo-
ral Trends in Incidence of Time-
Loss Injuries in Four Male Pro-
fessional North American Sports 
over 13 Seasons.” Scientific 
Reports, vol. 11, no. 1, April 1, 2021, 
p. 8278. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-021-87920-6.
Carp, Sam. “What Barcelona 
and Spotify Have Learned from 
One Year of Working Together.” 
SportsPro,  June 2, 2023. www.
sportspromedia.com/insights/fc-barcelona-spotify-shirt-spon-
sorship-drake-rosalia-lessons/.
“CBS Sports, Nickelodeon Team 
up for First-Ever Super Bowl 
Alternate Telecast.” NFL.com, 
https://www.nfl.com/news/
cbs-sports-nickelodeon-team-
up-for-first-ever-super-bowl-al-
ternate-telecast. 
Corea, Nicole. “How Climate 
Change Is Affecting Sports 
Around the World.” The Aspen 
Institute, October 1, 2021. www.
aspeninstitute.org/blog-posts/
how-climate-change-is-affect-
ing-sports-around-the-world/.
Credenza. “Blockchain Made 
Easy.” Accessed August 29, 
2023. www.credenza3.com. 
Gramlich, John. “As More 
States Legalize the Practice, 
19% of U.S. Adults Say They 
Have Bet Money on Sports in 
the Past Year.” Pew Research 
Center. www.pewresearch.
org/short-reads/2022/09/14/as-more-states-legalize-the-
practice-19-of-u-s-adults-say-
they-have-bet-money-on-sports-
in-the-past-year/. 
Green, Miranda. “NHL Report 
Finds Climate Change Hurts 
the Sport.” The Hill, March 18, 
2018. https://thehill.com/policy/
energy-environment/380648-
national-hockey-league-report-
finds-climate-change-hurts-the-
sport/.
Group, Armis. “Inclusive Tech-
nology: How to Boost Accessi-
bility in the Sports Industry.” 
Armis. www.armisgroup.com/
blogs/inclusive-technolo-
gy-how-to-boost-accessibili-
ty-in-the-sports-industry/. 
Inc., Betterguards Technology. 
“Betterguards Wins Sports 
Technology Award for Best 
Injury Prevention and Recovery 
Technology; Launches Ankle 
Brace Sales in the U.S. Market.” GlobeNewswire News Room, 
June 1, 2023. www.globe-
newswire.com/en/news-re-
lease/2023/06/01/2680403/0/
en/Betterguards-Wins-Sports-
Technology-Award-for-Best-In-
jury-Prevention-and-Recovery-
Technology-Launches-Ankle-
Brace-Sales-in-the-U-S-Market.
html.
Inc., Stagwell. “ARound and 
Minnesota Twins Pioneer 
In-Stadium Augmented Reality 
Stats Visualization to Further 
Innovate Target Field Fan Expe-
rience. www.prnewswire.com/
news-releases/around-and-min-
nesota-twins-pioneer-in-stadi-
um-augmented-reality-stats-vi-
sualization-to-further-inno-
vate-target-field-fan-experi-
ence-301871248.html. 
“Introducing Rithmm: A New 
Predictive Analytics Application 
That Will Change the Game for 
Sports Bettors.” Rithmm, March 
14, 2023.  www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20230314005439/en/
Introducing-Rithmm-A-New-Pre-
dictive-Analytics-Application-
That-Will-Change-the-Game-for-
Sports-Bettors.
“Is There Any End to the Pro 
Sports League Startup Craze?” 
InsideHook. www.insidehook.
com/daily_brief/sports/new-
pro-sports-leagues-flag-football. 
“It’s ‘Game On’ in the Field of 
Dreams—Which May Host Sports 
Tourism Too.” Sports Destination 
Management, February 12, 2021. 
www.sportsdestinations.com/
sports/sports-facilities/its-
game-field-dreams-which-may-
host-sports-20108. 
McCaskill, Steve. “What’s 
Happening in the World of 
RSNs and What’s the Future for 
Bally Sports?” SportsPro, April 
14, 2023. www.sportspromedia.
com/insights/analysis/bally-
sports-rsns-diamond-mlb-nba-
nhl-explainer/.SELECTED SOURCESSPORTS INDUSTRY773© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Notus Labs | Advancing Athletic 
Performance.” Notus Labs. Ac-
cessed August 30, 2023. www.
notus-labs.com. 
“Plaier.” Plaier. Accessed Sep-
tember 11, 2023. www.plaier.com. 
“Russia to Send 48 Athletes 
to ALBA Games and Will Com-
pete under Own Flag. Inside 
the Games, March 22, 2023. 
www.insidethegames.biz/arti-
cles/1135080/alba-games-rus-
sia-athletes.
“Semi-Automated Offside 
Technology.” FIFA. Accessed 
August 30, 2023. www.fifa.
com/origin1904-p.cxm.fifa.
com/technical/football-tech-
nology/football-technolo-
gies-and-innovations-at-the-fi-
fa-world-cup-2022/
semi-automated-offside-tech-
nology. “Sports Equipment Market Set 
to Surpass US178.50 Billion by 
2033: Key Growth Drivers and 
Trends | Persistence Market Re-
search.” Yahoo Finance, August 
7, 2023. https://finance.yahoo.
com/news/sports-equipment-
market-set-surpass-142100364.
html.
Sports, Playbk. “The Power of 
Sports Technology: Inclusion 
and Accessibility on the Rise.” 
Playbk Sports, February 22, 
2022. https://playbksports.com/
the-power-of-sports-technolo-
gy-inclusion-and-accessibili-
ty-on-the-rise/.
Squadron, Bill. “All-Seeing 
AI: One Day Technology Can 
Bring Consistency to Offici-
ating.” Sportico.com, June 
22, 2023. www.sportico.com/
business/tech/2023/artifi-
cial-intelligence-sports-officiat-
ing-1234724999/.“The Updated TGL Roster In-
cludes Plenty of Starpower for 
Tiger and Rory’s Monday Night 
League.” Golf, February 1, 2023. 
https://golf.com/news/tgl-ros-
ter-tiger-woods-rory-mcilroy-
league/.
“Tiger Woods Golf League Re-
veals Team in Wake of LIV/PGA 
Tour Announcement.” Golf, June 
8, 2023, https://golf.com/news/
tiger-woods-golf-league-tgl-re-
veals-teams/.
Tuesday, Heather McLean, et al. 
“Report: Sports Fans Demand 
Personalisation and Flexibility 
from Broadcasters.” SVG Europe. 
https://www.svgeurope.org/
blog/headlines/sports-fans-de-
mand-personalisation-and-flexi-
bility-from-broadcasters/. Zappos. “Zappos.com Be-
comes Official Partner of 
Viral Sensation the Savannah 
Bananas in Retailer’s First 
Experiential Sports Partner-
ship.” PR Newsire, February 14, 
2023. www.prnewswire.com/
news-releases/zapposcom-be-
comes-official-partner-of-vi-
ral-sensation-the-savannah-ba-
nanas-in-retailers-first-ex-
periential-sports-partner-
ship-301745977.html. SELECTED SOURCESSPORTS INDUSTRYSPACE2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION776© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSSPACE
777 T op Headlines
778 State of Play
779 Key Events
780 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
781 Why Space Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
782 Opportunities and Threats
783 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
784 Central Themes
786 Ones T o Watch
787 Important T erms
788 Space Politics
789 Geopolitical Tensions in Space
790 Emerging Space-Faring 
Countries
791 Governing Space
792 Space Defense
793 Scenario: Tax Tensions  
on Mars811 Monitoring Orbital Debris
812 Deorbiting Debris
813 Commercialization of Space
814 Off-Planet Tourism: Getting  
to Space
815 Off-Planet Tourism: Staying  
in Space
816 Space Entertainment and 
Events
817 Private Missions
818 Smaller Companies in Space
819 Scenario: Preparing for Game 
Day on the Moon
820 Origins of a Multi-Planetary 
Species
821 Search for Far-Off Life
822 The Search for Nearby Life
823 Moon, Then Mars
824 Scenario: The Moondust 
Mariner
825 The Search for Cosmic 
Resources826 Universe Mapping
827 Space Habitats
828 Scenario: The Martens’ Month 
on the Moon
829 Simulated Space 
Environments
830 Biological Adaptations  
for Space
831 Official Investigations of UAPs
832 Authors 
834 Selected Sources794 Domestic Competition
795 Space Blocs
796 Geopolitical Tensions over 
Space Junk
797 Scenario: Interplanetary  
Park System
798 Space Industry
799 Space Factories
800 Biomanufacturing in Space
801 Off-Planet Resource Production
802 The Satellite Boom
803 Constellation Management
804 Mining
805 Space Infrastructure
806 Telecoms
807 Maintenance Missions: 
Satellite Servicing
808 Monitoring Earth
809 Self-Assembly Tech
810 Green PropulsionINDUSTRYAccess to space 
is expanding, but 
challenges persist 
due to investment 
constraints, geopolitical 
tensions, and threats 
from a crowded orbit.01
02
03
04
05
777© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.The race to the moon is heating up 
Who can establish a base on the moon first? The highlight of recent successes and 
failures include India’s landing on the moon’s south pole. 
Space junk is still a threat 
SpaceX’s Starlink satellites performed 25,000 collision avoidance maneuvers in six 
months, showing the continued need for innovative solutions.
Distrust among the US and China extends into space 
China has accused the US of militarizing space, while the US fears that China will use 
electronic warfare jammers to target US satellites. 
Countries and companies rush to develop and bolster  
space capabilities 
Saudi Arabia, Scotland, and New Zealand are all increasing space capabilities 
while NASA’s partnership with startups will further its moon pursuits.
SpaceX’s busiest year yet
In 2023, SpaceX conducted over 90 orbital launches, breaking last year’s record by 29. 
The company also made strides on its Starship program, with the first two test flights 
ending in explosions but achieving partial success.  TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY SPACESTATE 
OF PLAYSpace exploration is entering a new era defined by fresh geopolitical rifts alongside the rise of 
new spacefaring nations. While the US and Russia unwind once-productive cooperation on proj-
ects like the International Space Station, this space race 2.0 sparks rapid capabilities develop-
ment. Past rivalries yielded innovations in integrated circuits, memory foam, solar technologies, 
and more. New friction may now drive the next wave of space-enabled advances. This contem-
porary competition, however, is not just a replay of past dynamics. It brings into play a broader 
constellation of actors, including smaller nations and private enterprises, all enabled by the 
decreasing cost of space access. As space access becomes cheaper, more countries can realisti-
cally launch their own missions. India and Japan recently landed lunar rovers, joining an exclu-
sive club. With more diverse space blocs taking shape, we may see new models of collaboration 
between secondary space powers.
Parallel to the geopolitical shifts is a burgeoning commercial space ecosystem now feasible 
given reduced launch costs. Microgravity research and development, space tourism, and asteroid 
mining represent trillion-dollar opportunities. As these space industries mature, we can expect 
related economic and technological ripple effects.
The enduring debate over humanity’s future direction—whether to prioritize our ventures into 
space or focus on Earth’s pressing needs—continues. Billionaire explorers like Jeff Bezos and 
Elon Musk champion the cause of space exploration, not merely as a pursuit of curiosity but as a 
necessary step for human survival. They argue for the establishment of human presence beyond 
Earth, envisioning space as a sanctuary that could ensure humanity’s continuity against exis-
tential threats. As Carl Sagan observed, “Since, in the long run, every planetary civilization will be 
endangered by impacts from space, every surviving civilization is obliged to become spacefar-
ing—not because of exploratory or romantic zeal, but for the most practical reason imaginable: 
staying alive.” Sagan’s words remind us that the journey to space transcends mere adventure or 
ambition. Investing in space exploration and planetary science is not just about the pursuit of 
knowledge or the expansion of human presence into the cosmos; it’s a critical step in ensuring 
the long-term sustainability and survival of humanity. The space economy is a series  
of contradictions. 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRY
778779© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.APRIL 14, 2023  
Mission Sets Off to Probe Jupiter’s Icy Moons  
Europe’s JUICE spacecraft begins its eight-year 
odyssey to Jupiter, targeting moons like Europa 
in the quest for extraterrestrial life clues.
MAY 1, 2023
James Webb detects water vapor  
JWST discovers water vapor on an 
exoplanet 26 light-years away from Earth. JUNE 29, 2023
Virgin Galactic launches  
Virgin Galactic successfully launches Ga-
lactic 01, its first commercial space flight. JUNE 28, 2023  
Universe Permeated with Gravitational Waves  
New measurements reveal a cosmic background hum of 
low-frequency gravitational waves, confirming Einstein’s 
century-old prediction and expanding our understanding 
of the universe’s fabric.AUGUST 2023
Lunar Highs and Lows  
India’s Chandrayaan-3 lands 
on the moon’s south pole as 
Russia’s Luna 25 crashes.KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY SPACE
780© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.UNLOCKING POTENTIAL IN SPACE
When it comes to space explora-
tion, there are never any guarantees. 
Missions are often delayed, and the 
complex nature of space travel of-
ten results in the failed execution of 
even properly laid plans. A wave of 
transformative developments will 
make our space-based futures look 
brighter, however. Based on near term 
developments and milestones, we will 
have more certainty on the viability of 
certain technologies such as asteroid 
mining, in-situ resource utilization, 
and space-based manufacturing. We 
will achieve new breakthroughs, plac-
ing humans in new environments. Ad-
ditionally, we will unlock new myster-
ies and potentially learn more about 
our origins. Space Manufacturing T akes Off
With significant interest from government or-
ganizations such as NASA, combined with the 
engineering know-how of startups like Red-
wire and Varda, the industry will soon know 
the viability of manufacturing in space and 
the true benefits of working in microgravity.
Humans on the Moon
NASA’s Artemis program has its sights on 
sending humans back to the moon and plans 
to do so by 2025. This along with the recent 
flurry of lunar activity, including India’s 
unmanned Chandrayaan-3 landing, expect 
humans to be there again soon. Asteroid Mining Viability
Asteroid mining in and of itself will not be a 
near term development. However, we should 
know more about its viability as startups like 
AstroForge have reestablished their interest 
in the activity and have insightful missions 
planned. ISRU on the Moon 
As a demonstration of oxygen production on 
Mars by NASA’s MOXIE has shown, in-situ 
resource utilization (ISRU) is crucial for space 
exploration. In due time, a demonstration of 
oxygen or water production will take place on 
the moon. LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
New Discoveries by the JWST
Since its successful deployment in space, the 
James Webb Space Telescope has continued 
to uncover new revelations and inspiration. 
The JWST will continue to discover more 
about space, potentially giving us new clues 
about our origins. Affordable re-entry
Expect a rise in companies focused on 
cost-effective return vehicles and methods 
to retrieve goods manufactured in space. If 
viable, this point-to-point space delivery and 
off-Earth industry promises immense expan-
sion for commercial interests.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionINDUSTRY SPACE781© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Space-based technologies 
play a critical role across 
the entire disaster 
management cycle. This 
includes prevention, 
preparedness, early 
warnings, response plans, 
and reconstruction. 
Predictive modeling 
can warn of potential 
threats, and provide 
information that’s critical 
for assessing risks of 
entering new markets or 
providing new services. Space can impact 
supply chains in two 
fundamental, yet 
dramatically different, 
ways. First, satellites used 
for Earth observation can 
help pinpoint the location 
of goods throughout 
supply chains, and help by 
proactively protecting key 
parts. Also, in the future, 
a company’s supply chain 
could extend to space, as 
space factories become 
more viable.Technology used in the 
Hubble Telescope has 
improved technology 
for cancer detection in 
women. Eye doctors are 
now using technology 
from the James Webb 
Space Telescope to 
help improve human 
eyesight. Other spillover 
technologies from 
space exploration could 
already exist and provide 
innovations for other 
adjacent industries.The new space race shows 
no signs of slowing 
down. Governments 
will continue to invest 
more of their budgets 
in the space industry to 
maintain competitive 
advantages. There could 
be opportunities to win 
government contracts 
that aren’t necessarily 
grandiose in nature—such 
as new applications for 
project management, 
not just engineering new 
rockets. At first, our crowded and 
increasingly unsafe orbits 
could seem to just be a 
threat to organizations 
operating in the space 
economy. However, this is 
a risk for everyone, as so 
much of our connectivity 
and navigation systems 
rely on space. Advocating 
for responsible orbital 
activity should be 
something we all invest 
in. There is an enormous 
economic opportunity 
to clean up Earth’s orbit. 
Unfortunately, we are 
the culprits responsible 
for creating this mess. 
Our space junk dilemma 
mirrors our current 
climate crisis. The 
stability of safe space 
travel is decreasing, 
and we must rely on the 
market to reverse this 
trend.Support for disaster 
preparedness and 
management More resilient 
and revolutionary 
supply chains Spillover technologies 
are there for the 
taking Capitalize on the 
interests of the 
public sectorResponsible orbital 
activity impacts 
everyoneExistential threats 
create business 
opportunitiesWHY SPACE TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY SPACEOPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
As long as regulations remain outdated, there’s a risk of countries operating 
kinetic-based anti-satellite weapons. These should be a worry for not just 
governments but companies whose satellites could get caught in the crossfire. 
As ground-based lasers become more sophisticated, there is an increased risk 
of being on the receiving end of a cyberattack. These nonphysical attacks can 
use lasers to jam or even blind satellites.
With the tense geopolitical environment of space, it could be easy for a country 
or competing business to mistake a mishap in space as a purposeful attack 
against them. Some groups might be quick to retaliate. 
Space debris poses the most significant space-related threat. In the event of 
the Kessler Syndrome, not only would satellites be destroyed but we would not 
be able to leave Earth, preventing us from being a multi-planetary species. 
The democratization of space poses the threat to traditional players of not only 
smaller and more nimble businesses but also less space-established nations. 
This could upend incumbents’ resourcefulness in the face of constraints. Opportunities
As more people and things travel to space, there’s a heightened need for 
insurance packages. These could cover the traveling individuals, their 
possessions, or the satellites in orbit. 
Counterintuitively, existential threats in space are leading to business 
opportunities. The industry for deorbiting space junk and reservicing satellites 
will remain a growth market for the foreseeable future. 
As SpaceX gets closer to reaching the limit of meaningful cost improvements 
for sending rockets to space, a new player could enter the satellite ride-sharing 
domain and gain some market share.
As sending payloads to space becomes more affordable, new business models 
have formed, and other alternative business models are yet to be discovered.
As space tourism unfolds, first-mover advantages open up for companies that 
offer entertainment services to guests. This will be a very niche market and might 
only benefit actual first movers.
782© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPACE
783© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Earth observation technol-
ogy will continue to im-
prove and reveal new types 
of data from advanced 
instruments. As machine 
learning and artificial 
intelligence also improve, 
companies can make the 
most of these data sets by 
uncovering new insights for 
urban planning, insurance, 
disaster preparedness, 
and agriculture for urban 
planning, insurance, di-
saster preparedness, and 
agriculture.The space economy will 
contribute to the burgeon-
ing biomedical revolution. 
To ensure that our bodies 
are conditioned and opti-
mized for space, research-
ers are exploring ways 
to edit humans’ biology. 
Research breakthroughs 
will optimize the human 
body for space travel and 
improve human experi-
ence on Earth. Research 
breakthroughs will optimize 
the human body for space 
travel and improve human 
experience on Earth. New pharmaceutical reg-
imens will be needed for 
individuals spending pro-
longed periods in space, 
upending the pharmaceu-
tical industry. The envi-
ronment of space will also 
transform the manufactur -
ing process for drugs. This 
presents a domain outside 
of the space economy 
where investments ulti-
mately will impact space. In space, gravity is not a 
constraint like it is on Earth. 
As space factories and 
manufacturing become 
more viable, businesses 
should explore products 
that would benefit most 
from these micro- and 
zero- gravity environments. 
Taking inventory of such 
products today will enable 
quick action in the future. Mining will be essential for 
future space missions and 
a worthwhile investment 
consideration. While many 
associate space mining 
with asteroids, whose 
possibility is further in the 
future, the prospect of min-
ing services on the moon 
looms much sooner. Mining 
will be imperative for all 
aspects of space travel and 
colonization. As the industry of preci-
sion agriculture grows, in-
vesting during its infancy 
could pay off greatly. As 
it becomes more widely 
adopted, more companies 
will follow John Deere’s 
lead and partner and 
collaborate with space-
based organizations that 
specialize in navigation 
systems. INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY SPACECENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 784INDUSTRY SPACE
Space Is Essential for Earth
Critics say we should protect our interests on Earth 
before entertaining the idea of exploring other worlds. 
However, this is not a zero-sum game. In fact, the 
benefits of space exploration and research manifest 
here, too. Much of our communication and navigation 
systems and architectures are made possible because 
of satellites and their constellations out in space. 
Earth observation services are providing us with a level 
of data we could not achieve on the ground—data that 
will prove invaluable as we navigate uncertain climate 
futures. Many of the technologies essential for space 
travel also have spillover effects, and will serve ex-
tremely useful purposes to our everyday lives. Microgravity’s Macro Potential 
Microgravity creates an environment for research im-
possible on Earth, potentially leading to breakthroughs 
and new inventions. Drug companies and materials 
scientists see huge potential in conducting experi-
ments aboard orbiting laboratories. Without gravity, 
they can develop new kinds of pharmaceuticals and 
advanced materials not possible on Earth. These 
breakthroughs might transform medicine, telecommu-
nications, electronics, and more. Many companies are 
already starting small-scale production of space-made 
materials. As launch costs continue to decline, space 
research is poised to skyrocket. We expect a flood of ex-
periments as access expands. But what goes up must 
come down. Secure transportation methods will be 
needed to return these precious space-produced goods 
to Earth. Solving this challenge will help commercialize 
outer space and unlock profits from zero gravity.Optimized Resource Utilization 
While space exploration is a noble and commendable 
endeavor, it comes with many perils. For one, getting to 
space is challenging and costly. Once there, the condi-
tions are unforgiving and not very favorable for human 
life. With all this in mind, space becomes the epitome 
of human resourcefulness and ingenuity, and these 
characteristics are absolutely essential for achieving 
success beyond our planet. Space exploration is es-
sentially a closed system: all resources within it are 
valuable and their use must be optimized. This mani-
fests itself in a number of technologies or theoretical 
solutions including reusable rockets, In-Situ Resource 
Utilization, additive manufacturing that takes advan-
tage of zero- and micro- gravity environments, resourc-
es for mining and harnessing materials for building 
habitats and spacecrafts, water for jet fuels and radi-
ation protection, and oxygen for supporting life. These 
optimized processes and technology engender compo-
nents necessary to ensure continued vitality. CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 785INDUSTRY SPACE
Democratizing Space 
Entering the space industry can be daunting. Creating 
the systems and technology required for space travel 
and exploration requires sophisticated engineering 
and a comprehensive understanding of math and 
science. Despite the barriers, space is continuing to 
become more accessible for unexpected countries 
launching space programs, fledgling startups raising 
capital to enter the race, and universities and academ-
ic programs with no previous experience. Today, you 
don’t have to create technologies or engineer complex 
solutions to enter the space economy. Turnkey satellite 
solutions and satellite-as-a-service business models 
allow small companies, developing countries, or in-
dividuals the chance to live out their space interests. 
Additionally, the increase in private missions and com-
mercial flights to space is encouraging for the democ-
ratization of space. In time, these options will become 
available to a broader audience.Collaboration Is Key But Murky
Throughout the history of space exploration, collabo-
rations have made impressive feats possible. Private 
companies might collaborate to create innovative 
technologies, or work with public-facing institutions 
that seek their ingenuity and scrappiness. For nations, 
the matter is more complicated despite instances of 
countries with shared interests accomplishing shared 
objectives in space. Sometimes, space collaboration 
lags behind the geopolitical situations on Earth. For 
now, Russia is still a member of the International 
Space Station. But the country’s actions on Earth could 
eventually put a strain on its space activities. Then 
there’s the US and China: If space collaboration could 
ever be possible for the two countries frequently at 
odds, this would reap immeasurable benefits for space 
exploration. However, China seems to be focusing on 
expanding its own space station, by doubling the size, 
as an alternative to the NASA-led ISS, indicating lim-
ited interest in increasing cooperation. As the race to 
space intensifies, the line between collaboration and 
competition becomes increasingly blurred, reflecting 
the intricate dance of diplomacy and strategic inter-
ests in the final frontier.Dr. Amy Williams, astrobiologist at the Uni-
versity of Florida, for her insights into Mars’ 
history and potential for supporting life. 
Dr. Christopher Mason, professor of ge-
nomics, physiology, and biophysics at Weill 
Cornell Medicine, for his book “The Next 500 
Years” and his work on bioengineering hu-
mans for space.
Jane Greaves, professor at Cardiff Universi-
ty, for her discovery of phosphine, a potential 
biomarker, in the clouds of Venus.
Ivo Labbé, research professor at Swinburne 
University of Technology, for his Nature pub-
lication on the six massive galaxies discov-
ered in the early universe. 
Dr. Robin Hanson, economist at George 
Mason University and research associate at 
Oxford University’s Future of Humanity Insti-
tute, for his theories on the “Great Filter” and 
“Grabby Aliens.” 
Delian Asparouhov, co-founder of Varda, for 
his work to create a platform for in-space 
manufacturing, especially related to the 
development of in-space pharmaceutical 
production. Sara Seager, physics professor at MIT, for her 
research on exoplanet atmospheres, interiors, 
and signs of life by way of exoplanet atmo-
spheric biosignature gases.
S. Somanath, chairman of the Indian Space 
Research Organisation, for his leadership 
and expertise in guiding the Chandrayaan-3 
mission. 
Dr. Jane Rigby, astrophysicist at NASA’s 
Goddard Space Flight Center, for being named 
the new senior project scientist for the James 
Webb Space Telescope mission. 
Dr. Ariel Ekblaw, founder of the MIT Space 
Exploration Initiative, for leading a portfolio of 
more than 40 research projects focusing on 
future life in space.
Dr. Nathan Lundblad, physics professor at 
Bates College, for his research aboard the Cold 
Atom Lab on the International Space Station.
Dr. Sarah Burke-Spolaor, associate professor 
of astronomy at West Virginia University, for 
proving the existence of low-frequency gravi-
tational waves in space.Dr. Alexandra Navrotsky, director at Arizona 
State University’s Center for Materials of the 
Universe, for her contributions to thermody-
namics and materials science. 
Martin Nisser, Ph.D. candidate in the HCI En-
gineering Group at the MIT Computer Science 
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, for his 
research in reconfigurable robots.
Gui Haichao, professor at the School of 
Astronautics, for becoming the first Chinese 
civilian to fly in space.
Jared Isaacman, CEO of Shift4 Payments, for 
his commitment to private space missions 
through the Polaris program.
Bill Diamond, president and CEO of the SETI 
Institute, for his leadership in the continual 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence.
Yuri Milner, Israeli entrepreneur, investor, 
physicist, and scientist, for his contribu-
tions to the Breakthrough Listen project and 
search for alien life. 
Dr. Catriona Jamieson, director of the 
Sanford Stem Cell Institute at the University 
of California, San Diego, for overseeing stem 
cell research in space.Rayyanah Barnawi, mission specialist on 
the Ax-2 mission, for becoming Saudi Ara-
bia’s first female astronaut in space.
Dr. Lisa Carnell, program scientist for 
Translational Research in NASA’s Biological 
and Physical Sciences Division, for her work 
related to 3D tissues and microphysiological 
systems.
Dr. Stafford Sheehan, co-founder and CTO of 
Air Co., for his research developing a kero-
sene-based rocket fuel.
Matt Gialich, CEO of AstroForge, for his com-
mitment to exploring the viability of mining 
asteroids. 
Dr. William Blackwell, laboratory fellow in 
the Applied Space Systems Group at MIT Lin-
coln Laboratory, for his leadership of NASA’s 
TROPICS project. ONES TO WATCH
786© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SPACEIMPORTANT TERMS
787CubeSats 
This small, square-shaped satellite measures 
10-by-10-by-10 centimeters, and typically weighs 
around 1 kilogram. CubeSats can be utilized indi-
vidually as single units or in a constellation. They 
have a wide range of applications, including testing 
instruments, conducting scientific experiments, 
facilitating commercial endeavors, and supporting 
educational initiatives. 
The Drake Equation 
This probabilistic argument is used to estimate the 
quantity of active and communicative extraterres-
trial civilizations within the Milky Way galaxy. 
Fermi Paradox 
The confounding situation of lacking definitive 
proof for advanced extraterrestrial life, despite the 
seemingly strong probability of its existence.
Great filter 
The term introduced by economist Robin Hanson 
suggests that, regardless of the widespread emer-
gence of life within our galaxy, every extraterrestrial 
civilization inevitably encounters an obstacle that 
threatens its own continued existence.Medium-Earth orbit (MEO)
A geocentric orbit extending from approximately 
2,000 kilometers (1,243 miles) to 36,000 kilometers 
(23,000 miles) above the Earth’s surface. Satellites 
positioned within MEO face an increased suscep-
tibility to potential damage as they are exposed to 
intense solar radiation. This orbital region hosts a 
variety of satellites, including global positioning 
systems and communications satellites. Satellites 
situated in MEO typically complete an orbit around 
the Earth in approximately two hours.
On-orbit satellite servicing 
The process of refueling, repairing, or maintaining 
space satellites while they are in orbit. 
Orbital space flight
When a spacecraft reaches a trajectory where it can 
remain in space for at least one orbit.
Space junk 
Defunct satellites and other man-made debris in 
orbit around the Earth.Suborbital spaceflight 
This occurs when a spacecraft travels to space but 
does not achieve an altitude and velocity resulting 
in a ballistic trajectory circling the Earth at least 
once. In-situ resource utilization 
The extraction, processing, and use of resources 
found on other celestial bodies like the moon or 
Mars.
The Kármán line 
Established by the international record-keeping 
organization World Air Sports Federation, this de-
marcation point distinguishes Earth’s atmosphere 
from outer space. It is defined to be at an altitude of 
100 kilometers above the mean sea level.
Kessler Syndrome  
This concept, introduced by NASA scientist Donald 
J. Kessler in 1978, envisions a situation in low Earth 
orbit where there are so many objects from space 
pollution that collisions between them trigger a 
chain reaction. Each collision generates more space 
debris, raising the risk of additional collisions.
Low Earth orbit (LEO)
A geocentric orbit spanning from approximately 160 
kilometers (100 miles) to 2,000 kilometers (1,240 
miles) above the Earth’s surface. This is typically 
where human-crewed artificial satellites operate, 
where their orbital path completes roughly every 90 
minutes.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRY788© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE  
POLITICSSPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Geopolitical tensions on Earth 
are spilling over into space-based 
relations among various nations 
and complicating aspirations 
to explore beyond our globe. 
Conversely, as space becomes 
more active, the events taking 
place there will undoubtedly 
impact relations here.The International Space Station once personified nation-to-nation 
cooperation, but that came into question in 2022 when Russia 
announced it would abandon the ISS by 2024. Since then, Rus-
sia softened this declaration and said it will support the station 
through 2028, but the country will likely still abandon its com-
mitment in the future. As the war in Ukraine continues, space 
represents a rare avenue where Russia and Western nations still 
cooperate and collaborate; however, these relations are tenuous at 
best. 
In space, a shifting geopolitical landscape is unfolding. In August 
2023, Russia’s Luna-25 spacecraft crashed into the surface of the 
moon’s south pole, just a few days before India’s Chandrayaan-3 
became the first mission to successfully land a craft there. While 
Russia and India have been partners on Earth, India’s display of 
strength could come at the embarrassment of Russia. In isolation, 
India’s achievement is significant for solidifying its position in a 
new space race as various groups rush to the moon to take advan-
tage of its resources. 
Other notable groups vying for access to lunar resources are the 
US and China, which have had a colorful past when it comes to 
geopolitics on Earth and in space. To further complicate matters, 
both countries have essentially declared space to be a military 
domain, leaving little hope that the two nations will cooperate on 
future related space endeavors.Traditionally, collaborative space projects have not always been 
a clear indicator of geopolitical relations on Earth. But now, it’s 
becoming even more challenging to disentangle countries’ rela-
tions in space with what’s happening on our home planet. Over the 
years, space pursuits by various countries have mostly had pos-
itive implications for research and technology development, but 
fear persists that space could be used by various world powers for 
military purposes. Recently, China accused the US of accelerating 
the militarization of space. Conversely, the US is wary of potential 
Chinese electronic warfare technology that could potentially deny 
US space-based communications. Whether or not there is merit to 
either country’s claims, the threat of a new cold war taking place 
in space is becoming more pronounced. While it could prove to 
be foolish to actually use space-based technologies to wage war 
on other nations, different countries could still engage in an arms 
race to preemptively render their opponents defenseless, mirror-
ing the dynamics of the previous Cold War. This ongoing threat 
highlights the pressing need for unified and binding international 
commitments to ensure the safe, peaceful, and equitable use of 
space. GEOPOLITICAL 
TENSIONS IN SPACE3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 789SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Multiple factors, such as reduced 
payload costs, advances in 
launch technology, and overall 
lowered barriers to entry, are 
making the prospect of space 
exploration more accessible to 
new figures in the public sector. In May 2023, two astronauts became the first Saudi Arabians to 
visit the International Space Station. This crew included Rayyanah 
Barnawi, who became the first Saudi woman in space. The Axiom 
Space’s Ax-2 mission signifies the increasing influence that Gulf 
nations are having on the space economy. Prior to this milestone, 
another Gulf nation had already left its mark in space: The United 
Arab Emirates has sent its own astronauts to space, launched 
spacecraft to both Mars and the moon, and deployed satellites. As 
for future missions, in 2028, the UAE plans to send a spacecraft 
to our solar system’s asteroid belt to study seven asteroids with 
the intent of learning more about our origins on Earth. Looking 
beyond Gulf countries, other new faces are entering the mix. In 
mid-2023, South Korea’s Nuri Rocket completed its third launch, 
but for the first time carried commercial payloads into space. 
Scientists from the Indian Space Research Organisation launched 
next-generation navigation satellite NVS-01, adding to India’s fleet 
of navigation spacecraft and providing interoperability with other 
countries’ global networks. Recognizing the heightened geopolit-
ical risks surrounding space, New Zealand has developed its own 
space policy, including objectives for growing an innovative and 
inclusive space sector centered around promoting and protecting 
its national security and economic interests. The policy serves as 
an important landmark in New Zealand becoming a space-faring 
nation. Of the over 70 documented space agencies, as of 2024, 16 possess 
the ability to launch, while only seven exhibit complete launch 
capabilities—meaning they can launch and also recover satellites 
and operate extraterrestrial landing capabilities. South Korea is 
the most recent country to join this exclusive list but Scotland 
could also join soon, as construction of Sutherland Spaceport is 
underway on its north coast. The only continent lacking launch ca-
pabilities is Africa, but even this could change soon, as plans exist 
to build a spaceport in Djibouti over the next five years with $1 bil-
lion invested by Chinese company Hong Kong Aerospace Technolo-
gy. This operation, along with existing space projects, could propel 
the African space industry to a value of $23 billion by 2026. There 
is significant economic incentive for new space-faring countries, 
and as prospects of sending payloads to space become more ac-
cessible and less costly, it should come as no surprise to see this 
trend continue. By expanding their presence in space, these coun-
tries will increase their autonomy, allowing them to stand up for 
themselves and their own interests—whether they want increased 
monitoring for agriculture programs or more control over telecom-
munications systems. EMERGING 
SPACE-FARING 
COUNTRIES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 790SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Both governments and 
intergovernmental organizations 
are advocating for responsible 
space behaviors to avoid a major 
catastrophe in space. As the space 
industry becomes more lucrative 
and enticing, new guidelines 
are needed to ensure safe and 
equitable exploration, exploitation, 
and utilization of space and its 
resources. In 2022, the United States banned direct-ascent anti-satellite 
(ASAT) missile tests, which can potentially create orbital de-
bris—an action intended to create an international push for more 
responsible space behavior. At the end of that year, the United 
Nations General Assembly overwhelmingly approved a resolution 
to suspend ASAT testing. Despite the nonbinding resolution’s 
immense support, only 13 nations have committed to its precepts. 
More countries are actively being encouraged to also commit. 
When it comes to governing space, many existing initiatives—
such as the one mentioned above—are driven by nations’ indepen-
dent interests and concerns. Currently, there is no agreed upon 
international framework for space resource exploration, exploita-
tion, and utilization—as noted by the UN brief “For All Humani-
ty—The Future of Outer Space Governance”—and no mechanism 
to even support the implementation of such a framework. The UN 
hopes that the dialogue and activity surrounding its brief will lead 
to the development of international norms, rules, and principles 
to address threats to space and its associated programs and sys-
tems. A combination of binding and nonbinding norms have also 
been proposed to address emerging risks to outer space security, 
safety, and sustainability. Individual nations, including the United States, have enacted their 
own resolutions to address activity in space, but such resolutions 
primarily serve the interests of the nation that proposed them and 
are only binding for the signing countries. Subsequently, this gives 
privileges to non-signing parties. The current actions of the United 
Nations are promising, as they move to implement a set of unified 
norms for space travel and use, but because some of the norms 
will still be nonbinding, obstinate countries could continue to 
make things complicated. 
Organizations such as the UN pursuing safer guidelines for space 
travel need to strike the appropriate balance between properly 
regulating activities and spurring innovation. As space explora-
tion remains unchecked, there is the increasing threat of debris 
or a geopolitical quagmire among competing nations. However, a 
hasty implementation of strict and stringent rules could drasti-
cally hamper the progress of bold and daring endeavors to access 
more of space. Both private and public organizations must prepare 
for a more regulated industry while also ensuring that the spirit of 
exploration and discovery that drives humanity’s fascination with 
space is not extinguished. GOVERNING  
SPACE3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 791SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Nations around the globe have 
a vested interest in protecting 
themselves from space-related 
activities. As space systems 
become more prevalent, countries 
will naturally become more 
suspicious of other competing 
nations, heightening the risk of 
space-based turmoil. President Joe Biden’s 2024 budget request increases funding for 
the US Space Force to $30 billion to meet evolving threats and 
protect the country’s interests in space. The institution has cited 
the importance of space to everyday life, including GPS navigation 
and communications. Ultimately, this budget increase marks the 
US’ attempt to keep pace with other countries, namely Russia and 
China. The US has identified the latter’s ground-based lasers as a 
threat to satellites and plans to transition to proliferated networks 
of smaller satellites in Earth’s orbit to combat the issue. The Space 
Force has also opened the Commercial Space Marketplace for 
Innovation and Collaboration to partner with the private sector in 
acquiring defense technology. 
In a historic first, Israel’s Arrow 2 missile defense system intercept-
ed and neutralized a ballistic missile beyond the Earth’s atmo-
sphere, marking a potential inaugural instance of space-based 
combat. The system obliterated a suborbital missile launched by 
Houthi rebels in Yemen, achieving interception above the Kármán 
line—the internationally acknowledged space boundary situated 62 
miles above sea level. This demonstration indicates that conflicts 
on Earth may begin to extend beyond our atmosphere as well.
Aside from space defense against other countries, planetary de-
fense involves initiatives to monitor and protect Earth from aster-
oids and other objects that could threaten our planet. Even though 
NASA’s Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART) happened almost 
two years ago, we are still learning more about this mission. DART’s 
successful impact with the asteroid Dimorphos altered the aster -
oid’s orbit but led to the creation of a crater that flung debris from 
the asteroid. ESA’s Hera mission, launching in October 2024, aims 
to study the Didymos binary asteroid and assess DART’s impact, 
providing key insights for future asteroid deflection strategies.As space presents itself as a new Wild West, it will continue to 
be perceived as a risk to national security, whether those threats 
come from rising geopolitical tensions and conflicts on our home 
planet, or from the impending threat of celestial objects that we 
have even less control over. 
When it comes to national defense, space has become critical for 
myriad reasons. So many space systems have become necessary 
components of our daily lives. Simple miscommunication among 
disparate nations can have outsized impacts, potentially leading 
to the destruction of important communication devices. More 
overtly nefarious threats exist as evidenced by Russia’s cyberat-
tack in February 2022 that left Viasat’s KA-SAT modems inoperable 
in Ukraine. This incident led to other next order impacts, resulting 
in the malfunction of 5,800 Enercon wind turbines in Germany and 
other major disruptions to major European organizations. The US 
Defense Department has vowed to openly communicate US mili-
tary space activities in an effort to prevent misunderstandings and 
miscalculations. However, China’s decision to not be as transpar-
ent complicates matters. Without unified standards and norms, 
we are just a minor mishap away from nations taking retaliatory 
measures on perceived space-based threats. SPACE DEFENSE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 792SPACE INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2043
T ax T ensions on Mars 
The Colonized Habitat Optimization and Mining Co. (CHOAM), operating primarily on Mars and its surrounding 
Lagrange Orbit Equilibrium stations, mined Martian water ice to support other Mars-based ventures, scientific 
explorations, and low orbit Earth habitats. Initially incorporated as a Delaware C corp, CHOAM contemplated a 
paradigm shift in its corporate structure amid the complex milieu of US corporate tax policy. Attracted by the 
increasingly business-friendly climate of Singapore, and its progressive stance toward space commerce, CHOAM 
considered reincorporation. Singapore’s introduction of tailored tax incentives for space-faring entities promised 
an advantageous arena compared to the US jurisdiction.
However, CHOAM’s interplanetary ambitions are being tethered by the restrictions of US export controls. Navigat-
ing through the maze of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) and the Export Administration Regu-
lations (EAR) was no minor feat. To circumvent the challenges of US export controls, CHOAM is ramping up in-situ 
inputs: By leveraging Martian regolith and other locally sourced materials, the company is extensively employing 
advanced 3D printing technologies to fabricate tools, infrastructure, and essential operational components. This 
drastic reduction in its Earth-based dependencies skirts many export control complications. CHOAM’s strategic 
move to Singapore didn’t go unnoticed. Other extraterrestrial corporations, grappling with the intricacies of off-
world operations under their respective Earth jurisdictions, have begun evaluating potential reincorporation in 
tax-favorable countries. 
793© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Having recognized the economic 
impact the new space economy 
will have on local economies, 
select US states and markets are 
trying to establish themselves 
as major hubs for domestic 
operations. Through economic 
incentives and relaxed 
regulations, these states will 
attempt to edge out others to 
gain a competitive advantage. In 2023, Texas Gov. Greg Abott signed HB3447 into law, establish-
ing the Texas Space Commission. This group will allocate $350 
million to develop the space industry in the Lone Star State, and 
will oversee planning, funding distribution, research, and educa-
tion efforts in the Texas space industry. In a similar vein, Florida 
Gov. Ron DeSantis signed a bill into law aimed at reducing liability 
for commercial spaceflight companies, with an ultimate goal of 
attracting more launch providers to Florida’s Space Coast. Under 
the law’s provisions, companies will be granted immunity from lia-
bility associated with flight-related injuries or deaths, as long as 
crew members sign a waiver. Other states have shown they want 
a foothold in the space industry. President Joe Biden’s decision to 
leave the US Space Command headquarters in Colorado evoked ire 
from Alabama officials. It was a reversal of a Trump administration 
decision to relocate the headquarters to Alabama. State officials 
claim abortion politics played a role in the change, as Alabama 
Republican Sen. Tommy Tuberville had been blocking military pro-
motions over the Pentagon’s abortion policies.In January 2023, Space Florida, the state’s aerospace economic 
development agency, announced that the total economic impact of 
its aerospace finance and development authority had reached $5.9 
billion since 2007. It expects the industry will have an addition-
al $5.3 billion economic impact over the next five years, with an 
average annual impact of $1.1 billion. Ultimately, Florida recognizes 
the tremendous economic impact of the space economy and is 
doing everything in its power to entice more organizations to move 
or establish operations in the state. The space industry’s potential 
economic impact on local economies is the central driver for the 
Texas Legislature’s committing $350 million to fund and support 
Texas aerospace and space projects and new economic incentives 
to draw space companies and space startups to the state. The 
reaction from the political leaders of Alabama is understandable 
considering the US Space Command represents the significance, 
influence, and status of the space industry. The activities of these 
states underscore one thing: Whoever dominates the space race 
will dominate here on Earth. DOMESTIC 
COMPETITION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 794SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Despite competition arising from 
the quest to travel to space, 
there’s also been extensive 
collaboration. Since the Cold 
War’s end, nations have been 
forming space blocs—groups of 
countries joining forces to further 
their collective interests in space. Many consider the European Space Agency—now consisting of 22 
nations—to be the first space bloc. One of the newer collaborative 
blocs is the African Space Agency, which officially formed in Janu-
ary 2023. Despite this union, Russia has tried to entice Algeria and 
Egypt to join its space program. The Latin American and Caribbean 
Space Agency now consists of 23 member states, and while no 
formal agreements have been brokered, China has expressed open 
support of the organization. Perhaps the most prominent collabo-
rative bloc is the Artemis Accords, drafted by NASA and the US De-
partment of State. This nonbinding multilateral arrangement with 
other world governments attempts to establish common princi-
ples, guidelines, and best practices for the safe exploration of the 
moon and beyond. NASA’s adjacent Artemis program will require 
significant partnerships with countries and private companies 
to ensure it sends astronauts back to the moon. In 2023, India, 
Ecuador, Argentina, and the Czech Republic became the most re-
cent countries to sign the Artemis Accords, marking a significant 
uptick in space collaboration with the US.Proponents of the Artemis Accords contend that the major tenets 
act as an extension of the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, to set principles 
for a safe, peaceful, and prosperous future in space. While a series 
of protocols to ensure this type of future is necessary, some have 
a complicated view of the Accords for a few key reasons. Notably, 
the 1967 Outer Space Treaty is seen as insufficient for governing 
current space endeavors, and the industry in general could benefit 
from a new, refreshed set of regulations to moderate activity in 
space. The treaty also asserts that “outer space is not subject to 
national appropriation by claim of sovereignty.” Forming space 
blocs could be seen as a strategy for skirting this major tenet: 
While not claiming sovereignty of the moon or other celestial bod-
ies, these blocs may make the case that their visits to and settle-
ment of the moon are not acts of individual state sovereignty, and 
thereby not in violation of the treaty. 
Opponents of the Accords contend that they are too centered on 
American and commercial interests, leading countries such as 
Russia and China to not sign the agreement. Both countries have 
their own individual and sometimes joint efforts to establish a 
presence on the moon, and continually seek collaboration with 
new countries and agencies, fully understanding this mode of op-
eration is necessary to be the leader of the modern space race.SPACE BLOCS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 795SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Space junk refers to the tens of 
thousands of defunct human-
made objects in space, including 
old rocket parts, dead satellites, 
and debris from collisions—both 
accidental and intentional. As 
more nations operate in space, 
managing this issue involves 
addressing concerns of national 
security, weaponization, and 
liability. About 100 trillion fragments of defunct satellites and spent rock-
ets orbit the Earth. While some of these fragments are monitored, 
others are too minuscule to be tracked, presenting a considerable 
danger. Potential collisions between them can create even more 
fragments. In a phenomenon known as the Kessler Syndrome, 
these collisions can create a cascading effect, where debris begets 
more debris in a runaway cycle. 
The severity of space debris was highlighted in January 2023, 
when an old Soviet-era rocket nearly collided with defunct satellite 
debris, a potential worst-case scenario that could have resulted 
in thousands of new pieces of debris. The threat is further com-
plicated by irresponsible actions including the deployment of 
anti-satellite devices. In November 2021, the Russian Ministry 
of Defense launched an anti-satellite (ASAT) missile, creating a 
cloud of debris that threatened the International Space Station. 
Following the incident, the UN approved a resolution against ASAT 
tests. Meanwhile, tensions continue to brew around North Korea’s 
satellite capabilities, leading South Korea and the US to agree on a 
joint probe into North Korean space rocket debris. In May 2023, the 
G7 nations deemed the issue of space debris an “urgent problem” 
that must be addressed collectively, including research in both 
orbital debris mitigation and remediation technologies.The escalation of space debris is both a technical challenge and a 
complex geopolitical issue. Nations possessing advanced space 
capabilities heavily depend on satellites for core national security 
functions, like surveillance, communication, and navigation. But 
satellites extend beyond military applications; from guiding us 
to our destinations through Google Maps to facilitating real-time 
financial transactions, commercial satellites are integral to our 
modern existence. Space debris, consequently, doesn’t merely 
jeopardize national security—it also threatens economic stability 
and daily lives. 
The problem exacerbates if debris from one nation damages 
another’s satellite, invoking questions of accountability and lia-
bility. While international space law offers a legal framework, its 
application can be ambiguous, potentially sparking international 
conflicts. Like the high seas, space is considered outside the juris -
diction of any one nation, leading to a “tragedy of the commons” 
scenario. Citing the mismanagement of the oceans as a cautionary 
tale in the journal Science, a group of scientists recently urged 
regulators to avoid repeating past mistakes when establishing 
governance for space. GEOPOLITICAL 
TENSIONS OVER 
SPACE JUNK1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 796SPACE INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2031
Interplanetary Park System 
After more nations started sending spacecraft to land on the moon’s south pole through the end of the 2020s, 
the United Nations finally decided to step in with more stringent and binding resolutions to regulate space 
travel. The international body had to be done right or risk both private and public operations wrecking the en-
tire space environment. The urgency to put a temporary reprieve on commercial operations on the lunar surface 
was precipitated when a US-based company’s testing equipment interfered with a Japanese rover, which almost 
sparked an international lunar incident. With commercial operations indefinitely suspended, various organiza-
tions were left hanging in the balance as their moon-based initiatives lay fallow. 
In a ruse to keep valuable experimentation and lunar-based research moving forward, the US is volunteering its 
Artemis Program to launch the Interplanetary Park System in an effort to ensure the heritage of space can “be 
enjoyed today and preserved for tomorrow.” Under the proposal, the IPS, through the collaboration of Artemis 
countries, now numbering 38, will continue its in-situ resource extraction and utilization and other experimental 
manufacturing methods, but all collected resources will be used for the infrastructure needed to establish mon-
uments and the necessary built environment for IPS programming. Artemis and the IPS pledge to make space 
accessible to all global citizens of Earth. After establishing the infrastructure that would least invasively allow 
individuals to visit historical and significant sites on the moon, the IPS plans to explore other potential locations 
in our solar system to establish additional sites of interest, using lunar resources for fuels and building materi-
als needed for such an initiative. 
797© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRY798© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE  
INDUSTRYSPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Low earth orbit (LEO) may be a 
more suitable environment for 
manufacturing some goods and 
products like semiconductors 
and artificial proteins. As orbital 
transport costs decrease, we 
may see more companies move 
specialized production to space. Space-based manufacturing harbors immense potential due 
to the unique conditions inherently present there. For instance, 
semiconductor manufacturing necessitates an extremely clean, 
low-pressure environment to avoid contamination. Naturally, the 
vacuum of space offers these conditions, a fact being capitalized 
on by companies like Space Forge, which intends to manufacture 
semiconductors in space. Researchers at MIT have utilized LEO’s 
microgravity to produce intricate “skins” for additive manufactur-
ing. Other efforts include Apsidal’s module to manufacture com-
plex glasses and fibers in space, and Varda’s successful launch of 
the first space factory on SpaceX’s Falcon 9 to produce pharma-
ceuticals (discussed in more detail under “Biomanufacturing in 
Space”).
The impact of space manufacturing extends beyond earthbound 
economies. It’s instrumental in establishing sustainable human 
habitation outside of Earth. Redwire Corp., through a recent NASA 
contract, is turning this concept into reality with FabLab, an 
in-space multi-material 3D printer. This transformative tool will 
empower space crews to manufacture essential items on demand, 
bolstering the self-sufficiency of future space dwellers and mark-
ing a significant leap toward a multi-planetary existence.Space-based manufacturing has the potential to overcome the 
constraints of gravity and optimize production in ways not possi-
ble on Earth. By making goods like semiconductors, organoids, and 
metal alloys in the microgravity of space, we can customize the 
manufacturing environment free from gravity’s limitations. As cli-
mate change disrupts supply chains on Earth, off-planet produc-
tion offers a resilient backup option, diversifying sources beyond 
our planet. In-space manufacturing may prove a strategic solution 
for enhancing supply chain resilience as accelerating climate im-
pacts threaten production on Earth. 
Space factories also play a pivotal role in enabling a sustainable 
long-term human presence in space. They not only reduce our de-
pendence on Earth but also make us more viable as an interplane-
tary species by drastically cutting costs and risks associated with 
launching resources from Earth. The International Space Station 
has been trailblazing in this respect, having 3D printed in space 
since 2011. This progress toward self-sufficiency shows in-space 
production is feasible and an essential step toward independence 
from Earth. It signals a new era enabling deeper space explora-
tion and habitation as humanity transitions to a multi-planetary 
civilization.SPACE  
FACTORIES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 799SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Biomanufacturing in space 
leverages microgravity 
to enhance production of 
biomolecules and materials, like 
drugs and tissues. It deepens 
our understanding of biology 
and aids clinical applications. 
As we plan for long-term space 
missions, sustainable in-space 
biomanufacturing becomes 
crucial.Organoids are tiny, lab-grown models of human organs used to 
study structure and function. On Earth, gravity flattens organoids 
into blob-like shapes. But in microgravity, cells proliferate faster 
and can grow in 3D and better mimic real organ behavior. Space 
also optimizes organoid development. The controlled environ-
ments of space stations further limit contamination risks, creat-
ing ideal biomanufacturing conditions. 
In 2023, Varda Space Industries launched the first orbital factory 
dedicated to pharmaceutical production in space. Its inaugural 
project focuses on assessing the manufacturing of the HIV med-
ication ritonavir under microgravity conditions. However, Varda 
encountered a regulatory setback after its June launch: While the 
Federal Aviation Administration approved the launch of the orbital 
factory, it has not authorized the descent of the recovery capsule, 
posing a challenge to the startup in retrieving its space-manu-
factured drug samples. Redwire Space was awarded a 14 million 
euro contract by the European Space Agency to design a compre-
hensive facility for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine 
on the International Space Station. This effort builds on Redwire’s 
existing bioprinting work on the station, including a project to 
bioprint human knee meniscus tissue. Meanwhile, researchers 
at the China Space Station have successfully created early-stage 
blood cells in space for the first time, bringing us one step closer 
to treating diseases by producing any type of human cell. In this 
experiment, pluripotent stem cells, capable of developing into 
any major human cell type, were sent to the Wentian lab module, 
where they successfully matured into hematopoietic stem cells, 
the precursors to blood cells.After decades of single-use spacecraft, SpaceX’s reusable launch 
systems have dramatically reduced the costs of accessing space. 
With biotechnology innovations accelerating in parallel, we have 
reached an inflection point where biomanufacturing in space 
is technically possible and may soon make financial sense. For 
example, growing human organs in microgravity could provide a 
cost-effective, long-term solution to organ shortages for trans-
plants. Producing biomaterials and pharmaceutical goods in 
space could lead to scientific breakthroughs or better drugs. Var-
da’s founder explained in an interview that until now, gravity has 
always been considered a constant. With space biomanufacturing, 
gravity can now be a variable to sub in and out of experiments. 
This could revolutionize fields like drug testing and disease mod -
eling by engineering higher-fidelity organoids. 
SpaceX enabled cheap launches, catalyzing space research. But 
achieving orbit is only step one. We also need companies focused 
on affordable ways to retrieve the results and deliver them safely 
back to Earth. Reusable reentry vehicles to ferry goods from cos-
mic factories will require regulatory greenlights. If approved, reg-
ular roundtrip transport could accelerate off-planet R&D across 
sectors. Furthermore, as we venture farther into space, the ability 
to manufacture biomaterials and pharmaceuticals in situ will 
become increasingly vital. Transporting all required medicines, 
medical devices, and even organs from Earth to off-world colonies 
would be enormously expensive and inefficient. Instead, estab-
lishing biomanufacturing infrastructure throughout the solar 
system can provide colonists with reliable on-demand access to 
medicines, nutrients, tissues, and organ replacements tailored to 
local needs.BIOMANUFACTURING 
IN SPACE 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 800SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Off-planet resource production, 
or in-situ resource utilization 
(ISRU), refers to the extraction, 
processing, and use of resources 
found on other celestial bodies 
like the moon or Mars. ISRU aims 
to make space missions less 
expensive and easier by reducing 
the amount of resources needed to 
be transported from Earth. It’s the 
key for long-term space habitation 
and deep space expeditions.ISRU endeavors are largely concentrated on extracting life-sus-
taining elements (water and oxygen) as well as providing rocket 
propellant for return trips to Earth. NASA’s Perseverance rover is 
actively seeking water on Mars, and similar strategies are applied 
on the moon using thermal extraction. Experiments like MOXIE on 
Mars have successfully produced oxygen. In recent years, however, 
the focus of ISRU has extended beyond oxygen and water produc-
tion. Companies like Air Co., a finalist in NASA’s Deep Space Food 
Challenge, have developed a method to convert carbon dioxide, 
water, and yeast starter into protein-rich yeast using a process 
that simulates plant photosynthesis but uses astronaut breath. 
This yeast can then be converted into a variety of food forms, po-
tentially supplying long-duration space missions. 
Blue Origin, funded by a $34.7 million NASA contract, is “Blue 
Alchemist”; this ISRU project is a reactor that separates oxygen 
from lunar regolith, leaving behind materials for solar cell con-
struction, while the oxygen could provide breathable air. Zeno 
Power and Redwire also won contracts that help missions to live 
off the lunar land. Zeno Power is converting heat generated from 
decaying radioisotopes into electricity to provide nuclear power on 
the moon. Meanwhile, Redwire is building roads and landing pads 
on the moon by utilizing a microwave emitter to transform lunar 
landscapes into solid surfaces.
The ESA is also experimenting with methods to create roads on the 
moon. In 2023, the agency successfully used a laser to melt sim-
ulated moondust. The goal was not just to pave roads for future 
on-moon transportation but also as a practical response to keep 
lunar dust at bay, which has caused issues in the past by clogging 
equipment during the Apollo era. Consider this analogy: If you’re a New Yorker planning a vacation 
in Europe, you wouldn’t pack all the water you’d need for drinking 
and bathing into your suitcase. Not only would it be exorbitantly 
expensive, but it’s also highly impractical since water is readily 
available in Europe. The same principle applies to space travel. 
With starting costs around $6,600 per kilogram, the fiscal burden 
of taking anything with you is undeniable. Even as SpaceX’s reus-
able rockets strive to bring down these costs, launch costs are still 
substantial. By tapping into local resources on the moon or Mars, 
we can significantly reduce the costs and challenges associated 
with space travel. Simply put, to establish self-sustaining colonies 
in space, we must utilize local resources. Without ISRU, practical 
and sustainable life on other planets remains a distant, unattain-
able dream. It’s too costly and risky to rely solely on Earth for the 
constant supply of life-sustaining resources. To live beyond our 
planet, we will require more than just the basic survival resources 
like water and oxygen; we need infrastructure and shelter. Efforts 
from companies like Blue Origin, Zeno Power, and Redwire will help 
establish the infrastructure we need for scientific research, coloni-
zation, and even industrialization. OFF-PLANET 
RESOURCE 
PRODUCTION2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 801SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Over the past decade, the 
number of satellites in space 
has grown almost sevenfold as 
costs decreased for building 
satellites and shipping payloads 
to space. Turnkey solutions and 
new business models are allowing 
smaller companies to enter the 
market, but to match the demand, 
new players will need to capture 
more market share.In the early 2010s, only about a thousand satellites were in orbit, 
mainly because of their high costs. Originally, building a satel-
lite cost $200–$300 million, and launches were around $380 
million each. Today, there are over 7,000 active satellites thanks 
to SpaceX’s efforts in reducing launch costs through reusable 
rockets and ridesharing services. By 2015, launch costs dropped 
to $275,000 per kilogram, and now range as little as $3,000/
kg–$6,000/kg. This affordability has opened doors for entre-
preneurs and hobbyists in satellite ventures. However, smaller 
satellite operators are struggling to get on SpaceX’s crowded 
launch schedule. Despite this, smaller launch companies like ABL 
Systems, Relativity Space, and Astra Rocket are emerging to meet 
the increasing demand. For those entering the satellite industry, 
turnkey solutions from companies like York Space Systems, Blue 
Canyon Technologies, and Apex Space offer mission design, space-
craft, launch, ground, and operations services. To cater to growing 
military demand, Lockheed Martin is restructuring its space di-
vision and selling technology and satellite parts to align with the 
booming space sector. For organizations with even fewer resources 
to spend on this industry, satellite-as-a-service is an increasingly 
popular business model offered by ISISpace, Loft Orbital, and Spire 
Global. While rideshare options on SpaceX rockets are showing to be more 
of a challenge, growth for the global satellite industry is far from 
slowing down. With growing demand, new players can gain market 
share. The market for hitching rides on other company’s rockets 
now consists of two broad categories: smallsat constellation de-
velopers looking to augment their systems, and startups, univer-
sities, and governments planning to send their first satellites to 
space. Additionally, regions such as Latin America and the Middle 
East are growing their space capabilities and also contributing to 
this new demand. 
Besides the decrease in cost to both build and launch satellites, 
two other significant drivers are creating demand in this indus-
try: the need for mobile communications and Earth observation 
(EO) services. Communications satellites account for the largest 
and fastest growing market segment. According to Grand View 
Research, this segment is currently valued at roughly $72 billion 
and anticipated to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 9.5% 
from now to 2030. Alternatively, Straits Research predicts the EO 
market will be worth $13.6 billion by 2030. New regulations will 
require organizations to report environmental impacts using sat-
ellite data. This mandated transparency is expected to create an 
Earth observation boom, driving innovation of technologies that 
enable independent tracking of sustainability metrics from space. 
This industry will have an immeasurable impact on resource and 
supply chain management as well as urban planning and develop-
ment—it shows no signs of slowing down.THE SATELLITE 
BOOM1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 802SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
With the meteoric rise of the 
satellite industry over the 
past several years, there is 
increasing need for effective 
and dependable satellite 
constellation management 
solutions. These systems assist 
satellite operators in optimizing 
performance while minimizing 
operational expenses. Florida-based Sidus Space offers a full suite of satellite constella-
tion management services. It assists in arranging the launch, en-
sures all necessary licenses and permits are in place, and handles 
all aspects of the day-to-day operations once in orbit—including 
monitoring the constellations’ health, adjusting their positions, 
and making sure they continue to function properly. Engineering 
services company A.I. Solutions specializes in satellite flight dy-
namics by providing expertise in orbital mechanics, mission plan-
ning, and satellite operations. It’s been involved in operating and 
managing satellite constellations associated with the Internation-
al Space Station, GPS, Landsat, and the Geostationary Operational 
Environmental Satellite. Its proprietary FreeFlyer software provides 
flexible and scalable options for both small and large satellite 
constellations. It can automate routine tasks and distribute them 
across virtual machines or cloud instances, providing coverage for 
constellations consisting of thousands of satellites. FreeFlyer also 
supports traffic management efforts for these complex satellite 
clusters. Raytheon’s constellation management solutions use a 
signal ground system and edge processing to enhance data col-
lection speed and accuracy. They employ artificial intelligence and 
machine learning to extract maximum value from on-orbit assets. Companies that rely on constellations of satellites to run their 
everyday operations need efficient and dependable systems and 
services, at minimal operational cost. Advanced signal process-
ing on satellites enables efficient use of available spectrum, with 
dedicated integrated circuits maximizing capability and efficiency. 
Phased array antenna technologies create dynamic spot beams, 
delivering signal power and capacity where needed on the ground. 
High-bandwidth optical inter-satellite links connect mega-con-
stellations, providing secure, low-latency data backhaul across the 
globe. From this complex network of technologies, operators can 
achieve real-time monitoring and notice of issues, consequently 
reducing possible downtime risk. They also realize efficiencies 
with optimized fuel usage and decreased maintenance costs. 
Through analytics, these services can open up revenue opportuni-
ties by enhancing satellite coverage and expanding service areas, 
thereby increasing the number of customers these constellations 
can serve. Overall, satellite constellation management systems 
enhance satellite performance, reduce costs, and improve custom-
er service.CONSTELLATION 
MANAGEMENT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 803SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Space mining is the process of 
extracting valuable resources 
such as minerals, metals, and 
water from celestial objects 
like asteroids, the moon, and 
other planets. The prospecting, 
excavating, and extracting of these 
resources can be used for various 
purposes including fuel production, 
construction of habitats, and future 
space exploration. In 2023, the OSIRIS-REx mission successfully returned a sample 
to Earth from asteroid 101955 Bennu. The spacecraft continued on 
to a new mission to explore the asteroid Apophis. Meanwhile, sci-
entists hope the sample will offer clues about whether asteroids 
brought water and other key ingredients for life to Earth billions 
of years ago. It could also help inform us of available materials for 
more commercial purposes. 
California-based startup AstroForge is embarking on two missions 
toward becoming the first commercial company to mine aster-
oids. It plans to use CubeSats on its first mission to test in-situ 
refining in a zero-gravity environment. The second mission will 
send a spacecraft on an 8- to 11-month journey to prospect a near-
Earth asteroid, which has yet to be publicly identified. Ultimately, 
AstroForge plans to extract rare minerals from these asteroids 
and bring them back to use on Earth. Colorado-based Karman+ 
is focused on creating technology to mine water from near-Earth 
asteroids. It has identified over a million of these asteroids that 
could potentially be mined using a model developed through a 
meta-survey of solar system objects. Asteroid Mining Corp. is also 
on a mission to prospect, explore, and extract resources from as-
teroids. It is developing Space Capable Asteroid Robotic Explorers 
(SCAR-E), a modular hexapedal robotics platform for drilling into 
asteroids and processing extracted materials in space. TransAs-
tra plans to mine moons and planets in addition to asteroids. By 
using its optical mining process, TransAstra will use concentrated 
sunlight to excavate feedstocks for propellant from these celestial 
bodies. While many space startups have set their mining ambitions on 
extracting valuable resources from asteroids, our moon will prob-
ably serve as a more valuable asset for collecting these resources 
first. With the success of India’s Chandrayaan-3 moon landing, the 
utilization of Earth’s moon as a viable location for landing, living, 
and exploration is gaining momentum. It is important for startups 
to consider the challenges of traveling to and mining asteroids in 
space, but the moon will also be a significant source for powering 
space activities and for supporting future moon missions. Oxygen, 
water, and metals can potentially be mined from the surface of the 
moon and used in supporting ways, such as producing rocket fuel, 
enabling life-support systems, and constructing infrastructure on 
the moon and in space.
The moon is known to contain abundant amounts of helium-3, 
which is a rare isotope on Earth that can be used in the process of 
nuclear fusion. The current price for helium-3 is $140 million for 
220 pounds, and the moon is estimated to have enough of it to 
generate $1.543 quadrillion. Asteroids, on the other hand, contain 
numerous metals including nickel, cobalt, and more valuable met-
als, such as gold, platinum, and rhodium. The asteroid 16 Psyche 
has been reported to contain $700 quintillion worth of gold.MINING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 804SPACE INDUSTRY805© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE 
INFRASTRUCTURESPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
A considerable portion of the 
world’s population shares 
information through mobile 
phones, PCs, and various 
electronic communication devices. 
While Earth-based networks 
have primarily facilitated this 
connectivity, a constellation 
of space-based satellites and 
technology will increasingly 
address the need while impacting 
new industries. In 2023, AST SpaceMobile collaborated with AT&T on the first 
satellite-to-smartphone call over a 2G to 5G network. Verizon, 
T-Mobile, and others are pursuing space connectivity too. NASA 
achieved record 200 gigabit per second data rates from an experi-
mental satellite using laser communications. Meanwhile, Starlink 
extended its customer lead, exceeding 1.5 million subscribers. In 
addition to this achievement, Starlink laser-based communica-
tions will be tested in space by the private Polaris Dawn mission, 
which will result in valuable data for future space communica-
tions systems. This year opened with John Deere teaming with 
SpaceX to enhance rural broadband access. An anticipated Star-
link IPO could intensify investment enthusiasm. 
Competitors have struggled to match SpaceX’s breakaway pace. 
Yet, competitors like Amazon and European-based OneWeb are 
slowly making progress. Amazon’s Project Kuiper aims to deploy 
a constellation of 3,236 satellites to achieve global connectivity. 
However, it will take several years before a sufficient number of 
satellites are in orbit to provide consistent and reliable commer-
cial service. For now, Starlink’s foremost rival in terms of broad-
band capacity is OneWeb, recently acquired by Eutelsat. Rather 
than direct consumer sales, OneWeb employs a business-to-busi-
ness model. It sells to intermediaries, like partner Airbus, which 
then provide access to institutional clients, prioritizing govern-
ments and militaries in initial efforts.On Earth, space-based telecommunications are already enhancing 
cellular connectivity more globally: Both developed nations and 
developing nations, as well as urban and rural communities, can 
benefit from this technology, ultimately bridging the connectivity 
gap that currently divides cultures and populations. Additionally, 
other innovations in this constellation of technology will improve 
space science instruments. The use of new technologies such as 
laser communications will enable more efficient data transmis-
sion and could make both communication in space and commu-
nication from Earth to space more reliable and efficient. Additional 
benefits include reduced system weight, heightened security, and 
greater flexibility for ground-based infrastructure. Taken together, 
these advantages will enhance the capabilities of scientific in-
struments and expand the possibilities for data analysis and data 
transfer. Eventually, laser communications will allow increased 
volumes of data to be transmitted over longer distances, which 
will be pivotal for establishing our presence in our solar system be-
yond our home planet. Ultimately, space telecommunications will 
impact life in space but also our experiences here on Earth, wheth-
er through more efficient communications or enhanced processes 
to industries such as agriculture. TELECOMS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 806SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
On-orbit servicing extends the 
operational life of satellites 
by repairing, upgrading, or 
performing maintenance while 
they are in Earth’s orbit. The 
service can be done through 
orbit adjustments, refueling, or 
upgrading instruments.The European Space Agency and European industry are working 
together to develop in-orbit servicing (IOS) technology. Companies 
working toward extending the life of satellites include Astroscale, 
ClearSpace, D-Orbit, and Telespazio; they’re making progress on 
IOS concepts involving maintenance, orbit adjustment, refueling, 
and instrument upgrades. Starfish Space, a startup founded by 
veterans of Blue Origin, obtained $14 million in funding to launch 
its own satellite-serving endeavors. After creating a prototype vehi-
cle called Otter Pup, they will attempt to dock on another satellite 
in orbit before trying it with a full-size Otter spacecraft. Northrop 
Grumman’s SpaceLogistics sold its third Mission Extension Pod 
(MEP), a propulsion system designed to extend the lifespan of 
legacy satellites in geosynchronous Earth orbit. The MEP will be 
placed on a satellite by a Mission Robotic Vehicle using robotic 
arms, and will essentially function as a jetpack for satellites. This 
will extend the satellite life by at least six years. The US Space 
Force now sees the value in servicing preexisting satellites and is 
investing in early-stage technologies. It’s working on a strategy for 
refueling and servicing satellites in geostationary orbit, and hopes 
to have the capability by the early 2030s. According to MarketsandMarkets, the on-orbit satellites servicing 
market is expected to grow significantly, from $2.4 billion in 2023 
to $5.1 billion by 2030 with a compound annual growth rate of 
11.5%. The telecommunications industry has serious interest in life 
extension services for maintaining satellites’ orbit and reducing 
fuel costs. Organizations are now viewing satellite servicing as a 
strategic advantage. By essentially refueling and repairing satel-
lites in orbit, satellite operators will have increased flexibility in 
response to threats. 
Satellite servicing is important for a multitude of other reasons. 
We rely on satellites for weather forecasting, communications, 
navigation, and scientific research. Maintaining consistent oper-
ation of these constellations will ultimately lead to longer service 
lives of spacecraft and increase the return on investment for com-
panies that launch these satellites. Servicing will also minimize 
the risk of space debris as satellites can be repurposed rather than 
merely decommissioned. MAINTENANCE 
MISSIONS: SATELLITE 
SERVICING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 807SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The harshest critics of space 
exploration often emphasize the 
need to focus on the challenges 
here on Earth before extending 
our energy to explore the 
cosmos. As it is, a constellation of 
satellites and associated space 
technology have been providing 
valuable information about our 
world since the 1960s. Much of the infrastructure we’ve set up in space is for monitoring 
Earth. Monitoring technology can be used to drive weather-track-
ing abilities, sustainability measures, and disaster prepared-
ness. As a pillar of space-based research, the International Space 
Station has a series of platforms for monitoring climate change, 
including external instruments measuring ground temperature, 
imaging spectrometers tracking dust particles’ impact on climate, 
and an instrument that measures atmospheric particles from 
events like volcanic eruptions. Additionally, CubeSats are used by 
the ISS to observe particle-cloud interactions and meteorological 
disasters. The European Space Agency also uses a fleet of satel-
lites to monitor soil moisture, measure polar ice thickness, and 
conduct analysis from radar imagery. Future missions including 
Flex will map vegetation, and Biomass will gather information on 
forests. The Canadian Space Agency and Spire Global will under-
take their WildFireSat mission using space-based thermal intel-
ligence to support wildfire management. In May 2023, Rocket Lab 
successfully completed two launches for NASA’s Time-Resolved 
Observations of Precipitation structure and storm Intensity with 
a Constellation of Smallsats (TROPICS) mission. TROPICS will use 
four CubeSats to monitor the evolution of tropical storms and 
hurricanes to enhance storm prediction. Furthermore, the esca-
lating regulatory focus on climate disclosure, marked by Califor-
nia’s 2023 enactment of mandatory emissions disclosure rules, 
is further catalyzing the growth of the Earth observation market. 
Expect the regulatory moment to incentivize the development and 
technology that facilitate accurate and independent metrics for 
monitoring our planet.As is the case with all technology, in time, monitoring technology 
has become more sophisticated since NASA started using it more 
than 60 years ago and can address a broader range of applications. 
By establishing a constellation of satellites in space, we can make 
more observations about a broad swath of phenomena that would 
require an exorbitant amount of ground-based observers to oper-
ate with similar accuracy. Earth observation satellites can assist 
in tracking gradual environmental shifts including deforestation, 
rising sea levels, and increasing wildfires. This data can assist in 
predicting crop yields as weather patterns become more erratic, 
helping to ward off food insecurities. Governments can use data 
collected from these satellites to improve their disaster prepared-
ness in the event of intensifying storms, including policies for 
evacuation plans, resource allocation, and emergency response 
strategies. Businesses can also benefit by using such data to 
safeguard supply chains and add resiliency to their value chains. 
The broader implication is that space exploration and its associ-
ated technology offer benefits that go beyond space itself. These 
practical applications impact our lives today and will help prepare 
for uncertain futures on Earth. MONITORING  
EARTH1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 808SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Self-assembly technology 
confronts numerous engineering 
hurdles related to deploying 
structures in space and 
constructing them there. It 
will unlock new pathways for 
pioneering novel, streamlined, 
and versatile space architectures.Several groups are experimenting with confronting the challenge 
of space construction. The MIT Space Exploration Initiative’s 
TESSERAE is the preeminent example of using self-assembly 
technology to construct space structures: Ariel Ekblaw’s project 
uses flatpack structures and self-assembling tiles embedded with 
electromagnets to snap components into water- and weather-tight 
structures that can serve humans in space as well as on Earth. 
TESSERAE tiles were included on Axiom’s Ax-1 research mission 
in 2022 and further tested during the 2023 Horizon zero-gravity 
flight by the Aurelia Institute. New features of the tiles include 
autonomous self-assembly through algorithmic design and 
enhanced bonding reconfigurability. The MIT Space Exploration 
Initiative is also exploring magnetically programming cubes to 
stochastically self-assemble. These ElectroVoxels could serve a 
variety of applications, ultimately providing solutions for space 
exploration’s unknown challenges. Caltech researchers have also 
implemented self-assembly principles in a solar power demon-
strator that successfully beamed detectable levels of power down 
to Earth. The design uses modules that are 35 cubic feet before 
launch but unfurl into huge flat squares 50 meters per side after 
launch. Space Forge is turning to origami to design Pridwen, its 
deployable heat shield. The shield creates ample surface area for 
even heat distribution and can be reused on multiple launches. Traditionally, structures in space have been completely utilitari-
an in their design. When scientists built the International Space 
Station, they had to launch disparate pieces into space that were 
assembled by spacewalking astronauts and robotics. Even as 
sending payloads to space becomes more affordable, this more ar-
chaic process for establishing structures in space is still cost pro-
hibitive, complex, and time-consuming. Other challenges include 
fitting all composite parts within the confines of rockets and en-
suring they withstand the harshness of the launch, while address-
ing the unforgiving conditions for the astronauts assembling the 
structures. Shifting the paradigm to self-assembling technology 
will provide solutions for many, if not all, of these challenges. It will 
enable more cost-effective solutions and architecture that is dy-
namic and multipurpose, imbuing structures with new vitality and 
cultural significance. If Ekblaw’s visions come to fruition, space 
will be fitted with stunning and inspiring cathedrals and concert 
halls, and not just sterile, single purpose research structures. 
Dynamic structures have other positive implications, such as 
the possible ability to self-regulate and self-heal. This technology 
could also have relevance on Earth, by providing dynamic habitats 
that can adapt to extreme weather and disaster events in real time.SELF-ASSEMBLY 
TECH2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 809SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Eco-friendly, storable high-
performance hypergolic 
propellants have been the 
holy grail of space propulsion 
for decades, but current 
breakthroughs are making this 
elusive form of propulsion more 
of a reality. Green propulsion 
alternatives will be key for 
reducing carcinogenic and 
environmentally damaging 
propellants. Łukasiewicz Research Networks’ Institute of Aviation has made 
significant advancements in the development of green, high-per-
formance, hypergolic propellants. Its new propellant uses hydro-
gen peroxide as an oxidizer with a novel fuel, offering high per-
formance, hypergolic ignition capability, and simplicity in engine 
design, potentially reducing costs for satellite platforms, landers, 
and launch vehicle upper stages. Benchmark Space Systems is 
another company dedicated to developing green, nontoxic propul-
sion systems and technologies to support space missions. Accord-
ing to Benchmark, its Halcyon Avant green bipropellant system 
boasts a 25% increase in fuel efficiency over other green mono-
propellants. The Space Enabled research group at MIT is exploring 
the use of wax-based hybrid rocket propellants, such as paraffin 
and beeswax. These materials potentially offer high performance, 
cost-effectiveness, and safety advantages compared to traditional 
toxic propellants like hydrazine. In an entirely different approach, 
California-based SpinLaunch is working to develop an innovative 
space launch system powered by kinetic energy. This technology 
involves a vacuum-sealed centrifuge mechanism that accelerates 
a rocket to speeds of up to 4,700 mph (7,500 km/h; 2.1 km/s) be-
fore releasing it into space. Once released, the rocket’s engines are 
ignited at an altitude of approximately 200,000 feet. Auriga Space 
offers another novel approach. In 2023, the company unveiled an 
electromagnetic launch system, akin to a maglev train, using a 
ground track to magnetically accelerate a vehicle to high altitudes. 
Like SpinLaunch, once the vehicle reaches a high altitude, it then 
fires engines for orbital insertion.It comes as no surprise that present-day spacecraft propulsion 
heavily relies on toxic and cancer-causing hydrazine propellants, 
presenting unique environmental concerns and associated safety 
risks. As the number of future space endeavors and applications 
continues to rise, adopting environmentally friendly space propul-
sion methods becomes supremely important. A study by the Na-
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration further highlights 
the environmental impact of space travel, indicating that global 
rocket launches (180 in total during 2022) release approximately 
1,000 tons of soot into the upper atmosphere per year. Projected 
increases in rocket launches risk exposing more people in the 
Northern Hemisphere to increased harmful UV radiation. 
Developing more environmentally forgiving propellants or viable 
alternative propulsion systems will be no easy task but ultimately 
will be necessary to adopt eco-friendly and nontoxic propellants 
to replace conventional, hazardous hydrazine-based systems. This 
change will further be precipitated by shifting regulatory require-
ments, changing market demands, and also by the technical and 
economic advantages offered by nontoxic alternatives. GREEN  
PROPULSION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 810SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Ongoing tracking and 
surveillance of defunct human-
made objects in Earth’s orbit 
will help prevent collision 
catastrophes and ensure that 
space remains accessible to us 
in the future. Monitoring goals 
include avoiding collisions of 
active satellites, understanding 
debris-generating events, and 
aiding efforts to mitigate and 
remedy debris.The growing risk posed by orbital debris has highlighted the need 
for enhanced monitoring as space becomes more congested. For 
example, SpaceX’s Starlink satellites conducted 25,000 collision 
avoidance maneuvers between December 2022 and May 2023. 
US agencies are ramping up efforts to monitor space debris, 
placing particular emphasis on objects larger than 10 centimeters. 
But there’s also an increasing awareness of the hazards posed 
by smaller fragments. Traveling at 17,000 mph, debris as small as 
a penny can wreak havoc on space assets. Recognizing this, the 
Office of the Director of National Intelligence launched the Space 
Debris Identification and Tracking (SINTRA) program, specifical-
ly aimed at tracking micro space debris. Separately, US Space 
Command is training AI on its extensive data, aiming to efficiently 
discern and prioritize critical threats. In October 2023, the FCC 
enforced its first space debris penalty in a settlement with Dish 
Network, forcing the company to pay a fee of $150,000 for failing to 
remove the EchoStar-7 satellite. 
Several companies have also entered the field. In 2023, Japan 
granted Astroscale a contract worth up to $80 million for a mis-
sion to gather data on an inactive satellite in orbit. This mission 
involves launching a spacecraft that will initially use ground-
based observations for proximity and then switch to onboard 
sensors for closer engagement. The spacecraft will then carry out 
detailed examinations of the defunct satellite using its integrated 
imagers and sensors. Another company, Odin Space, is working to 
detect orbital debris via a sensor on a newly launched space tug. 
Another startup, LeoLabs, monitors the trajectories and move-
ments of numerous spacecraft in low Earth orbit. Centimeter- and millimeter-sized fragments in space pose the 
most significant threats to missions in low Earth orbit. Yet, less 
than 1% of these potentially catastrophic objects are currently 
monitored, and many are inadequately assessed for the risks they 
present. The persistence of these debris is alarming; without atmo-
spheric drag, they can remain in orbit for centuries. This means 
any object sent to space without a plan for deorbit is destined to 
become hazardous debris. The financial and safety implications 
of space debris are also profound. In March 2023, an approaching 
piece of space junk threatened the International Space Station, 
forcing a hasty maneuver of the $150 billion station to safety. Such 
maneuvers are costly, averaging $1 million in expenses for propel-
lant and operational adjustments. 
Fortunately, we are getting much better at monitoring. Enhanced 
tracking and cataloging have granted satellite operators the 
capability to adeptly dodge potential collisions, thereby averting 
substantial collision risks. Consistent monitoring ensures that 
essential orbital pathways remain navigable, preserving them for 
future space ventures rather than rendering them too perilous to 
explore due to collision threats. MONITORING 
ORBITAL DEBRIS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 811SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Simply monitoring orbital debris 
is not enough—we also need 
to come up with technology to 
deorbit existing debris and make 
plans and protocols for deorbiting 
future space assets. Deorbiting 
existing debris is difficult and 
most efforts today are early stage 
and experimental. Proposed deorbiting solutions include controlled deorbit using 
spacecraft propulsion; drag augmentation with deployable sails or 
balloons; and active debris removal. The latter includes concepts 
like on-orbit capture, lasers to evaporate or slow debris, electric 
propulsion to dispose debris in graveyard orbits, and inflatable 
braking devices.
The European Space Agency recently succeeded in guiding a 
defunct satellite back to Earth, marking the first assisted reentry 
of its kind. Through complex maneuvers, the agency lowered the 
satellite’s orbit from 320 kilometers to 120 kilometers to en-
sure atmospheric reentry and burn up. Several startups are also 
pioneering deorbit efforts: Astroscale’s ELSA-M system will be 
the first to provide multi-removal services, supporting satellite 
operators including constellations with a compatible magnetic 
capture mechanism. ClearSpace, another startup, recently secured 
a contract for ClearSpace-1, the first active debris removal mis-
sion to capture and deorbit an object of more than 100 kilograms. 
Unlike these reactive approaches, D-Orbit’s approach is preventive. 
Its preinstalled Decommissioning Device is externally mounted 
on satellites before launch. The device will be used for end-of-life 
maneuvers—once a satellite is no longer functioning, D-Orbit’s 
device will boost the object to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere, or 
into a safer orbit. The escalating issue of space debris isn’t just a technical hurdle; 
it’s also an economic opportunity. Introducing financial incentives 
for space debris cleanup could expedite the process, mitigating 
the risk of a Kessler Syndrome—a domino effect of collisions 
that exponentially increase debris. Monetizing orbital debris and 
space preservation can yield significant savings, with break-even 
analysis indicating approximately $20 billion saved annually. 
These costs will soon equalize and then decrease, especially when 
post-mission disposal practices achieve a 90% success rate, cou-
pled with at least five active debris removals yearly. With forecasts 
suggesting the space debris monitoring and removal sector could 
grow from $942.3 million in 2022 to $1.5 billion by 2029, the finan-
cial potential is clear.
From a broader economic perspective, clearing space debris 
effectively unlocks invaluable orbital “real estate.” As the space 
industry burgeons, every cleared orbit paves the way for new sat-
ellite deployments, promoting a surge in space-related economic 
activities and opportunities.
But there are implications beyond the financial. The problem of 
space debris threatens our deeply human desire to explore and 
expand. The Kessler Syndrome warns of a bleak scenario where 
a dense debris field in low Earth orbit instigates a cascade of 
collisions, rendering space missions perilous or even unfeasible. 
In such a scenario, Earth could become an unintentional prison, 
cutting off our access to the cosmos.DEORBITING  
DEBRIS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 812SPACE INDUSTRY813© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.COMMERCIALIZATION 
OF SPACESPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
In existence since the 1990s, the 
commercial space transportation 
industry initially focused on 
launching satellites and sending 
cargo to the International Space 
Station. Now it’s sending tourists 
on suborbital trips in space.In the year between Jeff Bezos’ successful first suborbital space 
tourism flight aboard the New Shepard in July 2021, his Blue Origin 
took a total of six crewed flights aboard the launch vehicle. In 
total, it launched 25 nonprofessionals on suborbital flights to the 
edge of space—a list that includes notable individuals such as 
actor William Shatner, aviation pioneer Wally Funk, and TV person-
ality Michael Strahan. More recently, Richard Branson’s Virgin Ga-
lactic completed its first commercial flight, taking its crew to the 
edge of space aboard the VSS Unity. Members of the flight includ-
ed two Italian air force officers and an aerospace engineer from 
the National Research Council of Italy. The flight, called Galactic 
01, took the individuals 50 miles above New Mexico and lasted 
roughly 75 minutes. The succeeding flight, Galactic 02, included 
Olympian Jon Goodwin along with Keisha Schahaff and Anastatia 
Mayers, the first mother-daughter duo to fly to space. Startups 
Space Perspective and World View have a different approach for 
sending tourists to the stratosphere, namely by balloon. Space 
Perspective’s Spaceship Neptune, equipped with a lounge, bar, and 
Wi-Fi service, will travel at 12 mph, carrying passengers on sight-
seeing tours 19 miles above the Earth. World View’s balloon-based 
system will last about six to eight hours and take passengers to 
an altitude of at least 100,000 feet, allowing the passengers to see 
the curvature of the Earth. With the tragedy of the Titan submersible, individuals understand-
ably began to compare ocean exploration to that of space. There 
are similarities and differences between the two. George Nield, 
who was aboard the New Shepard on March 31, 2022, highlighted 
those similarities, indicating that both take place in harsh and 
unforgiving environments, involve a significant level of risk, are 
only available to a few select individuals, and cost an exorbitantly 
high amount of money. With these comparisons in mind, Nield 
admonishes that the space tourism industry needs to update the 
regulatory framework for commercial human space flight rather 
than merely rely on informed consent for travelers. He also urges 
that now is the appropriate time to question whether the industry 
is ready for a similar tragedy, emphasizing that rushed regulations 
in this space are essentially bad regulations. These are especial-
ly important considerations as a study from the Pew Research 
Center indicates that while over half of Americans expect space 
tourism to be commonplace by the year 2073, 65% said they would 
not be willing to go to space even if given the opportunity. While 
taking flights to space has its critics, the industry is still valued at 
$450 billion. Despite the risks involved, affluent thrill seekers will 
continue to seek novel experiences, such as space flight, instilling 
continued confidence in the market.OFF-PLANET 
TOURISM: GETTING 
TO SPACE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 814SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Staying in space involves 
constructing and inhabiting 
innovative structures that 
can serve tourists as well as 
businesses and scientists. Private 
space stations of the future will 
function as luxury hotels, business 
parks, and research centers. Despite its rebrand, Above Space (formerly Orbital Assembly) 
still has plans for its private Pioneer Station, described as the 
first business park in space with gravity, and is taking reserva-
tions for its future all-inclusive luxury space hotel. The station, 
which will be situated in low Earth orbit, is intended to be used by 
businesses, scientists, and tourists. Pioneer will include a rotat-
ing structure to simulate gravity, unlike other space stations. In 
2022, Hilton and Voyager Space announced their collaboration to 
provide a hotel in low Earth orbit. Voyager Space has more recently 
announced a partnership with Airbus to develop, build, and op-
erate Starlab, the station that will house Hilton’s hotel and could 
one day replace the International Space Station. California-based 
Orion Span has its own plans for a luxury space hotel known as the 
Aurora Space Station, with the hopes of offering extended stays 
in space. If things go according to plan, paying customers will be 
taken 200 miles above the Earth’s surface and spend 12 days at 
the hotel. Houston-based Axiom Space won NASA’s contract to 
construct the first commercially manufactured module for the ISS. 
It plans to attach this module in 2026, a second module in 2027, 
and a third in 2028. After this, its thermal power module will allow 
Axiom’s space station to detach from the ISS to become a com-
mercial free-flying station. Bringing tourists to space and keeping them there for a period of 
time is no easy task. It also doesn’t come cheaply, and critics will 
always oppose profligate and excessive spending for tourism. But 
space tourism also channels luxury spending toward continued 
and advanced research in the space industry. There is the signifi-
cant opportunity to increase scientific knowledge under the guise 
of adventure tourism. 
In addition to research, space tourism offers obvious econom-
ic benefits. It will require new business ecosystems and supply 
chains, creating entire new industries and jobs. The US Chamber of 
Commerce anticipates that the US will need more than 1.5 million 
workers to drive the new space economy. Space hospitality could 
serve as the testing ground for long-term space missions and 
colonizing space, providing us with more insights on the systems 
required to make space colonization possible, and the effects it 
will have on larger communities living in space. 
Visiting space can have other unexpected benefits as well. When 
Shatner went to suborbital space, he cited experiencing the over-
view effect, or the transformational and cognitive and emotional 
shift in a person’s awareness when they visit space. This effect 
would be conceivably more profound for individuals experiencing 
extended stays in space. Perhaps increased empathy among the 
affluent is something that critics of space tourism can get behind. OFF-PLANET 
TOURISM: STAYING  
IN SPACE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 815SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
As we establish long-term 
settlements in space, we will need 
forms of entertainment to inspire 
and stave off the impending 
isolation being in space elicits. 
Our time there will assuredly lead 
to novel events with new cultural 
significance.While not technically in space, electronic duo The Chainsmokers 
are set to perform the first concert in the stratosphere. The group 
plans to perform aboard World View’s pressurized space capsule 
tethered to a stratospheric balloon. 
Once humans are spending significant time in space, we’ll still 
want to enjoy the cultural elements we are accustomed to here on 
Earth. MIT-led project Telemetron Orchestra wants to contribute to 
ways we can create and experience music in space. The project is 
working to develop musical instruments that function to their full 
potential only in zero-gravity environments, raising the possibility 
of a culturally rich life in space. This could enable less gimmicky 
concert options that one day take place in the actual boundaries 
of space. 
Anticipating future sporting events, the Institution of Engineering 
and Technology has created a rulebook for how football—soccer to 
American audiences—would be played on the surface of the moon. 
Games would involve five players on each team and consist of 
four 10 minute quarters with 20 minute breaks to give players a 
chance to rest and recover. The optimistic plan is for these games 
to actually start happening by 2035, with players wearing slimmed 
down Apollo spacesuits equipped with internal cooling systems. In 
a similar vein, the Space Games Federation has identified pro-
spective above-the-Earth sports, such as float ball, which borrows 
elements from football, dodgeball, and basketball.Whether space becomes a viable option for extended vacations 
or for human colonization, it will be imperative to bring cultural 
elements along. These ventures into space will also create new 
cultures and new pastimes—and economic opportunities. Here, the 
introduction of microgravity will be both a burden and a benefit. It 
will hinder us from living our lives exactly as we are accustomed 
to, and we won’t be engaging in the same activities and sports we 
enjoy on Earth. However, it will also open up new possibilities for 
innovative competitions. As business parks and other structures 
become more commonplace, there will be first-mover opportuni-
ties to fully take advantage of the space entertainment and event 
industry. But in the immediate future, space tourism will likely 
remain a very small percentage of the overall commercial space 
economy, underscoring the importance of being the first to estab-
lish a market and set up shop. While merely being in space would 
provide an overwhelming source of entertainment for some, indi-
viduals will undoubtedly look for new things to do and new ways to 
stay entertained as we move toward democratized access to space.SPACE 
ENTERTAINMENT  
AND EVENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 816SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The inception of space travel and 
exploration was mostly driven by 
public or governmental interest. 
However, as early as the 1980s, 
private organizations began 
entering the space economy by 
conducting launches. Now in the 
21st century, a growing number of 
private companies are entering the 
space economy in earnest. China sent its first civilian astronaut into space in May 2023. 
Gui Haichao, a payload expert, took off from the Jiuquan Satellite 
Launch Center in northwest China to take part in a crewed mission 
to the Tiangong space station. Prior to this, all Chinese astronauts 
in space have been members of the People’s Liberation Army.
Japanese startup Ispace had hopes of becoming the first private 
mission to land an unmanned lunar module on the surface of 
the moon but was unsuccessful. Its HAKUTO-R Mission 1 module 
likely ran out of fuel before landing and crashed into the lunar 
surface. While not successful in landing on the moon, the mission 
achieved 8 of its 10 goals and also collected valuable data that will 
be beneficial for future missions. 
Jared Isaacman, the billionaire who funded the Inspiration4 Crew 
Dragon mission, aims to send additional private missions to 
space under the Polaris Program. The first mission, Polaris Dawn, 
will attempt to reach the highest Earth orbit ever flown, targeting 
870 miles over the Earth. Additionally, the mission also hopes to 
include the first extravehicular activity for a commercial mission 
with a civilian astronaut engaging in a spacewalk outside their 
craft. Private missions require scrappiness and ingenuity and are likely 
to result in innovations that can only be driven by privatized ven-
tures. Many technologies that ultimately benefit humans on Earth 
were also used for space exploration. These spillover effects can 
have immeasurable impact on our daily lives, as we’ll continue to 
see in future space endeavors.
High-profile private missions have the potential to capture public 
attention and inspire individuals worldwide. This inspiration can 
lead to a new generation of the public having an interest in space, 
highlighting the importance of STEM-based education and influ-
encing more students to study science, engineering, and mathe-
matics. 
The privatization of space has already proven to have positive ef-
fects. SpaceX’s reusable rockets have sustainability implications, 
but they also have greatly contributed to the reduced costs asso-
ciated with launching payloads to space, acting as a democratizer 
of the space industry and providing access to a much broader 
audience. Many of the initiatives associated with space junk re-
moval are also within the private sector. These efforts of cleaning 
the skies will be crucial for the continuation of the space economy 
for both public or private sectors. Unfortunately, the private sector 
is the primary culprit for much of the existing space junk, which is 
one main drawback of the practice.PRIVATE  
MISSIONS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 817SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Lower barriers to entry into the 
space industry as well as years of 
record-setting private investment 
have given smaller and fledgling 
companies a seat at the table 
in the new space economy. But 
as private investing becomes 
stingier, smaller companies must 
focus on core competencies 
and quality offerings to succeed 
over competition with weaker 
fundamentals. A number of companies with specialized offerings are already 
operating in this sphere. There’s Firefly Aerospace, which focuses 
on developing launch vehicles, in-space vehicles, and services for 
space transportation. Supported by a $112 million NASA contract 
to focus on lunar payload delivery, it is planning for its vehicles 
to serve missions in low Earth orbit and also to the moon. NASA 
selected Relativity Space to provide launch services in its Ven-
ture-Class Acquisition of Dedicated and Rideshare (VADR) mis-
sions. It was the first company to 3D print rockets and is now 
applying artificial intelligence and autonomous robotics to its 
arsenal as the pioneer factories of the future. The Y Combina-
tor-backed startup EPSILON3 provides solutions for space project 
management through web-based collaboration tools that focus 
on streamlining tasks related to spacecraft testing and opera-
tions. Its customer base includes Firefly, Inversion Space, Rocket 
Lab, and Virgin Galactic. Vestigo Aerospace places its emphasis 
on sustainability through deorbit capabilities for CubeSats, small 
satellites, and launch vehicle upper stages. Rogue Space Systems 
Corp. is creating   satellite vehicles and subsystems for on-orbit 
services for satellite operators. Its future fleet of Orbital Robots 
will perform tasks relating to inspection, maintenance, repair, and 
transport of satellites. The overall market slowdown has had significant impacts on many 
industries, and unfortunately, the space industry has not been im-
mune: In 2023, investors showed reduced interest in funding large 
investing rounds for space technology. Still, this pullback does not 
indicate the Space 2.0 era is coming to a premature end. Investors 
are anxious and looking for more sure bets. With this in mind, 
there remains significant enthusiasm for new and innovative 
space technologies, especially for launch and propulsion systems, 
manufacturing, and mining. Investors will still be keen on possible 
returns and novel possibilities the space industry could offer. 
Another bright spot in the future market is various countries’ inter-
ests in returning to the moon. NASA’s Artemis program presents 
compelling opportunities for startups. The US Space Force’s drasti-
cally increased budget includes a new office for the sole purpose of 
creating partnerships with the private sector. While private invest-
ment remains conservative, government agencies will continue to 
keep the space economy going. Chad Anderson, managing partner 
of Space Capital, even thinks the decline in private investment will 
bring resiliency to the market, as there will be a shift away from 
momentum investing and back to a focus on fundamentals. SMALLER 
COMPANIES  
IN SPACE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 818SPACE INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2036
Preparing for Game Day on the Moon 
Marta Peguero of Spain’s national women’s soccer team rose to prominence during the 2031 Women’s World Cup 
and further displayed her talents in 2035, when she won the Golden Gall for best overall player in the tournament. 
That’s when she was automatically chosen to captain one of the teams participating in the first-ever soccer 
exhibition match to be played on the moon’s surface. This exhibition match will function as a pilot to assess the 
viability of having future matches on the moon, as well as the possibility of having a more permanent staple of 
matches under the Lunar Professional Soccer Association. This pilot match will provide scientists and research-
ers with valuable data on the effects of playing sports in such conditions, affirming their postulations of the 
dynamics of the moon’s reduced gravity on ball movement and overall game play. 
But, before any of this can be played out on the moon’s surface, Peguero must engage in a strenuous condition-
ing regimen to ensure her body is prepared for the harsh conditions of space. This comprehensive regimen in-
cludes new pharmaceuticals to prepare both the athlete’s muscles and brain for the new conditions of space. It 
also incorporates strength training, aerobic fitness, and balance and coordination exercises to ensure she can 
adapt to these lower-gravity environments. In addition to exercises, a series of simulated activities aims to pre-
pare Peguero for her experience in space. She will engage in equipment simulation in a neutral buoyancy lab to 
give her an idea of the movement and activity required to function in the streamlined athletic sports space suits 
that will be used for the activities. A series of virtual experiences using haptic feedback will give her a sense of 
how the soccer ball might react on the moon. While the high-fidelity experiences are beneficial, there’s still noth-
ing like trying it all out in the natural environment, an opportunity Peguero is strongly anticipating.
819© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRY820© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ORIGINS OF A 
MULTI-PLANETARY 
SPECIESSPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Are we lonely or are we truly 
alone? The quest to discover 
life beyond Earth taps into a 
profound human yearning. 
Uncovering even the most 
rudimentary life-forms on far-
off exoplanets suggests that we 
aren’t a solitary exception. In 
their pursuit, scientists are open 
to detecting both the elementary 
and the complex.The search for life beyond Earth spans the simple to the advanced. 
We scour nearby planets for signs of basic biology, while also 
scanning the cosmos for sophisticated techno-signatures, aiming 
to discover alien civilizations across the full spectrum of evolu-
tion. One way of detecting a planet that hosts intelligent life is by 
studying what Earth would look like from light-years away. Recent-
ly, a team simulated radio leakage from Earth’s mobile towers to 
predict what an alien civilization might detect from nearby stars 
like Barnard’s Star, just six light-years from us. Though they found 
our current radio emissions would be difficult to detect, more 
powerful future systems could substantially increase our chances 
of being heard. 
Other efforts are focused on finding Earth-like exoplanets orbiting 
nearby stars. China plans to launch the Tianlin space telescope in 
2035 to seek potentially habitable planets while SETI scientists 
are devising plans for a listening post on the far side of the moon.
Artificial intelligence is enhancing these celestial search capabili-
ties. Through sophisticated machine learning algorithms, re-
searchers are pinpointing exoplanets by sifting through data from 
protoplanetary disks that envelop nascent stars. The James Webb 
Space Telescope further amplifies these efforts, offering unparal-
leled insights into the atmospheres of planets located hundreds 
of light-years away like WASP-39 b. Intriguingly, this gas giant 
akin in mass to Saturn revealed an unexpected presence of sulfur 
dioxide in its atmosphere.Discovering alien life has always been a focal point in science fic-
tion, often portraying a unified humanity in response—earthly wars 
halted, borders dissolved, and racial tensions diminished. But we 
don’t yet know if that unity would materialize in reality. 
The Drake Equation estimates the number of active, extraterrestrial 
civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy by considering factors like the 
rate of star formation, the fraction of those stars that have planets, 
the number of planets that could potentially support life, and sever-
al others. Considering the cosmos’ vastness—with trillions of stars 
and billions of Earth-like planets—the high probabilities suggested 
by the Drake Equation lead to a perplexing question: Why haven’t 
we encountered extraterrestrial life yet? 
This problem is called the Fermi Paradox, a contradiction between 
the high likelihood of extraterrestrial civilizations existing and our 
lack of contact with such civilizations. One possible explanation for 
the Fermi Paradox is the concept of the “Great Filter.” This hypothet-
ical stage, popularized by economist Robin Hanson of George Mason 
University, suggests that there is a phase in the development of a 
civilization that is almost impossible to pass. It could be that civili-
zations rarely develop intelligent life, or that advanced civilizations 
tend to self-destruct, or any other myriad of possibilities. This con-
cept implies that civilizations with the potential to communicate 
or travel interstellar distances are extremely rare or even nonexis-
tent. The Great Filter is just one of many hypotheses attempting to 
explain the Fermi Paradox. As we gather more exoplanet data, expect 
more theories to emerge.SEARCH FOR  
FAR-OFF LIFE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 821SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The search for nearby signs of life 
encompasses not only currently 
thriving organisms but also traces 
of past life and indicators of 
potential future habitability. This 
involves investigating planetary 
bodies within our solar system—
Mars, Europa, Enceladus, 
Ganymede—for signs of ancient 
life, current microbial activity, or 
conditions that could eventually 
support life.Researchers have long examined Mars for signs of life. Recent data 
from NASA’s Mars Perseverance rover reveals persuasive evidence 
of organic material. The evidence suggests a more intricate organic 
geochemical cycle on Mars than previously thought, indicating the 
existence of multiple reservoirs of potential organic compounds. 
Importantly, the study identified signals associated with molecules 
that suggest water may have been a crucial factor in the variety of 
organic matter on Mars. This implies that the essential building 
blocks for life might have existed on Mars for a much longer dura-
tion than previously considered. 
Farther away, there are efforts to scope out potential life hospita-
ble moons—specifically, Jupiter’s moons. In April 2023, the ESA 
launched the Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer (JUICE) to search for life’s 
building blocks there, though some moons are considered more 
promising than others due to the presence of liquid water, an energy 
source, and nutrients. Ganymede, one of Jupiter’s moons, is believed 
to have an ocean, making it a key target for the mission. NASA also 
plans to launch the Europa Clipper, which will explore Jupiter’s Euro-
pa moon to determine if Europa’s ocean could be a suitable habitat 
for extraterrestrial life. 
In addition to these efforts, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory is 
developing a robot called EELS (Exobiology Extant Life Surveyor); 
it’s designed to look for signs of life in the ocean beneath the icy 
crust of Saturn’s moon Enceladus by descending narrow vents in 
the surface that spew geysers. Although still in testing and devel-
opment, EELS’ ability to navigate a wide variety of terrains opens up 
new possibilities for exploring environments that were previously 
considered inaccessible, increasing the chances of finding evidence 
of past or present life in our solar system.In the words of Carl Sagan, “The significance of a finding that there 
are other beings who share this universe with us would be abso-
lutely phenomenal, it would be an epochal event in human history.” 
Finding evidence of even past life would be significant. It would 
provide clues that we aren’t alone in the universe and also shed 
light on the possibility of life elsewhere, even if it no longer exists. 
If life can form on other planets and moons in our galaxy, it raises 
the prospect of life being present in other parts of the universe.
Narrowing down our search to factors that facilitated life on Earth, 
such as water, oxygen, and energy sources, is a logical approach. 
However, discovering evidence of past or early life could also offer 
insights into our own origins. It prompts us to question the funda-
mental requirements for life. For instance, is liquid water essential 
for life to exist? Are we limiting our search by focusing only on fac-
tors that sustain life on Earth? Could other biomarkers exist that 
would provide more comprehensive insights? Additionally, under-
standing the reasons for the extinction of life elsewhere could help 
us prevent a similar fate on Earth. It is crucial to comprehend the 
conditions that support life, as eventually, humanity will need to 
expand beyond Earth. Scoping out the “real estate” of our local gal-
axy before it becomes a necessity to move beyond Earth is prudent 
and a good life insurance policy.THE SEARCH FOR 
NEARBY LIFE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 822SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
As astronaut Buzz Aldrin once 
said, “Mars is there, waiting to be 
reached. ” But first, we must return 
to the moon. A Mars mission 
requires advances in propulsion, 
life support, and radiation 
shielding. NASA will use the moon 
as a proving ground for Mars 
missions, and possibly as a future 
launchpad.Under NASA’s Artemis program, aimed at establishing a sustain-
able presence on and around the moon, the agency created a 
“Moon to Mars” office to synchronize lunar and Martian explora-
tion efforts. The moon will act as a proving ground for technologies 
and equipment, including human habitats, destined for Mars. Ar-
temis II will mark the program’s first crewed test, evaluating deep 
space exploration, the Space Launch System rocket, and the Orion 
spacecraft over a 10-day journey with astronauts on board.
Two behemoth rockets, one from NASA and another from SpaceX, 
have emerged as the focal points of the US’ moon return aspi-
rations. The fabrication, funding, and functioning of these two 
spacecraft epitomize distinctly divergent strategies for leaving 
Earth’s confines. NASA’s plan uses tried-and-true hardware with 
expendable rocket stages, while SpaceX’s Starship uses entirely 
new hardware, is designed for more people and cargo, and features 
reusable components. Once we have returned to the moon, the 
next step is to set up Gateway, the first space station in lunar orbit 
and a collaboration between space agencies in the US, Europe, 
Canada, and Japan. 
These countries aren’t the only ones with moon-to-Mars plans. 
India successfully landed Chandrayaan-3 in August 2023, making 
it the fourth country to complete a successful soft landing on the 
lunar surface. In early 2024, Japan became the fifth country to 
successfully land on the moon. These achievements follow a failed 
attempt by Russia to pull off the same feat. As for manned flights, 
NASA expects its astronauts to be back on the surface of the moon 
as early as 2025. China, hoping to become the second country to 
land humans on the moon, has plans for its taikonauts to land on 
the lunar surface around 2030. The moon-to-Mars approach enables us to test and validate sys-
tems required for the long journey to Mars, including long-duration 
spaceflight, surface operations, and supporting infrastructure. A 
successful return to the moon is a stepping stone toward the mon-
umental goal of landing astronauts on Mars, which is the most 
Earth-like planet in our solar system and likely the best chance of 
finding evidence of past or present life beyond Earth. As Stephen 
Hawking noted, “The human race shouldn’t have all its eggs in 
one basket, or on one planet. Let’s hope we can avoid dropping the 
basket until we have spread the load.” 
The problem of getting to the moon, and eventually Mars, isn’t so 
much technical as it is economic. For these ambitious ventures 
to be sustainable, they need to be economically viable, and it’s 
unlikely that we will achieve consistent and successful missions 
until there’s a clear profit motive. The effort also comes with 
geopolitical implications, especially given the chilly relationship 
between the US and China. Both nations aim to send people to 
the lunar surface in the coming years, but they do not generally 
collaborate on space research and exploration, and have limited 
communication in orbit and beyond. This lack of communication 
and transparency could lead to unintended crises, especially since 
both countries are planning to land missions at the moon’s south 
pole. It is imperative to establish clear communication channels 
and collaborations to ensure the safety and success of these mis-
sions, and ultimately, the survival and advancement of the human 
race.MOON,  
THEN MARS 1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 823SPACE INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2052
The Moondust Mariner 
By 2050, after a series of successful missions launched from Earth, over 100 humans had established a small but 
growing settlement on the Red Planet. The feats of engineering and courage were remarkable, but the journeys were 
neither easy nor cheap—the Earth’s gravity makes escaping its grasp expensive. For every launch from Earth, the cost 
was substantial, around $320.5 million for every 100 metric tons of payload. But recent developments have presented a 
game-changing alternative: launching from the moon.
The moon has become Earth’s pitstop and preparation ground for Mars missions. Engineers, taking advantage of the 
moon’s 1/6th Earth gravity, realized that the energy required to break free from its surface was significantly less. The 
escape velocity on the moon is only about 2.38 kilometers per second, as opposed to Earth’s demanding 11.19 km/s. This 
translates to massive fuel savings. Moreover, the lack of an atmosphere on the moon eliminates aerodynamic drag, 
another fuel and cost saver.
But the real game-changer is in-situ resource utilization. Recent lunar expeditions have confirmed vast deposits of 
water ice, especially at the poles. With the establishment of lunar bases and infrastructure, this ice is now being mined 
and then split into hydrogen and oxygen—perfect rocket fuel. Launching from the moon can reduce costs to just 25% of 
what launching from the Earth would be: For the same 100 metric ton payload, the cost is now just $80.1 million. This is 
a dramatic reduction from the Earth-based price tag. When considering multiple missions over years, the savings will 
be in the billions.
Now, the Moondust Mariner is ready. Built on the moon using advanced 3D printers, and fueled by lunar resources, it is 
set to be the first craft to travel from the moon to Mars. The success of the Moondust Mariner will prove a vital point: 
While Mars might be the future of humanity, the moon is its gateway. 
824© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The quest for cosmic resources 
encompasses the discovery, 
identification, and extraction of 
energy and material resources in 
outer space. A crucial resource in 
this pursuit is water, essential not 
only for human consumption but 
also as a source of fuel to sustain 
long-term human presence in 
space.Several countries and space agencies are embarking on missions 
to find water and other valuable resources in outer space. In 2023, 
NASA launched the Psyche spacecraft toward the unique, met-
al-rich asteroid 16 Psyche, believed to be composed of up to 60% 
iron and nickel. Orbiting between Mars and Jupiter, this asteroid 
is thought to be the exposed core of a primordial planetesimal. 
By August 2029, the mission will start investigating this celestial 
body, offering insights into the early planetary building blocks.
Russia’s Luna-25 lander aimed to confirm water ice deposits in 
craters at the lunar south pole, as previously detected by NASA and 
others. The rover failed to land on the lunar surface, but India’s 
moon rover, which landed shortly after Russia’s failed attempt, de-
tected several elements including aluminum, iron, calcium, chro-
mium, titanium, manganese, oxygen, and silicon. NASA’s VIPER 
rover will also soon launch to explore the moon for ice and other 
resources. This robot, targeting a late 2024 landing, will roam the 
moon’s extreme polar regions for 100 days seeking signs of usable 
volatiles. VIPER’s findings will aid efforts to harness these resourc-
es for future human space missions. Farther afield, the United 
Arab Emirates is exploring the asteroid belt to study water-rich 
asteroids. This mission aims to visit seven asteroids, tracing the 
origin and evolution of water in these space rocks. The findings 
will clarify if asteroids could serve as resource depots for future 
deep space missions. Even farther into space, the James Webb 
Space Telescope has detected water vapor around a rocky exoplan-
et 26 light-years away from Earth. Astronomers are now trying to 
determine whether that water vapor indicates the presence of an 
atmosphere around the rocky exoplanet, a finding that could have 
significant implications for the search for habitable planets. These 
efforts are part of a broader initiative to understand the availabili-
ty and distribution of water and other resources in our universe. When Neil Armstrong set foot on the moon in 1969, it was a fleeting 
visit. Now, our eyes are set on a more permanent stay. However, 
supporting extended human presence in space requires a robust 
infrastructure. Hauling all necessary supplies from Earth is a 
costly endeavor. At present, sending a pound to orbit costs around 
$10,000. NASA aims to drastically reduce this to just tens of dollars 
within four decades, and Elon Musk’s reusable rockets have al-
ready significantly reduced the cost of sending payloads to space. 
Still, the most economical approach lies in tapping into space’s 
indigenous resources—most importantly, water. Water is essential 
for sustaining life, but it also has immense potential as a rocket 
propellant. By decomposing water into its components of hydrogen 
and oxygen, we can create fuel capable of transforming the moon 
and potentially other celestial bodies into strategic pit stops for 
space exploration. Using local resources would reduce reliance on 
costly fuel launches from Earth’s deep gravity well. Rather than 
launching deep space rockets directly from our planet, we could 
launch from the moon using lunar-sourced propellant. The moon’s 
lower gravity allows for less propellant to escape the gravitation-
al forces. Ultimately, our pursuit of water and space resources 
transcends economic or scientific interest; it’s about sculpting a 
sustainable path for humanity’s cosmic journey.THE SEARCH 
FOR COSMIC 
RESOURCES1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 825SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Astrophysicists are working to 
create a map of the universe that 
helps us better understand space 
and time. This effort is dedicated 
to uncovering the mysteries 
of our universe’s formation, its 
components including the elusive 
dark matter, while ultimately 
enhancing our knowledge of the 
cosmos.Astrophysicists developed the most detailed map to date of the 
universe’s early and middle years using the Atacama Cosmology 
Telescope. Critically, it shows how light dating back to the Big 
Bang has been distorted, which appears to affirm the standard 
model of the universe’s development and Einstein’s theory of 
relativity. 
While we are substantiating our understanding of one aspect of 
space, emerging evidence is prompting a reevaluation of other 
prevailing theories. In its first few months of operation, the James 
Webb Space Telescope found six galaxies formed within the first 
700 million years of the universe that seem to be up to 100 times 
larger than standard theories predict. This challenges our under-
standing of the early universe: the mass of the stars in these gal-
axies exceeds the total mass available in the universe at that time. 
The European Space Agency has also developed its own special-
ized universe cartographer—the Euclid satellite. Launched in 
July 2023, Euclid will observe how dark matter and dark energy 
have evolved over time, in an effort to reveal more about their 
nature and role in our universe. Groundbreaking strides are also 
being made in gravitational wave detection. The North American 
Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves recently detected 
low-frequency gravitational waves, marking a historic break-
through after 15 years of searching. This discovery is significant 
because it opens up a new low-frequency window on the grav-
itational universe, enabling us to study how galaxies and their 
central black holes merge and grow over time.The mapping of the universe is of profound importance for several 
reasons, both scientific and philosophical. First, it challenges 
existing theories. The discovery of the six galaxies that seem too 
massive for their age forces scientists to rethink and potentially 
revise our understanding of the early universe, the formation of 
galaxies, and the distribution of matter. Second, universe mapping 
is crucial for understanding dark matter and dark energy, which 
make up about 95% of the universe. Understanding their proper-
ties and behavior will lead to a comprehensive understanding of 
the universe.
Beyond this, however, mapping the cosmos also has profound 
philosophical implications. It gives humanity a sense of perspec-
tive and scale, both literally and philosophically. The Copernican 
Revolution, which replaced the geocentric model with a heliocen-
tric one, challenged our fundamental understanding of human 
significance in the universe and major world religions. Galileo’s ob-
servations were considered dangerous to the Catholic Church, as 
the observations undermined its authority. New discoveries could 
similarly challenge modern fundamental beliefs, and we should be 
prepared for that. UNIVERSE  
MAPPING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 826SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
The next time we land on the 
moon, we plan to stay long term. A 
permanent human presence off-
planet requires the construction 
of space habitats to protect us 
from the harsh conditions of 
space. Plans are underway to use 
local resources. As we set our sights on establishing a sustained human presence 
on the moon and Mars, researchers are exploring various methods 
to construct habitats using local resources. In 2023, NASA fund-
ed multiple projects to help astronauts “live off the land” on the 
moon. One project plans to use lunar regolith to 3D print struc-
tures, landing pads, and roads. Another groundbreaking proposal 
introduces mycelium—derived from fungus—as a construction 
material. Mycelium can self-replicate and repair, making exten-
sions and repairs easy. Mycelium also excels as an insulator, fire 
retardant, and is toxin-free. It even rivals the compression strength 
of lumber and the flexural strength of reinforced concrete. Sep-
arately, Chinese scientists have identified glass fibers in lunar 
regolith as potential building materials. 
Instead of building on the surface, some researchers are looking 
into underground dwellings on Mars. One team has created robots 
that can autonomously explore caves and lava tubes as possible 
habitat sites. Using the planet’s natural features could require 
fewer resources while still providing protection from the harsh cli-
mate. Meanwhile, NASA’s latest Mars habitat competition crowned 
a design featuring a massive metal dome enclosing a 3D printer. 
This design produces hexagonal habitats using Martian-concrete, 
engineered for durability and radiation safety. Notably, key ele-
ments, like the dome and windows, will still need to be transport-
ed from Earth.Expanding human presence to the moon and Mars isn’t merely 
about planting flags; it’s about ensuring long-term survival in 
alien environments. The moon experiences dramatic temperature 
swings, and its thin atmosphere provides no protection from the 
harmful solar radiation or micrometeorite impacts. Mars, while 
having a thicker atmosphere than the moon, exposes inhabitants 
to intense radiation, both from the sun and cosmic rays, and 
experiences frequent dust storms. Additionally, Mars’ atmosphere, 
composed mainly of carbon dioxide, means habitats not only need 
to be airtight but also equipped with robust life support systems 
to provide breathable air.
Building these infrastructures requires a complex supply chain 
that can stimulate industries both on Earth and, eventually, ex-
traterrestrial environments. The demand for advanced materials 
and technologies will grow. Companies in radiation shielding, life 
support systems, or innovative building will tap into this expand-
ing market. These habitats demand specialized tools, opening 
avenues for precision engineering and robotics. As bases expand, 
there’s a push for self-sufficiency and local resource utilization. 
This could birth a new space-mining industry. Established habi-
tats might also serve as commercial hubs or research outposts. 
Private entities might lease space or resources, turning these out-
posts into economic zones, akin to free trade zones on Earth.SPACE  
HABITATS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 827SPACE INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2047
The Martens’ Month on the Moon 
The Martens are thrilled to plan their summer vacation: a month-long stay at the Lunar Resort. After last year’s 
tropical getaway to the Bahamas, they are ready for an out-of-this-world adventure. To plan for the big trip, the 
family scheduled appointments for the required lunar shots—specialized injections to temporarily activate certain 
genes to help their bodies adapt to the space environment. One set of genes will boost the body’s radiation resis-
tance, providing protection from exposure to cosmic rays and solar flares. Another set of genes will make it easier 
for the inner ear to acclimate to zero-gravity conditions, minimizing dizziness and motion sickness. The Martens 
don’t mind the quick prick of the injections, knowing the lunar genes will optimize their bodies for exploring the 
moon. Upon their return, the Martens will schedule a visit to receive shots to turn off the temporarily-activated 
genes, allowing their bodies to readjust to Earth’s gravity and radiation levels.
Keith Martens, the dad, is a major history buff. Keith is especially excited that the resort is situated right next to 
the historic 1969 moon landing site. This was no coincidence—it’s strategically located to attract more tourists. 
Tourism like this makes a long-term human presence on the moon financially viable. The mom, Sandy, is most 
looking forward to the resort’s lunar obstacle courses, which she hopes will rival her favorite “Tough Mudder” 
competitions on Earth. The Marten kids are equally excited, dreaming of bouncing across the lunar landscape and 
stargazing from the surface of another celestial body. 
After a month of fun and fascinating science, they will return to Earth with amazing memories. But for now, the 
genetic modifications they’re about to undergo will ensure their health and safety in the harsh extraterrestrial 
environment.
828© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Simulated space environments 
are artificially created settings 
on Earth that replicate the 
conditions of space, including 
Mars and the moon. The 
environments are used for training 
astronauts and studying possible 
biological and psychological 
adaptations to space life. The use 
of virtual reality and 3D printing 
has enabled more realistic 
simulations.In June 2023, four scientists embarked on a year-long Mars simu-
lation at the Johnson Space Center in Texas. The 1,700-square-foot, 
3D printed habitat will expose the crew to Mars-like conditions, 
where they will conduct experiments, grow food, exercise, and un-
dergo regular testing to provide insights for future Mars missions. 
The simulation, called the CHAPEA Mission, will also assess the 
psychological effects of isolation, resource limitations, and com-
munication delays with Mission Control. 
China has also developed a simulated environment for moon and 
Mars mission preparation. A 40-meter-high microgravity tower in 
Beijing simulates weightlessness experienced on these celestial 
bodies, providing a cost-effective solution for experiments without 
the expense of space travel. Researchers will use a linear motor 
to move objects vertically, approximating four seconds of weight-
lessness, a more economical approach than launching experi-
ments into orbit.
Virtual reality is also helping us prepare for lunar and planetary 
surface exploration missions. MIT’s RESOURCE project is testing a 
VR platform displayed on the Oculus Quest 2, designed for geologi-
cal analysis in lunar and planetary rover exploration missions. The 
platform integrates environmental data, including temperature, 
luminosity, and humidity, along with imagery from a commercial 
lidar camera and RGB imagery. Simulated environments like the Mars replica at the Johnson 
Space Center can prepare astronauts for the psychological chal-
lenges they will face during extended space missions. The stress-
ful circumstances of spaceflight, including confinement within a 
small space and the physiological effects of living in microgravity, 
can significantly impact an astronaut’s health. NASA hopes that 
the CHAPEA mission will provide lessons for future astronauts 
bound for Mars, such as how to collaborate under pressure and 
deal with homesickness. Kelly Haston, the mission’s biomedical 
researcher and commander, noted the importance of completing 
the mission without attrition. Though the crew can leave the sim-
ulation, Mars has no exit sign, making it essential to understand 
and address the psychological challenges in advance. Craig Haney, 
a University of California, Santa Cruz psychologist who research-
es solitary confinement, highlighted the importance of studying 
social isolation as it is a dangerous psychological toxin, with 
debilitating and sometimes permanent effects emerging in just a 
couple of weeks.
VR also plays a vital role in preparing for space missions and 
studying extraterrestrial surfaces. It provides a low-cost, immer-
sive environment for studying not only extraterrestrial surfaces 
but also remote or environmentally sensitive Earth locations. This 
approach enables researchers and astronauts to explore and un-
derstand various terrains and environments without the need for 
physical presence in space.SIMULATED SPACE 
ENVIRONMENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 829SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Surviving space’s harsh 
conditions requires more than 
physical structures shielding 
against radiation and other 
adversities. To truly thrive, 
researchers are considering 
biological engineering, reshaping 
our microbiome and harnessing 
gene editing to engineer the ideal 
astronaut for long-term, deep 
space exploration.Astronauts face significant physical changes in space, with the 
return to Earth posing even greater challenges. In a landmark twin 
study involving Scott Kelly, who spent nearly a year in space, and 
his identical twin, Mark, who stayed on Earth, researchers found 
temporary changes in telomere length, gene expression, cognitive 
performance, and eye health. Although most reverted to normal 
upon Scott’s return to Earth, some genes exhibited long-term 
changes, highlighting the need for further research and counter-
measures to mitigate the health risks of extended space travel. 
Researchers, such as Dr. Chris Mason from Cornell Weil, are 
working to enhance the human body’s resilience against space 
radiation by activating DNA repair genes and temporarily modi-
fying gene functions. A key focus of Mason’s work involves using 
CRISPR technology to selectively activate genes necessary for 
space, thereby altering the plasticity of specific targets without 
completely modifying the genome. Mason’s lab at Cornell has en-
gineered chimeric cells combining human and tardigrade genes, 
the latter being organisms capable of withstanding the vacuum 
of space. These hybrid cells can trigger tardigrade genes when 
exposed to radiation, a breakthrough aimed at bolstering human 
cell resistance to space radiation. Preliminary results indicated an 
80% reduction in DNA damage when subjected to X-rays.
The research underscores a pivotal moment in human history 
when our evolutionary trajectory is no longer solely dictated by 
natural selection but can be intentionally directed to prepare us 
for challenges beyond our planet, potentially unlocking a new era 
of human existence in space. The journey to becoming a multi-planetary species isn’t plan B for 
a dying Earth—it’s a recognition of the inevitable: No matter how 
diligently we care for our planet, the sun will eventually consume it. 
Humanity therefore will face a choice: migrate or perish. 
To avoid the extinction of our species, we must find and colonize 
a new habitable planet, potentially in a different solar system. How-
ever, our current biological limitations mean that the human body 
is ill-equipped for the journey. Presently, gene-editing technology is 
permanent and irreversible, which has far-reaching implications, 
particularly when it comes to germline gene editing (GGE). The pri-
mary ethical challenge with GGE is that genetic changes applied to 
the germline are inherited by subsequent generations—and there 
is significant debate about the ethics of modifying future children 
on Earth to participate in space missions.1 
This is why researchers are not only identifying genes that could 
make us better suited for space but also figuring out how to make 
these changes temporary, minimizing discomfort or long-term 
consequences when we return to our home planet. Moreover, it 
may be more pragmatic and cost-effective to adapt ourselves rath-
er than undertake large-scale engineering projects for fortification. 
For example, instead of engineering our environments to block 
radiation, perhaps we can program our bodies to resist radiation 
damage.
1. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11569-023-00438-1 BIOLOGICAL 
ADAPTATIONS FOR 
SPACE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 830SPACE INDUSTRYWHY IT MATTERS
Government efforts to understand 
unidentified aerial phenomena 
(UAP) are gaining momentum. 
Congressional hearings and the 
establishment of formal offices 
represent an initial step toward 
greater transparency and public 
disclosure on UAPs and also a 
first step in destigmatizing UAP 
reporting.In 2022, NASA started studying unexplained sightings called 
“anomalous phenomena.” After reviewing about 800 cases by May 
2023, the team found no clear proof of alien activity. However, they 
said it was impossible to draw firm conclusions due to limited 
data. Shortly later, three whistleblowers, retired military veterans, 
testified at a House hearing about the UAPs. They warned that the 
sightings pose a threat to national security and argued the gov-
ernment has been too secretive about them. 
Lawmakers who pushed for the hearing called for the govern-
ment to be more forthcoming about the unidentified anomalous 
phenomena. In this spirit, the Pentagon’s UFO investigative office 
launched a website to provide public access to declassified infor-
mation on reported sightings. Managed by the All-domain Anom-
aly Resolution Office, this initiative focuses on analyzing what the 
government labels as unidentified anomalous or aerial phenome-
na. The Department of Defense describes the website as a central 
repository for publicly approved UAP photos and videos. It will 
soon facilitate US government and military personnel in reporting 
objects that infringe US airspace or demonstrate advanced flight 
capabilities believed to surpass current human technology.“Two possibilities exist: either we are alone in the 
universe or we are not. Both are equally terrifying.”  
— Arthur C. Clarke 
For years, discussions around UAPs teetered on the fringes of 
mainstream discourse, often dismissed as conspiratorial. Now, 
discussions about UAPs have gained legitimacy via congressional 
hearings, credible witness testimonies, and the creation of official 
government offices to investigate them. The growing legitimacy 
of the UAP discussion is fascinating in and of itself, regardless of 
what the objects prove to be, because it demonstrates how rapidly 
a topic can transition from taboo to accepted in the mainstream. 
The legitimization itself warrants study for what it says about the 
dynamics of idea propagation and normalization.
The testimonies from retired military personnel point to UAPs 
being more than just an odd phenomenon—they represent a real 
national security threat. The unknown nature of these sightings 
makes it difficult for the military to discern friend from foe, an age-
old defense challenge. The materials science behind these crafts 
surpasses our known capabilities, implying either a tremendous 
covert leap in human technology or an extraterrestrial source.
As these conversations pivot from tabloid tales to the halls of 
government, the necessity for transparency becomes paramount. 
The Pentagon’s steps to declassify and centralize UAP information 
signal progress, but the journey to understanding this profound 
enigma has just begun.OFFICIAL 
INVESTIGATIONS  
OF UAPS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 831SPACE INDUSTRYAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
832© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRY833© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SAM JORDAN  
Manager 
Sam Jordan is a Manager at Future Today Institute. She leads our Advanced Comput -
ing practice area, which includes technology, artificial intelligence, virtual realities, 
networking, telecommunications, and space. She is a distinguished practice area 
lead, where she enables organizations to navigate through uncertainty with inno-
vative strategies. With a proven track record across various sectors, Sam’s visionary 
leadership has driven growth and resilience for Future Today Institute’s global clients and partners.
Before joining FTI, Sam was the CEO and co-founder of TrovBase, a secure data discovery and analysis-sharing plat -
form. Sam grew the company from idea to launch and executed the company’s transition from scientific replication to 
its current focus. In parallel, Sam engaged with the open science community, advocating for better data management 
practices to address challenges in scientific replication. Previously, she worked for IBM, where she helped large enter -
prises in the retail and distribution sector modernize their IT stack. Her expertise centered around mainframes, assisting 
with the integration of new software and modern methodologies to legacy systems.
Sam is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She holds a BS in Economics 
and Data Analysis from George Mason University and an MBA from New York University’s Stern School of Business.Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editors 
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSSPACE
 INDUSTRYSELECTED  
SOURCES
834© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SPACE INDUSTRY835© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“4 out 4,000 Selected to Live in 
Mars-like Simulation at John-
son Space Center for 1 Year.” 
ABC13 Houston, June 25, 2023. 
https://abc13.com/nasa-cha-
pea-mars-simulation-at-john-
son-space-center-trav-
el/13426531.
“Asteroid Mining Corporation 
Announces US Subsidiary and 
Opens Series A Round.” Yahoo Fi-
nance, February 5, 2023. https://
finance.yahoo.com/news/as-
teroid-mining-corporation-an-
nounces-us-170000283.html.
“Astronaut Twins Study Yields 
New Insights, Algorithms, and 
Portable DNA Sequencing Tools.” 
WCM Newsroom. https://news.
weill.cornell.edu/news/2019/04/
astronaut-twins-study-yields-
new-insights-algorithms-and-
portable-dna-sequencing-tools. 
Ben-Itzhak, Svetla. “Space 
Blocs: The Future of Interna-
tional Cooperation in Space 
Is Splitting Along Lines of 
Power on Earth.” Space.com, 
July 4, 2023., www.space.com/future-of-international-cooper-
ation-in-space-split-along-pow-
er-on-Earth.
Berriault, Lea. “China, Latin 
America and the New Space 
Race.” GIS Reports, July 4, 2023. 
www.gisreportsonline.com/r/
china-space-latin.
Blue Origin. “Blue Alchemist 
Technology Powers Our Lunar 
Future.” www.blueorigin.com/
news/blue-alchemist-pow-
ers-our-lunar-future. 
“Calls for a Treaty to Tackle 
Space Pollution in Earth’s Orbit.” 
https://www.nhm.ac.uk/discov-
er/news/2023/march/calls-for-
treaty-tackle-space-pollution-
earths-orbit.html. 
“Capturing the Moon: Assess-
ing Virtual Reality for Remote 
Lunar Geological Fieldwork.” MIT 
Media Lab. www.media.mit.edu/
projects/capturing-the-moon/
overview. 
Cascias, Antonio. “Space Indus-
try: Africa Is Ready for Liftoff.” 
DW, April 20, 2023. www.dw.com/en/space-in-
dustry-africa-launch-
es-new-space-agen-
cy/a-65373644.
“Christopher E. Mason - Prepar-
ing Humans for Space - Fron-
tiers Forum 2019.” Directed by 
Frontiers, 2019. YouTube, www.
youtube.com/watch?v=uV -
rOu2UgLVM.
Data, Active Satellite Orbit. 
“Active Satellite TLE Data and 
Information.” Orbit.Ing-Now.Com, 
https://orbit.ing-now.com. 
David, Leonard. “How Will Space 
Tourism Be Impacted by the 
Titan Submersible Tragedy?” 
Space.com, July 28, 2023. www.
space.com/spaceflight-ti-
tan-submersible-tragedy-im-
pacts.
Dinner, Josh. “Most Americans 
Expect Routine Space Tourism 
by 2073, but Few Would Actually 
Try It: Report.” Space.com, July 
20, 2023. www.space.com/amer-
icans-view-spaceflight-next-50-
years-pew-study.Donaldson, Abbey. “NASA Part-
ners with American Companies 
on Key Moon, Exploration Tech.” 
NASA, July 25, 2023. www.nasa.
gov/press-release/nasa-part-
ners-with-american-compa-
nies-on-key-moon-explora-
tion-tech.
“ELSA-M—Astroscale, Secur-
ing Space Sustainability.” 
Astroscale, https://astroscale.
com/elsa-m. 
Erwin, Sandra. “Space Force 
Official: Lack of Communication 
with China Increases Risk of 
Mishaps in Orbit.” SpaceNews, 
May 17, 2023. https://spacenews.
com/space-force-official-lack-
of-communication-with-china-
increases-risk-of-mishaps-in-
orbit.
Erwin, Sandra. “U.S. Declares 
Ban on Anti-Satellite Missile 
Tests, Calls for Other Nations to 
Join.” SpaceNews, April 19, 2022. 
https://spacenews.com/u-s-
declares-ban-on-anti-satellite-
missile-tests-calls-for-other-na-
tions-to-join.ESA Highlights in 2023. www.esa.
int/Newsroom/Press_Releases/
ESA_highlights_in_2023. 
“ESA Moves Ahead with In-Orbit 
Servicing Missions.” https://
www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/
Preparing_for_the_Future/Dis-
covery_and_Preparation/ESA_
moves_ahead_with_In-Orbit_
Servicing_missions2. 
European Space Agency. “Juice.” 
www.esa.int/Science_Explora-
tion/Space_Science/Juice. 
“EV9.” https://www.kia.com/
us/en/concept-vehicles/ev9. 
Accessed 11 October 2023.
Faboade, Deborah. “Russia Ex-
tends Invitations to Algeria and 
Egypt to Foster Space Collabo-
ration.” Space in Africa, July 13, 
2023. https://africanews.space/
russia-extends-invitations-to-al-
geria-and-egypt-to-fos-
ter-space-collaboration.
Faleti, Joshua. “New Zealand 
Launches National Space Policy.” 
SpaceWatch.Global, May 31, 2023.  https://spacewatch.glob-
al/2023/05/new-zea-
land-launches-nation-
al-space-policy.
Foust, Jeff. “Russia Commits to 
ISS Extension to 2028.” Space-
News, April 27, 2023. https://
spacenews.com/russia-com-
mits-to-iss-extension-to-2028.
Gohardani, Amir S., et al. “Green 
Space Propulsion: Opportunities 
and Prospects.” Progress in Aero-
space Sciences, vol. 71, Novem-
ber 2014, pp. 128–49. Science-
Direct. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
paerosci.2014.08.001.
IEEE Spectrum. “MIT Unveils 
a Megawatt Motor for Electric 
Aircraft.” https://spectrum.ieee.
org/electric-airplane. 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. “JPL’s 
Snake-Like EELS Slithers Into 
New Robotics Terrain,” May 8, 
2023. www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/
jpls-snake-like-eels-slithers-in-
to-new-robotics-terrain. SELECTED SOURCESSPACE INDUSTRY836© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Lea, Robert Lea. “The Universe 
Is Humming with Gravitation-
al Waves. Here’s Why Scien-
tists Are so Excited about the 
Discovery.” Space.com, July 
3, 2023. www.space.com/
gravitational-waves-astrono-
mers-why-so-excited.
Lesiv, Anna-Sofia. “The Satellite 
Renaissance,” June 12, 2023, 
https://every.to/p/the-satel-
lite-renaissance.
Mason, Christopher E. “To Mars 
and Beyond: Engineering Life as 
a Moral Duty.” GEN Biotechnol-
ogy, vol. 2, no. 2, April 2023, pp. 
103–05. liebertpub.com (Atypon), 
https://doi.org/10.1089/gen-
bio.2023.29094.cma.
McEntush, Ryan. “Space Launch: 
Who, What, and Where We’re 
Going.” Andreessen Horowitz, 
April 13, 2023. https://a16z.com/
space-launch-who-what-and-
where-were-going.“Mega-Constellations in Space: 
Revolutionising the Satellite 
Industry.” SecureCommuni-
cations. https://securecom-
munications.airbus.com/en/
meet-the-experts/mega-constel-
lations-in-space-revolutionis-
ing-satellite-industry. 
“Microgravity Extrusion.” MIT 
Media Lab. www.media.mit.edu/
projects/microgravity-hybrid-ex-
trusion/overview. 
“Microsoft Azure Kinect for a 
Lunar Environment.” MIT Me-
dia Lab. www.media.mit.edu/
projects/microsoft-azure-ki-
nect-for-a-lunar-environment/
overview. 
NASA. “13.0 Deorbit Systems.” 
www.nasa.gov/smallsat-insti-
tute/sst-soa/deorbit-systems. 
NASA. “Myco-Architecture off 
Planet: Growing Surface Struc-
tures at Destination.” March 30, 
2018. www.nasa.gov/general/my-
co-architecture-off-planet-grow-
ing-surface-structures-at-des-
tination.NASA. “NASA Partners with Amer-
ican Companies on Key Moon, 
Exploration Tech.” www.nasa.
gov/news-release/nasa-part-
ners-with-american-compa-
nies-on-key-moon-explora-
tion-tech/. 
“NASA’s Webb Reveals an 
Exoplanet Atmosphere as 
Never Seen Before.” NASA, 
November 22, 2022. www.nasa.
gov/universe/nasas-webb-re-
veals-an-exoplanet-atmo-
sphere-as-never-seen-before.
O’Callaghan, Jonathan. “Europe’s 
Juice Mission Will Launch to 
Jupiter and Its Moons: How to 
Watch.” The New York Times, 
April 13, 2023. www.nytimes.
com/2023/04/13/science/juice-
jupiter-launch-esa.html.
“Orbital Assembly—Pioneer 
Station.” Orbital Assembly Corp. 
https://abovespace.com/pio-
neer. Patton, Tom. “On-Orbit Satellite 
Servicing Becoming a Reality.” 
The Journal of Space Com-
merce, June 8, 2023. https://
exterrajsc.com/on-orbit-satel-
lite-servicing-becoming-a-reali-
ty/2023/06/08/.
“Polaris Dawn.” Polaris Program. 
https://polarisprogram.com/
dawn. 
Pultarova, Tereza. “Europe’s Jupi-
ter Icy Moons Explorer Is Unlikely 
to Find Life. Here’s Why.” Space.
com, April 11, 2023. www.space.
com/europe-juice-mission-life-
jupiter-moons.
Rainbow, Jason. “British Startup 
Powers up Sensor for Monitoring 
Tiny Orbital Debris.” SpaceNews, 
June 27, 2023. https://space-
news.com/british-startup-pow-
ers-up-sensor-for-monitoring-ti-
ny-orbital-debris.“Redwire Subsidiary Wins 
Contract with European Space 
Agency to Develop 3D-BioSys-
tem to Advance Tissue Man-
ufacturing Capabilities for 
Long-Duration Spaceflight and 
Improving Life on Earth.” May 9, 
2023. www.businesswire.com/
news/home/20230509005682/
en/Redwire-Subsidi-
ary-Wins-Contract-with-Eu-
ropean-Space-Agency-to-De-
velop-3D-BioSystem-to-Ad-
vance-Tissue-Manufactur-
ing-Capabilities-for-Long-Dura-
tion-Spaceflight-and-Improving-
Life-on-Earth.
“Redwire Wins NASA Contract 
to Advance New In-Space 
Manufacturing Capability 
for Journeys to Moon, Mars 
and Beyond.” Redwire Space, 
March 23, 2023, https://red-
wirespace.com/newsroom/
redwire-wins-nasa-contract-to-
advance-new-in-space-manu-
facturing-capability-for-jour-
neys-to-moon-mars-and-beyond.“Researchers at Łukasiewicz—
ILOT Develop New Rocket Fuel.” 
Science in Poland, https://
scienceinpoland.pl/en/news/
news%2C97724%2Cresearch-
ers-lukasiewicz-ilot-devel-
op-new-rocket-fuel.html. 
“Researchers Use AI to Discov-
er New Planet Outside Solar 
System.” ScienceDaily. www.
sciencedaily.com/releas-
es/2023/04/230424133426.htm. 
Revfine.com. “Orion Span: Infor-
mation About Orion Span Space 
Hotel.” Revfine.com, January 
14, 2022. www.revfine.com/ori-
on-span.
Ritter, Scott. “Geopolitics’ New 
Frontier in Space.” Energy 
Intelligence, January 23, 2023. 
www.energyintel.com/00000185-
de20-dba7-a19f-fe6340480001.
“Russian Anti-Satellite Missile 
Test Was the First of Its Kind” 
Space. www.space.com/russia-
anti-satellite-missile-test-first-
of-its-kind. SELECTED SOURCESSPACE INDUSTRY837© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Satellite Constellation Oper-
ations. Sidus Space.” https://
sidusspace.com/satellite-con-
stellation-operations. Sauers, 
Elisha. “India’s Moon Lander 
Makes History as First to Reach 
Coveted South Pole.” Mashable, 
August 23, 2023. https://mash-
able.com/article/chandrayaan-
3-india-moon-landing.
Seedhouse, Erik. “The Growing 
Chinese Space Threat.” Space-
News, February 21, 2023. https://
spacenews.com/the-growing-
chinese-space-threat.
Sheetz, Michael. “Investing in 
Space: Intelsat Signs up for 
Northrop Grumman Satellite 
Servicing.” CNBC, April 13, 2023. 
www.cnbc.com/2023/04/13/in-
vesting-in-space-intelsat-signs-
up-for-northrop-grumman-sat-
ellite-servicing.html.
SINTRA. www.iarpa.gov/re-
search-programs/sintra. 
“SINTRA: A Bold New Space De-
bris Enterprise.” www.iarpa.gov/
newsroom/article/sintra-a-bold-
new-space-debris-enterprise. Smith, Alex. “BMW Launches New 
ICON Electric Boat at Cannes Film 
Festival.” Motor Boat & Yachting, 
May 19, 2023. www.mby.com/
news/bmw-launches-new-icon-
electric-boat-126324.
Sorenson, Aaron. “Saudi Arabia 
Will Make History With Ax-2 
Mission.” Payload, May 19, 2023. 
https://payloadspace.com/saudi-
arabia-will-make-history-with-ax-
2-mission.
Sorenson, Aaron. “South Korea’s 
Nuri Rocket Lifts Off with Com-
mercial Payload. Payload, May 25, 
2023. https://payloadspace.com/
south-koreas-commercial-space-
sector-lifts-off. 
“Space Florida: $5.9 Billion 
Economic Impact on Florida’s 
Economy.” Space Florida. www.
spaceflorida.gov/news/space-flor-
ida-5-9-billion-economic-im-
pact-on-floridas-economy. 
“Space Station Studies Help Mon-
itor Climate Change.” NASA. www.
nasa.gov/mission_pages/sta-
tion/research/news/Space_Sta-
tion_Monitors_Climate_Change. “Stochastic Self-Assembly 
via Magnetically Programmed 
Materials.” MIT Media Lab. www.
media.mit.edu/projects/sto-
chastic-self-assembly-via-mag-
netically-programmed-materi-
als/overview. 
Szocik, Konrad. “The Ethical 
Status of Germline Gene Editing 
in Future Space Missions: The 
Special Case of Positive Selec-
tion on Earth for Future Space 
Missions.” NanoEthics, vol. 17, no. 
1, March 2023, p. 3. Springer Link. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11569-
023-00438-1.
“TESSERAE + Ax-1 Mission.” Au-
relia Institute. www.aureliainsti-
tute.org/posts/tesserae-ax1. 
“TESSERAE: Self Assembling 
Space Architecture.” Aurelia 
Institute. www.aureliainstitute.
org/tesserae. 
“The Chainsmokers Are Set to 
Perform a Concert in the Edge 
of Space.” The Independent, July 
20, 2022.  www.independent.co.uk/arts-en-
tertainment/music/news/the-
chainsmokers-concert-edge-of-
space-b2127253.html.
“Travel to Space.” Space Per-
spective, 26 Apr. 2023, https://
spaceperspective.com.
“UN Approves Resolution Not to 
Conduct Destructive ASAT Tests.” 
https://spacepolicyonline.com/
news/u-n-approves-resolution-
not-to-conduct-destructive-
asat-tests. 
United Nations Office for Outer 
Space Affairs. “Benefits of Space: 
Communication.” www.unoosa.
org/oosa/en/benefits-of-space/
communication.html. 
Wall, Mike. “How Would We 
Decode a Message from ET? New 
Project Will Give Us a Trial Run.” 
Space.com, May 22, 2023. www.
space.com/seti-decode-mes-
sage-aliens-practice-sign-in-
space.Wall, Mike. “NASA Establishes 
‘Moon to Mars’ Office to Help 
Get Astronauts to Red Planet.” 
Space.com, March 30, 2023. 
www.space.com/nasa-moon-to-
mars-office-artemis.
“Voyager Space and Airbus 
Announce Joint Venture to Build 
and Operate Starlab.” Airbus, 
August 1, 2023. www.airbus.com/
en/newsroom/press-releas-
es/2023-08-voyager-space-and-
airbus-announce-joint-venture-
to-build-and.
Wall, Mike. “Space Perspective 
Wants to Take Tourists on Bal-
loon Rides to the Stratosphere.” 
Space.com, June 18, 2020. www.
space.com/space-perspec-
tive-stratosphere-balloon-tour-
ism-flights.html.
Weightman, Louise. “ClearSpace 
to Launch the First Active Debris 
Removal Mission with Ariane-
space.” SpaceWatch.Global, May 
10, 2023. https://spacewatch.
global/2023/05/clearspace-to-
launch-the-first-active-debris-
removal-mission-with-ariane-
space.Werner, Debra. “LeoLabs High-
lights On-Orbit Maneuvers.” Spa-
ceNews, April 21, 2023. https://
spacenews.com/leolabs-high-
lights-on-orbit-maneuvers.
Williams, Matt, and Universe To-
day. “Glass Fibers in Lunar Rego-
lith Could Help Build Structures 
on the Moon.” https://phys.org/
news/2023-05-glass-fibers-lu-
nar-regolith-moon.html. 
Ziegler, David. “The Satellite 
Boom Is Far from Over.” Space-
News, May 9, 2023. https://spa-
cenews.com/the-satellite-boom-
is-far-from-over.
Zisk, Rachael. “Exploring the 
Cosmos in 2023.” Payload, 
December 21, 2023. payload-
space.com/exploring-the-cos-
mos-in-2023/.
Zisk, Rachael. “IARPA Launches 
Space Debris Tracking Initia-
tive.” Payload. August 3, 2023, 
https://payloadspace.com/
iarpa-launches-space-de-
bris-tracking-initiative.SELECTED SOURCESSPACE INDUSTRYHOSPITALITY • RESTAURANTS2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION840© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSHOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
841  T op Headlines
842 State of Play
844 Key Events
845 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
846 Why Hospitality & 
Restaurants Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
847  Opportunities and Threats
848 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
849  Central Themes
851 Ones T o Watch
852 Important T erms
853 Enhanced Hospitality 
Experiences
854 Interactive AI
855 Smart Rooms
856 Digital Wellness Treatments
857 Smart Resource Management
858 Nomadic and Modular Hotels875 Scenario: Your Chicken Soup 
for the Cold 
876 Authors 
878 Selected Sources859 Scenario: Nomad Stays 
860 Frictionless Stays
861 Hyper-Personalization
862 Pre-Experiencing Through 
Virtual Tourism
863 Business Automation
864 Scenario: The Mobile Passport 
Concierge 
865 Augmented Restaurants and 
Dining
866 Contactless Payments
867 Autonomous Restaurants
868 Everywhere Ordering and 
Anywhere Delivery
869 Monitoring Food Waste  
& Impact
870 Immersive Experiences
871 Scenario: Eating Darkness 
872 Engineered Food and Meals
873 Verified Loyalty Programs
874 Curated TastingINDUSTRYMajor hotel brands are 
expanding globally with 
over 2 billion people 
expected to travel yearly 
by 2026. Restaurants 
are diversifying 
offerings by exploring 
autonomous vending 
and flexible delivery.01
02
03
04
05
841© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Continued Global Expansions
Brands from Hilton to Club Med to IHG to Four Seasons are expanding to new 
global markets like Thailand, Mexico, South Africa, and Southern Europe.
2 Billion Travelers by 2026
According to research by Amadeus, there will be almost 2 billion people 
traveling at least once a year over the next three years.
Business Travel Grows
Business travel is three times higher than in 2021, signaling a return to 
pre-pandemic levels.
Roark Capital Acquires Subway
The largest restaurant acquisition in 2023, as reported, was the planned 
acquisition of Subway by Roark Capital, with a purchase price over $9 billion .
Multi-hyphenate Retail Restaurants
Eighty-eight percent of restaurants plan to offer new products and services 
that differ from traditional food offerings to differentiate their business and 
build better client retention.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSSTATE 
OF PLAYThe hospitality industry continues to struggle with labor shortages, new 
delivery methods and modes now expected by consumers, supply chain 
shortages, and increased costs. However, this has not deterred growth 
for major hotel brands and established quick-service restaurants, with 
growth for the latter projected to be just under $20 billion in 2023. Many 
brands and operators are using a balanced approach when applying 
emerging technologies to address their challenges. While restaurants have 
been quicker to recover workers than hotels, both portions of the hospi-
tality industry find themselves looking to automate and create contact-
less and frictionless experiences that ease staffing burdens. In 2023, the 
industry is exploring virtual experiences, digital concierges, and robotic 
staff. What was once a novelty is becoming more normalized, as many 
studies report that guests and customers prefer to interact less with hu-
mans and are more willing to share their data for perks. Some of the move 
away from human services is due to continued concerns over public safe-
ty, health, and sanitization. Increases in personalization are also helping 
transform expectations for this industry, so both restaurants and hotels 
are trying to learn as much as possible about guests and diners to antic-
ipate their needs. In some instances, researchers are exploring how tech-
nology can turn such a capability into a mostly back-of-house process, 
where everything from room selection to the food delivered is pre-prepared 
based on what is known about a guest’s preferences.Digitized hyper-personalization 
with contactless experiences is 
driving frictionless engagements 
and customer satisfaction.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
842STATE 
OF PLAYLoyalty and rewards programs have renewed interest in on-site experienc-
es, and companies are shifting toward exchanging location verification for 
increased access to amenities and secret menus. With customers sharing 
more information about themselves, the demand for secure data privacy 
is rising. For customers, the collection process remains highly conten-
tious, with their decisions on whether to share data highly influenced by 
what information companies are willing to share about themselves. Rec-
ognition-based technology, such as mid-air haptic and facial recognition 
technology, has increased in both sectors, with many guests accepting it 
because it enables more self-service transactions. As Gen Zers continue to 
flex their spending power, they expect companies to provide transparency 
on their actions and commitment toward bettering the planet, the work-
force, and general equity. The global shift toward delivery and takeout has 
led restaurants to revamp their spaces for efficiency, exemplified by the 
UK’s Pret A Manger, which expanded its “Dinners by Pret” delivery service 
and redesigned select shops to accommodate the surge in off-premises 
dining demand. As we look ahead, understanding and embracing these 
trends will be pivotal for both restaurants and hotels striving to meet the 
evolving needs of travelers and diners in this transformative era.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
843844© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY
MARCH 15, 2023
China reopens to foreign tourists  
As one of the last major countries to 
re-open its borders to foreign tourists 
post-pandemic, China lifts its restrictions 
and begins issuing travel visas.  
MAY 8, 2023
Biometric access changes  
Salito, known in the hospitality 
industry for electronic locks, 
acquires a UK-based company 
innovating in facial recognition 
technology.  JUNE 26, 2023
Autonomous QSRs  
Sweetgreen announces it 
expects all of its restaurants 
to be automated in the next 
five years.SEPTEMBER 7, 2023
Electrification parking  
Hilton’s expansion of Tesla 
charging stations will make 
it the largest provider of EV 
charging stations in the 
industry.MAY 22, 2023
Wendy’s instant pickup  
Wendy’s begins testing a new 
delivery method using robots 
and underground tunnels to 
deliver food to its parking lots.SEPTEMBER, 2023
Expanding focus in India and Southeast Asia  
Global occupancy levels for hotels are up with 
revenue per available room up 17%. Occupancy 
rates in locations like Bali, Jakarta, and Seoul 
are seeing higher occupancy than 2022.HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
845© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.POTENTIAL DISRUPTIONS CONTINUE TO LOOM
While many customers need stability 
to know if they should move forward 
with taking a trip, stability is not 
assured, which is normal. However, 
new tensions are arising that could 
further disrupt the market and in-
dustry. Much of these disruptions are 
due to customers demanding more 
personalization, which creates more 
work for businesses. That’s especially 
difficult when these new technolo-
gies are increasingly vital to remain 
competitive, but the labor force lacks 
the skills needed to implement them. 
These shifts to the market also offer 
opportunities to increase services 
and provide new touch points.Labor T ensions
As technology adoption increases, service 
unions could begin to feel pressure to block 
developments they feel would replace their 
members. Examples include the outcome of 
the recent SAG-AFTRA strike.
Power Stability
With climate change continuing to disrupt 
energy infrastructure, hotels and restau-
rants will need to prioritize improvements to 
remain stable for customers. This will be a 
challenge as the construction industry is also 
dealing with a labor shortage.AI Avatars
Brand representatives can curate their 
interactions based on a consumer’s 
preferences and response to targeted media. 
Booking interactions will be more friendly as 
a result, and dining experiences feel more 
personal. These nuanced relationships will 
transcend short-term brand mascots. Delivery Everywhere 
Convenience will continue to win out. Delivery 
has returned to pre-pandemic levels, but now 
consumers expect to be able to get items 
not just at home but wherever they are at 
any given time. This will require new tracking 
methods and omnichannel delivery methods.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Dark Dining
As space becomes a premium, store 
footprints will continue to shrink, creating 
fewer positions for human workers and more 
for robots. This can increase market presence, 
but will require greater upfront investments 
and market research.T echnology Upskilling
Current hospitality education institutions 
may need to add courses on technology and 
how to use it within the industry. QSRs will 
face challenges if they depend on employees 
lacking technological skills, necessitating 
upskilling cycles to train them to use new in-
store technology.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionINDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS846© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Customer segmentation 
is time-consuming, costly, 
and often overwhelmingly 
generalizes consumers. 
Hotels’ and restaurants’ 
use of  tech-enabled 
personalization and new 
product offerings could 
disrupt other markets 
that have yet to find ways 
to curate customized 
offerings. Traditional marketing will 
slowly shift as customer 
loyalty becomes more 
attuned to interactive AI 
offerings by restaurant 
and hotel brands. It 
will also offer new 
types of cross-industry 
partnerships, as these AI 
offerings will be able to 
cross-promote for hotels, 
travel destinations, dining 
locations, and events.As many populations 
around the world 
embrace WFH, they are 
also becoming more 
mobile. This nomadic 
way of living will lead 
to lodging revenue 
growth for companies 
that can attract more 
mobile workers while 
differentiating themselves 
from their competitors.Adoption of smart 
management systems 
will continue to become 
a competitive advantage 
for those that make 
the leap first. These 
systems will allow 
hotels and restaurants 
to redefine customers’ 
expectations. They will 
also help businesses be 
ready for future energy 
and environmental 
regulations that will 
disrupt operations.This trend will redefine 
the customer journey, 
enabling new selection 
criteria and opportunities 
for engagement. It can 
also provide new insights 
into consumer behaviors, 
based on what they 
interact with and what 
upselling options are 
available, and create new 
product offerings that 
generate revenue even 
before a consumer comes 
to the physical location. New forms of loyalty 
programs that include 
verification can improve 
transparency and 
customer retention. 
They can also offer 
ways to cross-promote 
new offerings and 
test new marketing 
strategies, and can 
potentially collect more 
data to further amplify 
the personalization 
customers are requiring.T ech-Enabled 
PersonalizationInteractive AI Nomadic Living Smart Management Pre-Experiencing Verified LoyaltyWHY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANT TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Automation could create curated guest and customer experiences, reducing 
the time needed to perform tasks. It would require a heavy lift of data on 
the front-end and permissions from customers, but this could become an 
attractive selling point that continues to grow as customers interact with the 
automation platform.
Chatbots becoming virtual avatars would allow for more friendly customer 
exchanges, especially as avatars become more lifelike. Companies with 
traditional call centers could replicate  face-to-face interactions with this 
technology.
Virtual try-before-you-buy add-on purchases could increase upfront profit and 
generate new revenue streams for multi-hyphenate businesses. The same 
technology can support product development and trials to gauge consumer 
interest.
Digital means could let companies offer increased wellness offerings, both 
in the home and on site. Their entry into new markets would require relatively 
little investment compared to developing a full site location.
Transparency through verified loyalty programs can increase trust for 
customers and businesses. Customers would be confident that their rewards 
are accurate and secure, while the business gets a platform for sharing their 
latest transparency reports.Opportunities
Businesses not already addressing the lack of data consistency and the need to 
verify existing data and implement new data collection tools are lagging. Data will 
continue to become more vital and ubiquitous.
Both businesses and workers face uncertainty in the future of human talent. 
Companies need to understand their weaknesses in future talent and provide 
messaging to current and potential employees to minimize fear of future job loss.
Delivery everywhere makes it harder to manage customer expectations and 
increases competition as traditional restaurants could see a decrease in foot 
traffic. It also impacts quality control and relies heavily on third-party platforms.
Guests’ expectations for medical biome testing could lead to on-site wellness 
facilities needing to follow new medical guidelines and procedures that increase 
staffing needs and change spatial allocation and design. Their liability risk could 
rise as a result.
Fast dining could take over slower traditional dining as consumers become 
increasingly time-poor. The importance of physical place could subsequently 
decline, meaning current investments may need to be rethought and redeveloped. 
Smaller urban infill locations may become a desirable strategy.
847© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS848© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Consider investing in data 
collection and analyza-
tion partnerships if these 
tasks are not already being 
done in-house. Y ou’ll gain 
the level of granular cus-
tomer insights needed for 
making informed decisions 
about the future. It will 
also increase efficiency by 
predicting staffing changes 
will need to be made. Upskill your talent now for 
a technology coworker 
or director, and consider 
looking for on-site techni-
cians who can service new 
enabled equipment. Also 
important will be creating 
partnerships with or hiring 
companies that can imple-
ment these technologies. 
Evaluating them now will 
prepare you for investing in 
them when the time is right.Consider transforming 
loyalty programs into data 
collection tools as one way 
to obtain data from your 
customers. This can also 
begin to set future payment 
expectations as blockchain 
technology scales in the 
future, and will be seen as 
a step in data security and 
privacy by consumers.Start investigating the 
adoption of robotic equip-
ment while talent short -
ages persist so you can 
leapfrog competitors that 
have already invested and 
installed their machinery. 
Focusing on where staffing 
shortages could occur—
versus investing in every 
flashy device—will allow 
you to bolster your produc-
tion line.Since reliable delivery staff 
will become quintessential 
to the market, especially as 
delivery becomes ubiqui-
tous, look for the right third 
party that has verified the 
skills of their delivery staff. 
For those third-party ven-
dors, consider finding ways 
to partner your employees 
with the right food vendor.Prioritize site develop-
ment for dark stores and 
infill locations so that if 
there is a talent drought, 
your stores do not go dark 
in other ways. Automation 
can help create smaller 
footprints, which means 
new site considerations 
could be developed 
for target markets. This 
includes hotel brands 
wanting to create mini 
experiences to attract 
visitors.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSGetting Personalization Right
Guests expect experiences to be customized to their 
granular needs and wants. Combine this with the fact 
that companies in the hospitality industry, whether 
they are willing to admit it or not, are struggling to 
figure out how to increase their market share and cus-
tomer loyalty and retention in unique ways. And compa-
nies putting money toward personalization are finding 
there are more ways than ever to achieve these goals. 
Personalized tastes, viewing experiences, rooms, food, 
and even entire menus are all on the proverbial table. 
Machine learning offers ways for companies to jump-
start this process, but lacks tools for either collecting 
the data or translating the data they have. Food and 
menus will be the most affected by this increase in per-
sonalization, as 3D-printed and engineered foods offer 
alternatives to traditional meals and flavor profiles. Po-
tentially, multiple diners ordering the same dish from 
the same menu would have entirely different experi-
ences from one another, with their food reflecting their 
idea of just the right amount of saltiness and spice.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 849INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
Elevated Experiences
Dining is no longer just about the sense of taste; 
increasingly, people are demanding experiences that 
cater to their other four senses, too. As luxury experi-
ences become more in demand, many are gravitating 
toward more sensorial experiences to elevate their 
dining events. New forms of synthetic media, including 
avatars and digital menus, offer highly entertaining 
interactive experiences, and immersive rooms create 
a complete separation from the reality outside. These 
kinds of experiences enhance the food, and provide 
guests with a high-level expectation of their future 
visit to the physical space. They are being used to 
help combat the pickup or delivery-first mentality for 
restaurants, while serving as educational tools that 
resorts and other hotel locations that host events are 
using to stay competitive. Elevated wellness experienc-
es also are providing guests one-of-a-kind experiences, 
especially when enhanced by technology. Boutique 
brands around the world are experimenting with new 
digital treatments meant to elevate mood and detox 
the body based on on-site testing.Labor Automation 
Amid persistent labor shortages, many hospitality 
companies  are using technology to automate their 
staff functions. Use of AI is happening for dynamic 
pricing, robotic cleaning staff, and automated con-
cierge services. This automation, once regarded as 
off-putting, is now being seen as a boon to customers 
and guests. Resource management systems offer ways 
for operators to hone in on specific staff functions and 
determine when they should be carried out, as well as 
when guests will want to interact with actual humans. 
In the quick-service restaurant industry, automation 
of the back-of-house cooking functions seem to be 
steadily increasing with more niche robotic equipment 
continuing to be developed. While ghost kitchens are 
declining, this automation may be one way for them to 
move forward, especially if they use it for the delivery 
process as several prominent chains have done.Climate Impacts 
Climate change continues to impact the hospitality 
industry. Disclosures for ESG standards are shifting 
decades-old practices; if companies are transparent 
in their sustainability actions, they could acquire new 
customers, but if they lag, they could be canceled. Cli-
mate change is a driver behind how spaces are being 
designed and how they’ll function, with a changing re-
ality requiring new energy sources and water reclama-
tion equipment. The electrification of vehicles is also 
shifting needs for guest, employee, and delivery driver 
parking. EV adoption will increasingly be an important 
area to watch and consider. Lastly, food production and 
waste has become more important, especially with the 
disruption of supply chains due to extreme weather, 
which is introducing new practices for watching what 
goes on the plate and what goes in the bin.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 850INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
Less Human Contact
Hotel guests are finding more ways to avoid human 
contact. They are happy to walk into a venue and have 
a completely automated check-in process, their room 
controlled by technology, and engage with events and 
the checkout process without seeing or speaking to 
a human staff member. This comes as no surprise 
as technology becomes more pervasive in the home, 
work, and retail worlds. Guests expect to be able to use 
technology to adjust their settings and customize their 
stay. Restaurant goers are moving into this category 
as well. Ordering can be done more seamlessly at the 
table with QR codes, and servers are using technology 
to know their guests’ needs and dietary restrictions. 
This knowledge helps to streamline the overall process, 
including faster customer service and turnover. Tradi-
tional dining restaurants are not following this trend 
as much, which could create an interesting dichotomy 
and reveal whether future customers prefer slower or 
faster service. Hyper-Locality
Determining where you stay or dine is becoming more 
localized to niche locations, reflecting a significant 
shift towards hyper-locality in the hospitality industry. 
This trend is evident from the emergence of nomadic 
hotels that tailor their location and offerings based on 
the precise desires of their guests to the meticulous 
precision of last-mile delivery services, ensuring meals 
reach consumers at their exact locations. Hyper-local-
ity is not just about geographical accuracy; it’s also 
about tailoring experiences and products to meet the 
specific cultural, dietary, and experiential preferences 
of local markets and individual consumers. Combined 
with technological advances in avatars and other 
interactive experiences, those local experiences could 
also become global marketing tools. This approach will 
allow restaurants and hotels to offer highly personal-
ized experiences, fostering a deeper connection with 
their clientele.Michael Bickel, CEO at TableMation, for driv-
ing tech-driven, immersive dining.
Steven Chen, architect at Moliving, and 
Hanna Bem, COO at Moliving, for designing 
the first nomadic hotel.
Robin Simsa, CEO at Revo Foods, for enabling 
3D-printed salmon at scale.
Dr. Cindy Heo, associate professor at EHL 
Hospitality Business School, for their paper 
on the novel use of machine learning for 
dynamic pricing.
Dr. Luciano Viverit, doctor of philosophy 
at INFN Milan, and Luis Nobre Pereira, vice 
president of Research Centre at University 
of Algarve, for their paper on the novel use of 
machine learning for dynamic pricing.
Dr. Vikas Sadvilkar, CEO at AirOWater, for en-
abling the development of clean water from 
humidity in the air.
Graeme McLean, professor of marketing 
at the University of Strathclyde-Glasgow, 
and Dr. Jennifer Brannon Barhorst, asso-
ciate professor of marketing at the College 
of Charleston, for their paper on the role of 
virtual reality in hotel booking.Grzegorz Sochacki, Ph.D. student at the 
University of Cambridge’s Department of 
Engineering, for his work on a robot chef that 
learns to taste food. 
Rajat Suri, former CEO at Presto AI, for soft-
ware and system development efforts leading 
to AI-enabled drive-thrus.
Gareth Hughes, founder and CEO at Crave 
Interactive, for developing interactive tablets 
that allow guests to utilize AI in hotel rooms.
Ben Kaplan, owner of PLNT Burger, and Ken 
Sutton, CEO of Yobe, for their work on voice-or-
dering at kiosks.
Shagufa Ali and Anupama Singh, assistant 
professors at Graphic Era Hill University, for 
their patent on a method of reviewing and 
selecting hotels based on real-time hotel 
rankings. 
Chris Silcock, chief commercial officer at Hil-
ton, for working on prebooking experiences.
Ajay Pratap Singh and team, for their patent 
for IoT-based predictive hotel arrival.Chris Somogyi, Dr. Soojin Jun and Paul 
Levins, co-founders at EverCase, for their 
work in the novel use of electric and magnet-
ic fields for food storage.
Logan Kim, CEO at Nuvilab, for using AI to 
analyze food nutrition and waste.
Marc Handels, chief technology and innova-
tion officer at SALTO Systems, for the compa-
ny’s work on facial recognition technology for 
the hospitality industry.ONES TO WATCH
851© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSIMPORTANT TERMS
852Back-of-house (BOH) 
The area in a hospitality establishment for food 
preparation, storage, and staff administration, gen-
erally away from customers.
Biometric payments
Technology that uses biometric data like facial rec-
ognition, gestures, voice, or fingerprints for identifi-
cation to complete a transaction.
Dark dining
A restaurant location that is completely autono-
mous and not meant for dining in.
Digital loyalty programs
Membership or rewards programs that use digital 
technology like blockchain to track customer inter-
actions and provide membership benefits.
Environmental, social, and corporate governance 
(ESG)
 The framework and disclosure around how a com-
pany addresses these issues.
Extended reality (XR)
A technology that can augment the physical world 
through either virtual or augmented reality.Natural language processing (NLP)
AI that can understand the human language and 
respond in a human-like manner.
Quick-service restaurants (QSR)
Restaurants that prioritize fast and convenient 
service over longer-stay dine-in experiences.
Revenue per available room (RevPAR)
A key performance metric of the hospitality in-
dustry that divides the total room revenue by the 
number of available rooms and assesses a proper-
ty’s performance.
Smart management
The use of technology to automate certain parts  
of the operational management of a restaurant  
or hotel.Facial recognition technology
Technology used to authenticate  customers by 
analyzing their facial features.
Frictionless experiences
Experiences that minimize physical contact, layout 
obstacles, and seamless interactions for guests 
and customers.
Front-of-house (FOH)
The area in a hospitality establishment where inter-
actions between guests and staff occur.
Kiosks
Self-service terminals of any kind, typically used for 
ordering or obtaining information.
Mid-Air haptics
Technology that can track movement and enable 
the sense of touch without touching a physical 
object.
Modularly built
A construction technique that uses prefabricated 
components to create a space, building, or other 
structure.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS853© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENHANCED 
HOSPITALITY 
EXPERIENCESINDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
AI is being used as an end-to-end 
assistant, as well as a synthetic 
persona to engage with guests. 
Traditionally relegated to the 
back end of the experience, this is 
happening from start to finish.AI is becoming more interactive, with many hospitality 
companies using AI personalities, avatars, or interfaces to 
interact with guests. While these AI interactions started 
with chatbots  responding to online inquiries, complaints, 
or reviews, they now occur during booking, while on the ho-
tel’s premises, or post-stay. Tools like Akia use NLP to speak 
to guests in their native language and answer questions, 
while Quicktext integrates into messaging platforms to in-
teract with potential guests. In April, Breezeway announced 
the launch of its Assist AI, which helps short-term stay rent-
als automate responses to potential guests about property 
information like parking, Wi-Fi logins, and other general 
information.
A recent patent shows how AI is now moving to the front-
end experience for guests as well, through travel agencies 
that are looking to manage booking blocks of hotel rooms. 
Crave AI, from Crave Interactive in London, works as a digital 
interactive display window. Guests use it  for learning about 
and booking rooms and spa treatments, and receive voice, 
video, and image replies to their queries. At the Cosmopol-
itan in Las Vegas, the AI bot Rose touts that she can “hook 
you up” with the best the town has to offer. Rose’s informal 
discussions about her favorite things make it seem like is a 
Sin City resident.Most guests are starting to prefer less contact with human 
staff. For companies considering using AI, consistency 
will be key in implementing this technology, as well as an 
increased social awareness for how adoption affects public 
perception. Integrating AI that uses NLP will lead to better 
customer experiences while reducing time needed to reply 
to guests. These AI interactions will also provide new data, 
including detailed segmentation information that a compa-
ny can use to update guest profiles, map customer jour-
neys, and train staff. It will be important to keep online and 
onsite experiences consistent, so guests feel that they get 
to know the AI. New forms of entertainment and recognition 
will open up to increase loyalty and engagement. Traditional 
rewards programs can be cumbersome, as with many other 
processes, but this and other tasks could become how AI 
manages mundane customer interactions. If used correctly, 
the technology could also help improve training by model-
ing the best interactions as rated by guests.INTERACTIVE AI1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 854INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
In-room technology now 
allows for voice-controlled 
interactions, new VR activities, 
sleep sensing beds, and more. 
IoT sensors, control panels, and 
voice-activated automation are 
helping to create unique guest 
experiences.Voice assistants for smart hotel rooms are becoming guests’ 
preferred technology advancement, and almost half of them 
report this technology factors into their decision about where 
to stay, according to a Hotel Technology News survey. Over 
half of hotel operators already offer or plan to add voice-con-
trolled technology in their guest rooms. Control through 
tablets has also become an expectation. Hotels like CitizenM 
and Four Seasons currently offer in-room tablets that control 
the blinds, adjust the temperature and lighting, and allow for 
food ordering and information searching. 
Increasingly, hotels are integrating smart sensors into guest 
rooms for more personalized control, safety, and efficiency. 
These sensors can be integrated into the HVAC system and 
occupancy sensors to track the areas being used and ad-
just building systems accordingly. In Lake Nona, Florida, the 
Wave Hotel will use Well+tech by Wave for air sanitization 
and circadian lighting to boost a guest’s circadian rhythm. 
Well+tech is also using AI-enhanced beds to help guests get 
a better night’s sleep. Sensors by pools and bath tubs are be-
ing explored in a patent for safety in monitoring water levels 
and temperature when a person is present.
VR is also making hotel rooms smarter with projection inter-
faces for guests to interact with and change how the room 
looks. Marriott’s customers can order VR headsets to their 
room and then have customized virtual experiences. One ex-
perience is a VR Postcard, which lets them experience stories 
from travelers around the world.Guests are beginning to expect smart and enabling tech-
nology in the room, and will increasingly feel neglected and 
frustrated by older technology. As properties look to com-
pete and differentiate themselves, smart rooms offer more 
engaging stays and experiences while feeding companies 
new data streams for how their future properties should 
operate. As the data becomes increasingly important to 
guests, so should considerations around transparency for 
how it will be used. Smart rooms can also be curated based 
on a value of the brand or a location, meaning the smart 
room could interact with its own style if it were in Mexico 
versus Italy. While the implementation of this technolo-
gy can be a costly investment, a return will be realized as 
guests increasingly rely on it for elevating their stay. Hotels 
can also craft a safety campaign around these improve-
ments, as they offer more curated control over the systems 
and tools used to clean rooms. However, cumbersome inter -
actions will need to be smoothed out prior to launch, or the 
technology will be seen as a burden rather than an exciting 
offering. This is especially pressing for technologies that 
will be augmenting traditional human-staffed roles.SMART ROOMS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 855INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Virtual wellness experiences, 
detox technology, and exercise 
technology are being integrated 
into traditional spa and wellness 
centers.Physical wellness has been a mainstay of offerings from the 
hotel industry, and Peloton and other interactive technology 
exercise equipment have already become integrated into 
these offerings. Physical and mental wellness experienc-
es are also now becoming more technologically enabled. 
Sensei Lāna’i, A Four Seasons Resort in Hawaii, is offering 
wearables and an analysis of a guest’s biometric data to 
optimize health awareness and offerings.
Detox technology is also enabling better physical health, 
with Montage Laguna Beach offering VR immersive expe-
riences and detox face and feet technology, and the spa at 
Claridge’s offering the UK’s only MLX i3Dome, a three-in-one 
body-detoxifying chamber. Mental health offerings enabled 
by technology are continuing to grow, too. Well+tech guests 
will have access to virtual reality-led meditation with 
LUVRworldwide, and the Carillon Miami Wellness Resort 
has what it calls the biostation, which is an anti-aging and 
medical wellness center. One offering at the biostation is a 
meditation pod that uses color, sound, and energies ther-
apy. Akasha Spa at Café Royal has launched London’s first 
Electronic Music Meditation class, and Kimpton Hotels 
has partnered with Talkspace to provide free online therapy 
sessions for guests. Wellness continues to be an important motivation for travel 
and a major factor in guests’ hotel selection criteria. With 
many still looking to spend down unused monies from the 
pandemic and prioritize their health and well-being, offering 
unique digital wellness experiences will garner international 
attention and guests. Aligning with these preferences ahead 
of investments will be key to their success, as well as make 
them more affordable. Digital wellness also offers non-tra-
ditional engagement with guests and can be done to scale 
in multiple sites, meaning smaller sites could still offer 
high-end digital wellness treatments that take up smaller 
footprints. More integration of wearables and data will also 
impact wellness treatments and help companies curate 
them to meet individual needs. This will require policies and 
adherence to health information privacy and individual cus-
tomer expectations. A particular challenge arises—capturing 
the data during the short amount of time when guests are 
on the property—so hospitality companies will need to fac-
tor in the ability to process data quickly.DIGITAL WELLNESS 
TREATMENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 856INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
The hospitality industry is 
responding to the call for better 
use practices by investing in 
smart resource management 
platforms, devices, and systems.Water is a top-of-mind resource for most hotels, but es-
pecially in areas where it’s scarce like the Middle East. In 
Dubai, Delta Hotels by Marriott are employing new technol-
ogy to address water scarcity in the region. The hotels use 
India-based AirWater’s Atmospheric Water Generators to 
turn the humidity into clean, drinkable water. In fact, they 
have two of these machines to provide water to all its guest 
rooms, restaurants, meeting facilities, spa, and gym. For 
pools, WaterGuru’s SENSE is an AI that can self-manage 
multiple pools for better water management and testing. 
And for HVAC, the Beverly Hilton and Waldorf Astoria Beverly 
Hills are using an ice-based thermal energy storage system 
called Nostromo Energy to provide carbon-free air condi-
tioning. Singapore-based proptech startup SensorFlow 
offers IoT and AI integration into a hotel’s energy manage-
ment system to help automate energy consumption. Hotel 
Marcel in New Haven, Connecticut, has become the first 
net-zero hotel in the US by relying on a variable-capacity 
heating and cooling HVAC system and Mitsubishi’s first 
installation of its Heat2O all-electric high-volume hot water 
system.Many guests are sensitive to the needs of the region they 
are visiting. They are well aware when there is a drought, 
and those who are eco-conscious will expect the places 
they stay to not tax a region’s fragile resources. In many 
regions, government entities are banning pools due to 
climate change. This, along with strains on existing power 
grids, will force the hospitality industry to become more 
responsible with its resources, and will necessitate hotels 
go beyond simply asking guests to reuse their sheets and 
towels. With many guests using sustainability to guide their 
travel destinations, hotels could become rated based on 
their carbon footprint and sustainability strategies or im-
plementations. This type of information is readily available 
in other markets—like grocery and dining, thanks to apps 
that give you information on how much your food is adding 
to your carbon footprint—but this type of information seems 
less marketed and offered in the hotel industry. For early 
adopters, it could be an effective marketing strategy and a 
differentiator.SMART RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 857INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
While a nascent trend, some 
new hotels are creating mobile 
properties that ebb, flow, and 
move due to guest demand. 
Nomadic and modular hotels can 
be quickly constructed, taken 
down, and relocated.The hotel industry is responding to the market’s increased 
desire for mobility with its own version of a pop-up: mov-
able hotels. Moliving is building a modular and movable 
hotel in New York that can scale up depending on needed 
inventory per season. The structure costs $150,000; it takes 
about five months to manufacture and can be removed 
without harming the land it sits on. Habitare is creating a 
movable luxury hotel that is meant to travel to locations 
that might have been previously inaccessible. Its model cre-
ates instant destinations, based on demand, that are quick 
and affordably constructed. 
For more permanent, but still modularly built hotels, we 
can look to Volumetric Building Cos.: It’s  working with 
Fairfield by Marriott to use modular construction to rapidly 
expand Fairfield’s existing properties worldwide with a new 
prototype. Uni Villas offers modular units to create mini 
resorts for entrepreneurs. These units are prefabricated and 
shipped on the back of a truck with furniture and check-
in systems included. London’s Aylott + Van Tromp offers 
Hytte: 15 pre-designed cabins for hotel operators to use. The 
cabins can either be off-the-shelf or customized and can be 
used for local stays or more remote destinations. Both Uni 
Villas and Aylott + Van Tromp say these types of creations 
are essential to enable the hospitality industry to respond 
to demands for new locations, while being sustainably 
minded.With a more mobile population looking for curated places 
to live and work, and the blending of working spaces into 
the hospitality sector, nomadic and modular hotels could 
offer more temporary ways to capture those guest stays. 
This could give the hospitality industry the potential to 
disrupt apartment and co-living spaces, as well as co-work-
ing locations with more nomadic and pop-up locations. 
While the mobility infrastructure could prove challenging, 
it could also allow development costs to go much further, 
allowing companies to set up a bare-minimum site ver-
sus a fully new-build location. As urban centers try to find 
ways to revitalize and reinvent themselves, these modular 
and nomadic locations could bring new opportunities for 
tourism and experiences, which means there could be new 
and specialized location offerings. This, paired with other 
entertainment offerings like concerts or events that are 
typically hard to reach or attend due to lack of hotel space, 
could also increase their relevance to the industry. Studying 
when market saturations peak will be critical to know where 
to invest here.NOMADIC AND 
MODULAR HOTELS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 858INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2033
Nomad Stays  
While traditional hotels are holding strong, there has been some strong competition from an unusual source: RV 
parks. Once thought of as a destination for campers and mobile families, with the addition of off-grid infrastruc-
ture and modular hotels, RV parks have become all the rage for pop-up hotels. Initially, there was an increase in 
RV parks in Norway, as tourism to its luscious fjords rose. Acting quickly, Marriott spun off a new division called 
Nomad Stays, which offers predictive insights into when and where pop-up hotels should be built and then taken 
down and moved to a new location. The Vinjerock and Træna music festivals were the first trial runs in 2028—
while they had moderate success, what was especially newsworthy was that the modular cabins were set up for 
the Træna festival first, taken down, shipped, and set up for the Vinjerock within a week’s time. Attendees report-
ed that they much preferred to sleep in one of the modular sleeper bunks that had its own facilities over using a 
tent. Once news of this got out, Burning Man organizers and participants soon began to contact Nomad Stays to 
see if they could purchase or rent these cabins, especially when the weather called for rain. Pretty soon, Nomad 
Stays had set up roving sites around the Isle of Arran in Scotland, Ladakh in India, and even Mount Cook National 
Park in New Zealand. Nomad Stays’ current top demographic? Autonomous vehicle owners. With more autono-
mous vehicles and people working from home, many have their cars book their Nomad Stay for them, and just let 
the road lead them to their next destination.
859© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Beyond contactless checking 
in and out, new technology for 
payments and authentication 
are minimizing staff-guest 
interactions and providing 
guests with greater access to the 
facilities and activities on site.Interactive digital concierges and XR technology are now 
facilitating a hotel guest’s entrance experience. Uniguest 
offers an all-in-one digital concierge signage system for 
finding information on restaurants, events, and other in-
formation. The goal of the system is to reduce the need for 
guests’ interactions with human staff, thereby freeing up 
humans to perform other work. At Yotel’s Singapore loca-
tion, digital check-in kiosks similar to the ones used at air-
ports provide guests a frictionless and humanless check-in 
process. The hotel has also been using robots to help with 
its service offerings since 2019.
Voice assistants are providing support, as guests can use 
them to request towels, check in or out, and make reserva-
tions without having to call the front desk. A recent patent 
is exploring using sensors embedded throughout the hotel 
to predict when guests will arrive, based on their uploaded 
profile and past activities, so staff can address the needs 
of the hotel room while guests are away. Some are using 
wireless sensing technologies to automatically identify 
and authenticate guests throughout the site, which helps 
enable seamless transactions. Similarly, contactless pay-
ments are no longer reserved for large resorts. Two hotels in 
Ibiza are using Very Important Bands (VIBs) to allow guests 
to skip lines, pay, check in and check out. Even elevators are 
becoming more frictionless with the NZ Technologies Hov-
erTap system, which allows for panel control by a touch-free 
hand gesture.Guests’ desire to have fewer interactions with human staff 
has extended from the check-in desk to wanting  to walk in 
and out without needing to speak to anyone at all. For the 
worn-out business traveler, a more frictionless stay could 
be especially nice. This could also be of benefit for anyone 
in the travel industry working off-hours or arriving early in 
the morning or late at night, worrying if the night manager 
will be available and responsive. With new management 
systems, guests will now select the number and type of 
interactions they do want to have with humans—and choose 
where and when. New booking practices will need to include 
this option for guests to select, and hotel staff might also 
need to ask that question upon arrival. On-site technology 
repairmen will also become more of a necessity due to the 
increased integration of humanless technology, in order 
for the experience to stay smooth. These technicians might 
also need to be more than repairmen if the frictionless stay 
includes digital wellness treatments or in-room cooking 
and dining.FRICTIONLESS  
STAYS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 860INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
On-premise staff, rooms, and 
spaces are utilizing technology 
to know guests’ preferences on 
a granular level; this includes 
predicting what guests might 
want before they even know 
themselves.Data to enable personalization is becoming more of neces-
sity to increase profit and generate guest loyalty. While a 
report from Sojern found that over three quarters of hotels 
have seen an increase in revenue after enabling first-party 
data acquisition, privacy of the data remains a concern. 
PassiveBolt offers a solution: a single travel profile that 
can be used across multiple sites, services, and operators  
to know more about their guests’ preferences. Since it’s a 
decentralized data storage platform, guests can turn off 
access to their data at any time. 
Predicting guest needs is also an increasingly needed skill. 
A recent patent looks to use AI to predict when guests will 
arrive while also integrating data that guests provide to 
choose the type of  room they would prefer and make other 
optimizations for their stay. Facial recognition is another 
technology enabling greater personalization. Using Google 
Glass, Itesso’s staff can instantly recognize guests and 
know how to personalize their interactions. Similarly, Hapi 
Guest uses its platform to give front desk agents more in-
formation about guests while they check in.Hyper-personalization is not new, but with new develop-
ments in technology it will scale to provide personalization 
on a microscopic level. Guests’ expectation of hyper-person-
alization will continue to grow as they experience what it’s 
like to stay in a place that knows them perhaps even better 
than they know themselves: Their data is used to make 
sure food shows up before they ask, and they are offered a 
wellness treatment due to their stress level. Consider this 
the next level of stars and ratings. Hyper-personalization 
could become a differentiating factor in how guests search 
for hotels, inquiring about the levels of personalization that 
are offered, which would need to be standardized by the in-
dustry as a whole. It will also impact when staff are working 
based on a guest’s preferences. Loyal and frequent guests 
will come to expect certain staff to be present when they ar-
rive or be ready to offer a desired service. This could impact 
scheduling for staff who are experts on preparing a specific 
food dish or administering a wellness treatment. Technolog-
ically enabled regional personalization could become a draw 
for tourists who are looking for consistent but more worldly 
places to experience.HYPER-
PERSONALIZATION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 861INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Travel is no longer just about 
going to a physical destination. 
Increasingly, customers are using 
virtual vacations and tourism in 
lieu of IRL traveling. Hotels are 
using virtual reality tours to entice 
guests to stay at their facilities, 
and this concept now extends 
to pre-experiencing events and 
other on-premise happenings for 
further enticement.Recent research shows that guests rely less and less on 
reviews, and VR plays a major role in influencing their 
expectations before they travel. This trend is growing with 
examples such as Radisson’s 3D virtual venue for guests to 
explore the hotel and even book their room, Atlantis Dubai’s 
Virtual Tour that lets guests see the quality level of the 
experience they will have at the resort, and The Grand Oasis 
Hotel’s 360º Hotel VR Tour. Omni Hotels has found that 
these types of virtual tours can increase booking conver-
sions from 16% to 67%.
Staff is also becoming integrated into this trend, like at Le 
Franschhoek Hotel & Spa, where a 360 VR tour offers poten-
tial guests the ability to meet the manager. With increasing 
virtual events, these experiences are also being hosted in 
the metaverse. RendezVerse is working with Marriott and 
Atlantis to replicate their hotels in the metaverse for vir-
tual conferences. This type of virtual tourism is also being 
explored by Wander, which is creating VR travel options for 
exploring ancient wonders, traveling by train, or touring 
museums. 
A recent patent also explores linking the real world with the 
virtual by using VR, cloud real-time monitoring, and robot-
ics to give skiers the experience of a ski resort’s live condi-
tions in the metaverse. This could enable other services like 
those of UrVenue, which creates 3D maps of pools, event 
venues, nightclubs, lounges, and more for guests to try 
before booking. Try-before-you-buy has become an expectation in retail, and 
the trend has now expanded to drive guests and tourists 
to a location. Guests will want to try their room first—to see 
the view or feel the bed firmness—and might also want to 
be walked through what their whole stay will look and feel 
like, which could be a paid add-on package. This capability, 
bundled with other personalized services and offerings, can 
create new travel and tourism packages and support events 
and conferences. Locations offering this service can pay a 
small fee to allow registrants to vote on which location they 
prefer based on the pre-experiencing offer. Pre-experience 
sales will help increase booking conversions, an incredibly 
important development when planning future conventions. 
It will also allow for customer feedback that can help opera-
tors know their areas of deficiency. Companies that manage 
booking sites and get paid by the rooms booked for these 
conferences should be capitalizing on this now if they are 
not already.PRE-EXPERIENCING 
THROUGH VIRTUAL 
TOURISM1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 862INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
From addressing staffing 
challenges to increasing sales to 
providing new means of safety, 
new technology is augmenting 
hospitality business practices and 
efficiencies.Automation is essential for creating better business flow. 
New platforms from Best Western are allowing guests to tip 
staff through eTip, reducing some financial processes. Pric-
ingServiceAI is automating pricing for rooms, using market 
data to update every few hours. In the back-of-house, facial 
recognition technology is making it easier for staff to clock 
in and out as well: FaceMe installed at staff entrances can 
check employees in and also check body temperature, 
which can be helpful during future health crises. Staff auto-
mation can also be seen through a patent for a housekeep-
ing system that will use AI sensors in a room to know what 
needs to be cleaned and directs a robotic cleaning staff to 
complete the necessary tasks.
Other forms of augmentation are occurring through block-
chain technology like LockChain, a decentralized subscrip-
tion-based platform to help make property rentals more 
secure. According to the 2023 Lodging Technology Study by 
Hospitality Technology, 70% of respondents were looking 
to add, upgrade, or change property management systems. 
New investments into management platforms like Germa-
ny-based Betterspace are providing better staff optimiza-
tion and customer communication, and will be used to help 
enhance their energy management platforms.
Technology is also now making pools safer. Coral Smart Pool 
is providing MYLO, a virtual lifeguard for hotels. Leonardo 
Hotels are implementing this system to detect if there is a 
drowning incident or dangerous situation, which triggers an 
alarm in the pool and the hotel lobby. With tourism increasing and labor decreasing, finding 
new ways to run the business—while also providing better 
experiences and collecting data—will continue to be of vital 
importance in the hospitality industry. New systems that 
optimize when staff needs to be present, and provide seam-
less payments for those staff members, will make working 
at those locations more desirable. These automated sys-
tems can also improve data integrity and veracity, meaning 
that the data collected can be trusted for informing future 
decisions. These reports will provide critical analytics that 
businesses will need for knowing where performance and 
satisfaction are lacking or exceeding expectations. They 
can also support targeted marketing campaigns based on 
the data collected through the automation processes that 
correlate to new promotions during offseasons or for repeat 
guests. Besides all this, automation can also help with dy-
namic pricing and real-time updates that can lead to max-
imum revenue generation. Prioritizing the right automated 
system and where it should be implemented first deserves 
to be a carefully considered decision within a long-term 
strategic plan.BUSINESS 
AUTOMATION1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 863INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2028
The Mobile Passport Concierge   
The Juan family eagerly opens their latest purchase, a sleek-looking glass screen slightly larger than a tablet greets them in their preferred 
language. It’s their new Mobile Passport Concierge, or MPC. “Welcome to a new traveling experience, Juan family,” it purrs. 
The glass projects an amalgamation of the family members’ faces and continues to speak. “Please place your fingers on the screen or 
speak your names so we can verify your identity.” After each member uses their preferred biometric to confirm their identity, MPC smiles. 
“Thank you. Now, as I have been given access to your shared calendars, I see that the big family vacation is coming up, but nothing has been 
planned yet. Is that correct?” 
The Juans all nod. 
“Fantastic, that is exactly what I hoped to hear because that’s what I do best. I will plan it all in 15 seconds or less! Based on the data you 
provided when you signed up for Hilton’s Curated HotelKey service, I am going to find a Hilton location that offers an immersive experience 
for Carlos, a 3D bio-scan for Lyla, a room that offers light and sound sensitivity screens for Miguel, and a restaurant that monitors food waste 
for Rosa. Here we go!” The MPC projects images showing a virtual worldwide search until it lands in Madrid. MPC chimes, “This is one of the 
newest nomadic destinations in Madrid and meets all of your specialized requirements and desires. It was built in under three months and 
travels to a new spot around the city every few years.” 
Very excited, the family books the trip, until MPC comes back with an alert. “I notice that Carlos’ passport will expire during your vacation. 
Shall I update it now?” Carlos gives his consent, to which MPC replies, “Very well. Please also remember to take me with you throughout the 
airport as I will manage your tickets, any further passport updates, and fill out your travel visas. For now, please sit back and enjoy a quick 
video of the potential memories you could create.” 
With that, the screen is divided into four panels, and each family member watches a curated movie of themselves on their future vacation.
864© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS865© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUGMENTED 
RESTAURANTS 
AND DININGINDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Restaurant patrons can now pay 
for their meals with new forms 
of integrated payment. This is 
being offered through biometric 
and other forms of contactless 
payments.Persistent concerns with surface sanitization have changed 
the way customers want to pay for their food. Most restau-
rant and QSR patrons prefer to use contactless payments 
and self-service kiosks—and businesses do, too, because it 
frees up servers to spend more time helping patrons versus 
cashing out tables. Presto was one of the first companies 
to release a tabletop ordering system and handheld tablet 
for servers, which increased the adoption of this trend. It 
has since evolved to allow customers to order and pay for 
their meal at the table with near-field communication (NFC) 
contactless cards and digital wallets.
Many restaurants and QSR chains are exploring using 
contactless forms of payment, such as biometric payments 
that include gesture, pay-by-face, or pay-by-palm. Panera is 
rolling out pay-by-palm capabilities for reward members to 
2,100 locations. Steak-n-Shake is allowing 500 of its loca-
tions to use pay-by-face, and plans to expand this technol-
ogy to another 300 stores. In one instance, at Pho Banh Mi 
Che Cali restaurants in Los Angeles, customers can opt for 
either paying by face or by palm. Some restaurants are also 
experimenting with bitcoin payments, sometimes through 
QR codes at the table. This builds off of systems like the 
Sunday app that launched during the pandemic. QR codes 
are now being discreetly placed on the table to offer promo-
tions or take patrons to secret menus as well.Even though many restaurants are actually reducing their 
payment options, consumers are starting to push for more. 
Some are asking for biometric payment options for con-
venience, and to make their experience quicker and fric-
tionless. So, there could be a rise in expectation for gesture 
and mid-air haptics technology at kiosks and checkout 
counters. This all comes at a time when credit cards are 
beginning to cost restaurants more in transaction fees and 
customers are taking note when the fees are passed on to 
them. The new forms of payment could create less friction 
and quicker processing. Covert menus and easier payment 
options will become more appealing to patrons who are 
looking for new experiences with little time to spare. As 
kiosks become more popular within QSRs for faster custom-
er experiences, this reduces front-end personnel needs—for 
some. Being aware of your demographics and allowing for 
those who choose to still have face-to-face interactions 
will be key to not exclude one consumer group over the 
other. Companies should begin to establish preferences for 
various forms of biometric payments now to help familiar-
ize their current and future customers with this new way of 
paying today.CONTACTLESS 
PAYMENTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 866INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Some kitchen, waitstaff, and 
ordering activities can now all 
happen with very little human 
intervention. This includes product 
ordering and prep work.Automated drive-thru ordering is beginning to become 
mainstream with companies like Wendy’s, McDonald’s, 
and White Castle rolling out AI to take over the ordering 
process. ConverseNow offers solutions for others looking 
to automate with two AI personas, George and Becky, which 
can have human-like conversations. Drive-thrus are also 
becoming smaller and more automated with conveyor belts, 
such as at a new McDonald’s prototype in Fort Worth, Texas: 
It has a smaller footprint, and patrons pick up their food at 
a dedicated window from a conveyor belt. At Wendy’s, deliv-
ery to cars in the parking lot is also looking different as it 
tests underground tubes and robots for food delivery.
Processes have also become more automated at restau-
rants and QSRs. Yum Brands is using AI to automate the 
kitchen flow, ordering, and delivery for thousands of its 
Pizza Hut locations. In the front-of-house, servers are now 
using wearables that receive notifications from the kitchen 
or Presto’s tabletop ordering systems when patrons need 
refills or if they have allergies. For the back-of-house, Convo-
Sense offers AI that can automate the cooking and baking 
systems by recognizing the food put into the cooking equip-
ment and automatically launching the correct preparation. 
From Matradee—using lidar to carry food and work around 
humans—to Servi—serving food and drinks—to Cecilia—
speaking 40 languages and serving up to 120 drinks in Is-
rael—robots are automating more functions in restaurants 
and QSRs. As patrons continue to accept less-human interactions 
when they see a return on their valuable time. These au-
tomations will be seen as a way to offer better efficiency 
for customers, help reduce errors, and potentially increase 
hygiene—all priorities for customers. They could open up 
possibilities for dark restaurants that function 24/7, a use-
ful development for more mobile populations, transporta-
tion professionals, and vacationing families. Yet automation 
could also become a sticking point for companies consid-
ering whether traditional sit-down-dining or autonomous 
restaurants offer a more lucrative path for either franchis-
ing or setting up a subsidiary brand. With a more mobile 
and connected world, however, automation offers the poten-
tial for consistency of experience no matter where patrons 
engage with your restaurant and food. It can also help the 
current issues due to a reduced labor force. However, it will 
shift future generations’ expectations of what dining expe-
rience should look like and adds a layer to the categories 
of traditional, QSR, and now autonomous. Established QSR 
brands trying to become more efficient will want to consider 
hefty renovations to turn human-run locations autonomous.AUTONOMOUS 
RESTAURANTS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 867INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Customers can order food for 
delivery almost anywhere now, 
especially with new tracking 
software and apps. This trend 
includes voice ordering, the use of 
kiosks, live tracking of deliveries, 
and new forms of delivery for 
restaurants and QSRs.Like other areas of the industry, voice ordering is becoming 
more integrated in the food ordering process and will be-
come ubiquitous. SoundHound’s new partnership with Or-
acle will further enable voice ordering at more point-of-sale 
locations—the platforms use AI to help patrons order and 
get information on deliveries and locations. Customers can 
dictate their order from Uber Eats to Alexa devices, and then 
ask those devices for delivery updates. Through a partner-
ship with Yobe, PLNT Burger uses kiosks with voice order-
ing to ease how patrons order. Grubbrr, a Florida company 
that offers self-ordering systems, claims that AI in kiosks 
can actually increase the amount of money patrons spend, 
which has been corroborated by other studies. 
For deliveries, Whataburger partnered with geofencing pro-
vider Radar to enable the QSR to know when patrons arrive 
to pick up their food. Domino’s launched its Pinpoint De-
livery system, which lets patrons select their exact delivery 
location, expanding the chain’s delivery offerings. Flytrex 
could help with this endeavor as well, as it is offering drone 
delivery to US suburbs for any need, including coffee. Alter-
natives to major delivery platforms are also expanding. Co-
ca-Cola’s minority stake acquisition of Thrive in India sig-
nals that more restaurants in that region will soon be able 
to create their own direct-ordering platform. And with apps 
like Wonder, cooking can also happen nearer to customers, 
even just outside their home in a van. In an interesting take 
on ordering, a new app launched at CES lets you designate a 
time and a place to use a nearby restaurant’s bathroom.Ordering systems now need to be integrated into more lo-
cations and be interoperable so that restaurants and QSRs 
don’t lose out on patrons who want to conveniently order 
from anywhere, even while walking down the street. The 
granular bifurcation of delivery spots presents both chal-
lenges and opportunities. Customers may expect mobile 
delivery, which means delivery drivers will have to track 
customers, versus customers tracking drivers. This reversal 
of roles means that customers will share new forms of data 
that could help autonomous restaurants or mobile loca-
tions to serve those areas. Voice biometrics could become 
more important for verification services, with customers 
expecting you to recognize their voice and have their order 
ready based on them saying hello. While this type of data 
could give businesses more data to know their customer’s 
needs, it also presents many issues for collection, storage, 
and privacy. Restaurants will need to establish guidelines 
for where ordering should occur, and might need to have 
new technology that helps resolve background noises and 
garbled messages, or that can offer live translation for 
customers who speak a different language. With drones and 
food preparation bringing food directly to the consumer, 
this also shifts service experiences, which have largely yet 
to be defined, and could be a way to differentiate these new 
offerings in the market. EVERYWHERE 
ORDERING AND 
ANYWHERE DELIVERY1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 868INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
As climate change creates 
fear that food resources will be 
disrupted, many are focusing on 
being more responsible with their 
food waste. Many restaurant 
industry-focused startups 
are providing platforms for 
monitoring and mitigating food 
waste.Increasingly, companies are interested in where their food 
waste ends up. Berlin-based Choco’s streamlines the food 
ordering process, and monitors waste and food inventory. 
Other companies are using blockchain technology; Con-
necting Food uses food traceability data to track products 
going through the production line to audit the food, manage 
suppliers, and create a digital twin of the product, all with 
the aim of increasing consumer confidence. Currently used 
by Wendy’s and McDonald’s, Bolivian software company 
Mojix uses blockchain to automate food safety compliance, 
manage expiration dates, and reduce waste. It covers the 
lifecycle of an item to help provide traceability throughout 
the supply chain.
Therma provides services more directly to restaurants by 
offering IoT sensors for 24/7 temperature monitoring and 
an app that can help reduce waste and improve food safety. 
Brands including TGI Fridays, Domino’s, and Wyndham 
Hotels use Therma to help protect their food inventory. 
Orbisk, a Dutch startup, puts a camera above a trash can to 
scan waste to help restaurants know their disposal pat-
terns. Kilmato, based in Sweden, helps provide more data 
transparency for menu items: Their web-based app allows 
restaurants and QSRs to calculate the climate impact of 
their food and dishes and then label them to tell customers 
the carbon impact of their food. While focused on the gro-
cery store rather than the restaurant, new AI scanners from 
a Dutch entrepreneur let customers scan avocados to see if 
they are ready for consumption.ESG expectations are impacting businesses in a variety 
of ways, with many responding by publicly sharing their 
procurement, labor practices, and waste management. 
These systems and technology tools can help food produc-
ers, restaurants, and QSRs provide data to prove they’re 
being responsible with their food waste. They can help now, 
but could ultimately be disrupted with the advent of more 
additively made food sources and materials, and it will be 
important to watch how restaurants balance these forces. 
In the near term, these new systems also offer opportuni-
ties for cost savings that can assist in addressing overuse 
and over preparation of food. In many regions, there are new 
regulations and requirements for this type of monitoring, 
and these tools can provide the data needed to show that 
companies are in compliance. For companies looking to tap 
into younger generations that care more about responsible 
consumption, addressing these issues will prove to be a 
beneficial marketing tool.MONITORING FOOD 
WASTE & IMPACT1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 869INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Eatertainment has evolved from 
breweries to be either mobile or 
permanent dining experiences 
that use technology to elevate the 
room, table, and decor.Dining experiences continue to push the boundaries with 
more immersive experiences that have become their own 
version of performance art. Technology enables these 
experiences to move beyond just tasting, to even include 
using food to experience emotions. Philadelphia, the cream 
cheese maker, created a sensorial experience that uses 
visuals and sound, along with cheese dishes, to let custom-
ers experience a range of feelings and different emotions. 
In Silicon Valley, iChina is debuting the first headset-free 
VR dining experience that will pair visuals based on the 
food that’s served. At the restaurant Ultraviolet, diners will 
enjoy 20 courses throughout the evening while the room 
shifts with projected images, changes in lighting, music, 
and scents. Inside Hard Rock Hotel Ibiza’s restaurant, you’ll 
find not only chefs but also directors and musicians. The 
guests will explore various places, times, and emotions over 
three hours through a VR headset at one of the world’s most 
expensive restaurants at around 1,800 pounds ($2,345) per 
person. Tablemotion Studios is already known for its experi-
ences at the SLS Hotel Beverly Hills and Four Seasons Hotel 
Austin, but the company will debut a new interactive expe-
rience at The Culinary Institute of America at Copia in Napa 
and the Ritz-Carlton at Half Moon Bay in California. This new 
experience took over 50,000 hours to create; it uses visuals 
with 4K resolution and laser projectors.As restaurants look to differentiate themselves by using 
technology to replace human-to-human contact with hu-
man-to-automated contact, these immersive experiences 
could become smaller in scale to still allow for more en-
gaged experiences and storytelling. Along with more inter-
active social media marketing and selling, these immersive 
experiences could offer customization through social sell-
ing, which can provide new data to help companies adapt 
to market trends. They also provide revenue diversification 
as restaurateurs and even QSRs can separately sell both 
food and experiences. Immersive experiences are currently 
focused on high-end dining locations but could grow and 
scale to augment QSRs, or even autonomous restaurants. 
However, focusing on the storytelling and the “why” behind 
the experience will be key for companies to get this right. 
Some experiences may not make sense, especially if they 
seem extravagant given current world issues like war or 
climate change. But for hospitality venues looking to attract 
conferences or companies looking for new ways to impress 
clients, these offerings could become a norm once they be-
come scalable—and extend to digital wellness offerings at 
both restaurants and other hospitality locations.IMMERSIVE 
EXPERIENCES1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 870INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2027
Eating Darkness   
As autonomous QSRs have taken over in fast-casual dining, Eating Darkness experiences began to dominate 
some traditional dining establishments. Many restaurants realized they needed to counterpoint to the tech-driv-
en experiences many diners chose throughout the week; it started with lowering lighting levels over the course of 
the meal until the guests were eating in complete darkness but soon became augmented with technology that 
focused on visual well-being and comfort that increased the importance of the food the patron was eating. Now, 
many patrons choose Eating Darkness as part of their reservation, which means that they are offered a light-
weight diminished reality band to don as they sit. They use it to choose the level of activity they see around them 
throughout the course of the meal, and their awareness will slowly fade to focus on just the food. Some describe 
it as a quiet hug and a shift away from the hustle and bustle of the world around them. The band facilitates 
the guest’s order through voice ordering, and then provides a choice of ASMR noises, which also grow fainter 
throughout the meal. While this is good for single diners, cordoned-off diminished reality rooms are available for 
groups that provide the same experience, but are based on the group’s shared preferences.
871© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
As a means for better health and 
sustainability, many restaurants 
are working to incorporate and 
offer lab-grown and engineered 
food. Some foods and meals 
are being engineered for 
specific customer engagement 
experiences that go beyond 
dining.Many companies are providing engineered food and meals 
to both restaurants and individual customers. In 2019, 
Foodadvisor began giving customers the ability to see what 
they are eating and to analyze its nutritional value. It also 
provides customized plans and advice on how to meet per-
sonal goals. SnapCalorie, a startup founded by the creator 
of Google Lens, plans to do something similar by using AI to 
estimate the caloric content of food based on a photo. What 
makes this app different from the rest is that it claims it 
can measure portion sizes.
Within 3D-printed food, several companies are working to 
bring engineered food to the mass market. Vienna-based 
company Mycorena has launched its whole-cut vegan salm-
on filet. This filet relies on new technology from Revo Foods 
that uses extrusion methods to integrate fats into fibrous 
proteins in a first-ever continuous production process for 
mass production. Researchers at Columbia University have 
combined 3D printing and laser technology to create and 
bake the first 3D-printed cheesecake; while this technology 
is not new, the researchers are considering what it would 
mean to create recipes like this for the masses to be able to 
download and use. Open Meals first began producing bio-
metric 3D-printed meals in 2019, but it is looking to expand 
with a fully autonomous restaurant with their products by 
2035—and with the possibility of AI-controlled 3D printers, 
could be available as a common kitchen appliance by 2040. 
Other foods being 3D-printed include chocolate, pasta, 
chicken, and steak.With personalized nutrition and food allergies increasingly 
in focus and a concern, 3D-printed foods offer new possi-
bilities for alternatives and food prep. This can help reduce 
potential for cross contamination, as long as the materials 
used for the printed food are managed and monitored as 
well. The challenge will be the visual aesthetics of these 
foods and consumers accepting that their traditional 
cheesecake or meats will look different but taste the same. 
This is ultimately something that should be consumer test-
ed and trialed, from which companies should create large-
scale marketing campaigns. Since engineered meals and 
foods also offer more sustainability and nutritional capa-
bility, if they can be printed to taste the same as unhealthy 
or nostalgic foods, they could potentially make unhealthy 
food less attractive. The control of taste will become the key 
driving factor for success or failure, meaning customers will 
want their dish to taste different than what their neighbor 
might be tasting. Such an achievement would unlock new 
potential for customized experiences and foods. While the 
culinary world is constantly trying to innovate, this offers 
a new arena for new types of chefs and business offerings. 
Scientists and material fabricators could become the culi-
nary geniuses of tomorrow.ENGINEERED FOOD 
AND MEALS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 872INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
Digital loyalty programs are 
increasingly looking to blockchain 
technology for verification 
of customer spending and 
offering new rewards for those 
engagements.Many loyalty programs are utilizing technology for increased 
engagement, and blockchain technology is at the forefront 
for many companies. One new offering is Blackbird: a loyalty 
program that gives partner restaurants a digital card to 
track and verify when customers visit and what they eat on 
Coinbase’s Base blockchain. These programs allow restau-
rants to create any kind of loyalty program they want: They 
can be free and help track the number of visits, or paid and 
used to offer perks and experiences. KitchData, known to 
enable delivery-first food brands, is now offering their cli-
ents the ability to create NFTs, SMS crypto wallets, and other 
Web3 offerings through Harmony.one’s blockchain. 
Companies are now exploring facial recognition technology 
to create more personalized experiences for loyal custom-
ers. Diners can choose to participate, and, in doing so, be 
recognized when they arrive at the restaurant. FaceME is 
one such platform that can offer this to restaurants, and it 
can be integrated into kiosks and other customer touch-
points. Tattle, a customer experience improvement plat-
form, is working on new ways restaurant companies can get 
data from their customers by offering programs to incentiv-
ize customers to scan their receipts. These new loyalty programs can obviously help increase 
customer engagement and retention, and can also provide 
an attractive experience to draw in new customers. The data 
and insights on customer preferences collected will be a 
critical component that companies will be able to under-
stand and influence. The programs can also potentially 
reduce administrative costs as they become fully automat-
ed. The use of blockchain also provides consistent trans-
parency, which will build trust among customers—but it will 
be key for companies to discuss and understand what level 
of transparency will be required. Past attempts at loyalty 
programs should also be a consideration because what may 
not have worked in the past may become functional today 
with these augmented offerings. The verification offered 
through blockchain technology further enables customers 
to have a frictionless dining experience, with the goal of cre-
ating diners who not only purchase food from the restaurant 
but also visit the restaurant’s physical location. VERIFIED LOYALTY 
PROGRAMS1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 873INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSWHY IT MATTERS
AI and other technology are 
being used to craft menus and 
meals customized to individual 
customer preferences.Personalization is growing in the restaurant industry, with 
AI offering new ways to customize your dining experience. 
Hungryroot, based in New York City, uses a quiz to identify 
what food you should order from the grocery store. AI plat-
form Nutrios creates a custom page that then offers curated 
meal plans and personalized food recommendations. AI is 
also being used to make menus better. Lunchbox is a tech 
startup that uses AI to generate food images for restaurants 
to incorporate into their menu. Focused only on the restau-
rant industry, website platform company Superorder has 
worked with over 1,500 restaurants to create a website based 
on typing in a simple query. 
Robotics may soon offer more personalized food that tastes 
best for consumers. A recent patent is exploring using 
AI to determine when a dish has met the right flavor re-
quirements using particle data. Beko and the University of 
Cambridge trained a robot chef to know if food was too salty. 
The robot mimics how humans chew food in order to taste 
the food in a similar manner. You can now also taste your TV. 
A Japanese professor created a lickable TV screen that can 
imitate different food flavors; this comes after a researcher 
at Meiji University created a tool that allows a user to taste 
anything they want without having to eat the food. NTT Doco-
mo, Meiji University, and H2L have also developed a unique 
technology that allows people to share tastes digitally.With curated tastings comes the opportunity for generating 
new experiences and customer retention through positive 
and personalized foods. The personalization of flavor means 
food may become individualized, similar to how engineered 
food flavors could become personalized; this could make it 
challenging to create a menu, unless you use AI or other au-
tomation tools. Eventually, we may see menuless offerings, 
where the menu is never posted or decided until the cus-
tomer walks in to be served. All of these developments com-
bined could become problematic for the back-of-house to 
create nuanced flavors—again, unless the capability  is tech-
nologically enabled. These new additions to the tech stack 
will be hard to implement unless costs are shared or the 
company has deep resources. However, many demographics 
share the same taste profiles, which could be a way to target 
the implementation of certain curated tastings and menus. 
Globally, this would obviously change and be a challenge 
as well. Companies should also prepare for a future when 
ratings of personalized flavors become as influential as a re-
view of the experience—the focus will shift away from styles 
or cuisine categories toward new flavor categories.CURATED TASTING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 874INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2026
Y our Chicken Soup for the Cold   
Hello viewers, it’s Chef Gordon Ramsay’s avatar. Welcome to today’s AR news segment, projected by your desk lamp spon-
sor. Our topic for you curated listeners who checked you like food news is about another food fad. In 2026, the latest craze 
to hit dining since butter boards and mood foods is chicken soup. People are absolutely going mad over chicken soup, 
lining up at any mobile pickup window they can find, or rushing out when their wearable pings that a new location has 
been set up near them. You may be confused, as many of us were at first, why chicken soup would be a fad-worthy food. 
It’s because of the brilliant integration of medicine into Campbell’s freshly printed soup paste. It sounds quite dismal but 
is actually on point because it tastes exactly how you remember soup from your childhood.
Yes, you heard me right.
When Campbell’s entered the mobile QSR market with this product a year ago, I thought they must have lost their heads, 
but I was quickly corrected when I went for my first tasting. After a quick lick of the lickable menu, which analyzed my sa-
liva memory, I spoke my order to the menu. It analyzed my voice to tell if I was sick, and then gave me a hot cup of curat-
ed soup designed to keep me well during cold and flu season. With the first sip, I could instantly tell this would be a hit. 
It felt like the recipe my mum used to feed me when I was a young lad. It created such a strong memory that I instantly 
went back to order the Campbell’s Soup Dropper for all of my restaurants. The taste alone made it a fad, but the benefits 
of not having to take ill-tasting medicine when you are sick have also got customers salivating for this soup. It has be-
come a bestseller for any restaurant that installs the Dropper.
875© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTSAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
876© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS INDUSTRY877© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSHOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS INDUSTRY
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editors 
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYMARK BRYAN  
Senior Manager 
Mark Bryan is a Senior Foresight Manager at the Future Today Institute and leads 
our Built Environment, Hospitality, Retail, Restaurants & CPG practice areas. Mark 
excels in applying strategic foresight to design and the built environment, anticipat -
ing future need states for our physical and organizational spaces. His expertise in 
integrating strategic planning with innovative design principles empowers busi-
nesses to anticipate and adapt to future trends, fostering sustainable growth, resiliency, and transformative change 
in their industries.
Before FTI, Mark worked as a workplace strategist, designer, design researcher, and futurist for clients across the 
country, most recently through his role as Director of Innovation + Research at a design and architecture firm.
Mark’s portfolio of clients includes national foundations, global CPG companies, international associations, product 
manufacturers, national retail brands, multi-family developers, healthcare systems, senior living facilities, restaurants, 
and large multinationals. Mark has produced original research and strategic analysis on the future of co-living, senior 
living, workplaces, play, hotels and resorts, dining, and distance learning.
Mark is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. He holds a BS in Interior 
Design from Virginia Tech and NCDIQ Certification.
SELECTED  
SOURCES
878© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS INDUSTRY879© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Domino’s Delivers Anywhere 
on the Map with Latest Tech 
Innovation.” Restaurant Dive. 
www.restaurantdive.com/news/
dominos-pizza-pinpoint-deliv-
ery-QSR-marketing/653335/. 
“Exploring the Latest Cyberse-
curity Technologies and Trends.” 
EC-Council University, February 
27, 2023. www.eccu.edu/blog/
technology/the-latest-cyberse-
curity-technologies-and-trends/.
“Hoteliers Are Leveraging 3D 
Maps from UrVenue to Advance 
Hospitality Commerce.” Hospi-
tality Net. https://www.hospitali-
tynet.org/news/4116058.html. 
“Klimato | Carbon Labelling for 
Restaurants.” Accessed Decem-
ber 13, 2023. www.klimato.co/. 
“Lab-Grown Meat Is on the 
Way.” The Takeout, June 23, 
2023, https://thetakeout.
com/usda-lab-grown-meat-
cell-cultured-chicken-upside-
foods-1850566211.M., Clemens. “Barilla’s 3D 
Printed Pasta Is Now Available 
for Sale.” 3Dnatives, June 13, 
2022, www.3dnatives.com/en/
barillas-3d-printed-pasta-for-
sale-130620224/.
“Marriott Property in Dubai Con-
verts Humidity into Drinking Wa-
ter for Guests.” Business Travel-
ler. www.businesstraveller.com/
business-travel/2023/02/09/
marriott-property-in-dubai-con-
verts-humidity-into-drink-
ing-water-for-guests/. 
McCurdy, William. “ClientScan 
Launches Facial Recognition 
Product to Help Self-Excluded 
Gamblers” Biometric Update. 
June 15, 2023. https://www.
biometricupdate.com/202306/
clientscan-launches-fa-
cial-recognition-prod-
uct-to-help-self-excluded-gam-
blers.
McLaughlin, Jack. “Wendy’s 
to Test ‘Instant Pickup’ Sys-
tem with Robots Delivering 
Food via Underground Tun-nels.” 614NOW, May 22, 2023. 
https://614now.com/2023/
food-drink/wendys-to-test-in-
stant-pickup-system-with-ro-
bots-delivering-food-via-under-
ground-tunnels.
Moh, Jun Jie, et al. “Gesture 
Recognition and Effective 
Interaction Based Dining Table 
Cleaning Robot.” 2019 7th Inter-
national Conference on Robot 
Intelligence Technology and 
Applications (RiTA), 2019, pp. 
72–77. https://doi.org/10.1109/
RITAPP.2019.8932802.
“New Immersive 3-D Animat-
ed Dining Experiences Debut 
Across United States.” Trazee 
Travel, February 28, 2023, 
https://www.trazeetravel.com/
new-immersive-3-d-animat-
ed-dining-experiences-de-
but-across-united-states/.
PYMNTS. “Sweetgreen Auto-
mates Kitchens, Robots Take 
Over Back of House.” June 26, 
2023. www.pymnts.com/restau-
rant-technology/2023/sweet-green-automates-kitchens-ro-
bots-take-over-back-house/.
PYMNTS. “Voice Commerce Takes 
Over the Restaurant Indus-
try.” May 4, 2023, https://www.
pymnts.com/restaurant-inno-
vation/2023/voice-commerce-
takes-over-the-restaurant-in-
dustry-with-oracle-uber/.
“Radisson Launches Immersive 
Experiences, Localization as It 
Moves to Next Phase of Digital 
Transformation.” Hotels maga-
zine. https://hotelsmag.com/
news/radisson-launches-im-
mersive-experiences-localizatio
n-as-it-moves-to-next-phase-of-
digital-transformation/. 
“Room2 Opens ‘World’s First 
Whole-Life Net-Zero Hotel’ in 
Chiswick.” Dezeen, Decem-
ber 23, 2021. www.dezeen.
com/2021/12/23/net-zero-ho-
tel-room2-chiswick-project-or-
ange/.
Roth, Emma. “Wendy’s Tests 
an AI Chatbot That Takes Your Drive-Thru Order.” The Verge, May 
9, 2023. https://www.theverge.
com/2023/5/9/23716825/wend-
ys-ai-drive-thru-google-llm.
Schwartz, Eric Hal. “Food Tech 
Startup Lunchbox Employs 
DALL-E Text-to-Image Generator 
for Restaurant Menus.” Voicebot.
Ai, February 13, 2023. https://
voicebot.ai/2023/02/13/food-
tech-startup-lunchbox-employs-
dall-e-text-to-image-generator-
for-restaurant-menus/.
“Serve Robotics to Deploy up 
to 2,000 Delivery Bots on Uber 
Eats.” Supply Chain Dive. www.
supplychaindive.com/news/
serve-robotics-uber-eats-deliv-
ery-robots/651683/. 
Snøhetta. Accessed December 
13, 2023.www.snohetta.com/. 
Soothe. “Soothe Launches New 
Hospitality Wellness Platform, 
Enabling Partners to Increase 
Revenue and Enhance Their 
Guest Experience.” April 12, 2023.  www.prnewswire.
com/news-releases/
soothe-launches-new-hospi-
tality-wellness-platform-en-
abling-partners-to-in-
crease-revenue-and-en-
hance-their-guest-experi-
ence-301795055.html. 
“Wearable AR Technology for 
Food Service Industry.” Accessed 
December 13, 2023. hwww.nsf.
org/blog/consumer/ar-technolo-
gy-food-industry. 
“WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions.” Accessed December 
13, 2023. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=NZ394437944&_ci-
d=P20-LJEKN0-65125-1. 
Zhan, Lingxue, et al. “Progress on 
Image Analytics: Implications 
for Tourism and Hospitality Re-
search.” Tourism Management, 
vol. 100, February 2024, p. 104798. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tour-
man.2023.104798.SELECTED SOURCESHOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS INDUSTRYSUPPLY CHAIN • LOGISTICS2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION882© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSSUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
883 T op Headlines
884 State of Play
885 Key Events
886 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
887 Why Supply Chain &  
Logistics Trends Matter  
to Y our Organization 
888 Opportunities and Threats
889 Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
890 Central Themes
892 Ones T o Watch
893  Important T erms
894 Supply Chain & Logistics 
Management
895 Augmented & Automated 
Processes
896 Real-Time Optimization
897 Visibility Track and Trace912 Authors 
914 Selected Sources898 ESG Tracking and Declarations
899 Omnichannel Management 
Platforms
900 Diversifying the Procurement 
Process
901 Last-Mile Solutions
902 Smart Ports
903 Scenario: The OmniVision 
Chain
904 Manufacturing & Distribution 
Enhancements
905 Continuous Additive 
Manufacturing
906 Smart Warehouses
907 Nano-Fulfillment Centers
908 Intelligent Packaging
909 Autonomous Cobots for 
Warehousing and Delivery
910 Scenario: The Chroma 
Information System
911 Scenario: Perpetual Motion 
ManufacturingINDUSTRYWarehouses hire robot 
workers as nearshoring 
drives growth and 
manufacturing moves 
off-land. Driverless 
deliveries and innovative 
eco-friendly packaging 
are also emerging.
883© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
01
02
03
04
05Fulfillment Companies Hire Robots
Human workers in warehouses are increasingly finding themselves working 
alongside robotic workers.
Mexico Becomes a Nearshoring T arget  
Exports from countries experiencing nearshoring to their regions, like Mexico, 
continue to grow.
Driverless Deliveries Are a Reality 
Automated delivery is now an expectation with companies like EASE Logistics 
piloting platooning in trucking transportation.
Packaging Is Not Just for Wrapping  
Packaging patents are trying to make disposal a more eco-friendly process—
and even edible.
Manufacturing Moves Off-Land  
Through ongoing research in additive manufacturing, researchers have 
found ways to manufacture more effectively in space and under water.STATE 
OF PLAYAfter the pressure and volatility of 2023, the supply chain, logistics, and manufactur-
ing industries are experiencing relative stabilization while dealing with ever-changing 
consumer demands, climate change disruptions, and labor shortages. 
Illness and reduced staff are major reasons for delays and bottlenecks in supply 
chains. A concerted effort to attract new talent include creating better working con-
ditions, training opportunities, and innovative recruitment strategies—some studies 
estimate that 87% of companies are trying such tactics to attract new workers. Con-
sumers returning to in-store shopping have increased expectations for seamless and 
rapid fulfillment services like next-day delivery based on their online shopping experi-
ences, and companies are looking to enhance their last-mile delivery platforms.
Investors and consumers keep pushing for supply chains to become greener, with 
a significant percentage of companies feeling the pressure to reduce their carbon 
footprint. As more companies—over 40%—make investments in electrification, re-
source management, and more sustainable practices, this will continue to grow. With 
2023 being the hottest year on record, many of these industries are also experiencing 
disruption due to extreme weather and looking to diversify sourcing and procurement, 
along with reshoring, to address the issue. However, delays at ports and limited sup-
plies of raw materials have combined into a worrisome challenge for manufacturing. 
Demand for logistics and manufacturing space continues to increase yet soaring 
construction costs are a barrier.
Many of these challenges are putting the focus on automation and the use of tech-
nology for greater efficiency and visibility. The integration of the data needed to make 
automated decisions still proves challenging, and much of the data remains siloed. 
The largest push across supply chains and logistics for artificial intelligence and ma-
chine learning has been in inventory and network optimization, as well as warehouse 
resource management. Spearheading a New Era of 
Advanced Automation and 
Crystal-Clear Visibility
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
884885© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.APRIL 25, 2023
Colors determines quality  
Researchers at the University of 
Genoa are working on packaging 
that changes color depending on 
the quality of the product inside. 
MAY 17, 2023
Driverless deliveries take off  
Ohio-based EASE Logistics announces its 
launch of the first autonomous trucking 
haul in the US.JUNE 28, 2023
Parabola lands funding  
Parabola makes automating manual processes 
easy to manage, regardless of a team’s technology 
proficiency. JUNE 15, 2023
Delivery robots require no humans  
Cartken’s delivery robots can now 
use AI for full Level 4 autonomy on 
sidewalks. AUGUST 9, 2023
Revolutionizing automated routes  
The EPG-Greenplan partnership reaches a 
milestone when logistics provider DANX 
starts implementing Greenplan’s innovative 
“overlapping” algorithm in Denmark.KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS886© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ON-DEMAND DRIVES INSTANTANEOUS 
PROCESSES
Change—whether from consumer de-
mands, new technologies, or global 
shifts—is the one constant in the supply 
chain and logistics industries. It’s what 
leads to new offerings and services, such 
as the industries’ need to respond to the 
increasing expectations for on-demand 
and instantaneous deliveries, commu-
nication, production, and reports. Inno-
vations in tracking and tracing goods, 
automation, and expedited and near-
shored manufacturing are happening, 
but attention is still needed to address 
the shortages in capital and talent. Proper 
investment to meet the gaps through 
technology will be expensive, and could 
create a burden many smaller companies 
cannot bear unless they create a clear 
strategic roadmap. With talent droughts 
occuring in all three they will have to keep 
competing for talent and seek out work-
ers willing to be upskilled.Personalized Delivery Gets Automated
As delivery routes and last-mile deliveries 
continue to increase in speed and complexity, 
automation will let logistics companies cre-
ate an intricate web of delivery offerings that 
can be unique to each customer. 
Virtual Agents T ake Over 
With workers continuing to grow in scarcity, 
virtual agents will take over back-of-house 
work in the warehouse. These virtual agents 
will soon be able to oversee themselves and 
their cobot workers, reducing the need for 
human intervention.Climate Insurance for Protection
As climate change continues to be a disrup-
tion, logistics providers will explore how they 
can insure against extreme weather events. 
These costs could be passed along to con-
sumers who choose goods from more volatile 
regions. Combating a Skills Drought 
Increased automation and use of virtual 
agents raise the need for workers to to know 
how to manage new tech-enabled work and 
tasks. This upskilling could be done through 
remote learning and working opportunities.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Instant Manufacturing Meets Demands
With manufacturing locations moving closer 
to the consumer and e-commerce increasing, 
manufacturers need to consider how to create 
products in the exact spot as their consum-
ers. Verification Based on Values
Global conflicts, combined with consumers 
and businesses wary of supporting govern-
ments with values antithetical to their own 
will increase demand for verification of supply 
chains. Granular data collection and transmis-
sion will enable this shift in transparency.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionINDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS887© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.As companies collect 
more data around 
their manufacturing 
processes, procurement 
procedures, and logistics 
for transporting goods, 
they will be able to 
create more in-depth 
reports to provide the 
level of transparency 
many governments and 
consumers require. This 
task can eventually be 
automated.It can be hard to 
ensure multiple 
management platforms 
are interoperable, and 
that their data can 
be utilized across the 
system. An omnichannel 
platform synthesizes and 
streamlines processes 
and information into 
one concentrated tool, 
to establish consistent 
workflows.While procurement gets 
disrupted by climate 
change and geopolitical 
conflicts, diversifying 
the procurement process 
and nearshoring can help 
mitigate future incidents. 
This will ultimately benefit 
the bottom line through 
customer satisfaction; 
however the upfront 
investment costs need to 
be charted quickly.As consumers and 
businesses continue 
to monitor their goods 
and orders as they move 
through the supply chain 
and then through logistics 
channels, the ability to 
communicate changes 
in real time will offer a 
sense of stability and 
transparency. Ultimately, 
companies need to decide 
on the method for such 
communication so the 
information is clear and 
not burdensome.While e-commerce 
continues to increase, 
companies need to 
ensure the production of 
goods isn’t interrupted 
or stopped. Continuous 
production through 
additive manufacturing 
can offer help in this 
area, and also sometimes 
reduce the raw materials 
needed to produce the 
goods.As cobots more closely 
resemble the typical 
worker, human managers 
might need new skills 
to manage them. 
Autonomous cobots can 
already travel without 
colliding into racks and 
other workers, but this 
technology will need 
to be monitored and 
probably further updated 
as warehouses undergo 
further developments.Track and Trace for 
Climate AccountabilityStreamlining 
Management PlatformsBeing Resource 
ResilientCommunicating in 
Real Time Continuous  
ProductionNew Management 
NeededWHY SUPPLY CHAIN, LOGISTICS & MANUFACTURING TRENDS MATTER 
TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
Data silos will hinder the flow of information, and ultimately slow the 
automation process. Companies that have already managed to bring all 
of their data streams to one platform will have a leg up, and their data 
integration will support better decision-making.
Lack of raw materials will become a pressing issue for manufacturers that 
are not diversifying their procurement channels and taking climate change 
issues into account. Related delays will ultimately force customers to 
reconsider who they will purchase from.
As delivery routes get more complicated, they could be both too difficult for 
human delivery workers and too costly for autonomous delivery. If companies 
don’t find the right balance, competitors will win out on savings realized from 
overlapping last-mile delivery routes.
Until it’s fully automated, data collection could lead to bottlenecks and 
time-consuming processes. However, the granular level of data that needs 
to be collected cannot be hurried, especially as new EU regulations require 
presentation of the data before allowing the goods to pass through its ports 
or be sold to consumers.
Tech adoption costs will continue to deter modernization and weaken 
competitiveness. For companies that are market constrained and too focused 
on the bottom line, they may not see the long-term return on investment and 
miss out on investment opportunities.Opportunities
Automation could augment production to help create goods more efficiently 
and deliver them faster. This can also offset talent shortages and help reduce 
costly errors that lead to recalls. It also helps with future preparedness.
Greater visibility means more efficient management of goods. Consequently, 
companies can optimize their inventory and thereby reduce the need for storage 
space. It also offers new ways to connect with customers and potential ways to 
upsell services.
Greater customer personalization can lead to renewed interest in lagging 
products. It also offers higher profit margins for goods that can be efficiently 
delivered. With more engagement and satisfaction, personalization data can 
also be leveraged to develop better products.
Amid talent shortages, staff augmentation and upskilling will create greater 
loyalty and better performance from employees, which ultimately impacts 
profitability and productivity. Augmentation will also improve future flexibility 
and workforce readiness as new technologies develop.
New forms of verification offer enhanced security and reinforces visibility and 
integrity with clients. As competitors work to mimic products and services, 
this level of verification can help reduce fraud and increase awareness of a 
company’s specific practices.
888© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS889© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Consider investing in the 
automation of data collec-
tion and analysis. Prioritize 
the investment based on 
what tasks are being done 
in-house on the preferred 
platform, to avoid creating 
two sources of data that 
cannot be integrated. Such 
automation opens up more 
reporting and analysis of 
current processes for a 
strong understanding of 
what technology imple-
mentation should be next. Upskill talent now so that 
they’re  ready to meet new 
technology needs—which 
could include how to man-
age or repair new equip-
ment or cobots. This could 
become a new pathway to 
long-term careers and op-
portunities in your company. Begin to investigate which 
cobot works best for you. 
Based on your company’s 
size and scope of pack -
aging and picking, this 
technology could serve 
different needs. Include 
strategic plans for future 
growth in this decision, or 
where staffing shortages 
are affecting your supply 
chains or manufacturers 
the most. Optimize visibility that 
works for the customer. 
Cumbersome platforms 
with confusing reports only 
add to the overload of data 
most customers have to 
slog through. Use data to 
prioritize the channels your 
customers want and help 
them understand how to 
gain insights from the new 
visibility.Invest in planning for new 
technologies that allow 
for better route optimiza-
tion and last-mile delivery 
deployment. Watch reg-
ulations on drones and 
other forms of autonomous 
delivery, to help decide 
which areas to invest in 
first. Exploring both options 
now can prepare you to 
act when those regulations 
come to fruition.Use your new data 
streams to offer insights 
that can improve your 
sustainability and respon-
sibility messaging to your 
customers. However, this 
needs to be done in a way 
that is personalized to 
their needs, which means 
more micro-level and tar -
geted communications.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 890INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
Automating Decisions and Processes
For companies working toward automation of deci-
sion-making and processes some are taking steps to 
bring their data into one knowledge bank. With vari-
ables like traffic jams, extreme weather, and fuel costs 
always at play, the logistics sector is most concerned 
with creating more efficient pathways for transporting 
goods. Progress in route optimization, coupled with 
autonomous vehicles, includes greater automated 
decisions on the flow of goods with minimal human in-
tervention, and will ultimately lead to cost reductions 
due to fuel efficiency and less human error. For supply 
chains, automation of the routing and sourcing of raw 
materials, demand forecasting, tracking of inventory 
levels, and accelerating response times continue to 
be top ways to drive down costs and meet customer 
expectations. In manufacturing, companies are focus-
ing their automation efforts on being able to make  
real-time process adjustments.Closing the Last-Mile Gap
Companies in Europe, parts of Africa such as Keyna, 
and India are creating alternatives for more efficient 
last-mile solutions. Bangalore has seen the largest 
growth. With consumers demanding delivery within 
minutes to very granular locations, it’s become a com-
petitive imperative to innovate this expensive portion 
of logistics, with the ultimate goal of delivering value 
and speed to end consumers. Advances in AI for route 
planning and altering routes in real time are providing 
greater service and transparency for customers. Along 
with electrified transportation, micro-fulfillment cen-
ters are making progress on new last-mile methods. 
As companies experiment with using larger fleets of 
drones that can handle increasingly heavy items, this 
technology is combining with platooning efforts that 
could create swarm delivery for the last mile.Authenticating Provenance of Goods
Customers and businesses can watch their goods 
throughout the entire process—from the time raw 
materials are picked up until they reach their final 
destination. Through new interconnected systems 
that provide real-time data, every step can be verified 
and recorded. Businesses and customers can possibly 
intervene if one step doesn’t align with their needs, val-
ues, or expectations. Ensuring authenticity and com-
pliance through this visibility is crucial and is happen-
ing through the use of new labels, product passports, 
and sensors. Also crucial is how the collected data gets 
managed and used. It can help prevent future bottle-
necks if it can be integrated into platforms that offer 
the required visibility.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 891INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
Improving Warehouse Efficiency 
In warehouses, delays can come from many sources 
such as injury or unexpected surges in demand. Re-
sponding to this risk, warehouses continue to become 
automated, dark, more connected and, in some cases, 
smaller. Whether they’re using drones to scan packag-
es and track inventory, automated picking, cobots that 
package the pallets, or augmented wearables for work-
er safety, warehouses are becoming more efficient. 
This efficiency is augmented by sensors that can tell if 
goods have spoiled or there is damage within the con-
tainer. With such tools, tracking inventory and manag-
ing inventory levels is becoming increasingly efficient 
and more manageable, and a synergistic ecosystem 
is developing, where each technology reinforces the 
other. Additive manufacturing also helps create more 
efficiency by freeing up more space for storage of parts 
only when those parts are needed.Hiring Robotic Staff
Each year, cobots become smarter, more autonomous, 
and more prolific, and this year is no exception. In fact, 
the first humanoid robot factory is set to open and 
produce 10,000 robots a year. These robots that work 
alongside human workers are being trained on more 
data that allows them to adapt and work around their 
human counterparts. Developers have focused on 
improving cobot safety measures, so a cobot knows 
what to do if it bumps into an unexpected obstacle or 
person. These cobots mitigate potentially harmful work 
for humans by either augmenting the human body or 
replicating repetitive tasks that could cause future 
injuries. Some of the augmented wearables can also 
offer predictive pathways through the warehouse to en-
sure worker safety. As autonomy continues to grow in 
robots and transportation, this trend will create new-
found efficiencies and productivity, particularly during 
peak demand seasons. The Intelligent Manufacturing Evolution
Manufacturing continues to transform from a tradi-
tional labor-intensive practice to a more sophisticated 
and interconnected system. Recent advances intend 
to create higher levels of productivity and efficiency, 
but they’re  also addressing sustainability require-
ments and enabling product personalization. The new 
tools and technology can spot flaws in products before 
they leave the floor, greatly increasing consistency for 
goods. Along with quality control, sensors and digital 
twins are getting companies to focus on predictive 
maintenance by reducing downtime during large runs 
or times of high demand. Additive manufacturing also 
allows for the integration of new materials that are 
themselves smarter and more connected. And it helps 
reduce the number of parts needed for production of 
a good, which can streamline production and reduce 
waste as only the parts needed are produced.Dr. Alexandra Brintrup, professor at the 
University of Cambridge, for her work in data 
revolution within supply chain networks.
S. Vijay, assistant professor at Arasu Engi-
neering College, for his work on autonomous 
drones.
Màrius Montmany and Oriol Hernandez, 
co-founders of Rever, for their work on in-
stant refunds and label generation.
Arti Kütt, CEO of Cleveron, for his work on 
parcel robots and lockers.
Paola Lova, assistant professor at the Uni-
versity of Genoa, for her work on intelligent 
packaging.
Ioannis Kaloskampis, David Bradnum, 
Charles McGowan, Paige Hunter, and  
Melissa Bui, all of the UK’s Data Science 
Campus, for their work using natural lan-
guage processing and transformer-based 
deep learning models to construct supply 
chain networks from unstructured text.Ieva Meidute-Kavaliauskiene, head of the 
Business Technologies and Entrepreneurship 
Department at Vilnius Gediminas Technical 
University, for her work in using neural net-
works within the supply chain.
Sehinde Afolayan, founder of Haul247, for 
his work in creating an end-to-end logistics 
platform in Nigeria.
Jörg Lamprecht, executive chairman and 
founder of Dedrone, for his work on a global 
network of urban drone detection services.
Antonio Spears, co-CEO at City Global, for 
his work on augmented reality technology in 
product development.
Mor M. Peretz, Dr. Alon Cervera, and Dr. Eli 
Abramov, co-founders of CaPow, for their work 
in bringing perpetual power to autonomous 
robots. 
Ali Ekti, researcher at Department of Energy’s 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, for his work in 
the development of low-powered sensors for 
pavement markers.Sachin Sharma, doctoral student at West-
ern Michigan University, for his contribu-
tions to the research on autonomous driving 
technologies.
Zachary Asher, assistant professor of 
mechanical and aerospace engineering at 
Western Michigan University, for his work on 
pavement markers supporting autonomous 
driving in tough conditions in remote areas.
Dr. Emma Y ang, assistant professor at The 
University of Texas at Arlington, for her work 
on hybrid additive-subtractive manufactur-
ing equipment.
Dr. Raymond Weitekamp, founder of Poly-
Spectra, for his work on generating stronger 
3D printed materials.
Pascal Bensoussan, chief product officer at 
Ivalua, for his work in AI-powered contract 
digitization and purchasing optimization.ONES TO WATCH
892© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSIMPORTANT TERMS
893Additive manufacturing 
A manufacturing process of creating objects by 
adding material layer by layer. It is synonymous 
with 3D printing but includes using reactive mate-
rials for 4D printing.
Customer relationship management (CRM)
A tool that manages a company’s interactions with 
current and potential customers.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
Integrates all facets of an operation, including de-
velopment, manufacturing, sales, and marketing.
Environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
Refers to the three central factors in measuring the 
sustainability and societal impact of an invest-
ment in a company.
Fulfillment centers 
Warehouse facilities used to store, package, and 
ship consumer goods. 
Last-mile delivery 
The final step of the delivery process where a prod-
uct moves from a transportation hub to the final 
delivery destination, typically a personal residence.Transportation management system (TMS) 
A system that plans, executes, and optimizes the 
physical movement of goods, both incoming and 
outgoing.
Warehouse management system (WMS) 
A system that supports and optimizes warehouse 
or distribution center management.Logistics 
The detailed coordination and implementation 
of complex operations involving the movement 
of goods, services, or information from origin to 
destination. 
Order management system (OMS) 
A system that facilitates and manages the order 
fulfillment process.
Product lifecycle management (PLM) 
A software solution that manages the entire life-
cycle of a product, from inception, through engi-
neering design and manufacturing, to service and 
disposal.
Procurement 
The process of sourcing and acquiring the goods 
and services a company needs to fulfill its busi-
ness model. It involves the negotiation of prices, 
terms, and contracts for purchasing.
Supply chain 
The entire system of producing and delivering a 
product or service, from the very beginning stage of 
sourcing the raw materials, to the final delivery of 
the product or service, to end consumers.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS894© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SUPPLY CHAIN 
& LOGISTICS 
MANAGEMENTINDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Supply chain and logistics 
providers are continuing to 
harness AI-enhanced automation 
and AI-augmented decision 
support solutions to stay ahead 
and capture value right from day 
one of implementation.AI-driven supply chain management models can opt for either a 
data-consolidation approach, by harnessing extensive training 
data sources, or use multiple specialized models tailored to spe-
cific domains. Companies such as Mariner and Landing AI provide 
solutions for manufacturing—including defect detection—which 
work with limited and imperfect data sets. This approach differs 
from big data solutions from providers such as Kitov and Cognex, 
which work by ingesting huge quantities of data.
Parabola, a Series B startup, uses AI to automate complex man-
ual processes through familiar spreadsheet functionality, and is 
usable by teams of all technical aptitudes. In the realm of cloud-
based solutions, Adiona has created an Optimization Software-
as-a-Service (OSaaS) that helps businesses improve their logistic 
processes while cutting costs. 
Going even further, researchers at the University of Cambridge are 
developing a platform that can make decisions and autonomously 
act on behalf of stakeholders in supply chains. This system has 
virtual agents that bridge internet of things  data and machine 
learning, possessing the ability to select suppliers, procure goods, 
and respond to unplanned events through pricing adjustments 
and automated rerouting. And Carrier Logistics Inc. has introduced 
AI-driven routing logic and planning optimization with a unique 
focus on terminal optimization for trucking fleets. The software 
features the ability to automatically plan shipments for every 
customer at every terminal, accounting for various factors like 
equipment, time windows, and traffic.Implementing augmented and automated processes significantly 
diminishes manual labor and human error, which translates into 
substantial cost reductions, greater efficiency, and an optimiza-
tion of resources. It can also help make better, data-informed de-
cisions. And by reducing errors and omissions, potential setbacks 
in the supply chain can be minimized. As access to automation 
grows, employees will gain the sense that they can more effectively 
contribute to growing the company and the bottom line. And auto-
mation can also prevent downtime-related losses by forecasting 
the least-disruptive times to conduct maintenance while extend-
ing the life of equipment through proper maintenance. Using au-
tomation to select suppliers could further increase efficiency but 
also lead to questions as to why those companies were selected in 
the first place. Defining the parameters for AI’s selection criteria 
will be incredibly important. By optimizing routes and reducing 
unnecessary mileage, companies can reduce fuel consumption 
and lower carbon emissions, aligning with the growing importance 
of sustainability in the supply chain and logistics industries.AUGMENTED 
& AUTOMATED 
PROCESSES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 895INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Companies can increase the 
control of the flow of goods, 
maximize fuel efficiency, and 
increase sustainability when they 
are able to optimize routes in real 
time, while still delivering their 
goods on time. Real-time supply chain optimization offers immediate insights, 
letting companies improve efficiency, reduce costs, optimize 
routes, and adapt to changing conditions. London-based Sensat 
creates digital twins for physical infrastructure; the digital replica 
updates in real time with automatic drone updates, camera feeds, 
and live data. Moving from visualization to real-time control, 
French company Zozio’s ROBIN presents a real-time SaaS using 
IoT trackers to monitor product and equipment locations at every 
production stage.
Aera Technology has partnered with Colgate-Palmolive, aiming to 
provide a single source of truth for data across multiple sources, 
predict optimal product allocation, and prioritize fulfillment and 
safety stock demand. 
Fleetroot’s IoT platform offers real-time tracking, route optimiza-
tion, and order management for fleets. In the realm of real-time 
fleet management, Nvidia’s cuOpt, an accelerated optimization en-
gine, can solve complex routing problems with subsecond solver 
response times for dynamic rerouting, job scheduling, and robotic 
simulations. It achieves world-record accuracy with a 2.98% error 
gap on the Gehring & Homberger benchmark.
Bettermile’s cloud-based logistics platform distinguishes itself 
with features like real-time tracking, dynamic route optimiza-
tion, and enhanced communication. Notably, it provides tailored 
solutions for specialized shipping industries, ensuring secure and 
punctual deliveries aligned with industry regulations. Lastly, on 
the note of eco-conscious routing, Greenplan stands out with its 
ability to optimize routes with a focus on diminishing carbon foot-
print while allowing spontaneous assignments in daily routes.Real-time solutions make it so companies can adapt to chang-
ing conditions, ensuring seamless operations and minimizing 
disruptions while containing costs. Businesses that embrace 
real-time optimization can consistently monitor and adjust oper-
ations, which will help them maintain high standards of perfor-
mance and increase customer satisfaction. Innovations that solve 
routing problems or merge routes will achieve new efficiencies 
and previously unrealized areas of potential. This kind of dynamic 
routing could also offer the ability to create more dynamic pric-
ing instead of fixed rates, depending on the level of efficiency 
that can be achieved. Because fuel is one of the biggest costs to 
these industries, this kind of optimization could result in almost 
immediate savings. But these real-time solutions can also dovetail 
to ensure transportation professionals do not exceed their allotted 
hours while providing greater insights on how they can maximize 
time on the road. Various conditions in the future such as sales, 
holidays, product runs, extreme weather, and traffic due to aging 
infrastructure could all be alleviated through the predictive plan-
ning these platforms offer.REAL-TIME 
OPTIMIZATION2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 896INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Track and trace solutions let 
organizations and customers 
track movement at every stage of 
the supply chain, helping manage 
uncertainty and disruptions in real 
time.Shipping track and trace is the backbone of modern logistics. In 
collaboration with British Telecom, Gorilla Technology Group has 
introduced a container identification and container damage de-
tection solution; this innovation uses AI and machine learning to 
analyze video footage, identify containers, track movements, and 
detect damages.
DB Schenker has introduced ultra-thin tracking labels in part-
nership with Sensos. These disposable labels can be attached to 
containers, pallets, or cartons to enable real-time tracking of ship-
ments across land, air, and ocean transport. They provide location 
and temperature data over the mobile network, ensuring security 
for valuable consignments.
DNA tags and traceability systems represent a novel frontier in 
supply chain security, offering atypical authenticity verification. 
Applied DNA Sciences employs synthetic DNA tags: Sprayed as a 
fine mist, they can be used for everything from tracking microcir-
cuits for the Department of Defense to tracing cannabis supply 
chains, making it a potent tool against counterfeiting. Eurofins 
and Applied DNA Sciences have further partnered to pioneer a 
DNA-based traceability system in the leather supply chain. The 
unique molecular signatures of synthetic DNA tags make them 
impossible to copy, providing forensic evidence of product authen-
ticity and safeguarding against counterfeit goods.
Continuing the exploration of supply chain security, Swiss startup 
ScanTrust combines secure QR codes and business intelligence 
software for supply chain data. Its QR codes facilitate anti-coun-
terfeiting for consumers using just a smartphone and require no 
programming. Track and trace solutions are enhancing logistics efficiency and 
customer service. Synthetic DNA tags represent a significant 
advancement in supply chain security, by offering unparalleled 
authenticity verification and protection against counterfeiting, 
strengthening brand trust and traceability. Potential benefits 
include improved visibility into the supply chain for customers 
and better inventory management for companies. Companies 
can reduce excess inventory, lower storage costs, and optimize 
stocking levels based on real-time demand if they properly track 
their goods. But in the future, the technology could prove problem-
atic as synthetic biology scales and DNA copyrights. The security 
for tracking will become even more important if supply chains 
continue to be disrupted, and companies will have to rely on their 
customers’ faith in the business to maintain stability. Hacking of 
track and trace opens up new forms of digital piracy that should 
be a concern.VISIBILITY TRACK 
AND TRACE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 897INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
With ESG tracking and 
declarations, companies can 
align their supply chains with 
their environmental, social, and 
governance goals, to foster 
transparency, responsibility, and 
sustainable practices.As more companies make ESG tracking a priority, a flurry of VC 
funding has opened up for startups focused on ESG reporting and 
management. That includes Germany-based IntegrityNext, which 
helps companies audit their supply chains for ESG compliance, 
and France’s SESAMm, which provides corporations with ESG 
insights into their supply chain. CarbonChain specializes in 
assisting industries with high emissions—such as agriculture, 
metal, mining, and oil and gas—to monitor their supply chain 
emissions. Companies upload their supply chain data on the 
platform and receive comprehensive emissions reports, complete 
with detailed breakdowns at the asset level and AI-generated 
sustainability insights.
Sheer Logistics introduced its own customized ESG dashboards 
that enable managed transportation clients to monitor real-time 
Scope 3 carbon dioxide emissions across all transportation modes 
in their supply chain. These dashboards aggregate transportation 
data, ensuring clients can accurately track, measure, and report 
emissions following a globally recognized standard developed by 
the Global Logistics Emissions Council.
In line with this trend, Apple released a new framework high-
lighting its progress on renewable energy adoption, efficiency 
improvement, and materials innovation. To do this, the company 
conducted in-depth analyses of the clean energy percentage used 
in manufacturing for each product and tracked the impact of ex-
panded recycled materials usage on device climate footprints.ESG tracking and reporting ensure compliance with ESG stan-
dards, thus reducing the risk of regulatory issues, financial pen-
alties, and reputational damage. ESG tracking is also a strategic 
asset in building a resilient, ethical, and competitive business. It 
can also help companies be better prepared for future risks to their 
resources in regions that are vulnerable to climate change. Making 
this kind of information publicly available enhances transparency 
and accountability, fostering trust among stakeholders, includ-
ing consumers and investors. This is increasingly important as 
consumer awareness and concern about environmental and social 
issues grow; companies with transparent and responsible prac-
tices in their supply chains can significantly influence purchasing 
decisions. Furthermore, prioritizing ESG tracking gives companies 
a competitive advantage in the market. But it’s not just about pub-
lic perception: ESG tracking and declarations equip companies to 
better adapt to changing economic and environmental conditions, 
providing resilience against the challenges of sustainability. ESG TRACKING AND 
DECLARATIONS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 898INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
A comprehensive platform 
that includes everything from 
warehouse management systems, 
to enterprise resource planning, 
to transportation management 
systems eases the responsibilities 
behind  sourcing, manufacturing, 
and delivering products to 
customers.Omnichannel, a pivotal strategy in modern commerce, seamlessly 
integrates varied sales and distribution channels to provide con-
sumers a unified expedited experience while minimizing invento-
ry. Recently acquired by Ingka Investments, the investment arm 
of Ikea, Made4net specializes in a cloud-based warehouse man-
agement system and end-to-end supply chain execution software. 
Its omnichannel fulfillment solution will boost Ikea’s operations, 
enhancing order fulfillment accuracy and supply chain visibility 
across 482 locations. Target has also highlighted the success of 
its omnichannel efforts: In a recent earnings report the retailer 
boasted a 4% growth in same-day services and a 7% increase in 
drive-up usage.
Flowspace’s software provides centralized visibility and reporting, 
offering modern omnichannel solutions to efficiently manage and 
optimize supply chain operations, whether a company uses its 
own facilities or Flowspace’s network. And Maersk has introduced 
an e-commerce fulfillment solution that streamlines warehousing, 
order processing, and last-mile deliveries, ensuring end-to-end 
visibility and reducing the need for multiple logistics partners.
Omnichannel fulfillment also boosts order volume and necessi-
tates quicker deliveries for smaller orders. Blue Yonder’s Ware-
house Execution System optimizes warehouse operations by 
efficiently allocating tasks to the appropriate resources, resulting 
in increased capacity and operational excellence. And Belgium’s 
Alpega provides a comprehensive logistics system for end-to-end 
transportation services by facilitating real-time communication 
between manufacturers and logistics providers while streamlining 
transportation requests into a single system. Omnichannel management platforms are essential in the supply 
chain, logistics, and manufacturing industries for creating a cohe-
sive and efficient consumer experience across various sales and 
distribution channels. By centralizing operations, these platforms 
greatly enhance customer retention and satisfaction. They skillful-
ly balance minimizing inventory levels with maintaining product 
availability, which reduces holding costs and boosts the overall 
efficiency of supply chain operations. Centralized reporting fea-
tures simplify the management and optimization of supply chain 
activities. Additionally, the cost-efficiencies introduced by these 
platforms span multiple facets of supply chain operations, includ-
ing warehousing, order processing, transportation, and adminis-
tration. Importantly, these platforms are designed for scalability, 
enabling businesses to adjust to fluctuating order volumes and 
smoothly expand operations. This adaptability is crucial for growth 
and meeting market demands, making omnichannel management 
platforms a strategic tool for businesses aiming to streamline 
their operations and effectively scale.OMNICHANNEL 
MANAGEMENT 
PLATFORMS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 899INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Companies are expanding their 
supplier base to make it more 
inclusive and in line with their 
corporate values—which can 
also benefit their bottom line. 
They’re achieving this through 
new technologies offering 
transparency and onboarding 
efficiencies.Broadening the procurement process is vital to bolster adapt-
ability and mitigate risks like supply interruptions and price 
fluctuations. Linkana streamlines supplier onboarding and 
governance with automated compliance processes, reducing 
the hassle of vetting new suppliers. Its methodology identi-
fies diverse and inclusive economy suppliers, automates risk 
analysis, and provides access to a vast B2B network.
Delving into cloud-based solutions, Ivalua offers an AI-en-
hanced source-to-contract process that simplifies supplier 
risk assessment, fraud reduction, and contract analytics. 
Omnia Partners’ Opus supports procurement with a simpli-
fied platform providing access to hundreds of cooperative 
contracts. Users can requisition from multiple suppliers 
in a single transaction and access real-time product data, 
eliminating the need for multiple websites or third-party 
platforms.
In digital procurement intelligence, Smart Cube’s Ampli-
fi PRO, an on-demand procurement intelligence platform, 
introduces AI/machine learning functionality for enhanced 
search capabilities. Users can post sourcing questions and 
get summarized responses within seconds. On a similar note, 
Scoutbee’s Intelligence Platform incorporates generative AI 
features to provide deep insights into supply bases. NASA 
has introduced its Acquisition Innovation Launchpad to 
accelerate innovation communication, diversify the indus-
trial base, and modernize procurement. With this initiative, 
NASA’s focus shifts to modular procurement approaches, 
emphasizing safe risk-taking and agility to adapt to a fast-
paced technological environment.Diversifying the procurement process is crucial in these in-
dustries because it significantly mitigates the risks related 
to sole-sourcing. By sourcing from a variety of suppliers, 
businesses can reduce vulnerabilities such as supply inter-
ruptions, price volatility, and weakened negotiation posi-
tions, thereby fortifying the resilience of their supply chains. 
Streamlining the supplier onboarding process through 
automated compliance procedures simplifies and accel-
erates the vetting of new suppliers, conserving time and 
resources. This automation not only facilitates engagement 
with a broader range of suppliers but also minimizes risks 
linked to new, untested suppliers, contributing to a more 
dependable supply chain. Additionally, a diverse procure-
ment strategy yields richer data and insights, improving the 
efficiency and effectiveness of decision-making processes 
in the supply chain. Overall, diversification in procurement 
is not just a risk management tactic but a strategic ap-
proach to building a robust, agile, and data-rich supply 
chain infrastructure.DIVERSIFYING THE 
PROCUREMENT 
PROCESS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 900INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Companies are seeking to shorten 
the last mile to increase their 
margins. Several new advances 
in technology are offering faster 
solutions and increased range of 
delivery.Last-mile solutions are the linchpin of modern supply chains, en-
suring timely deliveries, cost-efficiency, and a superior customer 
experience while addressing urbanization and sustainability chal-
lenges. Manna, an Irish company, is tackling the last mile in the 
sky: Its all-electric, zero-emission drones have an average delivery 
time of three minutes and offer sustainable shopping options 
while prioritizing customer privacy.
For ground-level solutions, Cartken’s delivery robots have 
achieved Level 4 autonomy on sidewalks, significantly reducing 
reliance on human operators and enabling cost-effective auton-
omous last-mile deliveries. AxleHire enhances last-mile delivery 
accuracy with its technology, helping cross-border e-commerce 
companies achieve next-day shipping upon entry into the US. 
Similarly, DeliveryDefense from UPS Capital uses predictive ana-
lytics to assess delivery risk associated with addresses across the 
US. It empowers e-commerce retailers to make informed decisions 
before shipping, enhancing the likelihood of successful deliveries. 
And Curri, which focuses on on-demand, last-mile logistics for the 
construction industry, offers nationwide fleet services for various 
load types, providing real-time tracking, proof-of-delivery, and 
comprehensive visibility.
Shifting to environmental impact, Estonian tech company Cleve-
ron has introduced a battery-powered outdoor parcel locker that 
significantly reduces CO2 emissions in the last-mile sector. Cycle, 
a B2B mobility solution for delivery services and couriers, enables 
sustainable last-mile delivery with e-bikes and has secured 10.3 
million euros in Series A funding.Last-mile delivery solutions are crucial for ensuring timely and 
efficient deliveries—a key factor in meeting customer expectations 
and maintaining a competitive edge. They significantly reduce 
delivery costs by optimizing routes, decreasing dependence on 
human labor, and increasing overall delivery efficiency. Providing a 
superior customer experience, vital for fostering brand loyalty and 
encouraging repeat business, is another critical aspect of last-mile 
solutions. Technological advancements such as dynamic rout-
ing algorithms and predictive analytics play a significant role in 
enhancing the accuracy and efficiency of these deliveries, making 
them both successful and cost-effective. Moreover, the develop-
ment of specialized last-mile services for specific industries, like 
on-demand logistics in construction, exemplifies the innovative 
potential of these solutions to meet unique industry needs. Last-
mile solutions are not just a final step in the delivery process; they 
are strategic tools for improving customer satisfaction, reducing 
operational costs, and driving innovation tailored to industry-spe-
cific requirements.LAST-MILE 
SOLUTIONS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 901INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
The congestion at ports that 
arose during the pandemic has 
begun to ease, but concerns 
about the future have companies 
looking for new shipping routes, 
new devices for monitoring 
congestion, new smart 
technology implementation, and 
new ways to expedite loading 
and unloading.Europe’s two largest shipping gateways have begun a series of 
investments to manage increasing shipping activity. The Dutch port 
of Rotterdam, known as one of the best smart ports in the world, is 
expanding its fully automated capacity and hinterland connectivity, 
while the Antwerp-Bruges port has launched an extensive digital 
radar and camera network to manage its substantial shipping traffic.
Amid these investments, Awake.AI has introduced the Smart Port as 
a service platform, leveraging Intel technology, AI, and 5G to enhance 
operational efficiency in ports. The platform utilizes machine-learn-
ing models and sensors to provide real-time awareness of cargo 
flows, optimized port utilization rates, and reduced emissions.
The Port of Ponce in Puerto Rico is set to become a Smart Port Lab 
through a partnership with Scale AI. A $2 million project will develop 
AI-enabled port infrastructure, including document processing, route 
optimization, and object recognition. This initiative aims to modern-
ize shipping and transportation equipment, unify shipping and port 
data, and enhance operations for the port.
In Asia, Langkawi Port is also focusing on enhancing its smart port 
infrastructure. It has partnered with CelcomDigi to use AI-driven 
safety and security solutions to analyze vehicles, create smart digital 
boundary control, and conduct general surveillance to ensure effi-
cient and secure port operations. And Tianjin Port Group and Huawei 
are deepening their cooperation to create a digital twin of the port 
leading to Beijing. This initiative involves constructing automated 
terminals, upgrading traditional terminals, and making the overall 
port more automated and intelligent.Smart ports are using  cutting-edge technologies like AI, 5G, and 
digital radar networks to revolutionize operations in the sup-
ply chain, logistics, and manufacturing industries. By providing 
real-time insights into cargo movements, these ports optimize uti-
lization rates and streamline processes, leading to cost reductions 
and enhanced supply chain efficiencies. This shift marks a sig-
nificant stride in the maritime sector’s digital transformation, by 
incorporating the use of digital twins—virtual replicas of physical 
ports—for smarter, more efficient operations. Additionally, features 
such as vehicle analytics, digital boundary control, and enhanced 
surveillance bolster overall safety and security, mitigating risks 
and ensuring uninterrupted port activities. Smart ports also play 
a pivotal role in the global trend toward connectivity and inter-
connectivity. They enhance hinterland links and unify shipping 
and port data, facilitating the management of extensive shipping 
traffic. In essence, smart ports are not just about technological up-
grades; they represent a holistic approach to redefining maritime 
logistics, emphasizing efficiency, safety, and global connectivity.SMART PORTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 902INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2031
The OmniVision Chain   
An immersive omnichannel platform called OmniVision has transformed how supply chain management controllers 
operate. Gone are the days of monitoring operations from a physical warehouse; now, controllers navigate a virtual 
landscape that mirrors the real-time dynamics of the global supply chain. Within the OmniVision environment, man-
agement controllers—equipped with advanced VR gear—stand amid a digital twin of the supply chain world. They ob-
serve a holographic globe where supply routes, manufacturing hubs, and distribution centers pulse with life. Through 
intuitive gestures, they zoom into specific areas, inspecting operations with incredible detail. They can visualize every-
thing from cargo ships navigating oceans to robotic arms assembling products in factories.
One of the platform’s groundbreaking features is real-time ESG reporting. Controllers can instantly access a site’s ESG 
metrics and observe live data streams of energy consumption, waste management, and labor practices. This transpar-
ency enables them to uphold ethical standards and swiftly make informed decisions. When a worker strike or a dis-
ruption occurs, the controllers, with a mere flick of their fingers, reroute production to an alternative site. This instant 
transition is possible thanks to OmniVision’s predictive analytics and interconnected global network. Customers, on 
their end, have embraced MyVisionLink, a personalized version of OmniVision that syncs with their preferences and 
purchase history, allowing for a harmonious interaction between consumer demand and supply chain responsiveness. 
This synergy ensures that product availability and delivery expectations are perfectly aligned, creating a seamless and 
satisfying customer experience.
903© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRY904© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MANUFACTURING 
& DISTRIBUTION 
ENHANCEMENTSINDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
The production process 
known as continuous additive 
manufacturing streamlines the 
creation of items by constantly 
printing parts, thereby reducing 
downtime and enabling the 
efficient production of complex, 
customized products.Continuous additive manufacturing drives a decentralized just-in-
time approach to production. To address speed bottlenecks, start-
up Ambots harnesses autonomous swarm robots for its solution, 
breaking down digital designs into manageable tasks through 
proprietary chunk-based 3D printing. Ambots is now leading the 
software development for a $3.5 million project that will 3D print 
horizontal mission structures for the US military.
For metal additive manufacturing, a collaborative research effort 
in South Korea has introduced a novel technology, enabling 
continuous additive manufacturing in various orientations. In 
another approach to 3D metal printing, Fabric8Labs, a San Diego 
startup, is developing electrochemical additive manufacturing. 
The room-temperature technique builds rapidly at the atomic level 
from a water-based feedstock containing dissolved metal ions. 
This approach allows for micron-scale feature resolution and com-
plex internal features, and can print onto temperature sensitive 
substrates such as PCBs, silicon, or existing metal components.
For hybrid additive-subtractive manufacturing, a researcher at the 
University of Texas at Arlington is exploring equipment that could 
efficiently repair and remanufacture parts, even in resource-con-
strained environments like space. VulcanForms integrates addi-
tive and subtractive manufacturing, as well as in-process sensing 
and machine learning to enable an industrial scale laser metal 
additive manufacturing solution. It produces parts for companies 
in the medical, defense, semiconductor, and aerospace industries, 
turning designs into finished parts in a matter of days. Research-
ers at EPFL’s Laboratory of Thermomechanical Metallurgy have 
validated the effectiveness of acoustic monitoring in laser-based 
additive manufacturing, enhancing product quality in industrial 
sectors using laser powder bed fusion.Continuous additive manufacturing is pivotal in cutting down on 
time and costs in the supply chain and manufacturing sectors. 
It also fosters a decentralized production model, enabling manu-
facturing at or near the demand point, minimizing transportation 
needs and costs. This method supports the production of custom-
ized products on demand, which is particularly advantageous for 
industries needing unique parts, such as health care and aero-
space. Moreover, the hybrid of additive and subtractive manufac-
turing in one continuous system catalyzes innovation in fields like 
aerospace and defense, allowing for on-site component repairs 
and diminishing the reliance on complex supply chains for part 
replacement. It also expedites the R&D cycle, crucial for sectors 
that depend on swift technological advancements and adaptabil-
ity. As this process continues to scale, it will create new forms 
of business services, and become increasingly important to the 
retail world. The selling of materials for these services also offers a 
potential new business venture, which would require large social-
ization efforts for consumer adoption.CONTINUOUS 
ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 905INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Smart warehouses are 
technologically advanced 
facilities that leverage 
automation, AI, and real-time 
data analytics to optimize 
inventory management and 
streamline the entire supply chain 
process.While IoT adds complexity to smart warehouses by generating vast 
amounts of data from various devices, edge computing supports a 
solution by processing all the data locally. Belgian startup Edgise 
is specializing in developing hardware for edge computing ap-
plications, enhancing AI processing speed in industrial systems, 
and optimizing processes by bringing AI closer to the data source. 
Another instance is Seattle-based Loopr, which offers AI-powered 
edge applications for defect scanning, maintenance prediction, 
and inventory management. 
Digital twin solutions can also help, enabling real-time monitor-
ing, analysis, optimization, and predictive maintenance. San Fran-
cisco startup Datumix offers a virtual 3D simulation and AI-driv-
en digital twin for equipment condition monitoring, improving 
loading and unloading efficiency by up to 30%, and reducing labor 
costs by 15%. German company Cognition Factory also offers an AI-
based digital twin solution for warehouse simulation. 
Amazon is deploying AI-powered damage detection to its ware-
houses to speed up fulfillment: The company’s computer-directed 
facility in San Antonio employs robots for inventory management, 
storing 18 million items at any given time and shipping 2 million 
items on a weekly basis. And in the spectrum of measurement 
innovations, MoistTech’s implementation of near-infrared technol-
ogy is a notable breakthrough. Through nondestructive, contact-
less analysis, it achieves an accuracy level of 0.1%, underpinning 
precise quality control and moisture management for optimized 
energy usage.Smart warehouses represent a significant leap forward for the sup-
ply chain, logistics, and manufacturing industries. Utilizing edge 
computing, AI, and digital twin technologies, they process vast 
amounts of data to optimize operations, demonstrating the criti-
cal role of advanced technology in logistics. Edge computing will 
become a necessity as it empowers smart warehouses by reducing 
latency, enabling real-time decision-making, and enhancing over-
all operational efficiency—ensuring timely and precise responses 
to dynamic warehouse challenges. Digital twins can optimize 
material handling systems, enabling easy planning, deployment, 
and continuous improvement of mobile robots. Predictive main-
tenance of equipment minimizes downtime, ensuring an unbro-
ken delivery chain, while AI in quality control guarantees product 
standards, boosting customer trust and mitigating risks. The rich 
data gleaned from smart warehouses offer insights for streamlin-
ing operations, providing a competitive edge and enabling quick 
adaptation to market shifts. This transformation is not just about 
efficiency; it’s about redefining the supply chain ecosystem to be 
more responsive, resilient, and customer-centric.SMART  
WAREHOUSES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 906INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Nano-fulfillment centers enhance 
supply chains and logistics by 
enabling hyperlocal, efficient, 
and swift last-mile deliveries. 
These can be small infill sites in 
the urban center of cities that 
bring manufacturing and delivery 
closer to the consumer.Automated, localized warehousing facilitates same-day and even 
quicker delivery to meet the growing demand for speedy e-com-
merce services. Retail giants like Walmart are already experiment-
ing with this: The company is creating next-generation fulfillment 
centers that blend robotics, AI, and human expertise to set new 
standards for delivery speed. These centers aim to reach 95% of the 
US population with next-day or two-day shipping. 
Other startups are focusing on creating technology that can be 
widely deployed. Nimble specializes in intelligent robotic fulfillment 
systems designed to efficiently pick, pack, and ship e-commerce 
orders, focusing on picking as the hardest part of the puzzle. Its 
technology reduces warehouse space requirements and offers rapid 
delivery, letting companies outsource their warehousing needs. In a 
similar vein, KwikShelf empowers Nigerian merchants with efficient 
inventory storage and order fulfillment. It plans to establish multi-
ple e-commerce fulfillment centers across large Nigerian cities.
However, finding the right place to set up nano-fulfillment centers 
can be challenging and costly. Mowito operates automated nano-ful-
fillment centers across Bengaluru, India, where the only human 
staffers are the delivery personnel who pick up orders. Its AI-driven 
robotic systems improve order accuracy, reduce operational costs, 
and enable 24/7 retail store operations.
On a regulatory note, Paris recently implemented a ban on dark 
stores, which are distribution centers for rapid grocery and house-
hold item deliveries. Paris authorities argued that these dark stores 
violated urban planning laws, categorizing them as warehouses, 
which are prohibited in residential zones.Nano-fulfillment centers are crucial for e-commerce success as 
they cater to the modern consumer’s demand for rapid delivery. 
By localizing and automating warehouses with advanced robotics 
and AI, these centers streamline order processing, reduce errors, 
and enhance efficiency. They utilize predictive analytics to forecast 
consumer behavior, strategically stocking items to expedite last-
mile delivery. But as regulations evolve, such as the dark store ban 
in Paris, the industry must navigate new compliance landscapes. 
One option is to work with local governments overseeing urban 
centers looking for ways to utilize vacant spaces—dark stores 
can in fact prevent urban decay. Outsourcing to nano-fulfillment 
providers offers companies cost-effective warehousing solutions, 
eliminating the need for large, traditional storage spaces. Upskill-
ing workers to work in these facilities will help companies that 
face backlash for reducing their dependency on human workers. 
These centers also represent a strategic evolution in logistics, by 
prioritizing speed, efficiency, and adaptability to changing market 
demands. NANO-FULFILLMENT 
CENTERS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 907INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Intelligent packaging, equipped 
with real-time monitoring and 
quality assessment capabilities, 
is necessary for reducing food 
waste, maintaining product 
freshness, and optimizing 
environmental benefits.Clarkson University’s biosensors lab has devised a food degrada-
tion sensor that enhances intelligent packaging. Discreetly placed 
within the packaging, the sensor changes color when food begins 
to spoil, minimizing the risk of throwing away food prematurely. 
The University of Genoa’s Department of Chemistry has similarly 
pioneered a smart packaging technology capable of detecting 
amines, compounds that signify protein degradation in meat, 
fish, and dairy. As amines accumulate during degradation, the 
packaging undergoes a noticeable color change, serving as an 
intuitive indicator of product quality. And the UK-based company 
“It’s Fresh!” focuses on extending the shelf life of fresh fruits and 
vegetables by controlling ethylene levels in the local environment, 
which is a key factor influencing ripening and spoilage. Recently, 
Nestle announced its research in using haptic feedback in pack-
aging to provide information about its products.
French company Lactips pioneered the development of edible 
packaging using casein protein derived from milk. While mimick-
ing plastic’s flexibility, Lactips’ patented film biodegrades within 
18 days, demonstrating eco-friendliness and good performance in 
keeping perishables fresh. Israeli designer Naama Nicotra’s Na-
kedPak transforms edible packaging into a culinary art form: Her 
innovative edible wrappers include spices and dissolve into delec-
table sauces when heated. Polynatural, based in Chile, addresses 
carbon emissions with “Shel-Life,” a 100% plant-based emulsion 
coating that preserves fruits and vegetables during transporta-
tion. And Austrian startup Speech Code has a novel sound-based 
packaging solution for the visually impaired. Its users can scan a 
unique code image to translate it into text or audio format without 
requiring internet access.Intelligent packaging should be a critical focus for the supply 
chain, logistics, and manufacturing industries, as it provides 
real-time data on product conditions, enhancing food safety and 
minimizing waste. Sensors will continue to advance, offering new 
warning systems these industries can capitalize on. Companies 
should start exploring embedded packaging sensors that de-
tect food degradation, ensuring only fresh, high-quality products 
reach consumers, which will help maintain brand integrity. Edible 
packaging presents an eco-friendly alternative, by cutting down 
on waste and environmental impact. While this novel innovation 
sounds promising, its success depends on consumer socializa-
tion. Reusable packaging further supports a circular economy by 
encouraging repeated use and reducing waste generation. These 
smart solutions are not just environmentally beneficial; they also 
bolster consumer trust and engagement through their active par-
ticipation in sustainability, offering strategic value to businesses 
looking to innovate and maintain a competitive edge.INTELLIGENT 
PACKAGING2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 908INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSWHY IT MATTERS
Autonomous cobots—robots that 
work next to human workers—
and other equipment are 
augmenting the warehouse and 
delivery spheres with safety and 
efficiency.Autonomous cobot-powered innovations are transforming logis-
tics for efficiency, safety, and sustainability. BionicHIVE brings 
futuristic efficiency to existing warehouses with its AI-powered 
robots that can easily traverse shelves. Exotec’s Skypod system 
functions as an automated fleet of robots, workstations, and 
conveyors: The solution contains 3D movements without the need 
of complicated infrastructure, operates in varied temperature 
conditions, and can access any item within two minutes, enabling 
a human-free environment.
Clevon, in partnership with Lithuanian grocery chain IKI, is pioneer-
ing Europe’s first fleet of autonomous robot carriers for daily deliv -
ery services. In the US, EASE is partnering with the Ohio Department 
of Transportation and DriveOhio to deploy connected and automat-
ed trucks on revenue-generating routes. Kratos is also extending 
its platooning technology for self-driving trucks to the Ohio-Indi-
ana region. This technology enables human-operated lead vehicles 
to be followed and mimicked by unoccupied follower vehicles.
Drones can provide rapid, precise, and efficient transportation 
while reducing environmental impact. Walmart is expanding its 
drone delivery in Dallas-Fort Worth through its partnership with 
Wing. Going beyond drones, MightyFly manufactures and operates 
long-range autonomous cargo aircraft that enable same-day deliv-
eries with a payload capacity of 500 pounds, a 600-mile range, and 
speeds of 150 mph.
In enhanced robots, CaPow is providing autonomous and mobile, 
perpetual cobots, ensuring 100% fleet utilization by eliminating 
charging downtime. Apptronik unveiled Apollo, a humanoid robot, 
which features advanced force control architecture for safe interac-
tion with humans. And Agility Robotics announced that its RoboFab 
facility will pioneer mass-producing humanoid robots, offering great-
er flexibility and versatility compared to current industrial robots.Autonomous cobots are revolutionizing supply chains by en-
hancing warehouse operations with their adaptability, safety, and 
efficiency. They’re capable of working alongside humans and seam-
lessly integrate into current layouts. Advanced technologies are 
evolving warehouses into human-free zones, increasing efficiency 
and operational speed. Drones complement these efforts with their 
swift, precise, and sustainable delivery methods. Humanoid robots 
with sophisticated force control are stepping in, safely collabo-
rating with human workers for tasks like unloading and picking, 
bolstering various industries. With their ability to handle repetitive 
duties, cobots free up human staff for complex tasks, while their 
embedded sensors offer vital real-time data, making them key to 
strategic decision-making. Their advanced safety features prevent 
accidents, ensuring a harmonious human-robot coexistence. Mul-
tifunctional, they manage inventory, quality control, and main-
tenance, proving indispensable to modern logistics. Despite the 
initial investment, the long-term savings on labor and increased ef-
ficiency solidify cobots as a strategic asset for the industry’s future.AUTONOMOUS COBOTS 
FOR WAREHOUSING  
AND DELIVERY2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 909INDUSTRY SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICSSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2030
The Chroma Information System    
By 2030, the world has embraced the Chroma Information System, a groundbreaking innovation in smart packaging that ended 
the era of uncertainty in food and medicine quality, giving rise to an unprecedented level of consumer safety and confidence. Every 
consumable product—from the freshest loaves of bread to the most critical heart medication—is encased in this intelligent pack-
aging, which is equipped with micro-sensors powerful enough to detect the slightest change in the product’s integrity. These sen-
sors actively monitor the molecular composition to ensure that the contents remain within the optimal range for human consump-
tion. Each package syncs to the purchaser’s wearable device, which holds their personal health and safety data. This harmonious 
interaction between packaging and personal tech is the cornerstone of consumer safety. The labels now act as an information 
display. With a simple tap, customers can see how much longer they have to eat the food or if they should get a refill on their pre-
scription. The labels also change colors when the sensors detect a deviation—be it spoilage or a mismatch with the buyer’s health 
profile. When the packaging’s exterior, normally vibrant and inviting, morphs into a universal shade of brown—a color specifically 
engineered to be perceived across the spectrum of color vision—it indicates that it is time to either recycle or compost the goods. 
This color change is not just a warning; it initiates an automatic return process. As soon as the product is set down, smart surfaces 
in homes and stores process the Chroma data and activate a return mechanism. Drones or automated systems retrieve the item, 
ensuring that it never reaches the consumer’s cart or cupboard. The Chroma Information System has rewritten the narrative of con-
sumer safety, where transparency is not just about what lies within but also about taking immediate action when standards are 
not met.
910© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRYSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2029
Perpetual Motion Manufacturing    
As dawn breaks over the horizon in 2029, a fleet of autonomous trucks are seen roving the highways. These are no ordinary vehi-
cles; they are the pulsing arteries of the world’s supply chain, the pioneers of a logistic revolution—they are Platooning Pioneers. 
Each truck is an autonomous powerhouse, fitted with state-of-the-art additive manufacturing plants, their cargo bays printing 
orders for toothbrushes, cutlery, glasses, bowls, and wearable cases in real time. The smart highway allows the platoon to be moni-
tored by an intricate network of sensors, relaying information back to the AI command center that calculates every move with preci-
sion. There is no need for stops; the platoon is a rolling fortress of productivity, a never-ending loop of delivery and manufacturing. 
Above, a swarm of drones buzzes like worker bees, each one departing from its respective truck with a package. They scatter across 
the landscape, their flight paths choreographed by algorithms, ensuring that every product reaches its destination on time. The 
Platooning Pioneers company offers services that slash delivery times, reduce inventory costs, and minimize waste. This is the epit-
ome of just-in-time manufacturing, a system where the supply chain is not just a route but a mobile assembly line. The Platooning 
Pioneers have set the stage for an era where roads are no longer mere paths but dynamic streams of creation and distribution. 
911© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRYAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
912© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRYChief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editors 
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEY
913© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MARK BRYAN  
Senior Manager 
Mark Bryan is a Senior Foresight Manager at the Future Today Institute and leads 
our Built Environment, Hospitality, Retail, Restaurants & CPG practice areas. Mark 
excels in applying strategic foresight to design and the built environment, anticipat -
ing future need states for our physical and organizational spaces. His expertise in 
integrating strategic planning with innovative design principles empowers busi-
nesses to anticipate and adapt to future trends, fostering sustainable growth, resiliency, and transformative change 
in their industries.
Before FTI, Mark worked as a workplace strategist, designer, design researcher, and futurist for clients across the 
country, most recently through his role as Director of Innovation + Research at a design and architecture firm.
Mark’s portfolio of clients includes national foundations, global CPG companies, international associations, product 
manufacturers, national retail brands, multi-family developers, healthcare systems, senior living facilities, restaurants, 
and large multinationals. Mark has produced original research and strategic analysis on the future of co-living, senior 
living, workplaces, play, hotels and resorts, dining, and distance learning.
Mark is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. He holds a BS in Interior 
Design from Virginia Tech and NCDIQ Certification.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSSUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
 INDUSTRYSELECTED  
SOURCES
914© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRY915© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Applied DNA’s CertainT Supply 
Chain Traceability Platform Fea-
tured in New York Times Article 
About the Need for Transpar-
ency and Compliance in Global 
Supply Chains Under Recently 
Passed U.S. Federal Regulation.” 
Yahoo Finance, April 7, 2023. 
https://finance.yahoo.com/
news/applied-dnas-certaint-
supply-chain-160000449.html.
“Barcodiscount.” James Dyson 
Award. www.jamesdysonaward.
org/2020/project/barcodis-
count/. 
Choi, Charles. “JFK Airport Will 
Demo AV Platooning in June.” 
Inside Autonomous Vehicles, 
March 22, 2023. https://inside-
autonomousvehicles.com/jfk-
airport-will-demo-av-platooning-
in-june/.“CLI Launches New Routing 
Logic and Planning Optimization 
Solution.” Commercial Carrier 
Journal, November 2, 2022. www.
ccjdigital.com/technology/
trip-planning/article/15302659/
cli-launches-new-routing-log-
ic-and-planning-optimiza-
tion-solution.
“Drone Delivery Canada Ap-
plauds the Release of Trans-
port Canada’s BVLOS Drone 
Safety Regulations.” Canadian 
Manufacturing, July 5, 2023. 
www.canadianmanufac-
turing.com/procurement/
drone-delivery-canada-ap-
plauds-the-release-of-trans-
port-canadas-bvlos-drone-safe-
ty-regulations-292938/.
“Ensuring AMR Manufacturers 
Constant Power for Robots.” 
Capow. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://capow.energy/per-
petual-throughput/. “Gather AI Acquires Ware in 
Merger of Warehouse Drone 
Vendors.” DC Velocity. www.dcve-
locity.com/articles/57882-gath-
er-ai-acquires-ware-in-merger-
of-warehouse-drone-vendors. 
Hanson, Kip. “Leading with 
Light.” SME, July 26, 2023. 
Accessed December 13, 2023.
www.sme.org/technologies/
articles/2023/july/leading-with-
light/. 
Hou, Jing, et al. “Large-Scale 
Vehicle Platooning: Advances 
and Challenges in Scheduling 
and Planning Techniques.” Engi-
neering, April 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eng.2023.01.012.
“How Siemens and Deloitte 
Are Using Digital Twins and 3D 
Models to Advance Smart Fac-
tories.” Supply Chain Dive. www.
supplychaindive.com/news/
smart-factory-siemens-de-
loitte-wichita-state-universi-
ty-digital-twins/650754/. “Improved Autonomy Leads to 
Profitable Robot Deliveries for 
Cartken.” Supply Chain Dive. 
www.supplychaindive.com/
news/autonomous-improve-
ments-cartken-delivery-ro-
bot-profitability/653019/. 
Inc, A.B.B. “ABB’s Latest GoFa 
Cobots Set New Benchmark with 
Heavier Payloads, Longer Reach.” 
www.sme.org/technologies/
articles/2023/june/abbs-latest-
gofa-cobots-set-new-bench-
mark-with-heavier-payloads-
longer-reach/. 
“Kraft Heinz to Build $400M Au-
tomated Distribution Center in 
Illinois.” Supply Chain Dive. www.
supplychaindive.com/news/
kraft-heinz-facility-400-mil-
lion-automation-robotics-facili-
ty/688252/. Lu, Lu, et al. “In-Situ Process 
Evaluation for Continuous Fiber 
Composite Additive Manufactur-
ing Using Multisensing and Cor-
relation Analysis.” Additive Man-
ufacturing, vol. 74, July 2023, p. 
103721. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
addma.2023.103721.
Newswire, P.R. “Ivalua’s New 
Platform Release Accelerates 
AI-Powered Contract Digitiza-
tion and Overall Purchasing 
Optimization.” AiThority, August 
30, 2023. https://aithority.
com/machine-learning/ivalu-
as-new-platform-release-accel-
erates-ai-powered-contract-dig-
itization-and-overall-purchas-
ing-optimization/.
“Nobel-Prize-Winning Chemistry 
Enhances 3D-Printed Polymers.” 
Engineering.com. www.engineer-
ing.com/story/nobel-prize-win-
ning-chemistry-enhanc-
es-3d-printed-polymers. Parabola. “Parabola Raises 
$24M Series B to Automate 
the ‘Un-Automatable.’” www.
prnewswire.com/news-releas-
es/parabola-raises-24m-se-
ries-b-to-automate-the-un-au-
tomatable-301865745.html. 
Priestman, David. “Overlapping 
Route Planning Solution.” Logis-
tics Business Magazine, August 
9, 2023. www.logisticsbusiness.
com/it-in-logistics/telemat-
ics-tms/overlapping-route-plan-
ning-solution/.
“Smart Port Situational Aware-
ness System Launched by 
Awake.AI and Intel.” Smart 
Maritime Network, May 31, 2022. 
https://smartmaritimenetwork.
com/2022/05/31/smart-port-
situational-awareness-system-
launched-by-awake-ai-and-in-
tel/.SELECTED SOURCESSUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRY916© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Stratasys and Desktop Metal 
to Combine: Good for Investors, 
Less So for 3D Printing.” Engi-
neering.com. www.engineering.
com/story/stratasys-and-desk-
top-metal-to-combine-good-for-
investors-less-so-for-3d-print-
ing. 
Swanson, Ana. “How AI and 
DNA Are Unlocking the Myster-
ies of Global Supply Chains.” 
The Economic Times, April 8, 
2023. https://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/small-biz/
security-tech/technology/
how-ai-and-dna-are-unlocking-
the-mysteries-of-global-supply-
chains/articleshow/99331955.
cms.
WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://patentscope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US398808424&_ci-
d=P12-LJR1VC-77376-1. 
WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=IN395400980&_ci-
d=P20-LJHHUZ-95778-1. 
WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=IN380203525. 
WIPO—Search International 
and National Patent Collec-
tions. Accessed December 13, 
2023. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=CN390944060&_ci-
d=P12-LJQ29Q-38932-1. SELECTED SOURCESSUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS INDUSTRYENTERTAINMENT2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT • 17TH EDITION919© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTSENTERTAINMENT
920 T op Headlines
921 State of Play
922 Key Events
923 Likely Near T erm 
Developments
924 Why Entertainment  
Trends Matter to Y our 
Organization 
925 Opportunities and Threats
926  Investments and Actions  
T o Consider
927 Central Themes
929 Ones T o Watch
930 Streaming
931 The New Influencer Economy
932 Decentralized Creative 
Collaborative
933 Immersive Narratives
934 Personalized Content
935 Massive Interactive Live Events952 Climate Infiltrates Art  
and Performance
953 Scenario: The Art of Scent 
954 Location-Based 
Entertainment
955 VR in Location-Based 
Entertainment
956 AR in Location-Based 
Entertainment
957 Blockchain Integrations
958 Assistive Amusement  
Park Robots
959 Amusement Parks  
for Niche Interests
960 Intuitive Optimization
961 Dynamic Operations
962 Immersive Museum 
Experiences
963 Theme Parks Go Green
964 Scenario: Theme  
Park in a Box965 Authors
967 Selected Sources936 Digital Celebrities
937 AI Assisted Creativity
938 AI Generated Voice Acting
939 Automated Content Production
940  Business Model Evolution
941 Environmental Impact of 
Streaming
942 Scenario: Spiraling into 
darkness
943 The Arts
944  Blockchain Art Market
945 Protecting Creativity
946 Multi-use Spaces
947 Performances Embrace 
Technology
948 The Holographic Live 
Performance
949 Virtual Reality Concerts
950 XR Fine Art
951 AI Generated Fine ArtINDUSTRYT echnology has stepped 
into the limelight and 
forced its examination, 
possibly paving the 
way towards defining a 
responsible usage.
920© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TOP HEADLINESINDUSTRY
01
02
03
04
05AI Enters Hollywood Contracts
Hollywood’s major labor unions—the DGA, SAG-AFTRA, and the WGA—all added 
some AI restrictions into their contracts, the first steps to creating regulatory certainty 
for usage of the tech.
Tightening the Belt  
As streaming becomes less profitable, production costs rise because of new guild 
contracts, and box offices continue to underperform, companies are instituting 
frugality measures such as layoffs.
AI Is Making Movies 
While still in its infancy, generative AI has graduated to making moving images.
T ouring Sets New Records  
Taylor Swift and Beyoncé set new records in every way, and with more options than ever 
to view live performances, the artists exponentially increased their earning potentials.
Reducing the Environmental Footprint 
Sustainability is entering all aspects of entertainment, ranging from movie production 
processes to amusement park business practices and themes of artistic exploration.ENTERTAINMENTSTATE 
OF PLAYFrom May 2, 2023 (the start of the Writers Guild strike) to November 9, 2023 
(when the tentative agreement with SAG-AFTRA was announced), studios 
and creators didn’t produce any work as they grappled with how AI could be 
leveraged fairly in the creative process. The result was new contracts that 
made significant strides toward protecting guild members, even though 
much of the language is vague—a necessity, as the potential of AI is just 
being explored. The results provide much-needed guardrails to enable sus-
tainable usage of artificial intelligence, an example other industries will 
emulate.
Generative AI has continued to democratize creativity, and we’ve seen both 
short films developed using text-to-video and a YouTube-DeepMind AI part-
nership that creates songs in the style of any artist. However, this democ-
ratization tends to create an overabundance of creators and content that 
could further fragment the audience and contribute to content fatigue. 
Sustainability is now a main consideration: Film sets have sustainability 
advisors, tours and theme parks run on renewables, and streamers are re-
ducing their digital emissions. Advances in holography and haptics enable a 
range of “secondary” experiences, too. These aren’t meant to replace the live 
event experience, but rather offer additional options at different price points 
(and varying environmental impact), opening up fresh ways of monetization.AI is infiltrating all aspects of 
the creative process, promising 
to make it leaner in an effort to 
increase profitability.
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT
921922© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.MAY 18, 2023
Galactic Starcruiser closure announced  
Disney closes its “Star Wars” hotel due to 
poor performance, dampening development 
of elaborate immersions.
JUNE 2, 2023
Coldplay’s sustainable touring  
The band announces their tour’s 
reduced emissions and waste. It 
also runs on renewable energies.OCTOBER 27, 2023
AI celebrity twin  
K-pop star Mark Tuan connects his 
digital twin with ChatGPT so fans 
can converse with him 24/7.JUNE 2, 2023
AI-generated short premieres  
Every shot of the film is generated 
by Dall-E.NOVEMBER 9, 2023
SAG-AFTRA agreement proposed  
After the WGA, the end of the actors’ 
union strike enabled the industry to 
get back to work.KEY EVENTSINDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT923© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.TIGHTENING THE BELT
After the golden age of content, all 
signs are now pointing toward effi-
ciency measures. Fears of a recession, 
inflation, a widening wealth gap, and 
geopolitical instability have many 
people holding on to their financial re-
sources. And that’s especially true in 
the entertainment industry, as prob-
lems with the streaming business 
model, increased production costs 
based on the new union contracts, 
and fractured audiences create an en-
vironment of extreme frugality. Tech-
nology looks like a knight in shining 
armor, promising to increase produc-
tion speeds and reduce costs without 
decreasing quality—if it is incorpo-
rated ethically and sustainably. After 
the unions’ negotiated contractual 
guardrails, those goals may be easier 
to achieve. Lower Production Budgets
As studios work toward making their stream-
ing services profitable, new lean processes 
will walk the line between providing enough 
content variety to avoid subscription fall-off 
and actually making money.
Engaging Broader Demographics
The aging population in Europe, Asia, and to 
a lesser degree the US, requires strategizing 
about what topics will make people over age 
60 tune in. On the other end of the spectrum, 
Gen Z requires special enticement to watch 
long instead of short-form content.Sustainability Practices
Gone are the days when entertainment 
companies just have to take their direct 
emissions into account. They’ll also have to 
consider reducing fan and production travel 
emissions, recycling, and using sustainable 
materials when planning and executing con-
tent.Overpresent Celebrities
Digital celebrities, both those with human 
counterparts and those without, allow anytime 
access for fans but run the risk of eradicating 
the defining feature of celebrity: scarcity.LIKELY NEAR TERM DEVELOPMENTS
Live-ish Experiences
As people have less disposable income, they 
will seek alternative entertainment options. 
Local pubs broadcasting a game or smaller, 
local live venues might be more attractive 
experiences than stadium concerts. Copyright Chaos
Microsoft launched its Copilot Copyright 
Commitment, assuming users’ legal copyright 
risks when using the company’s AI Copilot. 
However, as long as there is no clear regula-
tion, the use of many AI tools will continue to 
carry substantial legal risk.
11 MACRO SOURCES OF DISRUPTION
Technology Government Media &  
TelecomPublic Health Infrastructure Demographics Education Economy Environment Geopolitics Wealth  
DistributionINDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT924© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Changing demographics 
mean serving audiences 
with very different 
budgets, spending habits, 
and entertainment needs. 
As audiences become 
increasingly fractured 
and content even more 
abundant, it’s crucial to 
fine-tune offerings and 
approach storytelling 
from a world-building 
perspective with multiple 
entry points.  Influenced by the 
gaming experience, 
consumers engaging 
with imaginary worlds 
continue to demand more 
influence over them. 
Technology makes this 
easier by democratizing 
the necessary tools, but 
companies need to figure 
out how to collaborate 
with the audience without 
decreasing the quality of 
the work.Gaming, live events, 
and social media are 
Gen Z’s favorite forms 
of entertainment, all 
of which have strong 
communal elements. 
Apparel brands, food and 
drink companies, and 
hospitality companies are 
well-positioned to expand 
on their traditional 
offerings and create more 
immersive worlds that 
capture that generation’s 
attention.Artificial intelligence will 
fundamentally change 
processes: business-
related, administrative, 
and creative. Companies 
that embrace changes 
early on and rethink the 
way they do business 
will have the chance to 
create industry standards 
that are best for their 
purposes.The immersive exhibits 
for artists like Vincent Van 
Gogh that have sprung 
up over the past few years 
might be dismissed by 
art aficionados, but their 
huge success shows they 
hit a nerve. As AI becomes 
more prevalent in fine 
art, globally reproducible 
exhibit experiences might 
replace the admiration of 
a singular work.A decentralized data 
structure where the user 
has complete control over 
who can access personal 
data and for how long 
will shift willingness 
to share information. 
Entertainment companies 
will benefit if they 
consider early how to 
best utilize the insights 
they will gain, whether 
it’s within existing or new 
experiences.Shifting Customer 
HabitsNew Creative 
ExpressionsUnexpected 
DisruptorsFirst Mover 
AdvantageIrrelevance of 
OriginalityAccess to Personal 
DataWHY ENTERTAINMENT TRENDS MATTER TO YOUR ORGANIZATIONINDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT
OPPORTUNITIES & THREATS
Threats
The regulatory landscape for new tech, specifically AI and copyright, is still 
largely unexplored, and the regulations that do exist differ by country. This 
uncertainty can easily expose a company to significant legal liabilities.
The ease of creation that technology enables needs to be approached with 
caution. Frequent exposure to a franchise decreases audience interest and 
quickly leads to an apathetic response.
With digitization comes increased vulnerability to cyberattacks. As 
personalization becomes more prevalent, companies need to ensure that 
their customers’ data is safe throughout the entire ecosystem of devices they 
use for the experience.
It’s still unclear if streaming is a viable business model, and if technological 
advances can offset rising production costs. Pressure tests will reveal 
whether companies can continue to generate a profit in the shifting media 
landscape.
Interactive entertainment does require a minimum level of digital access, 
which includes hardware but also connectivity. A product’s reach needs to 
include swaths of the population with limited resources and access.Opportunities
Collaborations will uncover best practices for integrating new technologies in 
AI or XR. Joining forces with a niche player in the field is often more sensible, 
efficient, and less expensive than trying to build capacities in-house.
Both digital interactions and real-life offer opportunities to increase the level 
of engagement with audiences, and companies can choose to do this within an 
existing repertoire or with completely new products.
The fragmentation of audiences and desire for local content provide room 
for diverse voices to tell their stories, but companies should make sure new 
products that speak to different niches are still authentic to the brand.
Technology lowers the creative industry’s barrier to entry—not only for 
consumers but also for companies. It’s never been lower risk to experiment with 
new, unconventional ways to tell a story and engage audiences.
Using audience data creatively is crucial. How can you let data flow into your 
development process in fresh ways? How can you build additional trust to gain 
insights and provide a higher degree of personalization?
925© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT926© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Build an international net -
work of collaborators and 
partners. The increased 
taste for locally-produced 
content will require experts 
that are familiar with not 
only the creative sensibil-
ities but also the business 
in the different territories. 
Technology enables even 
smaller players to diversify 
their product offering.Invest in analyzing your 
environmental footprint. As 
both ESG standards and 
consumer sentiment toward 
sustainability become more 
demanding for entertain-
ment, it’s imperative to have 
transparency throughout 
your entire supply chain.Stay current on legal de-
velopments—litigation as 
well as regulation—for new 
technologies. Make sure to 
venture beyond topics that 
are immediately relevant 
for your company, such as 
XR or generative AI. Overall 
or tangential legislation 
can serve as an impulse 
driver for topics important 
to your business.Fine-tune your value prop-
osition on a granular level, 
and then adjust it for the 
different audiences you 
serve without compromis-
ing its core. In a world of 
content overabundance 
and increasing personal-
ization in every aspect of a 
consumer’s life, each piece 
of content needs to exactly 
fit an audience’s needs.Investigate thoroughly 
where crowdsourcing 
will serve the quality and 
relevance of your prod-
uct offering. This type of 
audience engagement is 
compelling, especially as 
it is just emerging, but can 
easily devalue the product 
and water down singular 
visions of creators, instead 
of enriching storytelling.Ensure you have direct 
access to your customers 
so you can market your 
products to them. The 
internet will change, and 
increasingly chatbots will 
become the new gate-
keepers instead of users 
searching the net. It’ll be 
even more challenging to 
find content as users stay 
on a single interface.INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO CONSIDER
1 4 2 5 3 6INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTCENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 927INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT
From Creator to Creative Director
Books, songs, images, presentations, short stories, 
videos—anything can be created with the touch of a 
button. While this empowers people who never before 
had access to creative tools and allows for diverse and 
fresh voices to be heard, it also shifts how humans 
use their brains. Editing and directing someone else’s 
output (whether a person’s or AI’s) is not as labori-
ously exhausting as birthing the piece of art. That 
might be fine, but it could also lead to more superficial 
engagement, decreasing impact and quality of cre-
ative endeavors. It also might have a different effect: a 
resurgent need for in-person and analog activity to be 
sure of someone’s actual capabilities. After all, only if 
you see someone create work can you confirm that no 
artificial means were used in the thought process or 
creative endeavor. Already today, schools are returning 
to oral exams for that reason, and startup investors are 
beginning to insist on in-person meetings to deter-
mine how clear a founder’s thought processes are.Personalized Content
Personalization of content is happening on two fronts: 
for a single viewer and for the entire audience of a 
show or movie. Netflix continues to dabble here, with 
the recent release of the interactive rom-com “Choose 
Love,” and Genvid released Silent Hill, a massive inter-
active live event where the storyline is driven by the 
audience voting on how different characters should 
behave. But significant developments are also happen-
ing outside the industry, where increasingly sophisti-
cated sensors in our smart devices can measure our 
biomarkers and AI can detect our mental and emotion-
al states based on that data—in real time. Eventually, 
a more streamlined version of personalized content 
won’t require conscious interaction with the viewer but 
will instead be synthesized by an AI based on our per-
sonal data. For both consumers and content producers, 
this will create unlimited opportunity to engage with 
established or new franchises, as the story will be dif-
ferent every time. The Industry Goes Green
Voluntary or not, sustainability is increasingly a con-
sideration in entertainment. Large movie productions 
hire sustainability consultants, theme parks are 
optimizing their energy usage and participating in the 
circular economy, and in the art world, exploration of 
environmental themes has become more common. 
In the performance industry, Coldplay’s “Music of the 
Spheres” tour raised the bar when it comes to holistic 
practices: it notched milestones including a 47% re-
duction in direct CO2 emissions and planting 5 mil-
lion trees, one for each concertgoer. In TV, the industry 
started addressing and minimizing the emissions con-
nected to streaming. As the effects of climate change 
further escalate, consumers will demand sustainable 
practices from all their favorite brands, including their 
beloved celebrities. This makes it all the more surpris -
ing that neither of 2023’s biggest tours—from Taylor 
Swift and Beyoncé—made any official announcement 
about their sustainability efforts.CENTRAL THEMES
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 928INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT
Immersive Experiences
Immersive entertainment is becoming more common, 
with Las Vegas venue Sphere setting the standard. 
Haptic seats vibrate and shake to convey a more real-
istic sense of what’s happening on screen, scents are 
channeled into the room, and temperature is adjust-
ed to create a new level of immersion into imaginary 
worlds. While the gaming and localized entertainment 
industries are much further along with helping their 
audience feel as if they’re living in an alternative real-
ity, these efforts are starting to bleed into traditional 
viewing experiences. Beyond Sphere, traditional movie 
theaters have integrated haptic devices; these offer 
a great differentiator to at-home entertainment and 
represent an attempt to get people back into cinemas, 
at least until the technology can be scaled for in-home 
use. As these new types of scores (olfactory, sensing) 
are added to productions, studios will need creative 
talent that can design and create cohesive sense lay-
ers for an entire show or movie, just as they do now for 
music or sound. Secondary Live Experiences
With the restrictions of the pandemic still fresh, peo-
ple are flocking to communally experience live perfor-
mances. Last year, Taylor Swift and Beyoncé’s mega 
tours broke every existing record, and they promise 
to continue to draw millions of people in 2024. Both 
stars also revived another form of entertainment: the 
concert film. Released first while she was still on tour, 
Swift’s film was a huge success, opening up second-
ary ways for fans to experience live entertainment. The 
movie’s audiences were (almost) as engaged as those 
who saw her performances in person, confirming the 
potential for deep emotional engagement even for 
those more removed types of experiences. As technol-
ogies like holograms and extended reality evolve with 
the necessary supporting infrastructure such as 5G 
and 6G, it’s easy to imagine myriad ways that a perfor-
mance can be enjoyed depending on personal budgets 
and level of enthusiasm.Splintering of Content
Audiences have been becoming more and more frag-
mented for years, making it difficult for stories (or 
actors for that matter) to gain global momentum. Now, 
audiences are increasingly favoring locally-produced 
content that stars local actors and caters to local 
sensibilities and senses of humor. And studios, both 
traditional ones such as Warner Bros. and Paramount 
and streaming platforms like Netflix and Amazon, are 
adjusting their strategies: All of them shifted toward 
country or regional-specific content production. If 
an idea works, it might get recreated for a different 
country, as was the case with Netflix’s French series 
“Call My Agent!,” which was reshot in the UK as “Ten 
Percent.” While this strategy creates more content and 
keeps people employed, smaller target audiences also 
means smaller budgets and more reliance on technol-
ogy to increase efficiency. It’ll also prevent the habit of 
relying on global talent to carry tentpole productions, 
currently the cornerstone of every major studio’s reve-
nue projection.Ke Li, Ph.D. student at Cornell University, for 
developing a wearable that creates a digital 
avatar based on facial expressions captured 
through sonar.
Hyunchul Lim, Ph.D. student at Cornell Uni-
versity, for developing a wrist camera that 
can construct 3D models of the body. 
Sven Bliedung von der Heide, CEO of Volu-
cap, for working on a completely portable 
volumetric video stage and pushing the 
boundaries of the medium.
Jacob Navok, CEO of Genvid Technologies, 
for making progress on interactive audi-
ence streaming and creating a new genre of 
entertainment with massive interactive live 
events.
T od Machover, director of MIT’s Opera of 
the Future, for his work on city symphonies, 
which create soundscapes of metropolitan 
areas in collaboration with their residents.
Keri Kilty, founder of Authentify Art, for devel-
oping a unique Internet of Things tag to veri-
fy proof of presence and tracking information 
of art pieces.Pär Almqvist, co-founder of Tracklib, for 
simplifying sampling for musicians while 
providing transparency in regards to copyright 
ownership.
Thomas Villepoux, storyverse designer at 
Digital Rise, for creating the VR series “Jail-
birds—The Eye of the Artist,” showcasing the 
possibilities of this storytelling form.
Davy and Kristin McGuire, founders of Studio 
McGuire and mixed reality artists, for seam-
lessly merging analog and digital in their 
Dracula pop-up book.
Eloise Singer, CEO at Singer Studios, for 
intriguingly combining education and enter-
tainment with her interactive VR experience 
about Bertha Benz’s role in developing the 
first automobile.
Dennis Lisk, Max Sacker, and Ioulia Isserlis, 
co-founders of Proof of Taste, enabling anyone 
to DJ in front of a virtual crowd in a photoreal-
istic environment.
Zeena Qureshi, co-founder of Sonantic, for 
her use of artificial intelligence to create real-
istic voices, such as Val Kilmer’s voice in “Top 
Gun: Maverick.”Phil Chen, founding partner at Race Capital, 
for his leadership at HTC Vive, which created 
the VR theater project “Light the Night: Red-
hat Killer” based on the namesake Taiwanese 
series.
Alan Cowen, founder and CEO of Hume AI, 
for working on AI that can detect and under-
stand human emotion.
Akira Asano, director at Aerial Burton, for 
creating a holographic projector that uses 
plasma laser to create images without need-
ing a surface for bouncing light .
Stephen Parker, creative director at Way-
mark, for creating the short film “The Frost” 
with every shot generated by GenAI Dall-E.
Scott Mann, co-founder of Flawless AI, for fa-
cilitating the use of AI in the filmmaking pro-
cess, specifically synchronizing the actors’ 
mouths to new lines of dialogue or dubbing.
T onia Samsonova, founder of Exactly.ai, for 
allowing artists to train an AI model on their 
own images so that it can apply the style to 
new creative works.Marc Carey, CEO and co-founder of Evolution 
Music, for promoting sustainability in the 
music industry by creating a bioplastic LP.
Dom Robinson, founder of Greening of 
Streaming, for bringing transparency to the 
environmental impact of the industry and 
initiating change.
Steve Zhao, founder and CEO of Sandbox VR, 
for creating immersive local VR entertain-
ment, the latest creation being an adaptation 
of Netflix’s “Squid Game.”
Patrick Johnson, CEO and founder of Rock 
Paper Reality, for bringing augmented reality 
to San Francisco’s Japantown with custom 
digital origami artwork.
Paul France, founder and CEO of Existent, for 
developing a platform that allows for actions 
in VR to affect the real world and vice versa.
Nick Fellingham, founder and CEO of Con-
dense, for building a platform that easily 
captures live performances and streams 
them into a virtual reality in real time.ONES TO WATCH
929© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT930© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.STREAMINGINDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
The influencer economy—driven 
by digital creators producing 
content to generate revenue for 
self-profit, brands, advertisers, 
and platforms—is estimated to 
hit over $21 billion in 2023. And it 
will only continue to grow, thanks 
to the expanding network of 
startups supporting the new class 
of entrepreneurs who thrive on 
social media.Platforms are constantly coming up with new ways to 
attract valuable influencers. Last June, TikTok introduced 
subscriber-only videos—a perk exclusively available to 
creators with over 1,000 followers, designed to strengthen 
ties between influencers and their fans. And in September, 
it launched TikTok Shop, which grants brands and creators 
the ability to sell directly through shoppable content on the 
TikTok app. In addition, Creative Juice has pledged to infuse 
$50 million into its Juice Funds, which allows deep-pock-
eted influencers to invest in up-and-coming creatives. The 
fintech company’s new Refresh product will showcase its 
take on the catalog licensing model pioneered by cre-
ator-growth companies like Jellysmack and Spotter. 
“Synthetic influencers,” anthropomorphic entities gener-
ated using AI, are also making waves: In 2022, Lu do Mag-
alu—the face of Brazilian retailer Magazine Luiza and the 
world’s most popular virtual influencer on Instagram—raked 
in over $16 million from sponsorship deals with brands like 
Adidas and MAC Cosmetics. Synthetic influencer creator 
Superplastic recently raised $20 million led by Amazon’s 
Alexa Fund in a deal that includes an animated series. The 
startup, launched by Kidrobot founder Paul Budnitz, plans 
to draw strategic backers like Google Ventures, Galaxy 
Digital, and Sony Japan to develop more character-based 
products across multiple platforms, including video games 
and social networks.Global ad spending on influencer marketing is projected to 
exceed $32 billion in 2024. And with no shortage of digital 
influencers in sight, the influencer economy will soon over-
take conventional marketing and advertising channels. The 
emergence of virtual influencers adds a whole new layer of 
complexity to the evolving class of tastemakers, who are al-
ready struggling to stand out in an oversaturated space. But 
AI-generated stars, which are becoming increasingly easy 
to produce and maintain, threaten to undermine the power 
and attractiveness of their human counterparts. Instead of 
paying a real-life influencer thousands of dollars per post to 
promote their products, brands may choose to collaborate 
with a computer-generated persona that’s more flexible and 
affordable. After all, virtual ambassadors carry a lower risk 
of damaging a brand’s reputation, since unlike humans, 
they’re not prone to emotional outbursts or bad behavior. 
The rise of synthetic influencers—such as Meta’s digital 
doppelgangers of real influencers TikTok tastemaker Charli 
D’Amelio and YouTube star MrBeast—might also worsen the 
mental health of social media influencers, many of whom 
reportedly suffer from paranoia, angst, and low self-esteem 
due to constant pressure and scrutiny. Their inability to 
achieve the same level of perfection as their AI-made rivals 
might result in even more anxiety and depression. THE NEW 
INFLUENCER 
ECONOMY3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 931INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
The growing demand for content 
has led to many new ways to 
produce it virtually, fueled by a 
global talent pool of creatives 
continually craving fresh ways to 
collaborate. Extended reality could 
enhance the field of decentralized 
creative collaboration, leading 
to more immersive engagements 
and allowing companies to even 
more accurately recreate in-person 
experiences for remote participants.CTERA Cloud Streaming allows creatives to seamlessly 
work together in real time using popular editing suites like 
Apple Final Cut Pro, Black Magic Design DaVinci Resolve, 
and Adobe Premiere Pro. Meanwhile, in the music realm, 
Audiomovers added MIDI streaming to its Listento software 
suite, allowing Listento Pro subscribers to easily transmit 
real-time MIDI data from any digital audio station over 
the internet. That means a music producer can capture a 
faraway musician’s live performance in real time and then 
immediately incorporate elements like additional instru-
ments to enhance the recording. Last April, Adobe expanded 
its Frame.io collaboration platform to accommodate photos 
and PDFs. The offering allows users to capture, edit, review, 
and approve content through a single hub, drastically 
improving workflow. Camera-to-cloud integration lets cre-
atives upload and store their media online and immediately 
access it from anywhere. Atomos, which produces recording 
monitors, has loaded its Ninja V and Ninja V+ models with 
the C2C technology, inviting its users to enjoy the feature 
through Atomos Connect. Improving ways for creators to collaborate remotely makes 
content faster and less expensive to produce, and can 
potentially boost output quality and value. C2C technology 
simplifies immediate file sharing, eliminating the need to 
ship memory cards and hard drives and minimizing the risk 
of data loss or damage. This democratization of creative 
tools has spurred the expansion of talent pools internation-
ally, enabling creators from opposite ends of the Earth to 
work simultaneously in real time. In turn, this phenomenon 
could unite a more diverse mix of voices and perspectives, 
ultimately leading to a more colorful showcase of stories 
and ideas. The maturation of audiovisual and haptic hard-
ware will accelerate the adoption of these practices, along 
with the proliferation of next-gen connectivity (5G and 
beyond), which will allow for near-zero-lag live collaboration 
and let more creators simultaneously use data- and com-
pute-intensive creative platforms. It could even spur the 
emergence of new forms of art and content (think: works 
produced by artists’ collectives at the scale of massive mul-
tiplayer online role-playing game user bases).  DECENTRALIZED 
CREATIVE 
COLLABORATIVE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 932INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
As our entertainment devices 
become more advanced, 
consumers are increasingly 
seeking out more engaging 
content that they can experience 
with multiple senses. New strides 
in volumetric video capture, 
spatial audio, and haptics allow 
audiences to see, hear, and feel 
the action like never before, 
turning passive spectators into 
active characters in a story. Around the world, entertainment venues are experimenting 
with immersive shows. At the Las Vegas Sphere, the iconic 
rock band U2’s performances unfold in a high-tech dome 
featuring haptics in 10,000 seats and a wraparound LED 
screen enhanced with 4D effects, including wind and scent. 
At Universal Studios Orlando, the “Bourne Stuntacular”—a 
live show based on the Bourne films, set in a theater with a 
130-foot-wide LED screen and automated interactive set piec-
es—delivers in-your-face action including high-speed chases, 
intense fighting scenes, and a thrilling rooftop escape. And 
the “Tornado Chasers” attraction at France’s Futuroscope 
offers a whirlwind experience comprising on-stage action 
and a 360-degree screen, with the audience seated on a 
circular platform that rises, tilts, and turns. Similarly, the 
Attraktion! Dome Ride Theater at SeaWorld Abu Dhabi boasts 
a dynamic seating ring alongside a 56-foot-wide LED sphere 
providing an uninterrupted 360-degree view. Companies 
are also finding ways to make video-game narratives more 
immersive: While playing “Assassin’s Creed Mirage,” gamers 
wearing the OWO vest can experience sensations exclusive 
to the new release. At IFA 2023, French company Actronika 
debuted similar haptic gear that’s capable of simulating the 
feeling of getting hit by a fireball or standing in a rainstorm. 
Showcasing less tech-centric (but equally immersive) spac-
es, the exhibition “Tim Burton’s Labyrinth” takes visitors on 
a multisensory journey through the filmmaker’s whimsical 
world—a tangle of walkable mazes with over 300 routes to 
explore, peppered with strange sounds, tactile touches, and 
optical illusions. As consumers’ appetite for multisensory experiences in-
creases, creatives will have to push the envelope on design-
ing one-of-a-kind engagements that showcase olfactory, 
tactile, and spatial elements to keep up. Beamform tech-
nology—which allows two people sitting five feet apart to 
hear different sounds or languages without headphones, 
creating a sensational experience that’s unique to each 
guest—unlocks a whole new level of event customization 
and could bring more diverse audiences together under the 
same roof. And the “lickable TV,” which is covered with a 
hygienic film that can be sprayed with various flavors, offers 
onlookers the chance to taste the food shown on the screen. 
(If commercialized, such an invention could enable distance 
learning for cooks, tasting games, and the ability to explore 
restaurant menus from across the globe within the comfort 
of your own home.) Meanwhile, interactive entertainment 
will overtake content meant for passive consumption, 
ultimately leaving a deeper imprint. And the practice of 
converging multiple media types into one experience—like 
a concert within a video game—will create new revenue 
streams for brands, advertisers, and performers. Enter-
tainment venues will increasingly depend on haptics and 
enhanced audio, driving up the price of admission to events 
and performances across the board. IMMERSIVE 
NARRATIVES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 933INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
With the emergence of more 
flexible forms of storytelling, 
audiences are no longer limited 
to a single journey. Viewers are 
invited to influence how the 
narrative unfolds, and AI-assisted 
writing can customize plotlines 
based on a user’s viewing history, 
browsing habits, and favorite 
digital publications. Netflix’s 2018 series “Black Mirror: Bandersnatch” presented 
viewers with a dizzying array of choices and possibilities, 
encouraging them to engage with the film more than once. 
Similarly, the streaming service’s first interactive rom-com, 
“Choose Love,” let audiences pick who the protagonist falls 
for, with six potential endings. In 2022, Amazon announced 
Create with Alexa, a kid-friendly AI tool that will craft a short 
story with just a few words. The company claims the out-
come will be different every time, even if a child picks the 
same exact prompts. In gaming, a new feature from NVIDIA 
gives players the ability to speak directly to a video game 
character and receive an immediate response, so they 
become part of the story themselves. Though personaliza-
tion is mostly rooted in viewers actively making choices as 
the story progresses, AI algorithms could curate content 
for users based on how they say they feel. For instance, a 
verbal prompt such as “show me a movie that will make me 
laugh” would automatically generate a list of comedic titles 
to choose from, tailored to an individual’s past viewing 
history. Technology could also evolve to the point where 
users are linking their biometrics to streaming services us-
ing smartwatch sensors, which would receive information 
about their mental and emotional states. Then media plat-
forms could determine the direction of a narrative based 
on viewers’ reactions to each scene (as indicated by their 
perspiration level, body temperature, and heart rate)—with-
out requiring their active intervention.Interactive storytelling stands to boost customer loyalty 
and engagement, as well as allowing content creators and 
streaming services to learn more about their audiences 
and use that data to tailor ads. Micro-fandoms surrounding 
different versions of the same title could emerge, while die-
hard fans might band together to figure out every possible 
combination of events and determine the best path to take. 
Interactive content could also help recapture users who 
are tired of conventional storytelling. Children’s program-
ming might benefit from flexible formats the most: Kids 
tend to have shorter attention spans, so they get bored of 
traditional content easily—and they have the time to en-
gage with shows, unlike many adults who like to multitask 
while watching television and don’t have the bandwidth to 
consistently interact. One potential downside is that these 
multilinear narratives may make it difficult for audiences 
to properly recognize and discuss important societal topics 
that the content aims to bring to light. PERSONALIZED 
CONTENT2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 934INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Combining the reach of broadcast 
TV and the interactivity of video 
games, massive interactive live 
events (MILEs) invite audiences 
to follow a plotline that unfolds 
over several weeks, encouraging 
them to interact with a livestream 
to impact the action. The cloud-
powered format is meant to 
entertain both passive viewers 
and actively engaged participants 
in real time. The first-ever MILE, an online series called “Rival Peak,” 
emulated a reality TV show starring 12 AI-generated compet-
itors. Over 12 weeks in 2021, the show received 200 million 
engagements on Facebook. More recently, DJ2 Entertain-
ment (one of the companies behind the pioneering pro-
duction), announced “Silent Hill: Ascension,” which follows 
multiple main characters tormented by monsters around 
the globe. Genvid Technologies has raised $113 million to 
develop MILEs and has announced two upcoming projects: 
“Borderlands EchoVision Live,” where viewers will sway the 
misadventures of eight tourists who find themselves in 
trouble after setting off on a safari, and “DC Heroes United,” 
where fans will influence the interactions of their favorite 
superheroes and help form a new Justice League. Genvid’s 
latest MILE concept, “Project Raven,” imagines users who 
will not only be empowered to decide the fate of humans 
hunted by zombies but also create characters they can 
send straight into the action. The company is also explor-
ing the idea of community building through MILEs, where 
participants of all ages can enter a livestreamed 3D space 
and engage with one another within a set time frame. Users 
would move freely within the digital realm and see the 
paths others have followed before them.The next generation of MILEs will call for a deeper collab-
oration between audience members at a much greater 
scale, inviting millions all over the world to act concurrently 
to control a storyline. Micro fandoms championing every 
possible ending may emerge, spurring the creation of mul-
tiple digital communities, each dedicated to engendering 
a specific outcome. While “Rival Peak” encouraged fans to 
work together to earn points, the ability of viewers to cre-
ate characters in “Project Raven” marks a new milestone 
in two-way storytelling, blurring the boundaries between 
the series’ spectators and creators. As participants become 
more involved in developing a MILE, they could be rewarded 
for their characters’ performance, with prizes delivered in 
the form of exclusive digital perks, small royalties, or even 
fractional ownership of the series. Successful MILEs could 
be translated into different forms of media, from colorful 
graphic novels to complex VR experiences. MASSIVE 
INTERACTIVE LIVE 
EVENTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 935INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Virtual stars never complain 
or get into trouble—plus, they 
work for free and are always 
available. That makes them 
much easier to deal with—not to 
mention, more lucrative—than 
human entertainers, creating a 
huge point of contention in the 
industry. Consequently, one of 
the main goals of last year’s SAG-
AFTRA strike was to stop AI from 
replacing actors on set.You may have already heard a virtual star on the radio or 
streaming music. Live 95.5, a radio station in Portland, 
Oregon, sometimes broadcasts a synthetic version of its 
midday host using Futuri Media’s RadioGPT—an AI-powered 
tool using GPT-4 to generate a script based on trending news. 
K-pop star Mark Tuan was the first celebrity to link his digital 
twin to a large language model, allowing fans to interact 
with him 24/7. And Hume, creator of “metastar” Angelbaby, 
raised $11.7 million to fund the creation of more virtual music 
artists. But not all of these virtual stars are authorized. Last 
year, a song featuring unauthorized deepfakes of Drake and 
The Weeknd’s voices, called “Heart on my Sleeve,” went viral. 
Tom Hanks took to Instagram to warn his fans about a dental 
plan ad that showcased an unsanctioned AI version of him-
self. And Warner Music signed a record deal with digital pop 
singer and Instagram influencer Noonoouri, whose voice was 
created using generative AI. 
While some musicians distance themselves from unap-
proved digital creations, others are embracing the new trend, 
urging fans to create content featuring their digital twins. 
One example is artist Holly Herndon, who created a site that 
allows anyone to produce deepfake songs using her voice. 
Similarly, Singaporean actress Jamie Yeo granted fintech 
company Hugosave permission to use her digital clone to 
sell its content, while soccer star Lionel Messi gave PepsiCo 
the green light to use his deepfake to promote Lay’s potato 
chips. Last October, Meta unveiled a roster of digital doppel-
gängers inspired by real-life celebrities, from anime superfan 
Tamika (played by Naomi Osaka) to “big sis” Billie (modeled 
after Kendall Jenner). As deepfake technology advances, it becomes harder to 
determine the authenticity of media, leaving celebrities 
more vulnerable to having their likenesses imitated and 
manipulated without their consent. Digital twins raise a 
lot of thorny questions about ethics and the mental health 
implications of giving users access to lifelike digital ver-
sions of favorite celebrities, which might lead to unhealthy 
one-sided relationships in social media and the metaverse. 
On the positive side, digital twins unlock many new op-
portunities for engagement. Fans can communicate with 
real-life stars in their own language and interact with their 
virtual versions at different ages, making celebrities seem 
relatable to a broader audience. 
Virtual stars could eventually outpace real-life performers 
in terms of earnings and reach. After all, AI creations—which 
are increasingly becoming cheaper to produce—demand no 
pay and require minimal upkeep. (Though this will likely not 
be the case for digital twins of human celebrities, who will 
eventually be compensated once proper legislation is put in 
place.) Digital celebrities can also be scaled and adjusted 
to suit any time or space, giving them an edge over flesh-
and-blood entertainers. With human celebrities increasingly 
willing to relinquish their full image rights to AI companies 
hoping to capitalize on their likeness, the media might 
soon be overrun with licensed deepfakes. Deceased creators 
could produce new works posthumously through their digi-
tal twins, which could be programmed to behave exactly as 
the creators did while alive. DIGITAL  
CELEBRITIES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 936INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Artists are increasingly relying 
on artificial intelligence not 
only to improve their creative 
processes and come up with 
project ideas but also to generate 
complete works—and even direct 
productions—with very little 
guidance. This begs the question: 
Does it matter whether a piece 
of art is created by a human or a 
machine?Artificial intelligence tools are already being utilized in 
video production. Synthesia employs natural language 
processing and machine learning algorithms to produce 
high-quality videos from text without any actors, mics, or 
cameras. Similarly, Synthesys’ technology allows you to 
pick a “Humatar” and feed a script for it to read in one of 
140+ languages. And new tools such as InVideo and Veed.
io enable users to create videos complete with a script and 
voice-overs and then edit them using simple text prompts 
to delete scenes, change accents, and more. Last year, 28 
Squared Studios and Moon Ventures released “The Safe 
Zone,” a seven-minute film fully written and directed by 
artificial intelligence. The producers—who generated an en-
tire storyboard using Dall-E 2—consulted ChatGPT on every 
stage of the filmmaking process, from prop suggestions 
and lighting requirements to camera positioning and cos-
tume design. In the music realm, AudioCipher’s text-to-midi 
plugin empowers creatives to turn words into melodies 
and progressions; Soundraw lets creators choose a mood, 
genre, and length to compose a track; Chirp turns lyrics 
into 20-second song sketches; and WarpSound supports 
GPT-4 text-to-music generation for live YouTube and Twitch 
streams. With the help of AI, nearly anyone can create a masterful 
work with minimal effort. Trained artists are forced to com-
pete with computer-savvy creators who can produce com-
parable content in a fraction of the time, despite lacking an 
artistic eye or a musical ear. And creatives are being pressed 
to develop new skills in order to stay relevant, transitioning 
into a hands-off role that calls for less ideating and more 
supervising. AI is blurring the lines between the conven-
tional and the unorthodox, diluting the art marketplace 
and making it more difficult for consumers to navigate. Are 
humans going to be more or less likely to go see a painting 
at a museum if it’s produced with a few lines of text in a 
matter of seconds? How will creatives’ growing reliance on 
AI tools impact the quality of content they generate? Should 
AI-assisted art be valued the same as their classically made 
contemporaries? And is the proliferation of AI works a threat 
to traditional artists? In the wake of the 148-day Writers 
Guild of America strike that paralyzed Hollywood, it’s easy to 
wonder whether AI stands to diminish the voices and power 
of human creatives, disabling them from fighting for better 
work conditions in the future.AI ASSISTED 
CREATIVITY5TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 937INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
AI makes it possible to take a film’s 
dialogue and dub it in multiple 
languages using re-creations 
of the actors’ voices. It can also 
synchronize the translated speech 
with the performer’s mouth 
movements, making it appear 
even more realistic.  Co-founded by movie director Scott Mann, Flawless AI pro-
vides AI tools to filmmakers and entertainment companies. 
The company is partnering with US seller and distributor 
XYZ Films and UK producer Tea Shop Productions to obtain 
the rights to foreign-language films. The company’s propri-
etary TrueSync technology—which was used in Mann’s “Fall” 
to cover more than 30 F-bombs that impacted the film’s ini-
tial rating—will create lip-synched versions of the acquired 
titles and convert them to English, starting with Crazy 
Pictures’ sci-fi adventure film “UFO Sweden.” Netflix doc 
“The Andy Warhol Diaries” showcased a synthetic version 
of the late artist’s voice produced by Resemble AI’s voice 
generator, which empowers users to create human-like 
voiceovers in seconds. And AI startup Papercup is collabo-
rating with Fremantle to localize the British TV production 
studio’s catalog of talent shows for Middle Eastern audi-
ences, with technology that automatically translates and 
dubs video content into Arabic. Indie film studio FilmRoj’s 
Polish psychological thriller “Swarm” features AI dubbing 
by Deepdub. The Tel Aviv company’s Deepdub GO makes 
professional-level dubbing available for all content types, 
and allows creators to use their own voice to guide intona-
tion. Meanwhile, Klleon’s patented technology can generate 
lip movements while maintaining the same voice and facial 
expressions with just one photo and a 30-second recording.As viewers’ tastes become more diverse, streamers contin-
ue to ramp up their efforts abroad, churning out endless 
content featuring international casts and storylines. Sim-
plifying the localization of media, AI dubbing has greatly 
extended the reach of cinematic productions, allowing 
distributors to target different audiences all over the world. 
Movie dialogues can also be tailored to suit various ages, 
further broadening their appeal. The new capability stands 
to drastically decrease production costs and unlock new 
revenue opportunities for producers and distributors. Actors 
could also benefit from the AI-powered technology, since 
it would increase their availability to take on more work by 
reducing the need for reshoots. But it might be bad news 
for Francesco Pannofino—the official Italian voice for George 
Clooney and Denzel Washington—and other local voice 
artists who could foreseeably lose their jobs to AI-powered 
tools. Audiences might protest the practice of having actors 
seemingly speak languages they’re not fluent in, the same 
way public outcry arises when performers portray different 
races and cultures. AI GENERATED 
VOICE ACTING4TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 938INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
AI is providing more efficient 
ways to streamline workflows and 
processes, enabling companies 
to not only scale their corporate 
communications and marketing 
efforts but also crank out fresh 
material at lightning speed with 
just a few text prompts and clicks. 
And with more solutions being 
bundled, automating content 
is bound to become even more 
affordable. Emarsys provides an omnichannel automation platform 
with AI tools and insights for marketers to quickly pin-
point priority customer segments and launch integrated 
campaigns across multiple channels. Similarly, Zapier lets 
users create customized automated workflows by having 
them simply outline their needs in writing. The company’s 
AI tools then crank out personalized no-code automation 
apps and dashboards. And Axios HQ offers AI-powered 
software that helps large organizations better manage their 
internal communications. Powered by a data-driven formu-
la, the company’s Smart Brevity AI tool crafts and delivers 
messages designed to keep stakeholders well informed 
and aligned. Aug X’s Augie, an AI-powered video generator, 
enables marketers with zero audio or video-editing skills to 
easily add narration, text, music, and photos to their pro-
motional clips. Twilio’s CustomerAI also helps users create 
journey maps for individual consumers in just seconds, 
and transform fragmented data into actionable insights. The proliferation and bundling of AI-powered solutions for 
marketing and corporate communications have lowered the 
price of such tools, making them more accessible to small 
companies with tighter budgets. With companies increas-
ingly relying on the same AI-powered software to create 
marketing materials, there’s a higher risk of campaigns 
sponsored by different brands unintentionally sharing the 
same visual elements or verbiage. That could prove prob-
lematic, given the loose regulations surrounding AI-gen-
erated content. What if two rival brands ended up with the 
same B-roll footage? Which company would have the right 
to use the overlapping assets? By leveraging AI tools to 
streamline operations, companies may have to spend more 
time and money on copyright litigation. They might also end 
up generating ad campaigns and other marketing materi-
als devoid of originality, authenticity, and genuine human 
emotion.AUTOMATED 
CONTENT 
PRODUCTION5TH YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 939INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Streaming platforms are 
revamping their business models 
in an effort to decrease shrinking 
membership. As many providers 
raise their subscription prices, 
some consumers are switching 
from ad-free subscriptions to less 
expensive ad-based plans. Ads used to be a hallmark of free content, but as the num-
ber of free streaming services has decreased, consumers 
are increasingly paying for ad-based plans to save money. 
In November 2022, Netflix replaced its Basic plan—which 
provided a single ad-free stream for $10 a month—with a 
cheaper offering that serves 4-5 minutes of unskippable 
ads per hour. Available in a dozen countries, the Standard 
with Ads option provides access to movies and shows in 
the same quality as the Standard plan, with some title 
restrictions. Soon after, Disney launched Disney+ Basic, 
an ad-supported subscription plan that grants subscrib-
ers access to its full catalog and offers high-quality video 
streaming on up to four devices at once. Peacock, Starz, 
Max, Paramount Plus, Apple TV+, and YouTube have since in-
creased their rates for ad-based subscription plans, placing 
an even bigger premium on commercial-free content. More 
streamers are also turning to live programming to drive 
revenue, including Netflix, which live streamed Chris Rock’s 
comedy special “Selective Outrage.” Startup Telly is trying a 
novel approach: Last May, the company—founded by Pluto 
TV veteran Ilya Pozin—gave away a free smart TV to 500,000 
customers. The 4K device features a second interactive 
screen that continuously displays shoppable content. Pozin 
believes that providing free hardware will give more con-
sumers access to devices—and in turn, increase the reach 
of its targeted ads.According to Comscore, Americans adopted ad-supported 
streaming services at a faster rate than non-ad subscrip-
tion-based plans between 2020 and 2022: a noticeable shift 
likely driven by growing inflation. So it’s no surprise that 
many streamers have begun introducing more affordable 
ad-supported streams to attract new subscribers. As enter-
tainment platforms scramble to recover from the economic 
downturn and stay relevant, many are reverting back to old 
practices rooted in the era of cable TV. They’ve taken a step 
back—toward ad-based content, staggered episode releases, 
and live programming, and away from the commercial-free, 
on-demand binge-watching culture that thrived during 
the pandemic. But with new blockchain-based players like 
EarnTV (a multiplatform video content delivery protocol that 
tokenizes entertainment by rewarding viewers for watching, 
liking, and sharing its content) gaining traction and push-
ing for decentralization, the end of streaming as we know it 
could be near. BUSINESS MODEL 
EVOLUTION1STYEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 940INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Though media streaming might 
be more eco-friendly than 
producing a vinyl record or CD, 
it still accounts for 3%-4% of the 
global carbon footprint. As the 
line between the physical and 
virtual world gets blurrier, the 
more important it becomes for 
streaming companies to find new 
ways to minimize their impact on 
the planet. Since its release, the energy used to store and transport 
data for streaming Olivia Rodrigo’s hit single “Driver’s 
License” on Spotify has generated the same amount of 
greenhouse gas as a plane flying between London and New 
York 4,000 times. To combat the negative effects of audio 
streaming on the environment, the music company intro-
duced Sustainable Sonics, which gives brands the oppor-
tunity to fund tree-planting initiatives that would offset the 
same amount of carbon emitted by their ads. Bitmovin, cre-
ator of FuboTV’s video streaming infrastructure, introduced 
ECO Mode—a sustainable feature that optimizes video 
quality to reduce data transmission, which in turn cuts CO2 
emissions. YouTube parent company Google, which plans to 
make its data hubs the most energy-efficient in the world, 
hopes to fully operate on clean energy by the end of the de-
cade. Its new carbon-intelligent computing platform shifts 
the execution of many computational tasks to low-carbon 
energies, such as solar and wind, when they are most abun-
dant. And these sustainability efforts aren’t just limited 
to data: Record companies are starting to develop ways to 
create vinyl with renewable and non-fossil fuel materials. 
UK-based Evolution Music claims its sugar-based, nontoxic 
bioplastic—which can be used to manufacture records with-
out having to modify the machinery at its record pressing 
plants—could help decarbonize the music industry. In the past, media companies have heavily relied on renew-
able energy certificates to fund initiatives that reduce or 
remove harmful emissions from the atmosphere to offset 
their carbon usage. The controversial method has been crit-
icized for providing organizations a way to buy themselves 
out of having to decarbonize their manufacturing and oper-
ation processes. Beyond that, many sustainability reports 
published by companies have proven to be inaccurate, since 
they are often based on in-house estimates instead of real 
energy consumption numbers. As a result, the Securities 
and Exchange Commission has proposed new rules re-
quiring climate-related disclosures to investors, as well as 
periodic evaluations to determine the validity of ESG claims. 
As climate change worsens, businesses must brainstorm 
more effective ways to counter their carbon emissions and 
decrease their power consumption—especially as investors 
become increasingly eco-conscious. Organizations should 
aim to increase consumer awareness of the negative effects 
of streaming and educate viewers on how to reduce their 
carbon footprint through small acts, such as limiting screen 
time and switching off monitors when not in use. Increasing 
efficiency through the adoption of more ethical and envi-
ronment-friendly practices could boost content production 
and raise profit margins, not to mention free up resources 
and time for entertainment platforms to explore additional 
revenue streams. ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACT OF 
STREAMING1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 941INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2035
Spiraling into darkness    
The big studios have shifted their offering from static storytelling to AI-driven, highly personalized movies and TV shows. AI, integrated with so-
phisticated wearable sensors, analyzes viewers’ emotional and physiological responses in real time to tailor the storyline to their preferences. 
Sensors in a smartwatch detect changes in heart rate, skin conductance, and even voice modulation to feed data back to the AI system.
 But there have been problems. While in a typical viewing session, the AI notes the viewer’s excitement and introduces scenes that create an in-
creasingly enjoyable storyline, recently malfunctions of the algorithms have become more common. As the AI detects the viewer’s subtle discom-
fort at certain suspenseful moments, it mistakenly interprets this as engagement and begins weaving in darker elements. The AI starts to delve 
into the viewer’s past viewing history, finding a pattern of avoidance of certain themes, and, misguidedly, it incorporates those scenarios into the 
current storyline to increase the emotional response. The movie becomes unsettlingly personalized. Situations echoing the viewer’s real-life fears 
are played out on screen. The AI, interpreting an increasing heart rate and agitated voice responses as signs of peak engagement, intensifies these 
aspects. This leads to a spiraling narrative, where the on-screen drama becomes a mirror of the viewer’s internal struggles and past traumas, blur-
ring the line between fiction and reality.
Viewers, especially young adults, are severely impacted by the accidental exposure to these deeply emotional rollercoasters; a suicide attempt 
after such an interactive viewing triggered nationwide protests to put up guardrails around these algorithms and hold companies accountable. 
However, governments are hesitant to overregulate the ever-evolving AI industry, and many argue “the algorithm is not the problem, but the per-
son’s emotional response to it.” So for now, it’s left up to the viewers (and parents) to ensure safe use of this kind of entertainment.
942© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT943© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.THE ARTSINDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
The blockchain art market—
which centers on NFT-based 
works created using modeling, 
algorithms, and data—went 
bust in 2022, partly due to the 
rapid devaluation of crypto 
exacerbated by the fall of digital 
currency exchange FTX. But new 
artists and platforms appear to 
be fueling its resurgence. Last summer, Refik Anadol worked with the Yawanawá com-
munity in Brazil on a multilayered digital masterpiece made 
of 1,000 one-of-a-kind NFTs that react to real-time weather 
data from the Amazon rainforest. The new media artist’s 
first major solo exhibit, “Living Paintings,” featured dy-
namic masterpieces based on California-related data sets. 
Christie’s 3.0, an on-chain digital art auction platform, host-
ed “Cartography of the Soul,” a curated sale featuring more 
than 30 works by generative artists including DeeKay, Smap 
Spratt, IX Shells, and Mad Dog Jones. More recently, the auc-
tion house’s “Future Frequencies: Explorations in Art and 
Fashion”—presented in collaboration with Gucci—brought 
in over $137,000. And five NFTs by Keith Haring, collectively 
called Pixel Pioneer, raked in $1.59 million last fall. Though 
there weren’t too many NFT works at Art Basel Miami 2023, 
Simon Denny’s “Metaverse Landscape 8: The Sandbox Land” 
still managed to draw plenty of attention, quickly selling 
for 30,000 euros on preview day. And thanks to Domini.art’s 
$DOMI crypto token, anyone can invest in blue-chip art. 
The NFT platform lets investors buy and sell fractionalized 
stakes in high-valued artworks, which are transformed into 
unique ERC20 NFT tokens on the blockchain, creating an 
indelible record of ownership and transaction history. Though the demand for NFTs plummeted in 2022, the 
blockchain art market still has a pulse—and as the value 
of cryptocurrency gradually rebounds, it’s poised to make a 
comeback. After all, blockchain technology has numerous 
applications in the virtual art marketplace—from allowing 
buyers to track assets and verify their provenance, to en-
abling creators to receive royalties for every secondary sale. 
But until NFTs regain the trust of investors stung by the 
sudden cooling of the digital art market following the initial 
hype, they are likely better off flourishing in well-established 
virtual ecosystems, like the video game realm. Web3 leader 
Yuga Labs has raised $450 million and is collaborating with 
a number of tech companies including Hadean and Far-
away to create Otherside. The initiative is an interoperable 
metaverse in which NFTs can grant characters unique abili-
ties and in-game virtual real estate. With so many strategic 
partnerships related to cryptocurrency and the blockchain 
in the works, it’s clear that companies and creators alike 
are finally realizing the true power and potential of Web3 
technology. Will the gamble of NFT investors undeterred by 
market volatility ultimately pay off? Only time will tell.BLOCKCHAIN ART 
MARKET3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 944INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Slowly but surely, new regulations 
on intellectual property and 
copyrights surrounding AI-
generated content are trickling 
in around the globe—but not 
fast enough. And with the 
definition of IP continuing to vary 
across borders, governments 
and agencies are struggling 
to reconcile the mismatched 
rules intended to protect artists 
and other creatives on an 
international scale.Last year, the US Copyright Office declared that works gen-
erated with the help of AI could be copyrighted, as long as 
they proved sufficient human authorship. And after Micro-
soft’s Copilot—an AI-powered tool designed to increase pro-
ductivity and promote creativity—raised concerns among 
customers over possible IP infringement, the tech giant 
issued a “Copyright Commitment” that safeguards users 
from potential legal risks. But creators are still vulnerable 
to having their existing works misappropriated by AI. John 
Grisham, George R.R. Martin, and a slew of other writers are 
suing OpenAI over claims that the tech company trained 
its AI models with their works without their permission. A 
similar suit was filed against Meta, alleging the compa-
ny used books to train its AI models without first gaining 
approval from their authors. And three artists have joined 
forces against Stability AI, DeviantArt, and Midjourney in 
a class-action suit that alleges the company’s text-to-im-
age AI tools have infringed on the rights of thousands of 
creatives by scraping their work from the internet without 
their permission. Meanwhile luxury brand Hermès won 
a trademark infringement suit against NFT artist Mason 
Rothschild, with the jury concluding NFTs are not protected 
under the First Amendment. Yuga Labs, creator of Bored 
Ape Yacht Club NFTs, won a lawsuit against Ryder Ripps and 
Jeremy Cahen, who minted NFTs that blatantly copied Bored 
Ape’s NFT collection.When the UK’s Intellectual Property Office suggested a 
copyright exemption that would give AI developers free use 
of copyrighted books and music for training, several mem-
bers of Parliament criticized the proposal: a response that 
echoes a growing sentiment among creators fearful of hav-
ing their works exploited. The rising wave of writers protest-
ing the use of their books to train AI-based models under-
scores the dire need for IP regulations designed to protect 
creators—a point further emphasized by the Screen Actors 
Guild’s failure to reach an agreement that would better 
protect its US members against the misuse of AI. New rules 
mandating approval from and compensation for creatives 
must also be implemented. Though the US Copyright Of-
fice’s first formal guidance on the governance of AI-assisted 
works is a step in the right direction, it fails to provide a de-
tailed explanation of the “human authorship” requirement, 
leaving the term open for interpretation. How the office 
plans to validate claims of authorship is also unclear, given 
the lack of dependable tools that detect AI-generated con-
tent. The verdict of Hermès v. Rothschild set a monumental 
precedent in blockchain art regulation, forcing NFT creators 
to think twice before creating pieces based on existing com-
panies and campaigns. Instead of engaging digital artists 
in legal battles over intellectual property, brands might be 
better off partnering with creatives to produce pieces that 
fans on both sides will love.PROTECTING 
CREATIVITY3RD YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 945INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Since films are so readily 
available at home via streaming, 
audiences are demanding 
a lot more from in-theater 
experiences. Cinemas have 
been forced to innovate and add 
spaces for activities other than 
movie watching. Galleries are 
also evolving, offering artists the 
chance to treat their show space 
as an extension of their canvas. It’s no longer enough for a venue to just include a standard 
theater space. New York’s Perelman Performing Arts Cen-
ter—a 129,000-square-foot cultural hub with 11 performance 
venues—hosts everything from intimate conversations with 
Hollywood stars to a reimagination of “Cats.” Aviva Studios 
in Manchester, England, features The Warehouse, a 69-foot-
high space that can be divided by a movable, full-scale 
acoustic wall. The high-tech venue can be adapted to fit any 
kind of setup, from theatrical events to multimedia shows. 
On a smaller scale, Andblack Studio designed a conical 
tent—made of modular steel panels from a prefabricated 
kit—to serve as a multifunctional events space in Ahmed-
abad, India. The lightweight structure, which can be taken 
apart and rebuilt elsewhere, features a dome that can be 
adjusted to accommodate a variety of events. New Jersey’s 
Cape Square Entertainment Center boasts an eight-theater 
cineplex alongside a 16-lane bowling alley, a golf simulator, 
and a 3,000-square-foot arcade. Rising in the city’s Green 
Heart district, Beijing’s Sub Center Theater will house an op-
era house, a drama stage, and a 5,500 seat concert hall. To 
achieve optimal acoustic performance, the complex is be-
ing built using smart construction technologies including 
robots, building information modeling, and 3D scanning. 
And there’s a new $40 million facility coming to San Fran-
cisco’s Chinatown: Soon to break ground, Edge on a Square 
will serve as an all-in-one exhibition space, art gallery, 
community center, and live performance theater dedicated 
to Asian American culture. The proliferation of digital experiences—driven by the rapid 
expansion of virtual realms and the rise of AI—is drawing 
audiences away from performances and exhibitions set 
in the real world due to their increasing ease of use and 
accessibility. Gatherings and events meant to foster a sense 
of community are more often being held online instead of 
in person. As a result, existing physical spaces are facing 
mounting pressure to adapt in order to stay relevant, and 
new venues are being built to be more dynamic and interac-
tive in an effort to attract an increasingly tech-savvy audi-
ence. Hybrid and customizable venues facilitate the produc-
tion of fully integrated entertainment experiences designed 
to appeal to multiple senses and leave a deeper impression 
on audiences. With AI-powered tools—which offer a higher 
degree of automation, precision, and remote management—
rapidly advancing, the cost of constructing such state-of-
the-art hybrid facilities is decreasing, freeing up funds for 
other projects. The flexible nature of versatile spaces allows 
property owners to quickly transition them from one func-
tion to another several times a day, providing more oppor-
tunities for monetization. When not in use, theaters and 
galleries can be repurposed to serve as meeting points for 
community events, classroom extensions for educational 
institutions, or nondenominational places of worship.MULTI-USE SPACES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 946INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Creatives are playing with new 
ways to incorporate technology 
into their works to better engage 
viewers, showcase alternate 
realities, and connect audiences 
around the world. Thirty audience members experienced German Opera on the 
Rhine’s “Die Tote Stadt (The Dead City)” through AR glasses 
that displayed additional cameras, background informa-
tion, and bilingual subtitles. Holographic theater company 
Verse Orlando has a new location in Florida featuring four 
mixed-reality experiences, combining live performances 
with AR inside a dynamic tent venue. Powered by AR compa-
ny Enklu, the immersive space is filled with virtual realms 
and interactive characters, making guests the main charac-
ters in their own story. BaggårdTeatret’s audio walks show-
case theater that unfolds on your time. The app-based inter-
active performance—available in three languages—invites 
you to take a stroll and follow prompts during the “invisible 
theater” production, which takes place across three scenic 
locations in Denmark. Fix + Foxy’s “Avatar Me,” a live digital 
performance, offered participants the chance to walk in 
someone else’s shoes as a digital avatar without physically 
traveling. Now showing, “Free Your Mind”—Danny Boyle’s 
reimagination of the 1999 film “The Matrix”—highlights the 
potential danger of AI-powered machines usurping humans 
in an immersive, tech-centric display showcasing oversize, 
state-of-the-art screens. And in Tokyo’s “Syn: A New Horizon 
of Physical Sensations,” an interactive exhibition by Rhi-
zomatiks and dance troupe Elevenplay, dancers perform in 
a dynamic space that transforms as the audience takes the 
stage. Artificial intelligence and other digital technologies are 
pushing the boundaries of storytelling, and they’re trans-
forming live performances from a passive activity to a 
stimulating, interactive one. The hands-on art form might 
prompt people to better grasp the message and meaning 
of a performance. It could also elicit unwanted reactions 
from viewers who might feel too overwhelmed or intimidat-
ed by tech-heavy productions, alienating those who may 
not be familiar with the devices or possess the know-how 
required to properly enjoy tech-enhanced performances. 
Infusing more technology into theater also amounts to 
higher production costs. That could drive up ticket prices 
and exclusivity, limiting accessibility to affluent theatergo-
ers. The ability to integrate AR sets, digital characters, and 
special effects might lead production companies to hire 
fewer actors or backstage personnel—ultimately disabling 
entertainment workers from fighting for better conditions 
in the workplace, and all but ensuring there are no repeats 
of 2023’s creative union strikes.PERFORMANCES 
EMBRACE 
TECHNOLOGY2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 947INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Volumetric capture and high-
speed connectivity are enabling 
larger-than-life hologram shows, 
with digital 3D renderings of 
human and animal performers 
alike taking over every stage. The 
tech and infrastructure for real-
time hologram performances 
might not exist just yet—but with 
rapid advancements in telecom 
technology, it’s on the horizon.Last year, “Star Trek” legend William Shatner “beamed” him-
self from a California studio to a Sydney stage using Proto 
Hologram’s Epic—a 7-foot-tall, $65,000 machine displaying 
such lifelike 3D images that it seems like a real person or 
object is inside. Chris Pratt, Manny Pacquiao, Logan Paul, 
and John Stamos have all taken a turn in the high-tech box, 
which has a more accessibly priced 2-foot-high, $6,900 ver-
sion called the Proto M. At SXSW, five musicians performed 
at an AR concert that invited fans worldwide to watch a 
floating 3D hologram version of the live acts. And following 
its successful run, George Lucas’ “ABBA Voyage”—which 
brought younger versions of the Swedish band members 
back to the stage—is set to embark on a global tour. Mean-
while, Deutsche Telekom has collaborated with several 
other communications companies, including Vodafone and 
Telefonica, to boost the quality of real-time holographic 
calls in the context of its 5G Early Access Program. Techno-
logical advancements are also empowering the masses to 
create their own holograms, with MIT’s Tensor Holography 
enabling the creation of 3D holograms for VR in real time—
using just a smartphone. But digital clones of human per-
formers aren’t the only holographic assets on the horizon. 
Years after German Circus Roncalli began using holographic 
animals in place of live ones, French circus L’Écocirque de-
buted an equally cruelty-free show featuring 3D projections 
of elephants, whales, and lions. Showcasing holographic creatures could prove to be a 
cheaper, cleaner, and more ethical alternative to exploiting 
real-life animals, which demand a lot of care. Promoting a 
strong sense of realism and fostering emotional connec-
tions, holographic technology has enabled celebrities to 
strengthen bonds with their fans on a whole other level 
as they engage with audiences as lifesize 3D holograms. 
It also allows performers to play faraway arenas without 
having to worry about the soaring costs of travel and the 
potential danger posed by future pandemics, and fans get 
to enjoy a lifesize show closer to home while paying less 
than they would for a traditional concert. But holographic 
communication demands a great deal of data and power. 
For holograms to truly gain traction, more energy-efficient 
processing systems must be implemented to reduce the 
cost of production and its impact on the environment. Soon, 
holographic devices could become just as commonplace 
as smartphones, providing an easy way to explore alter-
nate realities and storylines without having to experience 
the negative effects of VR headsets, such as eye strain and 
headaches. Further down the line, holograms might be able 
to react to their environment and move around in a more 
organic manner, creating a more interactive experience. THE HOLOGRAPHIC 
LIVE PERFORMANCE2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 948INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Virtual reality concerts—
which feature digitized stars 
performing in the metaverse—
have given entertainers a 
chance to rebound after 
countless live shows were 
canceled due to the pandemic. 
Beyond serving as a new form 
of entertainment, they foster a 
sense of community by providing 
a safe, neutral zone for fans to 
freely engage with one another.Tech entertainment company Wave—which transforms 
musicians into digital avatars that can be scaled up to a 
thousand times their actual size and puts them on virtual 
stages—treated EDM fans to a dazzling VR show featuring 
Calvin Harris, exclusively available to those with PICO head-
sets in Europe and Asia. Following the success of Megan 
Thee Stallion’s “Enter the Hottieverse,” AmazeVR—which cre-
ates short VR concerts for Meta Quest and Steam VR—pro-
duced two more digital shows featuring Zara Larsson and 
Upsahl, with several more VR concerts headlined by T-Pain, 
South Korean girl group Aespa, and K-pop singer Kai under-
way. Thatgamecompany’s “Sky: Children of the Light,” held 
in a virtual stadium modeled on the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, 
showcased a real-time Aurora concert that allowed 10,000 
gamers to simultaneously interact with one another. Beat-
day boasts the world’s first holographic music metaverse 
hub, giving audiences the opportunity to roam 360 degrees 
and engage in gamified interactions while watching a VR 
show. The company creates virtual spaces and captures 
artists’ shows using volumetric video, then invites fans to 
buy tickets to watch prerecorded performances that are 
only available to view in the metaverse during a set time. 
Last year, the platform hosted HTC Vive Originals’ latest 
metaverse project, “Light the Night: Redhat Killer,” an ex-
clusive VR experience combining puzzle games and concert 
elements that invites players to follow characters living in a 
futuristic cyberpunk world.VR concerts offer countless new opportunities for musi-
cians to generate revenue, from virtual merchandise and 
bonus experiences to gamified interactions. The emerging 
format’s reliance on high-tech headsets has both an inclu-
sive and exclusive effect: Though it boosts accessibility to 
those who can’t travel to see their favorite artists perform, it 
alienates those unwilling or unable to purchase the expen-
sive equipment required to participate. Competing brands 
also make it difficult for consumers to attend all their 
favorite VR concerts in one place, since certain shows can 
only be accessed using specific headsets. It’s possible fans 
will begin to see stars in a different light after attending 
enough VR shows, which portray performers as larger-than-
life characters that are flawless and infallible, and thus, less 
relatable. On the other hand, VR headsets provide a more 
intimate view that can make fans feel closer to their favorite 
musicians, leaving them with a more lasting impression 
of the immersive experience. Until the technology achieves 
widespread adoption, VR concerts will likely thrive the most 
in well-established metaverses that already have massive 
followings, such as gaming realms. (Consider Travis Scott’s 
Fortnite concert, which netted the rapper a whopping $20 
million—more than 10 times what he earns for an in-person 
event.)VIRTUAL REALITY 
CONCERTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 949INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Armed with a growing stable 
of creative tools powered by 
new technologies, artists are 
increasingly blurring the lines 
between the physical and digital 
worlds. Complex installations 
showcasing mixed realities point 
toward a future where art is 
increasingly harder to define.Spotlighted at the 58th Venice Biennale, Dominique Gon-
zalez-Foerster’s first VR artwork, “Endodrome,” invited 
visitors to immerse themselves in a colorful flurry of light 
and sound using VR headsets. In “Aki’s Market,” digital 
artist Glenn Kaino combines virtual reality with traditional 
painting and sculpture to tell the poignant life story of his 
late grandfather. Musée d’Orsay’s inaugural VR exhibit, “La 
Palette de Van Gogh,” imagines the painter’s final palette 
as a portal that transports visitors to a vivid digital land-
scape inspired by the artist’s avid use of color. At the Dubai 
Calligraphy Biennale, 3D painter Aimi Sekiguchi blended 
Japanese art and Arabic calligraphy with VR technology to 
create a unique immersive art experience that transformed 
the city’s Al Wasl Plaza into a digital canvas, designed to 
deepen one’s appreciation for both cultures. And visitors 
wearing VR glasses grip onto a railing as they stand next to 
the chariot atop Berlin’s Brandenburg Gate—in case they’re 
overcome with vertigo—at a new exhibit at Humboldt Forum. 
Titled “Loot—10 Stories,” the temporary showcase, created 
in collaboration with The Hague’s Mauritshuis and several 
other European museums, explores the history of stolen art 
partly through a virtual lens. Combining XR with more traditional art forms such as 
painting and sculpture is helping artists differentiate 
themselves in the increasingly saturated digital art space. 
Finding ways to stand out is even more crucial with the 
proliferation of AI-generated works, which can easily be pro-
duced by untrained artists armed with the right tools. The 
digital nature of XR-infused fine art allows it to be replicat-
ed and showcased in multiple locations at once, extending 
its reach beyond the confines of a single gallery. As technol-
ogy becomes more intertwined with art, video games that 
take place in the metaverse are gaining more appreciation 
for their artistic value. For instance, Hello Games’ “No Man 
Sky”—available on four VR platforms, including HTC VIVE 
and Oculus Rift—lets users embark on a visually arresting 
journey across alien planets. As more virtual spaces for 
appreciating art emerge, traditional galleries and muse-
ums may see a decrease in attendance. People could start 
to favor experiences that take place in the metaverse over 
the physical world, valuing the convenience it affords. This 
phenomenon could in turn promote a more sedentary way 
of living, negatively impacting society’s overall physical and 
mental health.XR FINE ART2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 950INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
AI-powered creative tools are 
making it possible to create 
elaborate works of art nearly 
instantaneously. Paintings 
that traditionally require 
weeks to finish by hand can be 
produced by a computer with 
just a few clicks and prompts 
through increasingly affordable 
generative AI platforms, 
empowering unskilled creatives 
to become fine artists. When The Hague put out a call for creative renditions of Ver-
meer’s “Girl with a Pearl Earring,” one of the works it chose 
to exhibit was created using Midjourney. The Museum of 
Modern Art in New York recently acquired AI data painter 
Refik Anadol’s “Unsupervised—Machine Hallucinations,” 
which reimagines images of artworks in the MoMA collec-
tion by running the museum’s visual archive through a ma-
chine-learning model. And at London’s Frieze art fair, French 
Impressionism commingled with artificial intelligence in 
“Jardins d’Été,” a digital series that showcased algorithmi-
cally generated clips and prints of painterly blooms by art-
ist Quayola, presented in partnership with electronics label 
LG OLED. Artist Andrés Reisinger’s latest AI creation, “Take 
Over,” reimagines ordinary buildings in big cities by draping 
them with a variety of pink fabrics meant to represent the 
individual personalities and styles of each place. At “Van 
Gogh in Auvers-sur-Oise: The Final Months,” a new high-
tech exhibit at Musée d’Orsay, guests can converse with an 
AI version of the legendary Dutch artist. Meanwhile, Florida’s 
Dalí Museum hosted a temporary exhibit called “The Shape 
of Dreams” that used Dall-E to generate a “tapestry” featur-
ing artwork inspired by guests’ dreams. Creative educators—including Columbia University profes-
sor Lance Weiler—are increasingly integrating AI into their 
curriculum, demonstrating a shift in the movement of art 
driven by emerging technologies. The demand for digital art 
is rising among mainstream audiences, in part because of 
how easily creators can gain a substantial global following 
by simply sharing their works on social media. The surge 
of synthetic media makes it harder for conventional artists 
to generate fresh material that can’t be easily trumped or 
re-created by AI, forcing them to adapt. With masterclasses, 
bootcamps, and online tutorials on prompting so readily 
accessible, anyone can learn how to use creative AI tools to 
produce monetizable works. That said, while some artists 
are embracing the new technology, others are strongly 
against it, fearful that AI creations will dilute the art market, 
devaluing pieces produced using traditional techniques—or 
worse, that their works will be used to train AI systems with-
out consent. This is such a concern that they’re counting on 
new anti-generative AI tools such as Nightshade, which pro-
tects artists’ original creations by confusing AI generators 
and corrupting their outputs. The EU’s Artificial Intelligence 
Act promises to keep AI systems in the region safe, trans-
parent, nondiscriminatory, and eco-friendly. It mandates 
the disclosure of all content created using AI, and calls for 
AI models to be updated to prevent them from generating 
illicit content. How policymakers plan to reinforce the vague 
and ambitious law remains to be seen.AI GENERATED  
FINE ART2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 951INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Artists and musicians are 
leveraging their craft to bring 
attention to environmental 
issues plaguing the planet, 
from global warming and 
deforestation to animal 
endangerment and reef 
preservation. And performers 
are becoming more mindful 
of how their touring habits are 
impacting the Earth.Last year, British painter James Hart Dyke retraced the 
steps of the first climbers to reach Mont Blanc’s summit 
150 years ago; in a series of over 40 paintings that went on 
exhibit at London’s Cromwell Place, he documented the 
devastating effect of climate change on Western Europe’s 
highest mountain. At Art Dubai, AI artist Refik Anadol 
launched “Glacier Dreams,” a multisensory 3D display that 
highlighted the beauty and vulnerability of Iceland’s vol-
canic glaciers, created to call attention to the dangers of 
rising sea levels. In Delhi, a multisensorial exhibit invited 
guests into a home that adapts to persistent air pollution. 
The house communicated with its occupants through a 
message ticker connected to a network of particle sensors 
that provided real-time air quality notifications. In music, 
Coldplay’s “Music of the Spheres” tour set a new high bar 
for concert sustainability. Meant to decrease the global 
series’ carbon footprint, the band’s eco-conscious efforts 
included optimizing water efficiency and waste manage-
ment, powering all operations with renewable energy and 
biofuels, and reducing CO2 by funding the planting and 
protection of millions of new trees, one for every ticket sold. 
Climate activist band The 1975 also hosted the world’s first 
“carbon-removed” live concert at London’s O2 Arena, where 
organizers employed numerous methods to physically ex-
tract the carbon emissions generated by the show.Using an artistic canvas to design immersive and inter-
active experiences around sensitive environmental is-
sues could ultimately prove very effective: the approach 
might encourage audiences to better listen, deepening 
their understanding of topics that are difficult to hear and 
discuss and encouraging them to take action. Art can also 
help stretch the imagination, pushing innovators to come 
up with creative solutions to the climate crisis. Chicago 
sculptors Amber Ginsburg and Sara Black hold interactive 
workshops where participants use pencils—made from a 
fallen tree infected with water mold due to stress caused by 
the changing environment—to write and illustrate potential 
fixes to the growing problem. Big-ticket performers are in an 
even better position to incite the masses, given the amount 
of influence they hold. If every musician adopted more 
sustainable practices while on tour, such as avoiding using 
private jets and gas-guzzling vehicles, it’s a good bet the 
global music industry’s carbon footprint—which amounts to 
540,000 tons of greenhouse gas emissions per year—would 
shrink. CLIMATE INFILTRATES 
ART AND 
PERFORMANCE1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 952INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2030
The Art of Scent    
Gone are the days when art was solely a visual or auditory experience. Now, scent-based artworks are taking center stage, offering a multidi-
mensional canvas that taps into the deep connection between scent, memory, and emotion.
 In major urban centers, olfactory galleries have sprung up, becoming the epicenters of this renaissance. These spaces are architectural mar-
vels, equipped with advanced ventilation systems that ensure a clean olfactory slate for each artwork and sophisticated scent diffusion tech-
nologies that release and control the intensity of fragrances. Visitors explore these galleries, each room offering a new aromatic landscape, trig-
gering emotions ranging from the ethereal to unsettling. The artists behind these scents work with an array of aromatic compounds, skillfully 
blending them to craft intricate olfactory narratives. They are stories, emotions, and experiences encapsulated in a whiff.
Interactivity is a cornerstone of these olfactory artworks. Many installations are designed to respond to the presence and actions of the audi-
ence. Through motion sensors and biometric scanners, the artwork detects the movement, heart rate, and even body temperature of visitors, 
altering its scent output in real time. This creates a dynamic, personalized experience, where the artwork grows and shifts with its audience.
Technology has also democratized olfactory art, allowing for personalized creations based on individual histories and preferences. Advanced 
algorithms analyze personal data to create bespoke scent compositions, offering a form of olfactory autobiography. These personalized scents 
can be experienced through home diffusers, which utilize micro-nebulization technology to turn liquid fragrances into a fine mist, filling a 
room with personalized aromatic art.
953© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENT954© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.LOCATION-BASED 
ENTERTAINMENTINDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Location-based entertainment 
(LBE) offers high-fidelity 
experiences that take place in a 
set physical space as opposed 
to exclusively online. Amusement 
parks, arcades, and other leisure 
venues are incorporating more VR 
into their products and services, 
leveraging the digital medium to 
create immersive localized social 
activities designed to enliven all 
the senses. Sandbox VR is producing a full-body LBVR experience based 
on Netflix’s “Squid Game,” where contestants venture to 
iconic locations from the show to compete against one an-
other. Motion Reality, Springboard VR, and Zero Latency all 
host similar free-roaming experiences for visitors equipped 
with tetherless VR and motion-capture gear to engage in 
highly immersive multiplayer battles set in massive virtual 
arenas. Family-friendly providers of standalone VR expe-
riences include Dreamscape and Divr Labs, which invites 
guests to embark on virtual adventures set in fantasy 
realms, from a prehistoric jungle to an apocalyptic zombie 
land. Players feel the wind on their faces, the heat on their 
backs, and the ground shaking beneath them as they navi-
gate the 1,600-square-foot multisensory playground. “Space 
Explorers: The Infinite” transports guests to the Internation-
al Space Station, where they can learn all about the daily 
lives of astronauts. And guests decked out in YULLBE Pro 
VR gear can discover what it’s like to navigate the world as 
a miniature-size person in Hamburg’s Miniatur Wunder-
land. Other room-scale VR providers such as Hologate and 
Virtual Room, which specializes in VR escape games, offer 
more space-efficient and affordable VR encounters. Seat-
ed VR—such as Triotech’s The Storm, a two-seat, coin-op 
VR simulator supported by 4D effects—allows audiences 
to enjoy passive experiences in even more compact areas, 
such as immersive pods. And Iconic Engine’s Holometric 
4D haptic-motion chair enables stunning extended reality 
experiences.  The latest development in VR comes from researchers at the 
University of Tsukuba in Japan, who have devised a method 
for inducing hot or cold sensations instantaneously—with-
out altering the temperature of a space or a person’s body. 
The revolutionary system allows developers to simulate 
real-world thermal conditions in a VR environment, adding 
an extra element of realism. This newfound ability enables 
the creation of even more immersive experiences while 
avoiding the effects of changing temperatures, which can 
negatively impact users’ health. MIT minds have developed 
BrightMarker, an invisible tagging system that employs 
hidden fluorescent tags embedded in physical objects to 
improve motion tracking and object detection in VR expe-
riences. Optimizing equipment and simplifying controls in 
virtual settings—such as requiring subtle hand motions 
instead of using handheld devices to take action—can make 
VR encounters more intuitive and user-friendly, widening 
their appeal to include less tech-savvy consumers. Though 
VR is isolating in nature, integrating it into LBE helps foster 
a communal sense by encouraging people to gather in a 
low-stakes setting and work together (or playfully compete 
against each other). Access to ultrarealistic VR experiences 
might also provide thrill seekers a way to relish the exhil-
aration of performing dangerous, rip-roaring acts without 
actually putting themselves or others at risk, ultimately 
reducing the number of deaths and injuries caused by reck-
less behavior. VR IN LOCATION-
BASED 
ENTERTAINMENT2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 955INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Augmented reality provides a 
more affordable and accessible 
way to enhance experiences 
than VR, and the rapidly-evolving 
technology is positioned to 
become the cornerstone of LBE 
entertainment in the coming years. 
It boasts countless applications 
in the industry, from competitive 
socializing to the gamification of 
the theme park experience. Universal’s Super Nintendo World—soon to arrive in Orlando 
as part of the company’s Epic Universe—serves as a life-
size, complex video game enhanced by AR and VR elements 
that combine physical props and projection mapping 
technology. Last summer, Rock Paper Reality launched a 
new location-based AR experience that transformed San 
Francisco’s Japantown with custom 3D digital origami 
works. The project was enabled by the integration of Goo-
gle’s Geospatial Creator platform with Adobe Aero, which 
lets developers construct, preview, and publish 3D and AR 
content anchored in the physical world. Escape Virtuality in 
New York City boasts an AR rock climbing wall that lets kids 
and adults alike choose from a variety of digital challeng-
es with different configurations that limit how and where 
they climb. At Universal Studios Hollywood, guests put on 
AR goggles that snap into an iconic red Mario cap to race 
in “Mario Kart: Bowser’s Challenge,” where they can throw 
shells at their opponents by simply turning their heads 
and looking in the direction they want to aim. Recently, the 
park’s parent company applied for a patent for an AR ride 
system that incorporates facial and skeletal recognition 
technology, suggesting future Universal theme park rides 
will be capable of transforming guests into different char-
acters or creatures. Augmented reality, which brings virtual objects into the 
physical world, is enabling entertainment developers to 
create more personalized interactive experiences for con-
sumers. It blends in with analog reality, and is more flexible 
to integrate than VR, which completely isolates users. And 
it has the potential to provide a different type of thrill—one 
driven by fictional characters that inhabit the real world, as 
opposed to an alternate universe. Guests can unlock hid-
den AR prizes or collectibles only accessible inside a theme 
park, which they can later retrieve via an accompanying 
app. Companies can then leverage the data they collect to 
formulate more targeted offerings, with the goal of driving 
overall engagement. Consider Pokémon Go: the popular 
game, which has sent millions of people armed with only 
their smartphones all over the Earth in search of digital 
monsters, continues to thrive eight years after its launch, 
demonstrating AR’s tremendous reach and potential to 
bring people together. AR IN LOCATION-
BASED 
ENTERTAINMENT2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 956INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Web3 is poised to disrupt business 
strategies and operations in the 
entertainment industry, offering 
new ways to combat piracy and 
boost efficiency, security, and 
transparency through blockchain 
technology. Destination-based 
NFTs—which can only be minted 
at specific physical locations—are 
also encouraging sedentary NFT 
collectors to step away from their 
screens and venture outdoors. Blockchain technology has many potential applications 
at theme parks, not the least of which is ticketing optimi-
zation. Users can have password-protected wallets with 
unique digital codes that trigger final payment and ticket 
transfer once they pass the gate. Blockchain technology 
could also be used to create a more flexible system for 
express-pass purchases through smart contracts. Guests 
could purchase tokens at a premium to bid on the rides 
and times they want, creating an efficient demand-based 
system. 
Superlocal, a location-based NFT built on the Ethereum 
blockchain, rewards users with digital currency and collect-
ibles as they venture to different places around the globe. 
Likewise, Lost Worlds is incentivizing creators to launch 
their own geoNFTs in the real world by dangling badges, 
tokens, and exclusive NFTs. And ReBASE, an NFT platform 
built on the Solana blockchain, urges users to attend group 
sessions held at designated locations to mint exclusive 
drops. On a related note, Disney partnered with Andrees-
sen Horowitz–backed Cryptoys to produce limited-edition 
collectible NFTs featuring Mickey Mouse, Minnie Mouse, and 
Pluto (similar to the “Star Wars” NFT set released in 2022). 
And “Free Renfield” granted fans of the Universal Pictures 
film “Renfield” the chance to win a number of Dracula-in-
spired rewards, including a digital art collection of individ-
ualized prizes that can be minted and traded through the 
Aptos blockchain. The emergence of location-based NFTs is driving collec-
tors to be more adventurous, pushing them to explore the 
outdoors and spend less time sedentary, fixated on their 
computers. It also creates a stronger sense of community 
among users, encouraging them to come together in per-
son to unearth hidden NFTs. For theme parks, integrating 
blockchain technology into ticketing operations reduces 
the risk of counterfeit tickets slipping through the cracks 
and removes the need for guests to bring ID and paper 
printouts, speeding up the admission process. Parks that 
incorporate smart contracts to create a bidding system 
for rides could monitor which attractions command the 
highest token prices, allowing them to pinpoint the most 
popular ones. They could also leverage blockchain capabil-
ities to create new digital currencies, which—if not used up 
by the end of a visit—could be exchanged back into local 
currency, unlike traditional park dollars. Increasing block-
chain fatigue and disillusionment surrounding its ease of 
use, however, threaten to derail the promising technology’s 
upward trajectory. BLOCKCHAIN 
INTEGRATIONS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 957INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Robots are no longer just 
sitting pretty at theme parks. 
Beyond enhancing animatronic 
experiences, androids are 
increasingly being put to 
work, bolstering services and 
operations on a whole new 
level.Upon entering Dubai’s Museum of the Future, guests are 
greeted by Ameca—an AI-powered humanoid robot that 
can answer questions, make facial expressions, and track 
movement. Disney recently filed a patent for a robotic arm 
that can lift passenger compartments from one ride track 
to another. Soon after, the company unveiled an emotive, 
two-legged android that can follow people around. And at 
SXSW 2023, the entertainment company introduced a new 
robot—modeled after “Zootopia” character Judy Hopps—that 
uses motion-capture data to create lifelike performances 
intended to have a deeper emotional impact. The House of 
Mouse’s patent for a “robotic sherpa”—an autonomous mo-
bile locker that will follow guests while storing their belong-
ings and interacting with them—was also finally approved. 
Meanwhile, Universal has filed a patent for an edible soft 
robotic system that will showcase or interact with consum-
able inflatable objects. And MIT researchers are at the brink 
of finding a way to create a system of tiny robots that can 
quickly assemble large-scale structures, from buildings 
and vehicles to larger robots. RoboFab—the world’s first 
factory for humanoid robots (created by Agility Robotics, 
which specializes in biped droids able to navigate complex 
environments)—can churn out 10,000 robots per year. Digit, 
the company’s flagship model, can perform tasks such as 
climbing stairs, opening doors, and carrying boxes. Assistive robots that can follow people have the potential to 
serve up personalized services to theme-park guests on the 
spot, boosting the amount of time spent on attractions by 
saving trips to customer service kiosks. And pairing cus-
tomers with attentive robot companions will make guests 
feel more seen and heard, despite the lack of real human 
interaction. With the ability to display convincing emotion, 
automated bots programmed to have a high degree of emo-
tional intelligence could assess visitors’ outward mood and 
behavior and instantly create experiences tailored to meet 
their individual wants and needs. Tesla has also hugely 
improved its Optimus bots: Able to detect and memorize 
environments, the autonomous humanoids could prove 
useful in streamlining operations at entertainment ven-
ues. If innovators succeed in creating a fully independent 
self-replicating robot assembly system that can build 
large-scale structures, the cost of constructing rides and 
other attractions at theme parks—both in terms of time and 
money—could significantly drop, improving a company’s 
bottom line. That said, the demand for Robots-as-a-Ser-
vice—which involves robotic companies offering use of their 
products and services to companies through subscrip-
tion-based contracts—stands to skyrocket, with more and 
more companies choosing to automate their systems. The 
growing trend doesn’t bode well for human workers, who are 
increasingly at risk of being replaced by robotic solutions. ASSISTIVE 
AMUSEMENT PARK 
ROBOTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 958INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Amusement parks are 
constantly evolving to meet 
consumers’ increasingly 
diverse interests. But instead 
of broadening their scope, 
some theme parks are opting 
to narrow their focus and 
differentiate themselves by 
appealing to smaller audiences, 
from sports fanatics and fright 
aficionados to adrenaline 
junkies. Guests at Leander Springs in Texas can enjoy EpicSurf, a 
stationary surfing experience that produces deep-water 
waves, which can be adjusted depending on a person’s 
skill level. Coming to Saudi Arabia, The Rig—an eco-friendly 
park that will only be accessible via boat or helicopter—is 
set to offer a variety of extreme sports and other adrena-
line-fueled adventures, from bungee jumping and paraglid-
ing to roller-coaster rides and submarine dives. Storyliving 
by Disney will allow diehard fans to own a home in a gated 
community staffed by Disney cast members. The first 
location, set in the Greater Palm Springs area, will feature 
parks and promenades designed by Disney Imagineers. 
Disney also recently filed a patent for drive-thru theme 
parks that envisions visitors driving into an immersive 
pod to be entertained while they await curbside orders or 
for their car to charge. Former Six Flags park AstroWorld 
is being reincarnated in the metaverse, set to become the 
world’s first amusement park built entirely on the block-
chain. AstroWorld NFTs will offer unlimited access to the 
digital model of the amusement hub, which will host car-
nival games, arcades, themed events, and virtual coasters. 
Meanwhile, a new theme park dedicated to horror experi-
ences is arriving in Japan. Called Immersive Fort Tokyo, the 
fully indoor destination will offer guests highly individual-
ized experiences, including the chance to become charac-
ters in a live-action murder mystery. Influenced by the rising cost of admission and increasing 
availability of cheap in-home entertainment, consumers 
might be less inclined to visit theme parks. In an effort to 
stand out, new venues are targeting audiences with more 
niche interests—not just in the physical world but also in 
the digital realm. Virtual theme parks are giving those un-
able to afford high ticket prices the opportunity to enjoy at-
tractions for free online, further democratizing theme parks. 
But more exclusive venues in far-flung, hard-to-reach places 
like Saudi Arabia’s The Rig are also emerging, poised to 
alienate all but the elite. And designing exclusive neighbor-
hoods to act as extensions of theme parks could potentially 
dull the magic for residents in the long term, since they 
might grow to take the theme-park treatment for granted. AMUSEMENT 
PARKS FOR NICHE 
INTERESTS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 959INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Theme parks are leveraging AI and 
the Internet of Things—coupled 
with data gleaned from in-park 
platforms, mobile apps, and 
wearables—to analyze customer 
behavior and create more 
customized experiences. The next 
step is finding a way to combine 
first-party data with information 
sourced from outside the park 
ecosystem for even greater 
efficiency and customization. Universal filed a patent application for a crowd manage-
ment system that would grant it the ability to control the 
movements of guests around its parks through wireless 
devices. The proposed method would deliver instructions 
to individual visitors, potentially requiring them to see at-
tractions or do activities at a certain time or in a particular 
order to ensure traffic remains evenly distributed through-
out the park. The company is also incorporating facial rec-
ognition technology at its Orlando theme parks, including 
the upcoming Epic Universe. The photo validation system 
will capture images of visitors upon their initial entry and 
control their access to certain parts of the park depending 
on their ticket tier. WaveTec’s queue management system 
enables theme parks to offer virtual lines, real-time queue 
tracking, personalized notifications, and better premium 
access. Pixera 2.0—a media server system that can be used 
to control immersive experiences, rides, queues, visuals, 
and more—serves as a platform from which operators can 
interact with several technologies at once. Hey Disney is 
now available for consumers to purchase as an annual, 
auto-renewing subscription in the US. First introduced in 
2021, the interactive voice assistant—which connects Dis-
ney’s Genie AI with Amazon’s Alexa—allows users to inter-
act with beloved Disney, Pixar, and “Star Wars” characters 
through Echo devices at home and at select Disney Resorts 
hotels, extending their experience well beyond the confines 
of a theme park. Theme parks are increasingly implementing new ways to 
not only monitor visitors and gather as much informa-
tion from them as possible but also control their behavior. 
Though such measures benefit guests by offering them 
more personalized experiences and minimizing wait times, 
it could impinge on their freedom to enjoy attractions at 
their own pace, as they please. Guests might feel pressured 
or overwhelmed if forced to follow strict schedules, de-
creasing their level of satisfaction. Incorporating outside 
intelligence into in-park findings to better engage guests 
and anticipate their needs might also be perceived as overly 
intrusive, making visitors feel uncomfortable and deterring 
them from revisiting. Accessing customers’ personal de-
tails also leaves them susceptible to hacking. Beyond that, 
there’s the question of how long theme parks will store vis-
itor information and how they intend to use the data in the 
future. In leveraging technology to optimize operations and 
improve their offerings, theme parks have to be careful not 
to make visitors feel like mindless sheep that can easily be 
controlled and exploited for intelligence. Though intended 
to speed up queues, the use of facial recognition could also 
introduce a new host of issues, including racial profiling—a 
problem that often arises in conjunction with the emerging 
technology. INTUITIVE 
OPTIMIZATION2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 960INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
Theme parks are leveraging data 
to sway customers’ decisions 
regarding when they will visit and 
what they will do during their stay, 
employing tactics such as surge 
pricing and push notifications that 
keep visitors up to date on wait 
times.Cmd-Ctr boosted Legoland Windsor Resort UK’s ride ca-
pacity by 10% by allowing ride managers to identify and 
prioritize “unsung hero” attractions with higher capacities. 
The cloud-based park operations system empowers opera-
tors to capture data and conduct safety checks while rides 
are in operation, boosting efficiency. Meanwhile, Disney 
has been able to increase Disney World’s capacity by 30% 
using insights from its complex data analytics system. And 
Calypso Water Park recently introduced RFID wristbands 
that guests can use to make in-park payments and store 
season passes (similar to Disney’s MagicBand+). More 
theme parks—most recently, three of Six Flags’ biggest 
locations—are also instituting dynamic pricing, which 
involves adjusting single-day ticket prices according to 
the level of demand, in order to even out crowds. Compa-
nies say the algorithm-driven strategy allows them to offer 
a better guest experience, since it helps mitigate crowds 
at parks and keeps their staff and resources from being 
stretched too thin.Flexible pricing has provided amusement parks with a 
much-needed method of generating additional revenue to 
fund the exceedingly immersive experiences customers 
are demanding . As XR rides and AI-powered adventures 
become the new gold standard, the cost of building and 
maintaining theme-park attractions will only continue to 
rise. Until there are cheaper ways to design and manufac-
ture high-tech offerings, customers will have to get used to 
climbing variable prices. Fully relying on algorithms to de-
termine prices removes human sensibility from the process, 
leaving parks at risk of experiencing wildly absurd surges 
driven by unexpected spikes in demand, including poten-
tially from scalpers. Take for instance Japan’s Ghibli Park, 
where rampant scalping during its 2022 opening weekend  
forced customers to pay illicit vendors more than 2,000% of 
the original ticket price to get a reservation. (The park has 
since banned the unauthorized reselling of tickets, though 
it’s unclear how well that rule is enforced.) Employing dy-
namic pricing could also damage a theme park’s reputation 
among its true-blue fans, ultimately decreasing customer 
loyalty and engagement. If theme park experiences do not 
significantly evolve or improve despite frequent price surg-
es, park attendance might drastically drop as guests deem 
the discrepancy between expected and actual cost increas-
ingly unwarranted and outrageous. DYNAMIC 
OPERATIONS2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 961INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
As society becomes more tech 
savvy, visitors at traditional 
institutions—including museums, 
zoos, galleries, and aquariums—
are expecting attractions to 
be increasingly smart and 
captivating. VR, AR, and 4D 
elements are breathing new 
life into artworks, animals, and 
artifacts, making educational 
showcases more playful and 
interactive. Arcadia Earth, an environmental art exhibit in New York 
City, engages visitors through holographic orb guides 
that they can see through HoloLens, Microsoft’s AR smart 
glasses. Creative collective Meow Wolf’s new immersive 
art museum in Houston, its fifth permanent project in the 
US, houses interactive multimedia installations by local 
artists. New York’s Artechouse, a modern space exclusively 
dedicated to tech-infused art, collaborated with NASA to 
create Beyond the Light, a new informative and interactive 
show that recounts how humans have experienced light 
over time using the latest audio-visual technology. And 
the city’s new House of Cannabis is chock-full of multisen-
sory trappings, including a trippy Disorientation Room. In 
Tokyo’s Azabudai Hills, the newly reopened TeamLab Bor-
derless: Mori Building Digital Art Museum features tech-in-
fused works that react to guests and transform in their 
presence, creating a unique experience for every visitor. 
On a similar vein, TeamLab Planets invites visitors to wade 
through water and wander through an ever-changing gar-
den of 13,000 real orchids that bloom midair. Meanwhile, 
Axiom Holographics’ augmented reality zoo—a showcase of 
laser-light 3D creatures—lets guests dive with a whale or 
swim with a hippo. Integrating interactive technology into exhibitions and 
utilizing walls as extensions of canvases create more 
mesmerizing, meaningful displays that leave longer lasting 
impressions on guests. VR and AR offerings give visitors of 
all ages the opportunity to engage with lifesize creatures 
they wouldn’t be able to interact with in the wild, while inter-
acting with 3D renditions of historical figures offers guests 
a more intimate educational experience meant to deepen 
their connection with the subject. Set to open in 2027, a pro-
posed London Tunnels installation featuring hi-res, large-
scale screens will reveal the story of a former WWII bomb 
shelter and secret M16 outpost. And an ongoing exhibit at 
the Berlin-Hohenschönhausen Memorial’s museum invites 
visitors to interact with contemporary witnesses who previ-
ously worked at the Stasi prison, generated using Volucap’s 
volumetric technology. IMMERSIVE MUSEUM 
EXPERIENCES2ND YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 962INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTWHY IT MATTERS
In an effort to decrease their 
carbon footprint amid worsening 
climate change, amusement 
parks are incorporating more eco-
friendly features—from renewable 
energy installations and electric-
powered vehicles to water 
conservation systems and large-
scale recycling programs. Channeling the power of IoT and advanced data analytics, 
many theme parks are installing smart grid systems—elec-
tric networks that leverage advanced technologies to track, 
control, and optimize their energy usage and distribution. 
Typhoon Texas and Wild Wadi Waterpark both use vari-
able frequency drives on all their pumps to help minimize 
energy consumption. Six Flags uses cooking oil from its 
own kitchens to fuel trains and vehicles at four of its parks, 
and Disneyland’s steam trains are powered by biofuel. 
PortAventura World in Spain runs completely on renewable 
energy and is 100% carbon neutral. Dedicated to combating 
climate change, France’s DéfiPlanet was built on the values 
of a circular economy, waste management, and corporate 
responsibility. And Dubai Parks and Resorts is develop-
ing a new water treatment plant that will safely recycle 
its lagoon water. Copenhagen’s Tivoli Gardens has run a 
recycling program since 1998, keeping 1.2 million plastic 
cups from being landfilled per year. And Universal Studios 
Hollywood is aiming to transition to a fully electric fleet of 
trams by 2025. On a larger scale, Six Flags Magic Mountain 
is installing a new solar carport and energy storage sys-
tem over its main parking lot that will annually produce 
20.8 million kilowatt-hours of electricity, enough to offset 
100% of the park’s energy usage. And Six Flags Over Texas is 
currently testing a waste disposal system that decreases 
landfill waste using microorganisms, which work to break 
down the refuse. Increasing consumption will further strain Earth’s resourc-
es, making it important for companies to find ways to 
mitigate the impact of human activities on the planet. Amid 
worsening climate change, consumers are becoming in-
creasingly concerned about the environment, pushing them 
to support brands and companies that prioritize sustain-
ability over profits. So it’s crucial for theme park companies 
to adopt more sustainable practices—not just to decrease 
their carbon footprint but to improve their brand reputation. 
Given their massive size and scale, amusement parks could 
potentially become self-sufficient autarchies independent 
from the grid, creating their own circular economy. They 
could incentivize visitors to go along with their sustainable 
efforts by gamifying eco-friendly initiatives (such as reward-
ing guests who recycle with digital tokens or currencies that 
they can exchange for food or merchandise), or monetize 
the renewable energy they produce.THEME PARKS  
GO GREEN1ST YEAR ON THE LIST
WHAT IT ISHOW IT WORKS 
© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 963INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTSCENARIOS
SCENARIO YEAR 2040
Theme Park in a Box    
The effects of climate change have deeply impacted travel: Extreme weather events cause frequent flight cancellations, wildfires 
(and the clouds of smoke they bring), floods, and storms devastate wide swaths of land, and stringent ESG requirements have 
increased costs all around (to either offset CO2 emissions or finance environmentally sustainable business practices). The ozone 
layer has become so diminished that it is dangerous to spend extended time outdoors.
 Theme park visitor numbers have greatly declined as a result. To offset losses and continue to allow families to engage with their 
different franchises, companies have created a “Theme Park-in-a-Box,” enabling families to have a communal theme park experi-
ence without leaving their home.
 The product is a software solution that enables multi-reality adventures and tabs into the different technologies ubiquitous in 
homes: smart kitchens, 3D printers, connected appliances, haptics, and XR devices. Outfitted in their haptic suits and VR-head-
sets in place, a family logs into the virtual theme-park universe as their avatars of choice, mingling with the other (virtual) visitors, 
which are indistinguishable from animated fantasy figures, there to entertain and engage the guests. The sensors integrated into 
the haptic suits capture physical and emotional responses in real-time, so that each ride is adjusted to fit the thrill-profile of the 
visitor, allowing families to experience rollercoasters and haunted houses communally. Stuffed animals and other mementos 
picked out in the virtual shopping square are printed out with the home 3D printer. Once it’s time for a deserved break from all the 
adventures, meals ordered from the park can be delivered at home within 15 minutes by a nearby restaurant, as local restaurants 
have partnered with theme parks to create a lucrative side business that benefits their neighborhoods.
964© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.INDUSTRY ENTERTAINMENTAUTHORS & 
CONTRIBUTORS
965© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY966© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.Co-author  
 KRISTIN TABLANG
Chief Executive Officer   
AMY WEBB 
Managing Director   
MELANIE SUBIN 
Creative Director  
EMILY CAUFIELD
Editor  
ERICA PETERSON
Copy Editor  
SARAH JOHNSON
Director of Operations  
CHERYL COONEYAUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORSENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY
966CHRISTINA VON MESSLING  
Senior Manager 
Christina von Messling leads our European client portfolio and our 
Life Sciences practice area at Future Today Institute. She is re-
nowned for her expertise in strategic foresight and an unparalleled 
ability to navigate complex industry landscapes. With a career span-
ning over two decades, she has guided multinational corporations 
through transformative strategies, leveraging his deep understanding of market dynamics and future 
trends.
Christina’s diverse experience across sectors enables her to craft visionary scenarios and strategies, 
driving sustainable growth and innovation for clients worldwide. Having split her time between Europe, 
the UK, Brazil, and the US, she combines a global perspective with in-depth, holistic expertise of the 
main drivers of change: technology, geopolitical, economic, and societal developments. She has 
advised leading pharmaceutical and healthcare companies, as well as beauty, entertainment, media, 
and retail brands.
Christina is a coach in the strategic foresight MBA course at the NYU Stern School of Business. She 
holds a Masters in Law from the Freie Universität Berlin, where she graduated within the top 10% of the 
nation. She works from offices in New York City, Berlin, and London.
SELECTED  
SOURCES
967© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY968© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Adobe Aero and Paper Tree.” 
Rock Paper Reality, May 14, 2021. 
https://rockpaperreality.com/
our-work/rpr-launches-first-of-
its-kind-experience-with-adobe-
aero-and-google-geospatial.
Adobe Expands Frame.Io Col-
laboration Platform Beyond 
Video. https://news.adobe.com/
news/news-details/2023/Ado-
be-Expands-Frame.io-Collabo-
ration-Platform-Beyond-Video/. 
Accessed November 21, 2023.
“Afreximbank Announces 
$1-Billion African Film Fund.” 
African Export-Import Bank,  
November 10, 2023. https://
www.afreximbank.com/afrexim-
bank-announces-1-billion-afri-
can-film-fund-.
“AI Movie Dubbing Offers 
‘Terrifying’ Glimpse into Film’s 
Future.” Dexerto. https://
www.dexerto.com/tv-movies/
ai-movie-dubbing-offers-ter-
rifying-glimpse-into-films-fu-
ture-2042648/. “Amazon’s Hey Disney! Voice 
Assistant Is Now Available in 
the US—Here’s How It Works.” US 
About Amazon, January 5, 2023, 
www.aboutamazon.com/news/
devices/amazon-and-disney-
team-up-to-launch-an-entirely-
new-alexa-enabled-experience-
for-fans-called-hey-disney.
“Americans Are Adopting 
Ad-Supported Streaming 
Services at a Faster Rate Than 
Non-Ad Subscription-Based 
Streaming Services, Signaling a 
Shift in the Market.” Comscore, 
www.comscore.com/Insights/
Press-Releases/2022/6/Ameri-
cans-Are-Adopting-Ad-Support-
ed-Streaming-Services. 
“Apple’s VR Debut to Fire up 
Stagnant Sector, Investors Say” 
PitchBook. https://pitchbook.
com/news/articles/apple-ar-vr-
headset-startups-meta. 
“Audiomovers Listento Adds 
MIDI Streaming.” Music Con-
nection Magazine, June 1, 2023. 
www.musicconnection.com/
audiomovers-listento-adds-mi-
di-streaming.Australia Launches Gold Coast 
Film Commission with 300% 
Boost in Screen Funding. www.
kftv.com/news/2023/09/06/
australia-gold-coast-film-com-
mission-300-percent-boost-
screen-funding. 
“Aviva Studios.” MIF t/a Factory 
International, Accessed Novem-
ber 21, 2023. https://factoryin-
ternational.org/aviva-studios. 
“Berlin-Hohenschönhausen 
Memorial.” Volucap. https://
volucap.com/portfolio-items/
volucap-in-berlin-hohenschoen-
hausen-memorial. 
“Bioplastic Records Could Help 
Decarbonise Music Business, 
Says Developer.” Reuters. 
www.reuters.com/business/
sustainable-business/bio-
plastic-records-could-help-de-
carbonise-music-busi-
ness-says-developer-2022-09-21. 
“BodyTrak Wrist Camera Con-
structs 3D Models of the Body in 
Real Time.” New Atlas,  Novem-
ber 9, 2022. https://newatlas.
com/wearables/bodytrak-wrist-
camera-3d-models-entire-body.Burgos, Matthew. “Watch Dis-
ney’s New Two-Legged Robot 
Dance, Emote and Follow People 
Around.” Designboom. www.
designboom.com/technology/
disney-research-new-bipedal-
robot-wall-e-prototype-3d-print-
ed-10-10-2023.
“Cannes’ Fantastic Pavilion 
Reveals Gala Screenings.” Vari-
ety. https://variety.com/2023/
film/festivals/fantastic-pa-
vilion-ted-raimi-monica-loza-
no-1235607324/. 
“CES 2023: Lenovo’s Opening 
a Portal to the Metaverse, No 
Headset Required.” Mash-
able, January 5, 2023. https://
mashable.com/article/lenovo-
metaverse-chronos-smart-pa-
per-yoga-book-9i-ces-2023.
“CES 2023: Razer Made a Haptic 
Head Cushion so You Can ‘Feel’ 
the Game.” Mashable, January 
5, 2023. https://mashable.com/
article/razer-project-carol-
gaming-chair-head-cushion-
ces-2023.Chan, J. Clara. “‘How Do We 
Pivot?’: Podcasting Turns to 
M&A and Cost-Cutting.” The 
Hollywood Reporter, June 6, 
2023. www.hollywoodreporter.
com/business/digital/pod-
cast-spotify-gimlet-parcast-ro-
coco-punch-audily-1235507912.
“Gen Z Opens Their Wallets as 
the Cost of Entertainment Ris-
es.” Intuit Credit Karma, 17 Oct. 
2023, https://www.creditkarma.
com/about/commentary/gen-z-
opens-their-wallets-as-the-cost-
of-entertainment-rises.
Chee, Foo Yun. “EU Looks to Take 
Lead in Metaverse World, Avoid 
Big Tech Dominance.” Reuters, 
July 11, 2023. www.reuters.com/
technology/eu-looks-take-lead-
metaverse-world-avoid-big-tech-
dominance-2023-07-11.
Cho, Winston. “Judge Rejects 
Disney’s Bid to Dismiss Lawsuit 
in Florida Feud Over Special Dis-
trict.” The Hollywood Reporter, 
July 28, 2023, www.hollywoodre-
porter.com/business/busi-
ness-news/disney-florida-law-
suit-desantis-1235547264/.“‘Choose Love’: What to Know 
About Netflix’s First Interactive 
Rom-Com.” Netflix Tudum, www.
netflix.com/tudum/articles/
choose-love-release-date-news. 
Accessed November 21, 2023.
“Christie’s 3.0 Presents: Car-
tography of the Soul.” www.
christies.com/about-us/
press-archive/details?PressRe-
leaseID=10950&lid=1. 
Coldewey, Devin. “‘Universal 
Translator’ Dubs and Lip-
Syncs Speakers—but Google 
Warns against Misuse.” Tech-
Crunch, May 10, 2023. https://
techcrunch.com/2023/05/10/
universal-translator-dubs-and-
lip-syncs-speakers-but-google-
warns-against-misuse.
“Coldplay’s Tour Drastically Re-
duces Band’s Carbon Footprint.” 
https://variety.com/2023/
music/news/coldplay-tour-car-
bon-footprint-sustainabili-
ty-green-1235632704. SELECTED SOURCESENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY
969© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Concert Industry Roars Back! 
Pollstar 2022 Mid-Year Re-
port.” Pollstar News. June 24, 
2022. https://news.pollstar.
com/2022/06/24/concert-indus-
try-roars-back-pollstar-2022-mid-
year-report.
Condense Live. www.condense.
live/condense-live. 
“Copyright Registration Guidance: 
Works Containing Material Gen-
erated by Artificial Intelligence.” 
Federal Register, March 16, 2023. 
www.federalregister.gov/doc  
uments/2023/03/16/2023-05321/
copyright-registration-guid-
ance-works-containing-materi-
al-generated-by-artificial-intelli-
gence.
Crowley, Sinéad. “Misinformation, 
Disinformation Worries on Rise—
Study.” June 2023. www.rte.ie/
news/2023/0614/1388998-news-
survey.
DALL·E 2. https://openai.com/
dall-e-2. Deepdub. Press release. https://
deepdub.ai/press-release/
deepdub-expands-beyond-holly-
wood-with-deepdub-go-a-gener-
ative-ai-studio/.
Demo, GPT-3. Wonder Studio AI | 
Discover AI Use Cases. Accessed 
July 27, 2023. https://gpt3de-
mo.com/apps/wonderstud-
io-ai-wonderdynamics. 
“Disney Loses Control of Special 
District to Florida Gov. Ron 
DeSantis.” The Hollywood Re-
porter. www.hollywoodreporter.
com/business/business-news/
disney-special-district-to-flor-
ida-gov-ron-desan-
tis-1235335782/. 
“Disney’s New AI Revolution: 
Disney Unveils Emotionally Intel-
ligent Robots to Captivate Audi-
ences and Redefine Theme Park 
Magic.” Yahoo Finance, March 
23, 2023. https://finance.yahoo.
com/news/disneys-ai-revolu-
tion-disney-unveils-164246543.
html.“Dome Ride Theater—the Most 
Immersive Ride in the World.” 
https://attraktion.com/dome-
ride-theater/. 
“Domestic Yearly Box Office.” Box 
Office Mojo. Accessed November 
16, 2023. www.boxofficemojo.
com/year/ytd. 
Eluvio: The Content Blockchain. 
Accessed June 12,  2023. https://
web3.wb.com/warnermedia/
movieverse. 
Ericcsson. “6G Spectrum—En-
abling the Future Mobile Life 
Beyond 2030.” www.ericsson.
com/en/reports-and-papers/
white-papers/6g-spectrum-en-
abling-the-future-mobile-life-be-
yond-2030. 
Ericsson Holographic Commu-
nication. Accessed November 
21, 2023. www.ericsson.com/en/
ericsson-one/holographic-com-
munication. 
ESG Highlights. Accessed 
November 21, 2023. https://in-
vestors.sixflags.com/esg-high-
lights. “EU AI Act: First Regulation on 
Artificial Intelligence” Euro-
pean Parliament.  August 6, 
2023. www.europarl.europa.
eu/news/en/headlines/so-
ciety/20230601STO93804/
eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-ar-
tificial-intelligence.
“Exhibition Virtual Reality—Van 
Gogh’s Palette” Musée d’Orsay. 
www.musee-orsay.fr/en/whats-
on/exhibitions/virtual-reali-
ty-van-goghs-palette. 
“Fashion’s Future at Auction 
Houses.” The Business of Fash-
ion, March 20, 2023. www.busi-
nessoffashion.com/articles/
luxury/fashions-future-at-auc-
tion-houses.
“Flocks of Assembler Robots 
Show Potential for Making Larg-
er Structures.” MIT News, No-
vember 22, 2022. https://news.
mit.edu/2022/assembler-ro-
bots-structures-voxels-1122.“Forecast 5G Adoption by Region 
2030.” Statista, www.statista.
com/statistics/1100828/fore-
cast-5g-adoption-2025. 
Forristal, Lauren. “Amazon’s New 
Alexa Feature Uses AI to Cre-
ate Animated Stories on Echo 
Show.” TechCrunch, November 
29, 2022. https://techcrunch.
com/2022/11/29/amazons-al-
exa-ai-animated-kids-sto-
ries-echo-show.
Fried, Ina. “Exclusive: Startup 
Teaches AI to Read Emotions.” 
Axios, January 26, 2023. www.
axios.com/2023/01/26/startup-
ai-emotions-hume.
“Genvid Entertainment and 
Konami Digital Entertain-
ment Announce Silent Hill: 
Ascension—Launching in 
2023.” Genvid Technolo-
gies. www.genvidtech.com/
press-releases/genvid-enter-
tainment-and-konami-digi-
tal-entertainment-announce-si-
lent-hill-ascension-launch-
ing-in-2023. “Google Taps ‘Carbon-Intelli-
gent’ Computing Platform to 
Help Maintain Grid Reliability 
in Power Crises.” Utility Dive. 
www.utilitydive.com/news/
google-carbon-intelligent-com-
puting-platform-system-reliabil-
ity-demand-response-grid-emer -
gency/698958/. 
“Google, Universal Music in Talks 
for Deal on AI ‘Deepfakes’—FT.” 
Reuters, August 8, 2023. www.
reuters.com/technology/google-
universal-music-talks-deal-ai-
deepfakes-ft-2023-08-08.
“Offering More LIVE Subscription 
Perks with Subscriber-Only Vid-
eos.” Newsroom | TikTok, August 
16, 2019. https://newsroom.
tiktok.com/en-us/live-subscrip-
tion-subscriber-only-videos.
Okusanya, Emanuel. “Megan 
Thee Stallion’s ‘Enter Thee 
Hottieverse’ Is a Satisfying but 
Limited Experience: Virtual 
Concert Review.” Variety,  July 8, 
2022, https://variety.com/2022/
digital/news/megan-thee-stal-
lion-enter-thee-hottieverse-vir-
tual-concert-review-1235311543.SELECTED SOURCESENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY970© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.“Plans for The London Tunnels 
Have Been Unveiled.” Wilkin-
sonEyre. https://wilkinsoneyre.
com/news/london-tun-
nels-plans-unveiled. 
Prime Video. Accessed June 8, 
2023. www.amazon.com/gp/vid-
eo/splash/freevee_findus. 
“Radio Host Sues OpenAI for 
Defamation Over ChatGPT 
Legal Accusations” Variety, 
June 8, 2023. https://variety.
com/2023/digital/news/ope-
nai-chatgpt-defamation-law-
suit-radio-host-1235637166. 
Ramachandran, Naman. “UK 
Union Launches Toolkit to Pro-
tect Performers From Unregu-
lated AI.” Variety, June 7, 2023, 
https://variety.com/2023/digi-
tal/global/equity-toolkit-unreg-
ulated-ai-1235634537.
“Refik Anadol: Living Paintings.” 
Accessed November 21, 2023. 
https://deitch.com/los-angeles/
exhibitions/refik-anadol-liv-
ing-paintings. “Refik Anadol x Yawanawá.” 
Therme Art. Accessed November 
21, 2023. https://therme.art/art-
ist/refik-anadol-x-yawanawa. 
Rice, Lynette. “Hume, A Web3 
Entertainment Co., Signs With 
CAA.” Deadline, January 31, 2023. 
https://deadline.com/2023/01/
hume-web3-entertainment-
signs-caa-1235244444.
“Rock Paper Reality, Google and 
Adobe Aero Partner to Make 
Location-Based AR Accessible 
to Any Business” LBBOnline. 
www.lbbonline.com/news/
rock-paper-reality-google-and-
adobe-aero-partner-to-make-lo-
cation-based-ar-accessible-to-
any-business. 
Rosser, Michael. “Japan Green-
lights First Official Produc-
tion Incentives (Exclusive).” 
Screen, May 19, 2023. www.
screendaily.com/news/
japan-greenlights-first-offi-
cial-production-incentives-exc-
lusive/5182266.article. Rugoff, Lazlo. “Michael Stipe 
Releasing First Commercially 
Available Bioplastic Record.” 
The Vinyl Factory, September 1, 
2022. https://thevinylfactory.
com/news/michael-stipe-bio-
plastic-environmentally-friend-
ly-vinyl.
“Runway AI Film Festival.” Run-
way. https://aiff.runwayml.com. 
Ryley, Maddy. “The Sphere in 
Las Vegas Opens September 
29.” Trade Show Executive, 
September 28, 2023. https://
tradeshowexecutive.com/the-
sphere-in-las-vegas-opens-sep-
tember-29.
“Sandbox VR & Netflix An-
nounce ‘Squid Game Virtuals’ VR 
Experience.” Auganix.org, Sep-
tember 27, 2023. www.auganix.
org/vr-news-sandbox-vr-netflix-
announce-squid-game-virtuals-
vr-experience.Schwartz, Eric Hal. “AI-Powered 
Andy Warhol Voice Reads His Di-
ary in New Netflix Documentary.” 
Voicebot.Ai, February 24, 2022. 
https://voicebot.ai/2022/02/24/
ai-powered-andy-warhol-voice-
reads-his-diary-in-new-netflix-
documentary.
SEC. “Climate-Related Disclo-
sures.” SEC.gov. Accessed No-
vember 21, 2023.  www.sec.gov/
securities-topics/climate-esg. 
Shimbun, The Yomiuri. “New 
‘Harry Potter’ Theme Park in To-
kyo Prompts Train Station Reno-
vation.” May 18, 2023, https://ja-
pannews.yomiuri.co.jp/society/
general-news/20230518-110275.
“Simulating Cold Sensation 
Without Actual Cooling.” Uni-
versity of Tsukuba, October 18, 
2023. www.tsukuba.ac.jp/en/
research-news/20231018140000.
html. Sloan, Garett. “Samsung Launch-
es Self-Serve Ad Platform to Take 
Nnext Steps in Connected TV.” 
Ad Age, September 30, 2020. 
https://adage.com/article/
digital/samsung-launches-self-
serve-ad-platform-take-next-
steps-connected-tv/2284601.
Spangler, Todd. “Spotify Laying 
Off 200 Employees in Reorg 
of Podcast Division.” Variety,-
June 5, 2023. https://variety.
com/2023/digital/news/spoti-
fy-podcast-layoffs-200-employ-
ees-1235632805.
“Starz to Raise Its Subscrip-
tion Price by $1 Next Week.” 
CNET. www.cnet.com/tech/
services-and-software/starz-to-
raise-its-subscription-price-by-
1-dollar-next-week. 
“Universal Applies for Aug-
mented Reality Theme Park 
Ride Patent.” WDW News Today. 
June 20, 2023, https://wdwnt.
com/2023/06/universal-ap-
plies-for-augmented-reali-
ty-theme-park-ride-patent/.“Unlock Your Creativity with 
Adobe Fire-Fly: Text-to-Image 
Generation Tutorial : StableDiffu-
sion.” www.reddit.com/r/Stable-
Diffusion/comments/1360x1u/
unlock_your_creativity_with_
adobe_firefly/. 
Urnau Gotardo, Paulo Fabi-
ano, et al. “Techniques for 
Improved Lighting Models for 
Appearance Capture.” June 22, 
2023, https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=WO2023115017&_ci-
d=P21-LLD9LZ-56409-2.
“U.S. Adult Zoomers’ Top Media 
for Ads 2023.” Statista, www.
statista.com/statistics/1385179/
media-generation-z-recep-
tive-ads-united-states. Accessed 
17 Nov. 2023.
“U.S Daily Social Media Engage-
ment by Generation 2022.” 
Statista, www.statista.com/sta-
tistics/1366903/us-gen-z-adults-
daily-social-media-usage/. SELECTED SOURCESENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY971© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.US20210060766A1 - Edible 
Soft Robotic Systems and 
Methods - Google Patents. 
https://patents.google.com/
patent/US20210060766A1/. 
US20230195855 Loca-
tion-Specific Non-Fungible 
Tokens. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US399955032&_ci-
d=P21-LLD9LZ-56409-2. 
US20230204964 Freeform 
Varifocal Optical Assembly 
https://patentscope.wipo.
int/search/en/detail.jsf?do-
cId=US400262916&_cid=P21-LL-
DA9S-72008-1. 
US20230209123A1 Guided 
Interaction Between a Compan-
ion Device and a User - Google 
Patents. https://patents.google.
com/patent/US20230209123A1. 
US20230224452 Enhanced 
Emotive Engagement with Volu-
metric Content. https://patent-
scope.wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US401611638&_ci-
d=P21-LKM61B-00181-1. US20230237753 Dynamic 
Facial Hair Capture of a Sub-
ject. https://patentscope.
wipo.int/search/en/detail.
jsf?docId=US403066542&_ci-
d=P21-LLD9LZ-56409-1. 
“Vodafone and Ericsson Power 
AR Opera Experience.” www.
ericsson.com/en/news/3/2023/
clear-the-stage-for-the-future-
of-opera-immerse-yourself-in-
new-worlds-of-experience-with-
augmented-reality. 
“WALDO: Future Video Synthesis 
Using Object Layer Decomposi-
tion and Parametric Flow Predic-
tion.” https://16lemoing.github.
io/waldo.
Wardrop, Ross. “A Digital Estate 
in The Sandbox Just Sold for 
$30,000—Way Above the Floor 
Price!” NFT Evening, January 9, 
2022, https://nftevening.com/
land-in-the-sandbox-just-sold-
for-30000-way-above-the-floor-
price.“Weekly Media Consumption U.S. 
2022.” Statista, www.statista.
com/statistics/1338542/me-
dia-access-consumption-week-
ly-by-generation-us/. 
“Welcome to the New Surre-
al. How AI-Generated Video Is 
Changing Film.” MIT Technology 
Review. www.technologyreview.
com/2023/06/01/1073858/sur-
real-ai-generative-video-chang-
ing-film/. 
Weprin, Alex. “Bob Iger Outlines 
New Disney Org Structure, With 
7,000 Job Cuts Planned.” The 
Hollywood Reporter,  February 8, 
2023, www.hollywoodreporter.
com/business/business-news/
disney-restructuring-dmed-ig-
er-layoffs-1235319661.
“What Is Crypto Art and How 
Does It Work?” Cointelegraph. 
https://cointelegraph.com/
learn/what-is-crypto-art-and-
how-does-it-work. “What Type of Facial Recognition 
Is Coming to Epic Universe and 
Universal Orlando?” Orlando 
ParkStop, Septe,mber 26, 2023. 
https://orlandoparkstop.com/
news/theme-park-news/what-
type-of-facial-recognition-is-
coming-to-epic-universe-and-
universal-orlando.
“Why Some Celebrities Are 
Embracing Artificial Intelligence 
Deepfakes.” BBC News, July 18, 
2023. /www.bbc.com/news/
business-65995089.
Wiggers, Kyle. “Google Makes Its 
Text-to-Music AI Public.” Tech-
Crunch, May 10, 2023. https://
techcrunch.com/2023/05/10/
google-makes-its-text-to-music-
ai-public.
Willman, Chris. “AI-Generated 
Fake ‘Drake’/‘Weeknd’ Collabo-
ration, ‘Heart on My Sleeve,’ De-
lights Fans and Sets Off Industry 
Alarm Bells.” Variety, April 17, 
2023. https://variety.com/2023/
music/news/fake-ai-generated-
drake-weeknd-collaboration-
heart-on-my-sleeve-1235585451.Zee, Michaela. “Tom Hanks 
Warns Fans About ‘AI Version 
of Me’ Promoting Dental Plan: 
‘I Have Nothing to Do With It.’” 
Variety, October 1, 2023. https://
variety.com/2023/film/news/
tom-hanks-ai-video-dental-
plan-warns-fans-1235741781.
“Zero-G Announces: Zero Gravity 
Concert Series.” Zero-G. www.
gozerog.com/article/zero-gravi-
ty-concerts. 
Zhao, Ziyi, et al. “A Review of In-
telligent Music Generation Sys-
tems.”. arXiv.org, November 22, 
2022. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2211.09124.
동하연. 가상 모델을 이용한 광고 서
비스를 제공하는 방법 및시스템. 
KR20230110219A, July 21, 2023.  
https://patents.google.com/pat-
ent/KR20230110219A/en.SELECTED SOURCESENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYABOUT 
FUTURE TODAY 
INSTITUTE
973© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved. 973974© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.AUTHORS & CONTRIBUTORS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Amy Webb
Chief Executive Officer 
Sam Jordan
Manager
WEB3
Melanie Subin
Managing Director
Grant Tinker
Associate
METAVERSE
Sam Jordan
Manager
BIOENGINEERING
Amy Webb
Chief Executive OfficerBUILT ENVIRONMENT
Mark Bryan
Senior Manager
NEWS & INFORMATION
Sam Guzik
Senior Expert Advisor
HEALTH CARE & MEDICINE
Christina von Messling
Senior Manager
Stephanie Valentino
Associate
FINANCIAL SERVICES & INSURANCE
Melanie Subin
Managing Director
Nick Bartlett
Manager
Grant Tinker
AssociateSPORTS
Nick Bartlett
Director
SPACE
Sam Jordan
Manager
HOSPITALITY & RESTAURANTS
Mark Bryan
Senior Manager
SUPPLY CHAIN & LOGISTICS
Mark Bryan
Senior Manager
ENTERTAINMENT
Christina von Messling
Senior Manager
Kristin T ablang
AssociateEDITORIAL STAFF 
Emily Caufield
Creative Director 
Erica Peterson
Editor
Sarah Johnson
Copy Editor
Cheryl Cooney
Director of Operations ENERGY & CLIMATE
Christina von Messling
Senior Manager
Emma Miller 
Associate
Nicholas Imbriglia
Associate
Mahak Chhajer
Associate
MOBILITY, ROBOTICS & DRONES
Nick Bartlett
Manager
Matt Herman
Contributor
COMPUTING
Sam Jordan
Manager2024 FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT975© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.2024
ABOUT FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE
About Us
Founded in 2006, Future Today Institute is an advisory firm 
specializing in strategic foresight, driving corporate strategies 
that lead to long-term success and resilience.
Future Today Institute partners with global business leaders 
to navigate disruptive change and uncertain futures with 
confidence. We fuel actionable strategic decisions that 
prepare you to take on global challenges, create sustainable 
value and ensure long-term growth.
As the global leaders in strategic foresight, our rigorous data- 
and research-driven methodology positions us to anticipate 
the unexpected and develop strategically driven roadmaps 
to manage risks and take advantage of opportunities today, 
tomorrow and into the future. 
We empower leaders to make better decisions about the 
future, today.Contact Us
For an introductory conversation to 
learn how Future Today Institute can 
assist your organization with its strategic 
planning and foresight needs,  
please contact: 
Social
Twitter (X) @FTI
Linkedin  @Future-T oday-Institute
Facebook  @Future T odayInstitute  
Instagram  @futuretodayinstituteinquiries@futuretodayinstitute.com
futuretodayinstitute.com
+1 267 342 4300FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT976© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.METHODOLOGY
Future Today Institute conducts in-depth qualitative and quantitative re-
search throughout the year to identify emerging trends. We review patent 
and trademark filings, pre-print and published scientific papers, investment 
rounds, online search trends, macroeconomic data, publications from gov -
ernments worldwide, news mentions, influencer posts and other sources, and 
we use a proprietary system to identify patterns, which are then grouped into 
nodes and evaluated using a set of standardized indicators. Qualified trends 
are further scored for their trajectory, momentum and timing. Additionally, 
we harness the deep subject matter expertise of our Future Today Institute 
network, leading to valuable insights about the topics we cover. 
In continuous publication since 2007, Future Today Institute’s annual report 
includes maturing and emerging trends grouped into two categories: in-
dustry and technology. Industry trends reflect the ways in which technology 
is shaping the future of an entire industry. Technology trends are specific 
developments within one arena, such as artificial intelligence. Covering a 
wide range of technologies across industry sectors creates a holistic view of 
change and provides leaders with a clear understanding of their potential 
impact. Trends are published as individual Industry and Technology reports, 
as well as in one combined report with all of our research.
Monitored regularly, trends help executives recognize emerging threats and 
opportunities in the near-term and enable them to develop perspectives, 
strategies and plans for the future. Future T oday Institute’s Strategic Foresight Methodology
What is  
INFLUENCING  
the future?
What is  
THE future?
What is  
YOUR ORG’S 
future?GLOBAL MACRO SCENARIOS
STRATEGIC
SIGNALS & LONG-TERM TRENDS
Signals
Trends
Uncertainties
Scenarios
Opportunities/Threats  
and Rehearsing
Planning01
02
03
04
05
06
Actioning072024 FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT977© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.DISCLAIMER
The views expressed herein are the authors’ own and are not representa-
tive of the greater organizations in which they have been employed. The 
names of companies, services, and products mentioned in this report are 
not necessarily intended as endorsements by Future Today Institute or this 
report’s authors.
Future Today Institute’s 2024 Tech Trends Report relies on data, analysis, 
and modeling from a number of sources, which includes sources within 
public and private companies, securities filings, patents, academic re-
search, government agencies, market research firms, conference pre-
sentations and papers, and news media stories. Additionally, this report 
draws from Future Today Institute’s previous EMT Trends Reports, FTI Trend 
Reports, and newsletters. FTI’s reports are occasionally updated on the 
FTI website.
FTI advises hundreds of companies and organizations, some of which are 
referenced in this report. FTI does not own any equity position in any of the 
entities listed in this presentation.
Any trademarks or service marks used in this report are the marks of their 
respective owners, who do not endorse the statements in this report. All 
rights in marks are reserved by their respective owners. We disclaim any 
and all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this report.2024 FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT978© 2024 Future Today Institute. All Rights Reserved.USING AND SHARING THE MATERIAL IN THIS REPORT
Y ou are free to:
Download the materials for your or your organization’s 
non-commercial use.
Use the assets with full attribution to Future Today 
Institute using the following language: “This material 
is copyrighted by Future Today Institute and licensed 
under the Creative Commons 4.0 International 
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0). ”
Use assets in a reasonable manner, but not in any way 
that suggests that Future Today Institute endorses you 
or your use.Y ou may not:
Use the materials for any commercial purposes, 
which includes: selling, licensing or charging for 
products or services that use the materials.
Publish the materials in a book or upload to a 
website or intranet without prior written permission 
from Future Today Institute.
Remix, transform or build upon the material 
without giving appropriate credit to Future Today 
Institute as the originator of the work using the 
following language: “This material is adapted from 
original work copyrighted by Future Today Institute 
and licensed under the Creative Commons 4.0 
International License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0). ”
Assert a relationship with or endorsement from 
Future Today Institute. 
2024 FUTURE TODAY INSTITUTE • 2024 TECH TRENDS REPORT2024   
TECH TRENDS  
 REPORT17TH EDITION
2024   
TECH TRENDS  
 REPORT17TH EDITION