See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/343262528
Transforming Marketing with Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research · July 2020
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.25848.67844
CITATIONS
13READS
14,436
2 author s:
Piyush Jain
Delhi T echnologic al Univ ersity
3 PUBLICA TIONS    15 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Keshav Agg arwal
Delhi T echnologic al Univ ersity
8 PUBLICA TIONS    21 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Piyush Jain  on 28 July 2020.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3964  Transforming Marketing with Artificial Intelligence  
Piyush Jain1, Keshav Aggarwal2 
1B. Tech Student, Department of Production and Industrial Engineering, Delhi Technological University,   
Delhi,  India  
    2B. Tech Graduate, Department of Production and Industrial Engineering, Delhi Technological University,   
Delhi  India  
--------------------------------------------------------------------- ***----------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract - Marketing has become complex in the last one decade with the introduction of Artificial Intelligence. Artificial 
Intelligence Marketing is a technique of optimally utilizing technology to enhance customer’s experience. In recent times it 
becomes really imp ortant for the companies to recognize  and understand customer needs and their expectations in terms of 
products as well as services. With the help of AI, Marketers can process the huge amount of data, carry out individualized sa les 
and fulfil customer expectations. Besides this, the perceptio n they get about the customer and their requirements in a shorter 
time frame help them to boost campaign performance and Return on investment (ROI) rapidly. In this paper, authors have 
reviewed the whole concept of using Artificial Intelligence in marketin g. It provides comprehensive details of the benefits of 
implementing AI in marketing, how AI is reshaping marketing, need of AI in marketing which is illustrated with real world 
examples from different businesses. This paper also entails a section dedicate d to implementation of different AIM strategies. 
Authors have thoroughly studied the implications of AIM technology throughout the customer life cycle. At last, there is a 
detailed sector -wise and region -wise analysis. After reading this paper, the reader would be well -informed about the modern 
marketing methods. The reader would have a complete overview of the present -day Artificial Intelligence Marketing 
strategies and the reader would have a holistic view of the AIM sector . 
 
Key Words :  Artificial Intell igence, Marketing, Artificial Intelligence Marketing, Business Forecasting, AIM, Marketing 
Strategy, Personalization  
 
1.INTRODUCTION  
To begin with, marketing is a technique for communicating, creating, exchanging and delivering offerings that have value 
for clients, partners, customers or consumers. Initially, it seems really difficult to relate the field of Artificial Intellig ence 
with various marketing strategies as one has to think out of the box to study or explore this field. It is even harder to 
imag ine any field that has not been impacted by AI. The development of Artificial Intelligence has altered the dynamics of 
marketing across the world.  
1.1 What is Artificial Intelligence Marketing?  
Artificial Intelligence Marketing (AIM) is an approach of optimally utilizing technology and customer data to enhance the 
customer’s experience. The various techniques used to accomplish such a task are Big Data Analytics, machine learning and 
gaining insights of our targeted sector of customers. Suc h operations have made it apparent to call this aeon as “The Ai 
Marketing Era” which obligates radical transformation in former pattern in which the marketers interact with their 
customers, formulate the strategies to accomplish their objectives.  
Accordin g to a survey conducted by Weber Firm, it has become evident that consumers across the globe are in the view that 
impact of AI on society is positive rather than negative. Furthermore a report : AI - Ready or Not ,II carried out by KRC 
Research, commissione d by Weber Shandwick in June 2016 polling 150 CMOs (Chief Marketing Officers) in the UK ,China 
and the USA has arrived at the judgement that around 55% of the CMOs believe that AI will pose a substantial influence on 
marketing as well as communications and  relations with the customers better than social media. Marketing currently serve 
as the 4th largest use case of AI concerning resources spent, and the 6th largest industry adopter of AI technology, with 
around 2.55% of the total industry having invested i n it.[1]  
1.2 Benefits of Artificial Intelligence Marketing (AIM)  
Evaluation of some ways that can help marketers to shape marketing strategies and their outcomes with the use of AI in 
the future [Refer figure 1]:  
 
 
           International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3965  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig - 1: Benefits to Customers and Marketers [2]  
 
 Profound Hunting:  With the rapid growth of technology, customers can find whatever they are looking for at any 
time with the help of rapid -fire search engines (Google, Yahoo etc.). What Artificial Intelligence does is help 
marketers in analyzing customers' search patterns and determining the key areas to which they must focus their 
efforts.  
 Genius Advertisements:   With the availability of plentiful data, marketers can create smarter and more effective 
online advertisements. AI solutions can deeply evaluate a customer’s keyw ord searches and social profiles and aid in 
creating personalized advertisements.  
 Filtered Content:  Audience analytics can help marketers to understand customers on an individual basis. AI can be 
used to filter the potential buyers and create customized co ntent which would be ideal and relevant to the potential 
customers groups.  
 AI Bots:  Customer retention is as important as the generation of new customers. AI serves as a major driver for 
customer retention. AI Bots are used to run chat functions and direct -to-consumer engagement. Through this 
marketer can cut their extra expenditures and save time.  
 Progressive Learning:  AI can not only use access to hidden insights but also can be taught to integrate formerly 
hidden insights into latest campaigns. With pass age of time these AI solutions will become even smarter and more 
effective in eliminating trash data and promoting real -time decision -making.  
1.3 How is Artificial Intelligence (AI) reshaping marketing?  
It has become customary to perform large - scale data analysis in the marketing sector. Elements like Artificial intelligence, 
machine learning is making their mark on corporate operations. After increased use of these trailblazing techniques 
marketing teams have wide scope to convey massive value to AI’s pot ential data. Artificial Intelligence is the ability of 
machines to execute intel lectual  tasks that one can relate with human minds such as problem solving, learning, exercising 
creativity, reasoning, perceiving and interacting with the environment.  
The em ergence of AI -powered marketing solutions is reducing the responsibility of marketers and assigning tasks to 
machines. Graph 1, displays statistics related to end results achieved through the implementation of AI Marketing. Graph 2 
highlights AI  Adoption i n different sectors and fields . 
Reaping Rewards:  Companies have to focus on three major areas to exploit the benefits of AI, which are Marketing and 
Commercial Talent Management, Data Strategy, Data Expertise. Over time the processing power and data harves ting 
advances and AI -powered systems become smarter. But the level of effectiveness of these systems depends on how well the 
organizations  can interpret answers and work on them to construct their future commercial strategies.  
Customer Segmentation: The jo b of marketers is to furnish the Right information to the Right individual at the Right point 
of time, to complete this marketer  prefer customer segmentation. Most organizations  prefer clustering their customers on 
certain factors which are similar at that  time. AI helps marketers to distinguish their customers and discover what 
motivates them. This information helps marketers in creating a long -lasting relationship with their customers. [5]  
Emerging Trends:  Artificial Intelligence is enterprising three meg atrends in marketing: personalization, forecasting and 
automation. Marketing leaders mainly need to focus on these three areas to develop beneficial capabilities. Automation is a 
process of making decisions by the use of machines or helping human -decision makers by providing recommendations. 
Product recommendation and dynamic pricing are examples of automation. Forecasting is the development of models for 
future scenarios by finding some patterns in historical (previous) recorded data. These forecasting sys tems keep on 
learning and inculcating from new data, this implies they are not static. Personalization refers to usage of results or 
outcomes developed, which are tailored according to different customer segments. With the usage of comprehensive 
customer i nformation, these systems analyze  every potential customer and cluster them according to some common factors.            International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3966   
Graph - 1: Business outcomes with use of AI Marketing [3]  
 
 
Graph  - 2: AI Adoption in different sectors and fields (all values in percentage) [4]  
 
1.4 Need for Artificial Intelligence in marketing  
Of 100 senior marketers from various industries 55 percent of the enterprises are executing or considering using AI in 
marketing  practices, according to a study by Smart Insights [6]. So, why is this shift from traditional marketing to AI 
marketing occurring?  
Marketers can process huge amount of marketing data, from various platforms such as web, social media and emails in a 
compa ratively faster time. Besides this, the perception they get about the customer and their requirements in a shorter time 
frame help them to boost campaign performance and Return on investment (ROI) rapidly. As a result, marketers can shift 
their time and fo cus to other equally or more important tasks. Another factor which necessitates AI to be implemented in 
marketing practices is that in recent times it becomes really important for the companies to recognize and understand 
customer needs and their expectati ons in terms of products as well as services. This helps marketers to identify who their 
target audience is and thereby creating a personal experience for users. With implementation of AI, marketers are capable 
of understanding customers’ behavior and gene rate customer insights and enhance the four C’s: Customer Targeting and 
Lifetime Value, Customer Engagement, Customer Experience and Customer Loyalty.[7]  
 
 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3967  2. CORE ELEMENTS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MARKETING  
 
Figure 2 explains the sequence for execution of core elements from gathering data to producing powerful solutions. AI 
Marketing include few key elements which make it as powerful as it is today. These elements function in series as they are 
explained below:  
 
Fig - 2: Core elements used in series in AI Marketing [8]  
Big Data  can be considered the basic concept of collecting a huge amount of data of customers' purchase patterns as well as 
new customers' purchase preferences. It can also be referred as marketer’s competence to aggregate and segregate 
extensive data sets with minimal manual work. Such altered data can be used by the marketing teams for ensuring that the 
right message is being delivered to the right person at the appropriate time via a channel of choice.  
Machine Learning  in general can be referred to as building and utilizing models based on recognized patterns. Machine 
learning platform comes into the picture when marketers try to retrieve significant information from huge data 
repositories. This can help in recognizing and understanding t rends or common instances and successfully anticipate the 
insights and reactions, helping marketers in understanding the major factor and probability of certain actions repeating.  
Powerful Solutions  the end result, provided by artificial intelligence mark eting truly conceive the world in a similar 
manner a human would. The platforms provided by AI can recognize the significant concept and themes across huge data 
sets astonishingly fast. While considering the technical aspects AI solutions also interpret co mmunication, feelings and 
desires like a human which make this platform widely accepted.  
3. LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
Thomas Davenport [9] in his research paper proposed a structure for comprehending the effect of AI specifically on the 
influence of AI on marketing strategies as well as customers’ behavior. He concluded: AI’s short - and moderate -term impact 
may be more limited and if AI augments (rather than replace) human managers it will be more effective.  
Neha Soni [10] elucidates the impact of AI on bus iness – from innovation, research, market deployment to future shift in 
business models. She explains the two major factors responsible for making AI the core technology for extreme automation. 
Furthermore, she describes the concept of “AI Divide” or “The dark side of AI”.  
Muhammad Zafeer Shahid [11] did a qualitative research by interviewing marketing professionals from different firms to 
analyze  the parameters that contribute in integration of AI with marketing. His findings highlighted benefits of 
amalgamating AI in marketing whereas technical compatibility was most challenging.  
Gijs Overgoor [12] elaborated how Cross – Industry Standard Process  for Data Mining (CRISP – DM) structure can be used 
for developing AI Solutions to Marketing problems. He illustrated this idea with an interesting case study of Automatic 
Scoring Images for Digital Marketing.  
N. Ramya [13] in her research reviewed differe nt factors influencing consumer buying behavior . Brands have an 
opportunity to develop strategy and personalized marketing message by recognizing and comprehending the factors that 
have impact on their customers.  
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3968  Nausherwan Raunaque [14] study focuses on t he factors which online buyers take into consideration while shopping online. 
His findings include and how their security and privacy concerns about online marketing influences their online buying 
behavior . 
Dr. Md. Tabrez Quasim [15] presents different typ es of forecasting and AI techniques that are useful in business forecasting. 
In his research he examined some present approaches of AI that seemed to be beneficial and promising for business 
forecasting.  
Albert Annor -Antwi [16] states that AI when integrat ed with other technologies ML, Big data, Data Analytics would yield 
more accurate results than any other forecasting method. He elaborated shortcomings of AI, being costly and cybercrime 
threats to AI - powered forecasting.  
Naresh K. Malhotra [17] in his st udy amalgamates both academic as well as practitioner outlook in order to examine the 
issues and emerging trends that will shape the role of marketing research.  
The objective of the research by Dhanushanthini Ajanthan [18] is to examine and identify the ef fect on brand equity who’s 
major dimensions are: Brand loyalty, brand awareness, brand image and perceived quality of social media marketing.  
Neil A. Morgan [19], in his research not only unveils the important challenges to marketing strategy research but also 
uncovers numerous opportunities for generating highly pertinent modern and creative theories.  
Anyuan Shen [20] did an investigative research of customers’ lived experiences of commercialized recommendation. 
According to him, researchers may discover a  new standpoint – the customer’s outlook – with a view to analyse theories of 
personalized marketing.  
Jerry Vesanen [21] through his research paper makes the meaning of personalization clear to maximum extent. Findings 
reveal that personalization is not ye t widely applied as it is not clearly understood by majority of marketers as it has 
different meanings for different businesses.  
Ki Youn Kim [22] did a study with aim to qualitatively recognize topologies and characteristics of the big data marketing 
strat egy. She focused on impacts of Big Data Analytics in business perspective, with execution of Q methodology.  
Alexandra Amado [23] evaluated the implementation of Big Data in Marketing, with the goal to spot trends in these fields. 
His findings exhibited tha t theirs is and increasing interest for Big Data in marketing over the years. Hence it is necessary to 
expand efforts in regard with the business so that Big  Data can flourish in the Marketing sphere.  
Stefan Lessmann [24] research focuses on empirical targ eting models. Author argue adduce about standard practices to 
thrive such models do not gauge sufficiently for business objectives.  
Ayse Bengi Ozcelik [25] elaborates about psychological interpretation or behavior  of recipients in the effectiveness of onli ne 
ads customized using behavioral  targeting.  
Aman Abid [26] tested the impact of different content characteristics and cues on followers’ online expression and 
understood the moderating consequences of content curation. He evaluated role of marketer gener ated content in building 
online relationships.  
Samira Khodabandehlou [27] developed a framework for customer churn prediction, which included six stages for precise 
prediction and averting customer churn in business. Author found that the discount, recepti on of returned items, prize, 
number of items and distribution time came best predictor variables apart from frequency and monetary (RFM) variables.  
Jean Paul Simon [28] provided an outline of the key trends in the domain of Artificial Intelligence and a gl obal overview 
about regions along with companies. Author says that legal, ethical, socio -economic aspects  (ELSE) can turn into barriers to 
deployment of AI technologies and explains how demand seems to be uncertain for AI on both sides i.e. business and 
consumer.  
Thanos Skouras [29] lay out a collation as well as assessment  of reception  of pricing by disciplines of economics and 
marketing. The major reasons for differences in both approaches are dissimilar historical origin, key concerns and doctrinal 
evolu tion.  
4. WAYS IN WHICH AI CAN BE IMPLEMENTED IN MARKETING  
 
The various ways in which Artificial intelligence can be used in marketing (refer figure 3) are explained below [31]:  
           International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3969   
Fig – 3: Ways in which AI can be implemented in Marketing [30]  
 
4.1 AI enhanced Ad - Targeting  
 Automatic process of purchasing and selling advertisements is known as programmatic advertisements. The 
marketers approach advertisers and publishers which in turn connects to ad inventory. Advertisers charge 
wages from marketers  in return for advertisements. Artificial intelligence technologies use algorithms which 
are developed for customer behavior analyses. Customer cookie data is also gathered to help marketers in 
taking informative decisions and utilizing this data for real -time campaign optimizations. Targeted customers 
or audiences which show great chances of conversions are displayed particular advertisements in a certain 
interval of time. The advertisements viewed by customers differ according to their past searches and a ctions .  
 
4.2 Websites Personalization  
Artificial Intelligence ability is far from building websites from the basics, it helps marketers in improving the visitor 
experience with smart personalization of companies ’ websites. Graph 3 exhibits various benefi ts of website personalization. 
Such intelligent AI algorithms can be used for personalization in two ways:  
 Push Notifications - With usage of behavioural personalization algorithms, specific push notifications can be flashed 
or sent on targeted customer dev ices.  
 Website Experience - After complete analyses of data elements relating to a particular customer which includes 
demographics, locality , interaction with website,  device, etc. AI displays the finest content as well as offers for that 
user.  
Out of the ma rketers surveyed 33% of them implement AI to provide customized websites, according to THE 2017 Real – 
Time Personalization Survey conducted by Evergage. Out of the same set of marketers (mentioned above), 63% stated that 
they observed enhanced customer ra tes and 61% noted enriched customer experience.  
4.3 AI powered content creation  
Artificial intelligence powered tools like wordsmith have the ability to convert data into logical text. These automatic 
content generation mechanisms save marketers time. This AI content generation tools are so intelligent that readers cannot 
discern betw een text written by machines and text written by a human. 20% of all business content is formulated by 
machines by 2018, according to Gartner predictions. Content with basic formats as well as rule sets like profit and loss 
summary, real - time stock insigh ts, sports game recaps, hotel descriptions can be generated using machines.  
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3970   
Graph – 3: Benefits of personalized websites [32]  
4.4 Chatbots  
Intelligent chatbots are providing majestic customer support in different sectors like fashion, healthcare, insurance etc. 
Chatbots can even create personalized content for humans by accessing huge amounts of customer -cantered data. They can 
comprehend position or environment specific requests to understand patterns, identify problems and guide users for what’s 
causing that certain issue. Chatbots are not limited to customer service only. [33]  
4.5 Email  Content Creation  
Earlier was the time when marketing teams required to spend hours assembling and scheduling weekly emails for various 
customer sections. Even after usage of smart subscriber segmentation marketers were not able to deliver personalized 
email to every single  customer. After AI Marketing comes into picture these all steps are carried out by machines with less 
manual work. 80% of marketers are of the view that personalized content or email are more effective than non -
personalized content (study by Demand Metric ).  
After mapping the subscriber’s email browsing data and website experience AI -powered dynamic emails can be created. 
Compilation of dynamic emails can be done based on various factors such as user’s wish list, previous website experience, 
time spent on webpage or some external factors like most popular ongoing trends or content, interests of analogous visitors 
etc. Graph 4 can be referred to for understanding the benefits reaped from AI powered Email content curation.  
4.6 Churn Predictions  
Marketers  with use of AI -powered algorithms can recognize disengaged customers who are about to leave or churn from 
their brand or product for a competitor. Such tool can perform the task of gathering data, constructing predictive models 
and testing and validating mode ls on actual customers. Churn predictions help marketers in analyzing omnichannel events 
and find out about depreciating customers participation. The information collected can also depict the stage of churning of a  
particular customer. There can be two typ es of churning customers: quick - churn customers who tend to abandon product 
shortly and late – churn customers who have long lasting relationships with a product or brand.   Late – churn customers 
have scope of being incentivized to keep using the product , on-contrary it is difficult to re -engage quick – churn customers. 
Machine learning algorithms are required to be modified or even built from ground according to different products or 
brands for finding churn predictions.  
4.7 Dynamic pricing and customer  insights  
Duration that is required in order to crux complete data and compare them with the customer's behavior pattern will be 
much greater if the task is done by humans, whereas AI can do the same task on the fly and could smartly provide marketing 
insights. Dynamic Yield aids brands like Sephora, Armani, Under Armour make actionable customer segments with 
applications on machine learning algorithms. Marketers can use these algorithms to avert the stock that has short supply 
from being advertised to shop pers who undoubtedly return products. With the help of dynamic pricing marketers can 
optimize their sales when demand is high.[35]  
 
 
 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3971   
 
Graph - 4: Benefits realized by use AI powered Email Content Curation [34]  
 
4.8 Automatic speech and image recognition  
Nowadays, computers can be considered having vision just like humans and it can be referred to as computer vision. This 
vision can be used in attaining high - level understanding from digital image or image. Computer vision employs machine 
learning algori thms and pattern recognition to acquire veridicality of human visual systems. Computer vision is now 
extended to voice recognition also, which makes them recognize the user's voice and interpret their words they speak. 
Marketers can use image recognition f or better synchronization between store visits and online content. Image recognition 
has enhanced customer experience, like if a google photos user types dog in his search bar, the application will display all 
the pictures of dog in his phone or even it re cognizes human faces and allow to segregate their photographs.  
4.9 Business Forecasting  
Future of a business depends on various complex and correlated factors and forces which are sometimes difficult to 
measure. Major hurdle for marketers is how to pred ict the exact future of a business or a product which applies intricate 
sets of inputs. However, there are some machine learning processes which allow marketers to collate inbound 
communication against traditional metrices in order to perceive answer for c omplexed strategy questions. With the coming 
up of AI Marketing, questions about if a prospect is ready for discussion or not does not exist, as data provides explanation s. 
5. APPLYING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS CUSTOMER LIFECYCLE  
 
Analyzing and predicting consumer journey is troublesome for marketers. Consumers convey their opinion in the form of 
blogs, Tweets, “likes,” videos, search, comments and conversations and through various channels. In figure 4 customer 
interaction and valu e are displayed over a period of time along with the role of machine learning, propensity modelling, AI 
application during different stages. Customer experience is a competitive driver of growth when successful and the greatest 
source of risk when failing.  [37]  
Machine Learning comprehends the analysis of historical data from various business interactions with audiences and their 
responses. This data helps in identification of the success factors of a person’s communications, including targeting, offers , 
copy and frequency. Algorithms for Machine Learning generate insights via predictive analytics, and it depends on 
marketers to take actions according to those insights or set certain directives for AI to act on them.  
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3972   
Fig - 4: Customer Journey [36]  
Estimation of the possibility of subjects executing specific types of behavior (e.g. purchasing of a product) by taking into 
account independent covariates and confounding variables that affect such behavior is known as propensity modelling. This 
conceivab ility is considered as a probability which is defined as propensity score. [38]  
The four major stages of customer lifecycle are explained as follows:  
1. Reach  
For marketers, sometimes it is challenging to track when a need is triggered among customers as i t eventuates at category 
level rather than the brand level. A key marketing scheme is when consumers initiate deliberate possible offerings to match 
up to their requirements, to inculcate the brand into customers' consideration set. Marketers job comprises  of expanding 
visibility of the brand and intensifying crucial grounds for consideration. [39]  
2. Act  
After customers pen down their brand preferences, marketers pitch to implant certainty in the offerings as well as to coax 
them that they are making best choices.AI help in accomplishing these objectives by predictive analysis, lead scoring, 
learning from consumers behavior and providing real time insights. Marketers can also employ emotional AI to perceive 
consumers' feelings about their brand publicly.  
3. Convert  
After consumers deduce the worth of their preferred brand and the amount, they are willing to spend, marketers shift their 
focus from decision process to action process. They achieve this task by strengthening brand’s value juxtaposed with its 
com petitors. The purchase process of the consumers can be completely transformed with help of AI. Marketers implement 
intelligent purchasing systems for their consumers and can also regulate the “sweet spot” for pricing known as dynamic 
pricing.  
4. Engage  
During this stage, consumers are in a position to evaluate their interest and satisfaction with a particular brand and can 
scrutinize whether to repurchase from that brand i.e. engaging with name of brand. The post purchase services are on of 
deciding fact ors and marketers using AI enable chatbots for better customer service. Marketers can segment their most 
valuable customers or loyal customers, and they can further focus in customer - relationship management campaign.  
6. REAL WORLD EXAMPLES OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE MARKETING APPLICATION          
Possibilities with AI are limitless for marketers. The following are some examples of how brands are implementing AI as an 
integral part of their marketing strategy:  
 Norwegian Air , an airline company tried figu ring out key markets based on various criteria like flight location. 
They developed a custom ML model to target users within their designated market areas (DMAs), who accounted 
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3973  for customers which are most likely to engage with their airline and complete b ooking. The campaign overreached 
Norwegian Air's targets, delivering a "cost per booking" CPA that was 170% lower than the CPA goal. The 
company's secondary goal is to aware key markets about “World’s Best Long -Haul, Low Cost Airline.” was also 
accomplishe d by this strategy.  
 Starbucks  used predictive analytics by using loyalty cards and user mobile applications to gather and analyze  
consumer data. This strategic plan of application of AI and big data was presented in 2016. Starbucks delivered 
personalized marketing messages to customers including recommendations. Their mobile application allowed 
users to place an order directly from phone via speech commands. This implementation of AI helped the company 
in increasing annual revenue by 11% from year 2018 in contrast to 2017. [40]  
 Wowcher , a leading e -commerce company, ramped up its social media in the year 2018 with the usage of AI -
powered copy - writing technology. This tool was having the advantage of studying and analyzing  emoticons as a 
part of speech and writing patterns. After this analysis AI engine developed an emoji based social writing which 
resonated with most users. Wowcher achieved  a  31% reduction in cost per lead, as well  as a higher Relevance 
Scor e as a consequence of this technology. [41]  
 Nestle or Unilever  used AI technology to harmonize insights from a pool of references like songs and popular 
media content in public domains for trends in food consumption. Unilever di scovered a relationship between 
breakfast and ice cream. Additional research displayed that brands such as Dunkin Donuts are so far serving ice 
cream in their breakfast menu and sweet products were becoming popular in breakfast in the US. They considered 
this as an opportunity and they came up with a variety of cereal flavored  ice cream or “Breakfast for Desserts” 
which became an industry standard. [42]  
 Alibaba , a retail giant, launched “FashionAI” outfitter in Hong Kong. Its aim was to streamline the custo mers’ 
fashion retail experience with implementation of AI and using smart garment labels. These labels recognize when 
the product is grabbed and smart mirrors recommends correlated items along with the garment’s description. The 
subsequent idea of Alibaba is to show a list or virtual wardrobe of all the garments tried or touched by a user 
during his/her store visit. The employment of new technology by Alibaba is a need of hour in times of consumers’ 
ever -changing expectation. As per a survey conducted 46% o f respondents were of the opinion that their encounter 
with technology instils additional credence in a specific brand showing a trust and positive response. [43]  
 Nike  launched a program wherein customers were provided with the flexibility to design their sneakers in their 
own way at the store, in 2017. The technology permits users to design the pattern to be printed on plain Nike shoes, 
according to their own choice. T his is a great gimmick to increase sales of the company and furthermore it helped in 
collecting huge amounts of information relating to customers’ predilection about sneakers. With this information 
and machine learning algorithms Nike developed designs for  future products and also delivered personal product 
recommendations or messages to users.  
 Amazon  pioneered personal recommendation in early stages of AI Marketing. They developed new algorithms for 
dynamic pricing of products and in recent years they hav e launched checkout - free physical stores in San Francisco, 
Chicago, Seattle which works on AI -powered sensors and detect automatically which item a customer has picked up 
and charges them automatically of amazon go application.[44]  
 Netflix  provides personalized recommendations to every user with implementation of AI based on what the user 
likes and what user watches. It analyses customer reactions to different shows, documentaries, films and then after 
looking into billions of records sugge sts the best one. Most of the shows watched by users are discovered with this 
AI based recommendation system. [45]  
7. REGIONAL ANALYSIS (ADOPTION RATE)  
 
AI is populated on such a big scale that the total revenue for this technology is expected to incre ase from 7.4 billion US 
Dollars in 2018 to 89.85 billion in 2025 [46]. Across the globe marketers have discovered two major uses of AI Marketing 
which are task automation and data analysis. With increase in essence of customer data for marketers and market ing 
strategies, most of global marketing professionals are shifting or planning to shift for use of AI Marketing.  
Since  the use of AI technology in marketing is still in its infancy, it comes as no bombshell that many industry professiona ls 
are not yet unreservedly  convinced of AI’s influence on marketing, and as such are not yet comfortable with automating 
anything other than select stages of their campaigns.[47]  
Marketers requi re a detailed overview of evaluation as well as data and algorithm usage related to AI -run processes. Some 
of the industry doesn’t seem to be ready to seize control over their work in favor of artificial intelligence.            International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3974   Below mentioned are data of AI Market ing used across different regions across the globe.  51% of marketers are already 
using AI, while 27% of them are planning to incorporate it within their digital marketing strategy [48].The global market for  
AI Marketing is estimated to grow at a significan t rate between the forecast period of 2018 - 2023. Table 1 and graph 5 
shows the execution of AI Marketing for various purposes in different regions across the globe.  
Table - 1: Regional Adoption of AI Marketing (all values in percentage) [49]  
Purpose                                                                  North America  Europe  Asia Pacific  
Analysis of data  51 52 49 
On-site personalization  27 23 23 
Optimization and testing  26 18 19 
Email marketing  24 19 34 
Image recognition  22 19 20 
Automated campaigns  19 18 20 
Content creation  18 11 29 
Programmatic advertising  15 28 22 
Digital asset management  15 10 22 
Video recognition  9 14 12 
Creative and design work  8 13 23 
Automated offers  8 10 11 
Other  9 5 6 
 
Graph - 5: Regional Adoption of AI Marketing [49]  
          International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3975  8. CONCLUSION S  
 
AI Marketing is new playbook for Marketers which is making them shift from marketing automation to marketing 
personalization. The need for customization, reactive design and dynamic engagement have b een long talked about and 
introduction of AI has served as catalyst to initiate this required marketing transition. There has been a growth in scope of  
AI with regard to its application in marketing. This marketing aeon can be considered both interesting a s well as challenging 
and frightening. With the advent of artificial intelligence marketing, automated and traditional marketing techniques took a 
backseat and things like personalization, speech and image recognitions, chatbots, churn predictions, dynamic  pricing and 
customer insights came into the vision. Availability of wide range of data has made it possible for the marketers to carry ou t 
individualized sales and marketing and fulfil customer expectations to the maximum extent.  
Currently, AIM is in its  infant stage and with its fast pace, it is expected to reshape marketing strategies and business 
models. Some market research topics may become insignificant as these roles will be taken over by machines and advanced 
jobs will be created, which will requi re high potential and knowledge. In near future AIM is likely to substantially change 
both marketing strategies as well as customer behavior. AIM will surely explode up with a lot more surprises in the coming 
future.  
REFERENCES  
 
[1] Weber Shandwick Homepage, https://www.webershandwick.com/wp -content/uploads/2018/04/AI -Ready -or-Not-
report -Oct12 -FINAL.pdf, last accessed 2019/12/24.  
[2] Thiraviyam T., Artificial Intelligence Marketing, In: Proceedings of International Journal of Recent Research Aspects, 
pp. 449 –52, April (2018)  
[3] HBR Homepage, https://hbr.org/resources/pdfs/comm/people.ai/acceleratingsales.pdf last accessed 2020/02/12  
[4] Mckinsey Homepage, https://www.mckinsey.com/featured -insights/artificial -intelligence/ai -adoption -advances -but-
foundational -barriers -remain, last accessed 2020/02/07  
[5] InsiderPro Homepage, https://www.idginsiderpro.com/article/3302739/how -ai-is-reshaping -marketing.html Last 
Accessed 2020/02/19.  
[6] Smart Insights Homepage, https://www.smartinsights.com/managing -digital -marketing/managin g-marketing -
technology/how -ai-is-changing -the-role -of-the-marketer -in-2018/, Last Accessed 2019/12/20.  
[7] M. Avinaash, Dr. Jayam R., Artificial Intelligence - The Marketing Game Changer. In: proceedings of International 
Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics , pp. 1881 -1890, 119(17), IJPAM (2018)  
[8]  MapR Homepage, https://mapr.com/blog/demystifying -ai-ml-dl/. Last Accessed 2019/12/20.  
[9] Davenport T., Guha A., Grewal D., Bressgott T. (2020), How artificial intelligence will change the future of marketing, 
Journal o f the Academy of Marketing Science, pp. 24 -42, 48(1)  
[10] Soni N., Sharma E. K., Singh N., Kapoor A. (2019) Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Businesses: from Research, 
Innovation, Market Deployment to Future Shifts in Business Models, Journal of Business Re search  
[11] Shahid M. Z., Li G. (2019), Impact of Artificial Intelligence in Marketing: A Perspective of Marketing Professionals of 
Pakistan, Global Journal of Management and Business Research: E Marketing, pp. 26 -33, 19(2).  
[12] Overgoor G., Chica M., Rand W., Weis hampel A. (2019), Letting the Computers Take over: Using Ai to Solve Marketing 
Problems, California Management Review, pp. 156 -185, 61(4)  
[13] Ramya N., Dr. Ali M. SA (2019), Factors Affecting Consumer Buying Behaviour, International Journal of Advanced 
Researc h, pp. 563 -568, 7(1).  
[14] Raunaque N., Zeeshan Md., Imam A. Md. (2016), Consumer Perception Towards Online Marketing in India, 
International Journal of Advanced Engineering, management and science, pp.1236 -1240,2(8).  
[15] DR Quasim Md. T., Chattopadhyay R. (2015), Artificial intelligence as a business forecasting and error handling tool, 
COMPUSOFT an International Journal of Advanced Computer Technology, pp. 1534 -1537, 4(2).  
[16] Annor - Antwi A., Al -Dherasi A. A. M. (2019), Application of Artificial Intelligence in Forec asting: A Systematic Review, 
SSRN Electronic Journal  
[17] Malhotra N.K., Peterson M. (2001), Marketing research in the new millennium: Emerging issues and trends, Marketing 
Intelligence and Planning, pp. 216 -232, 19(4).  
[18] Ajanthan D. (2017), The Impact of a Soc ial Media Marketing on Customer Based Brand Equity - A Special Reference to 
Travel & Tourism Industry in Sri Lanka, TRANS Asian Journal of Marketing Management Research, pp. 36 -46, 6(11).  
[19] Morgan N. A., Whitler K.A., Feng H., Chari S. (2019), Research in mar keting strategy, Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, pp. 4 -29, 47(1).  
[20] Shen A. (2014), Recommendations as personalized marketing: insights from customer experiences. Journal of Services 
Marketing, pp. 414 -427, 28(5).  
[21] Vesanen, J. (2007), What is per sonalization? A conceptual framework, European Journal of Marketing, pp. 409 –418, 
41(5/6).            International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology  (IRJET)        e-ISSN: 2395 -0056  
                Volume: 07 Issue: 07 | July 2020                   www.irjet.net                                                                     p-ISSN: 2395 -0072  
 
© 2020, IRJET       |       Impact Factor value: 7 .529        |       ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal       |     Page 3976  [22] Kim K. Y. (2014), Business intelligence and marketing insights in an era of big data: The q -sorting approach. KSII 
Transactions on Internet and Information Systems, pp. 567 –582, 8(2)  
[23] Amado A., Cortez, P., Rita P., Moro S. (2018), Research trends on Big Data in Marketing: A text mining and topic 
modeling -based literature analysis, European Research on Management and Business Economics, pp. 1 -7,24(1).  
[24] Lessmann S., Haupt  J., Coussement K., De Bock K. W. (2019), Targeting customers for profit: An ensemble learning 
framework to support marketing decision -making. Information Sciences, pp.15 –22.  
[25] Ozcelik A. B., Varnali K.  (2019), Effectiveness of online behavioral targeting: A psychological perspective, Electronic 
Commerce Research and Applications, 33  
[26] Abid A., Harrigan P., Roy S. K. (2019), Online relationship marketing through content creation and curation, Marketing 
Intelligence and Planning.  
[27] Khodabandehlou S., Zivari Rahman M. (2017), Comparison of supervised machine learning techniques for customer 
churn prediction based on analysis of customer behavior. Journal of Systems and Information Technology, pp. 65 –
93,19(1/2).  
[28] Simon J. P. (2019), Ar tificial intelligence: scope, players, markets and geography, Digital Policy, Regulation and 
Governance, pp. 208 –237, 21(3).  
[29] Skouras T., Avlonitis, G. J., Indounas K. A. (2005), Economics and marketing on pricing: How and why do they differ? 
Journal of Pr oduct and Brand Management, pp. 362 –374, 14(6).  
[30] Moftak Homepage, https://www.moftak.com/how -artificial -intelligence -is-reshaping -the-workforce -management/, 
last accessed 2019/12/20.  
[31] Content Marketing Institute Homepage, https://contentmarketinginstitute.c om/2017/08/marketers -use-artificial -
intelligence/, last accessed 2020/02/07  
[32] Evergage Homepage, http://www.evergage.com/wp -content/uploads/2016/06/2016 -Trends -in-Personalization -
Survey -Report -Evergage -final.pdf, Last Accessed 2020/02/07.  
[33] Emarsys Homepage, h ttps://www.emarsys.com/app/uploads/2019/08/Whitepaper_Making -Immediate -Impact -
with -AI_07 -1.pdf, Last Accessed 2020/02/02.  
[34] Quicksprout Homepage, https://www.quicksprout.com/how -to-increase -sales -by-personalizing -the-customer -
experience/, Last Accessed 2020/ 02/07.  
[35] Feedough Homepage, https://www.feedough.com/examples -of-artificial -intelligence -in-marketing/, Last Accessed 
2019/12/26  
[36] Smart Insights Homepage, https://www.smartinsights.com/tag/artificial -intelligence -ai-for-marketing/, Last 
Accessed 2020/02/19.  
[37] Richrelevance Homepage, https://www.richrelevance.com/blog/2018/10/26/ai -infused -marketing -across -
customer -lifecycle/,Last Accessed 2020/01/13.  
[38] Data Science Foundation Homepage, https://datascience.foundation/sciencewhitepaper/propensity -modelling -for-
busin ess, Last Accessed 2020/01/13.  
[39] Kietzmann J., Paschen J., Treen E. (2018), Artificial intelligence in advertising: How marketers can leverage artificial 
intelligence along the consumer journey, Journal of Advertising Research, pp.263 -267, 58(3).  
[40] Macrotrends  Homepage, https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/SBUX/starbucks/revenue, Last Accessed 
2019/12/30.  
[41] Econsultancy Homepage, https://econsultancy.com/how -wowcher -used -ai-copywriting -tool -reduce -facebook -ad-
cpl/?zd_source=mta&zd_campaign=13370&zd_term=chir adeepbasumallick, Last Accessed 2019/12/30.  
[42] Martech Advisor Homepage, https://www.martechadvisor.com/articles/machine -learning -ai/5 -examples -of-ai-in-
marketing -in-2019/, Last Accessed 2019/12/30.  
[43] Social Media Strategies Summit, https://blog.socialmediastra tegiessummit.com/10 -examples -of-ai-in-marketing/, 
Last Accessed 2019/12/30.  
[44] Concured Homepage, https://www.concured.com/blog/5 -brands -that -are-successfully -leveraging -ai-for-marketing, 
Last Accessed 2019/12/29.  
[45] PegasusOne Homepage, https://www.pegasusone.c om/top -5-real -world -applications -artificial -intelligence/, Last 
Accessed 2019/12/29.  
[46] Statista Homepage, https://www.statista.com/topics/5017/ai -use-in-marketing/, Last Accessed 2020/01/09.  
[47]  Market Research Future Homepage, https://www.marketresearchfuture. com/reports/artificial -intelligence -
marketing -market -6568, Last Accessed 2020/01/11.  
[48] Leftronic Homepage, https://leftronic.com/artificial -intelligence -statistics/, Last Accessed 2020/01/11.  
[49] Statista Homepage, https://www.statista.com/statistics/915372/mark eting -related -use-artificial -intelligence -world/, 
Last accessed 2020/01/09.  
View publication stats