In collaboration  
with Frontiers Media
FLAGSHIP REPORT
JUNE 2023Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies of 2023Contents
Images: Midjourney, Studio Miko. All images in this 
report have been generated using artificial intelligence.
© 2023 World Economic Forum. All rights 
reserved. No part of this publication may 
be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, including photocopying 
and recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system.Disclaimer 
This document is published by the  
World Economic Forum as a contribution 
to a project, insight area or interaction. 
The findings, interpretations and 
conclusions expressed herein are a result 
of a collaborative process facilitated and 
endorsed by the World Economic Forum 
but whose results do not necessarily 
represent the views of the World Economic 
Forum, nor the entirety of its Members, 
Partners or other stakeholders.Preface
Introduction
Methodology
1  Flexible batteries
2  Generative artificial intelligence
3  Sustainable aviation fuel
4  Designer phages
5  Metaverse for mental health
6  Wearable plant sensors
7  Spatial omics
8  Flexible neural electronics
9  Sustainable computing
10  AI-facilitated healthcare
Contributors
Endnotes3
4
5
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
31
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
2Preface
For more than a decade, the Forum has been 
surveying academics, industry leaders and futurists 
on the emerging technologies set to transform 
economies and societies. In doing so, the  
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023 report seeks 
to help professionals across sectors and industries 
anticipate exponential technologies, interpret their 
implications and champion industry-shaping and 
society-serving applications.
Since the first edition in 2011, the annual report has 
identified little-known technologies that have gone 
on to have global impact. For example, the precise 
genetic-engineering tool, CRISPR-Cas9, featured 
in 2015, went on to become Nobel Prize-winning 
science five years later and is now being used to 
create insect and drought-resistant crops in harsh 
growing conditions around the world. Messenger 
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) vaccines, which earned 
their place in the 2017 report, became the 
technology underpinning the majority of COVID-19 
vaccines protecting lives worldwide. In the few 
years since AI-led molecular design made it onto 
the 2018 list, Deepmind’s AlphaFold has predicted 
the structure of 200 million proteins, and the first  
AI-discovered drugs have entered clinical trials.
Now in its 11th year, the Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies of 2023 report outlines the 
technologies poised to positively impact society in 
the next three to five years. The report broadens its 
scope beyond describing the top 10 technologies 
and associated risks and opportunities to include 
a qualitative assessment of how each technology 
is set to impact people, the planet, prosperity, 
industry and equity. Unique for each technology, 
these “impact fingerprints” are meant to stimulate 
further analysis and debate about how emerging technologies – some of which you might never 
have heard of – can and will shape our collective 
future in the years ahead. Also new for the 2023 
edition is a collection of transformation maps from 
the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform, which 
provide deeper insights and context on each 
technology by showcasing how they connect to 
other topics on the global agenda and surfacing  
the latest trusted publications for further reading.
This year’s report brings together the perspectives 
of over 90 experts in 20 countries from all world 
regions. This report would not be possible without 
their openness to contributing their insights, and we 
sincerely thank them all. We greatly appreciate, too, 
the leadership of our Top 10 Emerging Technologies 
Steering Group Co-Chairs, Mariette DiChristina 
and Bernard Meyerson, who, along with many 
members, have been loyal collaborators since the 
inception of the Top 10 Emerging Technologies 
report series. We would additionally like to thank 
our knowledge partner for this year’s edition, 
Frontiers, for the deep expertise and scientific rigour 
of their journal editors – across the articles, impact 
fingerprints and transformation maps. Our thanks 
also to the project team: Greta Keenan, Saemoon 
Yoon, Minji Sung and Sebastian Buckup, as well 
as the wider team at the Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution for their input.
New technologies have the power to disrupt 
industries, grow economies, improve lives and 
safeguard the planet – if designed, scaled and 
deployed responsibly. We hope that this year’s 
report serves as a powerful tool for business leaders 
and policy-makers to unlock the transformative 
potential of emerging technologies and shape  
their inclusive adoption.Jeremy Jurgens  
Managing Director,  
World Economic Forum
Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies of 2023
June 2023
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
3Introduction
In the introduction of his 2016 book, The Fourth 
Industrial Revolution, Klaus Schwab advised that 
humanity should “take dramatic technological 
change as an invitation to reflect about who we are 
and how we see the world”. The Top 10 Emerging 
Technologies of 2023 report is an ongoing response 
to that invitation to improve the state of the world 
and the humans inhabiting it. The driving forces 
behind the innovations featured in this special report 
are the acceleration of global connectivity, the rise 
of AI, along with the convergence of the physical, 
digital and biological worlds.
Consistent with the Fourth Industrial Revolution, 
several of the technologies cited use data and 
computing to enhance public health. The list 
explores how AI is enabling improvements in 
healthcare delivery, especially to those who live  
in less well-resourced areas; how flexible batteries 
are powering wearable technologies and bendable 
displays that enable wearable medical devices and 
biomedical sensors; and next-generation neural 
electronics that can interact with millions of cells at 
once more safely. With mental health issues more 
pressing in the post-pandemic world, virtual shared 
spaces in the metaverse are facilitating global 
outreach to serve those in need.In this report, you’ll learn about how spatial omics 
is creating a new generation of molecular-level “cell 
atlases” to help unlock life’s mysteries. In a new 
approach to treatment, researchers are engineering 
viruses, called phages, to augment human, animal 
and plant health.
Beyond the understanding and treatment of disease, 
the rapid public emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) 
shows a potential to vastly enhance access to and 
implementation of human knowledge. Generative AI, 
embodied in ChatGPT and Bard, has demonstrated 
the creation of original social and technical content in 
seconds. Those abilities developed from models trained 
on vast information content ingested from the web.  
It is, however, important to be cognizant of the societal 
issues created by these “super-human” capabilities.
Human well-being also ultimately requires a healthy 
planet. Addressing this need, the “top 10” includes 
wearable plant sensors, which enable increased food 
production by improving plant health. With the impact 
of climate change ever-more dire, two cited innovations 
offer progress: sustainable aviation fuel, made from 
biological or non-biological sources, and sustainable 
computing, which is paving the way towards net-zero 
carbon data centres. However, far more innovation is 
required to mitigate this existential threat to humanity.A message from the Co-Chairs of the 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies report 
steering committee.
Mariette DiChristina  
Dean and Professor of  
the Practice in Journalism,  
Boston University College  
of CommunicationBernard Meyerson  
Chief Innovation Officer 
Emeritus, IBM 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
4Methodology
Choosing the top 10 list for 2023
Technologies for consideration for the 2023 
list were collected via a survey distributed to the 
steering group and wider expert network, as 
well as the World Economic Forum’s Innovator 
Communities from December 2022 to January 
2023. Survey respondents were asked to complete 
the following fields:
 –Technology name
 –Description of the technology
 –Fields impacted by the technology
 –Description of the impact of the technology on 
these fields, including benefits and risks to society
 –Justification for why the technology should  
be on the 2023 list. 
The 95 valid technology nominations were reviewed, 
debated and ranked by the steering group over 
the course of three meetings between January and 
February 2023, eventually whittling the list down to 
the final 10 based on the judging criteria:
 –Novelty: the technology is emerging and at an 
early stage of incipient development, not already 
widely used.
 –Applicability: has the potential to be of 
significant use and benefit to societies  
and economies in the future; is not of only 
marginal concern.
 –Depth: is being developed by more than 
one company and is the focus of increasing 
investment interest and excitement within the 
expert community; likely to have a significant 
impact in the next 3-5 years.
 –Power: is potentially powerful and disruptive  
in altering established ways and industries.
Members of the steering group volunteered 
to author the articles in the report, consulting 
specialists in their networks for added input. All 
articles were fact-checked and edited by Frontiers.
“Impact fingerprint”
The content of the Top 10 Emerging Technologies 
of 2023 report is built upon the contributions 
of experts from academia and industry. The 
methodology of this edition is based on the previous 
10 editions but incorporates “impact fingerprint” 
survey data for the first time. To achieve this, expert groups of academics and 
industry leaders were curated for each of the 10 
technologies listed in the 2023 report. They were 
then asked to predict the future impact of their 
respective technology, rating the projected influence 
on a scale from 1 to 10, should these technologies 
achieve widespread adoption in the next 3-5 years. 
The survey aimed to assess the potential effect of 
these technologies across five distinct metrics:
A. People 
Participants rated their expectations regarding 
each technology’s potential to enhance 
security and dignity—spanning areas such 
as food security, access to clean water, and 
improvements in healthcare outcomes—over 
the next decade.
B. Planet  
Participants gauged the extent to which they 
envisage the technologies could help protect and 
restore our planet. This included considerations 
such as restoring biodiversity, minimizing waste, 
and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
C. Prosperity 
Survey respondents were asked to evaluate 
the potential of each technology to improve the 
quality of life for individuals worldwide. Factors 
considered included job creation, enhanced 
connectivity, and increased leisure time.
D. Industry  
Participants assessed the potential of these 
technologies to disrupt existing industries and 
generate new markets over the next decade.
E. Equity 
Finally, the survey asked participants to rate 
the potential for these technologies to promote 
global societal equity. This involved estimating 
their capacity to democratize access to 
essential resources and services like healthcare, 
energy, materials, and the internet.
Academics were mainly selected from Frontiers’ 
network of scientific journal editors, while industry 
leaders were selected from the Forum’s Innovator 
Communities. 
Of the 100+ experts invited to contribute to one  
of the 10 technology surveys, 69 respondents  
from 18 countries contributed their assessment. 
Scores were averaged for each dimension of  
the impact fingerprint for each technology,  
with optional comments collated for additional 
context to scores.
The results have been visualized using radar charts 
(see Figure 1) and are present in each section. 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
5Methodological limitations
This methodology was designed to be rigorous within 
a range of constraints. 
First, given that some of the technologies on the 
list are truly emerging, there were limitations to 
how many academics and industry leaders in the 
Forum and Frontiers extended networks could be 
considered experts on these topics for participation in 
the impact fingerprint survey. Second, response rates varied across the 
technologies, with different ratios of respondents from 
industry and academia. 
Third, qualitative scores varied within technologies, 
partly due to different interpretations of the impact 
dimensions and partly due to different vantage points. 
On balance, the impact fingerprint data visualizations 
provide a complementary qualitative dimension to 
the articles for each technology in this year’s report 
and prompt further analysis and debate about 
how emerging technologies are likely to shape the 
collective future in the years ahead.“Impact fingerprint” radar chart FIGURE 1
D.
Industry
– Disrupt existing industries
– Create new markets  E.
Equity
– Democratize access 
to healthcare, energy, 
materials, internet etc.A.
People
– Security and dignity such 
as food security
– Access to clean water
– Improved healthcare 
outcomes 
C.
Prosperity
– Quality of people’s lives, 
such as creating new jobs
– Providing greater connectivity 
between people
– Increasing leisure time B.
Planet
– Protect and restore the 
planet, such as restoring 
biodiversity
– Limiting waste 
– Reducing greenhouse gases12345678910
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
6Strategic Intelligence 
transformation maps
Another ambition for the 11th edition of the report 
was to facilitate deeper reader engagement with 
each of the technologies beyond the short articles 
included. To achieve this, Frontiers co-curated 
transformation maps for each technology, housed 
on the Forum’s Strategic Intelligence Platform, where readers can learn more about the key issues of each 
technology and how it connects to other topics on 
the global agenda as well as find the latest articles 
on the topic from trusted sources. 
The descriptions were predominantly based on the 
articles in this report. Key issues were determined 
based on guidance from the steering group authors and 
the input of Frontiers’ editors. Key issue descriptions 
were researched and written by Frontiers’ editors. 
FIGURE 2
Licensed for professional use. 
© 2023 World Economic Forum.Example Strategic Intelligence transformation map
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
7Flexible batteries
Powering wearable technologies 
for healthcare and e-textiles.01From rollable computer screens to “smart” clothing, 
the future of electronics looks to be increasingly 
flexible. The rapidly escalating development of 
wearable devices, flexible electronics and bendable 
displays demands power sources that match the 
agility of these systems. Standard, rigid batteries 
may soon be a thing of the past as thin, flexible 
batteries – made of lightweight materials that can be 
easily twisted, bent or stretched – reach the market.  
Several types of flexible batteries are currently available. 
These batteries are rechargeable and include lithium-
ion or zinc-carbon systems placed on conductive 
polymer current collectors. In some cases, additives 
enhance conductivity and flexibility.1 The electrodes of 
flexible batteries can be coated with – or even printed 
onto – flexible substrates, including carbon-based 
materials like graphene, carbon fibres or cloth.  
Flexible batteries have applications in a growing 
number of fields, including wearable medical 
devices and biomedical sensors, flexible displays 
and smartwatches. Health-related applications 
powered by these batteries could transmit data 
wirelessly to healthcare providers, facilitating remote 
patient monitoring. Further, flexible batteries that 
can be integrated into the fabric of jackets, shirts 
or other apparel will be required to power emerging 
textile-based electronics with capabilities ranging 
from built-in heating systems to health monitoring.  
The flexible battery market is expected to expand 
rapidly in the coming years. One study forecasts 
that the global flexible battery market will grow by 
$240.47 million from 2022-2027, accelerating at a 
compound annual growth rate of 22.79% during this 
period.2 The primary drivers of growth are expected 
to be the increasing demand for wearable devices 
and the growing trend towards miniaturization and 
flexibility of electronics. 
Several companies are actively developing and 
commercializing flexible battery technology, 
including LG Chem, Samsung SDI, Apple, Nokia, 
Front Edge Technology, STMicroelectronics, 
Blue Spark Technologies and Fullriver Battery 
New Technology.3 However, there is still room for 
innovation in this space, and new players are likely 
to enter the market as the technology evolves. The ability of flexible batteries to be bent, twisted 
and stretched makes them ideal for use in wearable 
devices. As the market demand for wearable 
technologies continues to grow, the future of 
flexible batteries is promising, and further advances 
are likely. As with all batteries, one hurdle to 
overcome is their safe disposal and recycling, which 
should come as the technology and associated 
applications become circular. Revolutionary 
advances in flexible-battery technologies and their 
accompanying industries are expected to continue 
for many years to come.
 Image: 
A new generation of flexible 
batteries may allow for the 
seamless integration of 
technology into fabrics  
and clothes.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Technology fabric 
with interwoven digital 
elements”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to flexible 
batteries on the Strategic 
Intelligence Platform.$240 million
Forecasted growth of the global 
flexible battery market between 
2022-202722.79%
Compound annual growth  
rate between 2022-2027
People
ProsperityIndustryEquity PlanetImpact 
fingerprintJavier García Martínez  
Professor of Chemistry and Director, Molecular 
Nanotechnology Lab, University of Alicante
Joseph Costantine  
Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, American University of Beirut
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
9Generative artificial intelligence
Expanding the boundaries  
of human endeavour.02Olga Fink  
Professor of Intelligent Maintenance 
and Operations Systems, EPFL 
Julien Weissenberg  
Founder, Deep Tech Experts
Generative artificial intelligence (AI) is a powerful 
type of AI that can create new and original content 
by learning patterns in data, using complex 
algorithms and methods of learning inspired by the 
human brain. While generative AI is still currently 
focused on producing text, computer programming, 
images and sound,4 this technology could be 
applied to a range of purposes, including drug 
design, architecture and engineering.
For example, at the time of this writing, initial work 
has been published on generating candidate drug 
molecules targeting particular conditions5 and 
on creating pictures of imaginary buildings or on 
generating interior design. NASA engineers are 
currently working towards AI systems that can 
construct lightweight spaceflight instruments, 
achieving a 10-fold reduction in development 
time while simultaneously improving structural 
performance.6 Generative AI technologies may 
even impact the food industry and the design of 
everyday objects, from furniture to appliances. In 
scientific research, generative models could facilitate 
breakthroughs by improving experimental design, 
identifying relationships between data elements 
and creating new theories. For example, recently 
developed AI algorithms can translate a mathematical 
formula into plain English or analyse brain activity 
data to generate drawings of the objects that human 
participants are holding in mind.7,8
High school and university students are using 
generative AI more frequently, with some institutions 
forbidding their use while others are integrating 
generative models into teaching practices9 or 
even training students to master these tools. Used 
properly, generative AI can create personalized 
curricula that adjust to student skills and learning 
progress while encouraging critical thinking, igniting 
creativity and harnessing novel ideas. 
In the workplace, the use of AI-based language 
models like the recently popular ChatGPT or its 
successors can increase productivity and improve 
output quality, restructuring human tasks towards 
idea generation and editing as opposed to rough 
drafting.10 Generative AI technologies specifically 
benefit low-ability workers and can increase job 
satisfaction and self-efficacy. Given the potential 
for productivity gains resulting from adopting these 
new technologies, it’s crucial to acknowledge the 
likelihood of job displacement. As such, policies  
and programmes that support workers in their efforts 
to upskill and reskill are essential in ensuring that the 
benefits of technological innovation are widely shared 
and that workers are equipped with the skills needed 
to thrive in the changing job market. The newest developments involve autonomous AI 
systems that can make important decisions or take 
significant actions. For instance, AutoGPT is an 
autonomous AI application using the GPT-4 language 
model. AutoGPT can automatically accomplish  
a user-identified goal by dividing the goal into 
smaller tasks and employing tools like internet 
searches or text-to-speech technology. The 
growing integration of generative AI technologies, 
particularly autonomous AI, into multiple aspects 
of people’s daily lives, is generating both public 
excitement and concern.
To build public trust in generative AI, applications 
should meet agreed-upon professional and ethical 
standards. Generative AI systems represent the 
data they were trained on and the conventions 
governing society at that time. Care should be 
taken to mitigate AI bias based on training data, 
with a focus on including “outlier” data and novel 
societal conventions. Further, the decision-making 
processes of an application should be easy to 
understand, an application’s goals should be 
clearly disclosed to operators and end users, and 
individual privacy should be respected. Ethical 
guidelines and governance structures must 
be developed to mitigate potential harm and 
ensure that technical progress is balanced with 
responsible use. Finally, copyright attribution must 
be addressed so that proper credit is given to AI 
designers, creators of training data and authors  
of instructions for using the applications. 
With the correct controls in place, generative AI can 
provide more time for creativity, demonstrate the 
boundaries of knowledge, and act as a sparring 
partner to challenge conventional thinking.
 Image: 
Generative AI can 
synthesize what it has learnt 
from gigantic data sets 
to create and intuit new 
information in novel ways.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Glitched image overlaying 
various styles of painting, 
photography and 3D 
renderings”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to generative 
artificial intelligence on 
the Strategic Intelligence 
Platform.
People
ProsperityPlanet
IndustryEquityImpact 
fingerprint
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
11Sustainable aviation fuel
Moving the aviation industry 
towards net-zero carbon emissions.03Mariette DiChristina  
Dean and Professor of the Practice in Journalism,  
Boston University College of Communication
Lee Sang-Yup  
Senior Vice-President for Research, Korea Advanced 
Institute of Science and Technology
Lauren Uppink Calderwood  
Head, Climate Strategy, Centre for Nature and Climate, 
World Economic Forum
Aviation accounts for 2-3% of global CO2 emissions 
annually, with concerning “business-as-usual” 
projected emissions of 39 gigatonnes between 
2022-2050.11,12 While the use of electric vehicles for 
ground transport is rapidly increasing, the aviation 
sector has struggled with decarbonization because 
energy-dense fuels are required for long-distance 
flights. Additionally, the high price of replacing aircraft 
means that the current fleet will remain in operation 
for decades, and electric or hydrogen-fuelled planes 
may not be viable for long-distance flight in any case.
Enter a solution that does not require large-
scale changes to current aviation infrastructure 
and equipment: sustainable aviation fuel (SAF), 
produced from biological (e.g. biomass) and non-
biological (e.g. CO2) resources. Combined with 
other decarbonization strategies, including system-
wide operational efficiencies, new technologies and 
carbon offsets, SAF should move the airline industry 
towards reaching net-zero carbon emissions in the 
coming decades.
Today, SAF makes up less than 1% of global jet 
fuel demand, but this must increase to 13-15% by 
2040 to put the aviation industry on the path to net 
zero by 2050.13 Such an increase will require the 
creation of 300-400 new SAF plants; and airlines, 
manufacturers and fuel companies are working 
around the clock to enable this level of scale.
Fortunately, the production of SAF from biogenic 
raw materials using renewable energy is steadily 
increasing. According to the International Air 
Transport Association, SAF production reached 
at least 300 million (optimistically 450 million) litres 
in 2022, nearly triple that produced in 2021.14 An 
increasing number of airlines have committed to 
using SAF, a trend that will be accelerated through 
global efforts such as the World Economic Forum’s 
Clean Skies for Tomorrow initiative15 and First 
Movers Coalition.
The American Society of Testing and Materials 
(ASTM) has approved nine SAFs for blending at a 
ratio of up to 50% with conventional petroleum-
based jet fuel.16 The first SAF, approved by ASTM 
in 2009, is produced by converting syngas (a 
mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen) 
into hydrocarbons through a series of chemical reactions. Syngas can be prepared from biomass or 
wastes or, better yet, from captured CO2 and green 
hydrogen using renewable energy.
The second SAF, approved in 2011, is produced 
from plant oil and animal fat. The availability and 
collection of raw materials, along with the need for 
sustainably produced green hydrogen, remain major 
challenges for this option. Metabolically engineered 
microorganisms that can break down abundant, 
non-edible biomass could potentially reduce 
dependence on plant oils and animal fats.17
Over the past several years, seven more SAFs have 
been approved, with other exciting candidates 
still in active development. One example uses 
engineered bacteria to improve the SAF’s energy 
profile.18 In 2023, a consortium of actors in the 
United Kingdom is poised to deliver the first net-
zero transatlantic flight using solely sustainable 
aviation fuel, demonstrating the potential of this 
rapidly evolving technology and moving the world 
closer to net-zero aviation.
 Image: 
Sustainable aviation fuel, 
created from biomass 
and combined with other 
decarbonization strategies, 
plot a reliable course to net-
zero aviation.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated): 
“Drops of fuel splashing  
in the shape of leaves”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to sustainable 
aviation fuel on the 
Strategic Intelligence 
Platform.
People
ProsperityPlanet
IndustryEquityImpact 
fingerprint
2-3%
of annual global CO2 
emissions are from aviation
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
13Designer phages
Engineering viruses to augment 
human, animal and plant health.04Mine Orlu  
Professor of Pharmaceutics, University College 
London (UCL) School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Life 
Sciences, UCL 
Wilfried Weber  
Scientific Director, Leibniz Institute for New Materials
The number of microbes living on and within the 
human body matches, and may even exceed, 
the number of human cells.19 The community 
of microbes an organism harbours is called its 
microbiome, and the microbiomes of humans, 
animals and plants play important roles in the 
health of these organisms.20,21
Recent advances allow engineering of the 
microbiome to benefit human well-being and 
agricultural productivity. Key to this engineering 
are phages – viruses that selectively infect specific 
types of bacteria. Upon infection, a phage injects 
its genetic information into the bacterium. Using 
synthetic biology tools, the genetic information of 
phages can be reprogrammed so that infected 
bacteria execute a bioengineered set of genetic 
instructions. With bioengineered phages, 
scientists can change a bacterium’s functions, 
causing it to produce a therapeutic molecule or to 
become sensitive to a certain drug, for example. 
As phages generally only infect one type of 
bacteria, individual bacterial species within the 
complex microbiome can be targeted.
Designer phages are showing potential for 
treating microbiome-associated diseases such 
as hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) – a rare 
but serious condition that affects the kidneys 
and blood-clotting functions, caused by a certain 
species of E. coli. Scientists engineered the 
genetic material of an E. coli-infecting phage 
to encode genetic “scissors” that can chop 
up the E. coli genes that lead to HUS. Animal 
studies demonstrated that administration of 
these designer phages significantly reduced 
the presence of the HUS-causing strain of 
E. coli in the microbiome and alleviated HUS 
symptoms.22 This approach was recently granted 
an orphan drug designation by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration, poising it for clinical 
trials.23 Phages are also being designed as feed 
supplements to enhance the growth of livestock, 
treat certain plant diseases and eliminate 
dangerous bacteria in food supply chains, in 
alignment with the World Health Organization’s 
“One Health”  approach.Promising early results of designer phage therapies 
are attracting significant venture capital that will help 
to facilitate clinical testing of engineered phages. 
Potential applications of designer phages are 
numerous and diverse. Locus Biosciences is using 
engineered phages to combat antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria, whereas Eligo Biosciences is pursuing similar 
approaches to make certain bacteria less pathogenic. 
Of the 44 phage-related clinical trials with therapeutic 
intent, 29 have been posted since the beginning of 
2020.24 Phage-based therapies involving both natural 
and designer phages will continue to emerge as a 
powerful method to engineer microbiomes, enhancing 
the health of humans, animals and plants.
 Image: 
Engineered viruses 
could allow for hyper-
targeted therapies that 
can selectively affect 
specific bacteria.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“A microscopic image of  
a virus attacking a cell”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to designer 
phages on the Strategic 
Intelligence Platform.Phages are showing potential 
for treating microbiome-
associated diseases and 
revolutionizing the engineering 
of microbiomes for human, 
animal and plant health.
People
ProsperityPlanet
IndustryEquityImpact 
fingerprint
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
15Metaverse for mental health
Shared virtual spaces to  
improve mental health.05Corinna Lathan  
Co-Founder and former Chief Executive Officer, 
AnthroTronix 
Geoffrey Ling  
Professor of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Hospital
The Surgeon General of the United States recently 
declared war on what he calls “one of the country’s 
most pressing public health issues of our time”. 
Excess screen time and social media can decrease 
psychological well-being,25 but they can also 
enhance well-being when used responsibly.26 
Screen time spent building connections in shared 
virtual spaces might help combat the growing 
mental health crisis as opposed to contributing to it.
Virtual shared spaces are digital environments 
where people can interact professionally and 
socially. The future of these spaces is commonly 
referred to as the metaverse, which may include 
virtual shared spaces enhanced with augmented 
or virtual reality (AR/VR). Just as multiple shared 
virtual platforms currently exist, there will likely be 
multiple metaverses, differing in purpose and level 
of immersiveness.
The mental health crisis that existed prior to the 
COVID-19 pandemic has since increased to 
unprecedented levels,27 making conditions ripe for 
metaverse-enabled mental health treatment. The 
number of mental health providers is insufficient 
to meet the escalating crisis,28 and, in the United 
States, a federal reimbursement opportunity for 
tele-mental health services is in the works to 
combat this shortage.29 Ideally, a mental health-
centred technology-based infrastructure will 
support all aspects of mental health: prevention, 
diagnostics, therapy, education and research.
Gaming platforms are already being leveraged 
for mental health treatment. Such platforms not 
only increase patient engagement but also help 
destigmatize mental health issues. For example, 
DeepWell Therapeutics has created video games 
to treat depression and anxiety; UK-based Xbox 
studio Ninja Theory has incorporated mental health 
awareness into mass-market games and plans to 
expand into treatment with their Insight Project; and TRIPP has created Mindful Metaverse, which 
enhances well-being through VR-enabled guided 
mindfulness and meditation.30
Maturing interface technologies could further 
augment social and emotional connections between 
distant participants. For example, Emerge Wave 1 
is a tabletop device that uses ultrasonic waves to 
simulate touch, enhancing users’ social experience. 
Noninvasive neurotechnologies can even provide 
feedback attuned to a user’s emotional state. For 
example, Neurable headsets use electrodes to 
measure emotion and can adjust music accordingly. 
Eventually, the metaverse will also connect to 
therapeutic neurotechnologies, such as direct brain 
stimulation to treat intractable depression.31
Leveraging the metaverse for the continuum of 
mental healthcare needs could be a win-win. Not 
only would patients benefit, but grounding the 
metaverse in a practical, necessary application could 
drive the emergence of this advancing virtual space.
 Image: 
The metaverse may  
be used to provide a 
shared virtual space for 
people to connect and 
access therapy. 
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“People boating on lake  
in a glass cube”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to metaverse 
for mental health on the 
Strategic Intelligence 
Platform.People
Industry
Equity
ProsperityPlanetImpact 
fingerprint
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
17Wearable plant sensors
Revolutionizing agricultural data 
collection to feed the world.06Rona Chandrawati  
Associate Professor, University of New South Wales 
Carlo Ratti  
Director, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
Senseable City Lab
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization 
states that world food production will need to 
increase by 70% to feed the world’s population in 
2050.32 Technological innovations in agriculture will be 
a key step towards meeting this dramatic escalation 
and improving the world’s food security.
Traditionally, crops have been monitored via soil 
testing and visual inspections, both of which are 
expensive and time-consuming. Recent 
technological advances have improved the ease of 
crop monitoring, enabling farmers to monitor crop 
conditions at a larger scale. For several years, the 
health of farmland has been monitored using low-
resolution satellite data.33 Now, sensor-equipped 
drones and tractors are providing higher-resolution 
information about crop conditions.34,35 Resultant 
information from all forms of monitoring can be 
processed using AI. The next frontier in crop 
monitoring is even higher resolution: the monitoring 
of individual plants.
Wearable plant sensors promise to improve plant 
health and increase agricultural productivity. These 
sensors are small, non-invasive devices that can be 
attached to crop plants for continuous monitoring of 
temperature, humidity, moisture and nutrient levels. 
Data from plant sensors can optimize yields, reduce 
water, fertilizer and pesticide use, and detect early 
signs of disease.
Two companies, Growvera and Phytech, have 
independently developed micro-sized needle 
sensors that insert into a plant’s leaves or stems 
to measure changes in electrical resistance. Data 
are transmitted wirelessly to a computer or mobile 
device, where they are analysed to generate insights 
about plant health. Farmers can thus monitor 
crops in real time and perform precise interventions 
based on the specific demands of plants, such 
as adjusting irrigation or fertilizer application in 
response to moisture levels or nutrient data.
Much work remains. Wearable sensors can be 
expensive to install and maintain, and interpretation of sensor data may require specialized expertise. 
Improved data analytics tools are needed to help 
farmers make informed decisions about crop 
management from sensor data. The long-term 
effects of wearable sensors on plant growth and 
development also warrant investigation.
Despite these challenges, wearable plant sensors 
are poised to revolutionize crop production and 
management. By providing real-time data about 
plant health and environmental conditions, these 
devices can help farmers optimize agricultural 
productivity, reduce waste and minimize 
agriculture’s environmental impact – all while  
helping to feed the world’s growing population.
 Image: 
Individual plant monitoring 
would allow for the 
harvesting of extremely 
high-resolution data on  
a farmer’s crop.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“Microchip attached to  
a leaf”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to wearable plant 
sensors on the Strategic 
Intelligence Platform.
People
IndustryEquity
ProsperityPlanetImpact 
fingerprint
70%
increase in world food 
production will be required  
to feed the global 
population by 2050.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
19Spatial omics
Molecular-level mapping 
of biological processes to 
unlock life’s mysteries.07Elizabeth O’Day  
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Olaris
Angela Ruohao Wu  
Associate Professor, Hong Kong University  
of Science and Technology 
Xu Xun  
Director, BGI Research
 Image: 
New imaging 
techniques may allow 
for unprecedented 
access to the previously 
unobservable.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“Organic cell structure at 
the molecular level taken 
through microscopic 
imaging in a heatmap style”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to spatial omics on 
the Strategic Intelligence 
Platform.The human body is composed of approximately 
37.2 trillion cells. How do they all work together 
to keep us alive and healthy? Spatial omics may 
provide researchers with an answer. By combining 
advanced imaging techniques with the specificity 
and resolution of DNA sequencing, this emerging 
method enables the mapping of the what, where 
and when of biological processes at the molecular 
level. Starting with an organ of interest (such as a 
mouse brain), scientists slice tissue into sections only 
one cell thick. Innovative techniques are then used 
to visualize the locations of specific biomolecules 
in each slice .36,37,38 Spatial omics allows previously 
unobservable cell architecture and biological events 
to be viewed in unprecedented detail.
A new generation of molecular-level “cell atlases” 
are under development thanks to spatial omics, 
detailing the myriad biological processes occurring 
in humans and other species .39,40 For example, 
using spatial omics, scientists constructed a 
three-dimensional cell atlas of fruit fly larvae and 
unlocked the black box of organ development in 
mouse embryos.41,42,43 Another study revealed that 
the injured amphibian axolotl brain heals itself using 
mechanisms mirroring those activated during brain 
development .44 Spatial omics also shows promise 
in therapeutic discovery. Using this technique, 
scientists identified a population of neurons in 
the spinal cord that appears to be responsible for 
recovery after spinal cord injury. Stimulating these 
neurons in paralysed mice sped up their recovery 
to walking  .45 Additional health-related applications 
include characterizing the various cell types in  
a tumour to customize treatment and unravelling  
the mechanisms of complex diseases like 
Alzheimer’s disease and rheumatoid arthritis .46 
Infectious diseases can also be investigated using 
spatial omics. For example, a spatial omics study 
of samples from people who died from COVID-19 
revealed that SARS-CoV-2 causes widespread 
disruption of cellular pathways across all tissues .47
The need to democratize and scale up spatial 
omics technologies is pressing. With a total 
market value of $232.6 million in 2021 and an 
estimated revenue of $587.2 million in 2030, a 
growing list of public and private companies are 
seeking to provide spatial omics solutions  .48 While 
academic and translational research centres made up 89% of the market in 2020 , 49 the market is 
dramatically expanding to include pharmaceutical 
and biotech industries.
To realize the full promise of spatial omics, 
technical challenges around data acquisition, 
processing, storage and standardized reporting 
must be addressed. Further, applications should 
be expanded to map other biomolecules, such as 
metabolites, and other organisms, including plants 
and invertebrates, to further illuminate the underlying 
biology. In the brief time since Nature Methods 
selected spatial omics as the method of the year in 
2021 ,50 it has evolved from a niche technique to one 
that is poised to become standardized and widely 
employed, revolutionizing the understanding of life.
$587 million
Estimated revenue in 2030
People
IndustryEquity
ProsperityPlanetImpact 
fingerprint
$232 million
Spatial omics technologies  
total market value in 2021
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
21Flexible neural electronics
Better engineered circuits to 
interface with the nervous system.08Wendy Ju  
Associate Professor, Cornell Tech
Geoffrey Ling  
Professor of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Hospital 
Ruth Morgan  
Vice-Dean (Interdisciplinary Entrepreneurship), 
Faculty of Engineering Sciences, UCL
Angela Ruohao Wu  
Associate Professor, Hong Kong University  
of Science and Technology
In recent years, brain-machine interfaces 
(BMIs) have gained visibility, igniting collective 
imaginations regarding the power and potential 
of one day controlling machines with thoughts. 
BMIs allow electrical signals the brain produces to 
be captured by sensor hardware. Algorithms then 
decode these electrical signals into instructions 
that a computer can understand and execute. 
BMI-like systems are already used to treat 
patients with epilepsy, and in neuroprosthetics – 
prosthetic limbs use electrodes to interface with 
the nervous system.51,52
Despite initial successes, there are challenges 
to these technologies. Current implants used by 
doctors are made of hard materials, like the chips 
inside a laptop or phone, and they can trigger long-
term scarring and cause substantial discomfort. 
They cannot bend or adapt to brain movements 
so, over time, they “drift” in position, decreasing 
the accuracy of the captured signals. Non-invasive 
methods, like electrodes placed on the outside of 
the skull, do not require surgical implantation but 
provide only muffled, difficult-to-decode signals – like 
listening to a person talk through a thick face mask.
Researchers have recently developed brain 
interfacing circuits on biocompatible materials that 
are soft and flexible. Flexible circuits can conform to 
the brain, reducing scarring and sensor drift, and they 
can be packed with enough sensors to stimulate 
millions of brain cells at once, vastly outperforming 
the scale and timeframe of hard probes.53
When used in neuroscience research, flexible 
BMIs could deepen understanding of neurological 
conditions such as dementia and autism. In the 
clinic, flexible BMIs could provide greater control 
of neuroprosthetics without requiring frequent recalibration.54 Applications of flexible BMIs55,56 
are already undergoing US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)-approved clinical trials, rapidly 
making this technology a reality. In the future, other 
implantable devices, such as cardiac pacemakers, 
could adopt similar types of materials. 
Looking forward, advances in materials 
manufacturing and soft-circuit printing could further 
improve flexible BMI technologies, eventually 
leading to true human-AI interfacing. As with many 
emerging technologies, broad ethical issues must 
be considered prior to the wide implementation of 
these interfaces. Potential health outcomes must 
be balanced with public acceptance and trust. 
Further, given the sensitive nature of brain-derived 
data, privacy and ethical use guidelines must 
establish how these data can be used in the short, 
medium and long term.
 Image: 
Breakthroughs in flexible 
electronics may pave 
the way for neurological 
treatments.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“bright-white, flexible  
electronics”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to flexible neural 
electronics on the 
Strategic Intelligence 
Platform.
People
IndustryEquity
ProsperityPlanetImpact 
fingerprint
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
23Sustainable computing
Designing and implementing 
net-zero-energy data centres.09Olga Fink  
Professor of Intelligent Maintenance and  
Operations Systems, EPFL 
Andrew Maynard  
Professor of Advanced Technology Transitions, 
Arizona State University
While the Earth is indisputably facing a worsening 
environmental crisis, increasing reliance on data 
may not seem to play much of a role. Yet data 
centres, which facilitate Google searches, email, 
the metaverse, AI and myriad other aspects of 
an increasingly data-based society, consume an 
estimated 1% of the electricity produced globally,57 
and this amount will only increase with growing 
demand for data services. While there is no single 
“green data” magic bullet, it is expected that 
the coming decade will boast substantial strides 
toward net-zero-energy data centres as emerging 
technologies are combined and integrated in 
innovative ways – rapidly making the dream of  
net-zero-energy data centres an achievable reality.
First, to address heat-management issues, liquid 
cooling systems are being developed that use water 
or dielectric coolant to dissipate heat, and excess 
heat is being repurposed for applications including 
space heating, water heating and industrial 
processes. For instance, the city of Stockholm is 
implementing projects to harness waste heat from 
data centres to heat homes.58
Second, AI is being used to analyse and optimize 
energy use in real-time, maximizing efficiency 
without compromising performance. DeepMind 
has successfully demonstrated the potential of 
AI-powered energy management, achieving up to a 
40% reduction in energy consumption at Google’s 
data centres.59
Third, the technological infrastructure supporting 
net-zero-energy data centres is becoming more 
modular and demand-based. For instance, 
cloud and edge computing systems allow data 
processing and storage to be spread across 
multiple devices, systems and even locations.60,61 
As an example, Crusoe Energy installs its modular 
data centres at sites where methane flaring 
occurs to enable cloud computing infrastructure 
to be powered by methane gas that would 
otherwise have been released directly into the 
atmosphere. These and other prefabricated units 
can be easily deployed, expanded or relocated, 
allowing data centre operators to optimize energy 
use and adapt to their companies’ changing 
needs. Additional innovations in software and 
hardware include novel computing architectures 
like systems on a chip;62 and optimizations such as energy-proportional computing, in which 
computers use energy proportional to the amount 
of work being performed.63
Achieving net-zero-energy data centres will involve 
innovative approaches to integrating the above 
mentioned approaches with new electricity 
generation, storage and management technologies. 
Given the wave of innovation and investment in 
this area, there is reason to be optimistic about the 
years ahead.
 Image: 
Innovations in heat 
management and energy 
optimization can help  
data centres switch to 
a more environmentally 
friendly future.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“Futuristic data centre 
with nature inside and 
surrounding”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to sustainable 
computing on the Strategic 
Intelligence Platform.Data centres, which 
facilitate Google searches, 
email, the metaverse, AI 
and myriad other aspects 
of an increasingly data-
based society, consume 
an estimated 1% of the 
electricity produced globally, 
making the dream of  
net-zero-energy data centres 
an achievable reality.
People
IndustryEquity
ProsperityPlanetImpact 
fingerprint
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
25AI-facilitated healthcare
New technologies to improve the 
efficiency of healthcare systems.10Daniel E. Hurtado  
Associate Professor, Pontifical Catholic  
University of Chile 
Andrew Maynard  
Professor of Advanced Technology Transitions, 
Arizona State University
Bernard S. Meyerson  
Chief Innovation Officer Emeritus, IBMMine Orlu  
Professor of Pharmaceutics, UCL School  
of Pharmacy, Faculty of Life Sciences, UCL 
Landry Signe  
Senior Fellow, Brookings Institution
The shortcomings of healthcare systems all over 
the world became abundantly and horrifyingly 
clear during the early days of the COVID-19 
pandemic when the sustainable workloads of many 
hospitals were rapidly exceeded. In response, 
government-based and academic teams have 
been created to integrate AI and machine learning 
(ML) into healthcare – both to anticipate impending 
pandemics and to aid in effectively addressing them 
(AI4PEP).64,65 These emergent efforts to enhance 
the efficacy of national and global healthcare 
systems in the face of major health crises, and 
to democratize access to care, are in their initial 
stages but will rapidly scale up by integrating quality 
data into the AI and ML models.66
AI-based technologies could also help to tackle a 
related challenge – the long delays many patients 
experience when attempting to obtain medical 
care through the healthcare system.67 Surprisingly, 
delays often arise not from a lack of capacity 
but due to uneven access to – and resultant 
underutilization of – existing facilities. When applied 
to a curated data set of existing medical facilities, 
AI, ML and data analytics, techniques dramatically 
improved patient access to treatments. Medical 
Confidence, a subsidiary of CloudMD, used such 
technology to optimally align patient treatment 
needs with facility availability, enabling dramatic 
reductions in treatment wait times – in some cases, 
from many months down to only weeks.68 An AI-
based approach to optimizing access to care is 
becoming broadly adopted in Canada and will likely 
be replicated elsewhere.
The impact of AI-based healthcare could be even 
more profound in developing nations, which often 
lack the infrastructure and personnel to deliver 
health services to much of their populations. 
Intelligent tools to assist in the identification, 
monitoring and treatment of new or ongoing 
medical conditions – such as an AI-based system 
to facilitate the reading of radiological data69 – are 
a first step in leveraging AI and ML to enhance 
healthcare capabilities in locations where care is 
currently inadequate. India, for example, has a 
widely dispersed population of over 1.4 billion and has embraced an AI-based approach to enhance 
medical outreach. The Indian government has 
enabled physicians to engage remote communities 
through assistive technologies, with requisite 
privacy safeguards in place.
In addition to protecting data privacy and gathering 
quality data needed to generate these insights, 
other challenges to implementing AI-facilitated 
healthcare approaches include bolstering public 
acceptance and universal adoption of such 
technologies, assuring patient compliance and 
addressing possible national security concerns. 
While these remaining hurdles may be challenging 
to overcome, the risks of inaction are clear.
Moreover, any system that curates personal data 
on the health and welfare of a vast population must 
function within the bounds of a carefully crafted 
legal and ethical framework. Such considerations 
are already the topic of extensive discussion,70 
and legal frameworks are beginning to emerge in 
anticipation of the global application of AI and ML 
to healthcare. AI-based healthcare solutions will 
become ever-more pervasive in the next three to 
five years, to the great benefit of human health – 
particularly for those in underserved populations.
 Image: 
One of the most effective 
ways emerging AI systems 
may impact healthcare is 
through the treatment of 
data and analytics.
Credit: Midjourney and 
Studio Miko. 
Prompt (abbreviated):  
“Abstract population data”.
Read more: 
Discover expert analysis 
related to AI-facilitated 
healthcare on the Strategic 
Intelligence Platform.
People
IndustryEquity
ProsperityPlanetImpact 
fingerprint
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
27Contributors
AcknowledgementsCentre for the Fourth  
Industrial Revolution
Sebastian Buckup
Head, Network and Partnerships 
Greta Keenan
Strategic Impact and Communications Lead
Saemoon Yoon
Lead, Innovator Communities
Strategic Intelligence Platform
James Landale
Head, Content and Partnerships 
John Letzing
Digital Editor 
Stephan Mergenthaler
Head 
Minji Sung
Specialist, Content and Partnerships
Centre for Nature and Climate
Lauren Uppink Calderwood  
Head, Climate StrategyFrontiers
Susan Debad 
Consultant
Frederick Fenter 
Chief Executive Editor
George Thomas 
Public Affairs Manager
Participating journals:
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 
Frontiers in Batteries and Electrochemistry 
Frontiers in Cell Signaling 
Frontiers in Chemical Biology 
Frontiers in Computer Science 
Frontiers in Energy Efficiency 
Frontiers in Fuels 
Frontiers in Lab on a Chip Technologies 
Frontiers in Medical Technology 
Frontiers in Medical Engineering 
Frontiers in Membrane Science and Technology 
Frontiers in Microbiology 
Frontiers in Plant Science 
Frontiers in Systems Biology 
Frontiers in Virtual Reality
Production
Laurence Denmark
Creative Director, Studio Miko 
Sophie Ebbage
Designer, Studio Miko
Martha Howlett
Editor, Studio Miko
George Messer
Designer, Studio Miko
The Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution 
would like to thank the members of the steering 
group who adjudicated the top 10 technologies 
and authored the articles in the report. Additional 
thanks to the other contributing academics – many from Frontiers’ network of scientific 
editors – and business leaders, from the 
Forum’s Innovator Communities, for their impact 
assessment of the top 10 technologies via the 
“impact fingerprint” surveys.World Economic Forum 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
28Steering group 
Co-Chairs
Mariette DiChristina 
Dean and Professor of the Practice in Journalism, 
Boston University College of Communication
Bernard S. Meyerson 
Chief Innovation Officer Emeritus, IBM
Members
Enass Abo-Hamed 
Chief Executive Officer, H2GO Power 
Jeff Carbeck 
Vice-President, Corporate Innovation, Eastman
Rona Chandrawati 
Associate Professor, University of New South Wales 
Liming Chen 
Chair of Greater China, World Economic Forum
Joseph Costantine 
Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, American University of Beirut
P . Murali Doraiswamy 
Professor of Psychiatry and Medicine,  
Duke University School of Medicine 
Sarah E. Fawcett 
Senior Lecturer, University of Cape Town 
Olga Fink 
Professor of Intelligent Maintenance and  
Operations Systems, EPFL
Javier García Martínez 
Professor of Chemistry and Director, Molecular 
Nanotechnology Lab, University of Alicante
Daniel E. Hurtado 
Associate Professor, Pontifical Catholic University 
of Chile
Wendy Ju 
Associate Professor, Cornell Tech 
Jeremy Jurgens 
Managing Director, World Economic Forum
Corinna Lathan 
Co-Founder and former Chief Executive Officer, 
AnthroTronix 
Lee Sang-Yup 
Senior Vice-President for Research, Korea 
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Geoffrey Ling 
Professor of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Hospital Andrew Maynard 
Professor of Advanced Technology Transitions, 
Arizona State University
Ruth Morgan 
Vice-Dean (Interdisciplinary Entrepreneurship), 
Faculty of Engineering Sciences, University College 
London (UCL)
Elizabeth O’Day 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Olaris
Mine Orlu 
Professor of Pharmaceutics, UCL School of 
Pharmacy, Faculty of Life Sciences, UCL
Carlo Ratti 
Director, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT) Senseable City Lab
Barry Shoop 
Dean of Engineering, Albert Nerken School 
of Engineering, The Cooper Union for the 
Advancement of Science and Engineering
Landry Signe 
Senior Fellow, Brookings Institution
Wilfried Weber 
Scientific Director, Leibniz Institute for New Materials
Angela Ruohao Wu 
Associate Professor, Hong Kong University  
of Science and Technology 
Xu Xun 
Director, BGI Research
Academics 
Mark Billinghurst 
Professor, University of South Australia
Cristina Botella 
Full Professor, Universitat Jaume I
Yohann Boutté 
Research Director, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique (CNRS)
Kim Bullock 
Clinical Professor, Stanford 
Mouloud Denai 
Senior Lecturer, University of Hertfordshire
Anirban Dutta 
Associate Professor in Biomedical Engineering, 
University of Lincoln
Issam El Naqa 
Chair and Senior Member, Moffitt Cancer Center
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
29Sanket Goel 
Professor, BITS Pilani, Hyderabad Campus
Chenghong Gu 
Reader, University of Bath
Thomas Hartung 
Professor, Johns Hopkins University
Paul Hyman 
Professor of Biology, Ashland University
Xiuliang Jin 
Professor, Institute of Crop Sciences,  
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Kumaran Kannaiyan 
Associate Professor, Guangdong Technion Israel 
Institute of Technology
Farah Kidwai-Khan 
Senior Data Scientist, Yale
George Kouvas 
Chief Technology Officer, Wyss Center for Bio and 
Neuroengineering
Oliver Kröcher 
Head of the Bioenergy and Catalysis Laboratory, 
Paul Scherrer Institut
Eungje Lee 
Staff Scientist, Argonne National Laboratory
Yongliang Qiao 
Research Fellow, The University of Adelaide
Deborah Richards 
Professor, Macquarie University
Stefano Rinaldi 
Associate Professor, Università degli  
Studi di Brescia
Dwayne Roach 
Assistant Professor, San Diego State University
Philippe Roux 
Professor, Université de Montréal
Yasir Saleem 
Lecturer in Computer Science,  
Aberystwyth University
Michael Short 
Professor, Teesside University
Lei Shu 
Professor, Nanjing Agricultural University
Mel Slater 
Distinguished Investigator, University of Barcelona
Lena Smirnova 
Assistant Professor, Johns Hopkins UniversityDaobilige Su 
Associate Professor, China Agricultural University
Vincent Quoc-Huy Trinh 
Clinical Assistant Professor, Université de Montréal
Julien Weissenberg 
Founder, Deep Tech Experts 
Alicja Wegrzyn 
Professor, University of Gdansk
Yaolin Xu 
Researcher, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für 
Materialien und Energie (HZB)
Guo Zhao 
Associate Professor, Nanjing Agricultural University
Innovator Community members
Marissa Ruby Brock 
Senior Director, Policy and Government Affairs, 
Sourcemap 
Jamie Burrows
Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Vertical Future 
Isaac Castro
Co-Founder and Co-Chief Executive Officer, Emerge 
Jim Flatt
Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer,  
Brightseed Bio 
Adam Hildreth
Founder, Crisp 
Igor Jablokov
Chief Executive Officer, Pryon 
Bu Gi Kim
Chief Executive Officer, Standard Energy 
Sky Kurtz
Founder and Chief Executive Officer,  
Pure Harvest Smart Farms 
Ben Lamm
Chief Executive Officer, Colossal Biosciences 
Kevin Lang
Chief Executive Officer, Agerpoint 
Maarten Michielssens
Founder and Chief Executive Officer, EnergyVision
Tsuyoshi Stuart Oda
Founder and Chief Executive Officer,  
Alesca Life Technologies 
Joe Paluska
Chief Marketing Officer, One Concern 
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
30Joris Poort
Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Rescale
Felix Reinshagen  
Chief Executive Officer, NavVis 
Umesh Sachdev
Chief Executive Officer, Uniphore 
Jimmy Samartzis
Chief Executive Officer, LanzaJet
Ritwik Sinha
Strategy Analyst, Our Next Energy (ONE)Didier Toubia  
Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Aleph Farms 
Raj Verma
Chief Executive Officer, SingleStore
Ellie Wood
Chief of Staff to the Chief Executive Officer, 
LanzaTech 
Josef Zankowicz
Vice-President Corporate Development, Canvass AI
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
31Endnotes
1. Kong, Long, Cheng Tang, Hong-Jie Peng, Jia-Qu Huang and Qiang Zhang, “Advanced Energy Materials for Flexible Batteries 
in Energy Storage: A Review”, SmartMat, vol. 1, issue 1, 2020, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/smm2.1007.
2. Infiniti Research, Global Flexible Battery Market 2023, 2023, https://www.reportlinker.com/p06419157/Global-Flexible-
Battery-Market.html.
3. Grand View Research, Flexible Battery Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report By Application, Regional Outlook, 
Competitive Strategies, And Segment Forecasts, 2019 To 2025, n.d., https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-
analysis/flexible-battery-market.
4. Gozalo-Brizuela, Roberto and Eduardo Garrido-Merchan, “ChatGPT Is Not All You Need. A State Of The Art Review  
of Large Generative AI Models”, Cornell University arXiv, 2023, https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04655.
5. Anstine, Dylan M. and Olexander Isayev, “Generative Models as an Emerging Paradigm in the Chemical Sciences”, Journal of 
the American Chemical Society, vol. 145, issue 16, 2023, pp. 8736-8750, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.2c13467.
6. McClelland, Ryan, Generative Design and Digital Manufacturing: Using AI and Robots to Build Lightweight Instruments, 
Current Developments in Lens Design and Optical Engineering, 2022,https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20220012523/
downloads/McClelland-Generative%20Design%20SPIE%202022.pdf.
7. Taylor, Ross, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom et al., Galactica: A Large Language Model for Science, 
arXiv (preprint), 2022, https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09085.
8. Takagi, Yu and Shinji Nishimoto, High-Resolution Image Reconstruction with Latent Diffusion Models from Human Brain Activity, 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, https://sites.google.com/view/stablediffusion-with-brain/.
9. Baidoo-Anu, David and Leticia Owusu Ansah “Education in the Era of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI): Understanding 
the Potential Benefits of ChatGPT in Promoting Teaching and Learning”, Social Science Research Network, 2023,  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4337484.
10. Noy, Shakked and Whitney Zhang, Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Effects of Generative Artificial Intelligence, 
Social Science Research Network, 2023,https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4375283.
11. Lee, D.S.; D.W. Fahey, A. Skowron, M.R. Allen et al., “The Contribution of Global Aviation to Anthropogenic Climate Forcing 
for 2000 to 2018”, Atmospheric Environment, vol. 244, no. 117834, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117834.
12. Mission Possible Partnership (MPP), Making Net-Zero Aviation Possible: An Industry-Backed, 1.5°C-Aligned Transition 
Strategy, 2022, https://missionpossiblepartnership.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/Making-Net-Zero-Aviation-possible.pdf.
13. Ibid.
14. International Air Transport Association, 2022 SAF Production Increases 200% - More Incentives Needed to Reach  
Net Zero, [Press release], 7 December 2022, https://www.iata.org/en/pressroom/2022-releases/2022-12-07-01/.
15. World Economic Forum, Clean Skies for Tomorrow: Sustainable Aviation Fuels as a Pathway to Net-Zero Aviation, 2020, 
https://www.weforum.org/reports/clean-skies-for-tomorrow-sustainable-aviation-fuels-as-a-pathway-to-net-zero-
aviation?DAG=3&gclid=Cj0KCQjw2v-gBhC1ARIsAOQdKY1WXKkH-k6HwvUOJBSC2T-BAwxSFL8BKxzUYD-
HyZBEOV9xcICFHowaArThEALw_wcB.
16. The American Society of Testing and Materials, Standard Specification for Aviation Turbine Fuel Containing Synthesized 
Hydrocarbons, 2022, https://www.astm.org/d7566-21.html.
17. Kim, Hye Mi, Tong Un Chae, So Young Choi, Won Jun Kim and Sang Yup Lee, “Engineering of an Oleaginous Bacterium 
for the Production of Fatty Acids and Fuels”, Nature Chemical Biology, vol. 15, 2019, pp. 721-729,  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-019-0295-5.
18. Cruz-Morales, Pablo, Kevin Yin, Alexander Landera, John Cort and Robert Young et al., “Biosynthesis of Polycyclopropanated 
High Energy Biofuels”, Joule, vol. 6, 2022, pp. 1590-1605, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2022.05.011.
19. Looi, Mun-Keat, “The Human Microbiome: Everything You Need to Know About the 39 Trillion Microbes That Call Our 
Bodies Home”, BBC Science Focus, 14 July 2020, https://www.sciencefocus.com/the-human-body/human-microbiome/.
20. Peixoto, Raquel, Derek Harkins and Karen Nelson, “Advances in Microbiome Research for Animal Health”,  
Annual Review of Animal Biosciences, vol. 9, 2021, pp. 289-311.
21. Trivedi, Pankaj, Jan Leach, Susannah Tringe, Tongmin Sa and Brajesh Singh, “Plant–Microbiome Interactions:  
From Community Assembly to Plant Health”, Nature Reviews Microbiology, vol. 18, 2020, pp. 607–621.
22. Bloomberg, Eligo Presents Preclinical Data Demonstrating for the First Time that Gut Microbiome Modulation via Delivery 
of CRISPR Nuclease [Press release] , 15 June 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2021-06-15/eligo-
presents-preclinical-data-demonstrating-for-the-first-time-that-gut-microbiome-modulation-via-delivery-of-crispr-nuclease.
23. Eligo Biosciences, Eligo Bioscience Receives FDA Orphan Drug Designation [Press release], 11 October 2022, 
https://eligo.bio/eb003-odd-rdp-fda/.
24. Strathdee, Steffanie, Graham Hatful, Vivek Mutalik and Robert Schooley, “Phage Therapy: From Biological Mechanisms 
to Future Directions”, Cell, vol. 186, no. 1, 2023, pp. 17-31.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
3225. Twenge, Jean and W. Keith Campbell, “Associations Between Screen Time and Lower Psychological Well-Being Among 
Children and Adolescents: Evidence from a Population-Based Study”, Science Direct, vol. 12, 2018,  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211335518301827.
26. “Screen Time Can Be a Lifeline…” Family Zone, n.d.,  
https://www.familyzone.com/anz/families/blog/screen-time-can-be-a-lifeline.
27. Becerra, Xavier, Andrea Palm, Rebecca Haffajee, January Contreras et al., “Addressing the Nation’s Behavioral Health Crisis: 
An HHS Roadmap to Integrate Behavioral Health”, Health Affairs Forefront, 2 December 2022, https://www.healthaffairs.
org/content/forefront/addressing-nations-behavioral-health-crisis-hhs-roadmap-integrate-behavioral-health.
28. Weiner, Stacy, “A Growing Psychiatrist Shortage and an Enormous Demand for Mental Health Services”,  
American Association of Medical Colleges, 9 August 2022, https://www.aamc.org/news-insights/growing-psychiatrist-
shortage-enormous-demand-mental-health-services.
29. Barsky, Troy, Jodi Daniel, Stacie Heller and Allison Kwon, “President Biden Signs End-of-Year Legislation Including 
Telehealth, Medicare & Medicaid, Mental Health, Pandemic Preparedness, and Other Health Care Provisions”,  
Health Law, 25 January 2023, https://www.cmhealthlaw.com/2023/01/president-biden-signs-end-of-year-legislation-
including-telehealth-medicare-medicaid-mental-health-pandemic-preparedness-and-other-health-care-provisions/.
30. Schrempf, Matthias, Julian Petzold, Morten Petersen, Tim Arndt et al., “A Randomised Pilot Trial of Virtual Reality-Based 
Relaxation for Enhancement of Perioperative Well-Being, Mood and Quality of Life”, Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 12067, 2022.
31. Rao, Vikram, Kristin Sellers, Deanna Wallace, Morgan Lee et al., “Direct Electrical Stimulation of Lateral Orbitofrontal 
Cortex Acutely Improves Mood in Individuals with Symptoms of Depression” Current Biology, vol. 28, issue 4, 2018,  
pp. 3893-3902, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.026.
32. “World must sustainably produce 70 percent more food by mid-century – UN report”, United Nations News, 2013,  
https://news.un.org/en/story/2013/12/456912.
33. Zhang, Chongyuan, Afef Marzougui and Sindhuja Sankaran, “High-resolution satellite imagery applications in crop 
phenotyping: An overview”, Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 175, no. 105584, 2020,  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0168169920309194.
34. Olsen, Daniel; Anderson, James. “Review on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Remote Sensors, Imagery Processing, and  
Their Applications in Agriculture”, Agronomy Journal, vol. 113, issue 2, 2021, pp. 971-992, https://acsess.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/agj2.20595.
35. “Precision Agriculture: Sensors Drive Agricultural Efficiency”, Sensors & Systems, 21 January 2013,  
https://sensorsandsystems.com/precision-agriculture-sensors-drive-agricultural-efficiency/.
36. Marx, Vivien, “Method of the Year: Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics”, Nature Methods, vol. 18, no. 1, 2021, pp. 9-14.
37. Moses, Lambda and Lior Pachter, “Museum of Spatial Transcriptomics”, Nature, vol. 19, no. 5, 2022, pp. 534-546.
38. Williams, Cameron, Hyun Jae Lee, Takahiro Asatsuma, Roser Vento-Tormo and Ashraful Haque, “An Introduction to 
Spatial Transcriptomics for Biomedical Research”, Genome Medicine, vol. 14, 2022, pp.  1-18.
39. Poo, Mu-Ming, “Transcriptome, Connectome and Neuromodulation of the Primate Brain”, Cell, vol. 185, 2022, pp. 2636-2639.
40. Elmentaite, Rasa; Cecelia Domínguez Conde, Lu Yang and Sarah Teichmann, “Single-Cell Atlases: Shared and  
Tissue-Specific Cell Types across Human Organs”, Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 23, no. 7,  2022, pp.  395-410.
41. Yang, Pengyi and Patrick Tam, “Mouse Organogenesis Atlas at Single-Cell Resolution”, Cell, vol. 185, 2022, pp. 1625-1627.
42. Pour, Maayan and Itai Yanai, “New Adventures in Spatial Transcriptomics”, Developmental Cell, vol. 57, 2022, pp. 1209-1210.
43. Koch, Linda, “A Panoramic View of Mouse Organogenesis”, Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 23, no. 7, 2022, pp. 393-393.
44. Lust, Katharina, Ashley Maynar, Tomás Gomes, Jonas Simon Fleck et al., “Single-Cell Analyses of Axolotl Telencephalon 
Organization, Neurogenesis, and Regeneration”, Science, vol. 377, issue 6610, 2022, p. 377, https://www.science.org/
doi/10.1126/science.abp9262. 
45. Kathe, Claudia, Michael Skinnider, Thomas Hutson, Nicola Regazzi et al., “The neurons that restore walking after 
paralysis”, Nature, vol. 611, no. 7963, 2022, pp. 540-547. 
46. Zhang, Jiajun, Jianhua Yin, Yang Heng, Ken Xie et al., “Spatiotemporal Omics–Refining the Landscape of Precision 
Medicine”, Life Medicine, vol. 1, issue 2, 2022, pp. 84-102, https://doi.org/10.1093/lifemedi/lnac053.
47. Park, Jiwoon, Jonathan Foox, Tyler Hether, David Danko et al., “Systemic Tissue and Cellular Disruption from  
SARS-CoV-2 Infection Revealed in COVID-19 Autopsies and Spatial Omics Tissue Maps”, bioRxiv, 2021,  
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.08.434433.   
48. “Spatial Omics Solutions Market Worth $587.2 Million by 2030 - Exclusive Report by InsightAce Analytic”, InsightAce 
Analytic, 10 August 2022, https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/spatial-omics-solutions-market-worth-587-2-
million-by-2030---exclusive-report-by-insightace-analytic-301603401.html. 
49. Grand View Research, Spatial OMICS Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report by Technology (Transcriptomics, 
Genomics, Proteomics), by Product, by Workflow, by Sample Type, by End Use, by Region, and Segment Forecasts, 
2021–2028, n.d., https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/spatial-omics-market.
50. Marx, Vivien, “Method of the Year: Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics”, Nature Methods, vol. 18, no. 1, 2021, pp. 9-14.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
3351. Qin, Kefan, Wei Ma, Changzheng Hu, Guobin Shuai and Wiebo Hu, “A Wireless Universal Brain-Machine Interface (BMI) 
System for Epileptic Diseases”, 2022 5th International Conference on Circuits, Systems and Simulation, 2022, pp.  
156-160, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCSS55260.2022.9802412. 
52. Vattendahl Vidal, Gabriel, Matthew Rynes, Zachary Kelliher and Shikha Goodwin, “Review of Brain-Machine Interfaces 
Used in Neural Prosthetics with New Perspective on Somatosensory Feedback through Method of Signal Breakdown”, 
Scientifica (Cairo), 2016, https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/8956432. 
53. Tang, Xin, Hao Shen, Siyan Zhao, Na Li, Jia Liu, “Flexible Brain–Computer Interfaces”, Nature Electronics, vol. 6, 2023, 
pp. 109-118.
54. Zhao, Siyuan, Xin Tang, Weiwen Tian, Sebastian Partarrieu et al., “Tracking neural activity from the same cells during the entire 
adult life of mice”, Nature Neuroscience, vol. 26, 2023, pp. 696-710, https://www.nature.com/articles/s41593-023-01267-x. 
55. BioSpace, WISE Completes Enrolment in Pivotal Clinical Study of Novel Neuro-Electrodes for Brain Monitoring [Press 
release], 23 January 2020, https://www.biospace.com/article/wise-completes-enrolment-in-pivotal-clinical-study-of-
novel-neuro-electrodes-for-brain-monitoring/. 
56. Holt, Kris, “FDA Clears Synchron’s Brain-Computer Interface Device for Human Trials”, Engadget, 28 July 2021,  
https://www.engadget.com/fda-brain-computer-interface-clinical-trial-synchron-stentrode-190232289.html?guccounter=1. 
57. Rooks, Timothy, “Data Centers Keep Energy Use Steady Despite Big Growth”, Deutsche Welle, 24 January 2022, 
https://www.dw.com/en/data-centers-energy-consumption-steady-despite-big-growth-because-of-increasing-
efficiency/a-60444548.
58. Biba, Erin, “The city where the internet warms people’s homes”, BBC, 13 October 2017,  
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20171013-where-data-centres-store-info---and-heat-homes.
59. Evans, Richard and Jim Gao, “DeepMind AI Reduces Google Data Centre Cooling Bill by 40%”, Deep Mind, 20 July 2016, 
https://www.deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-ai-reduces-google-data-centre-cooling-bill-by-40.
60. Katal, Avita, Susheela Dahiya and Tanupriya Choudhury, “Energy Efficiency in Cloud Computing Data Centers: A Survey 
on Software Technologies”, Cluster Computing, 2022, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10586-022-03713-0.
61. Flower, David, “How Machine Learning and Edge Computing Power Sustainability”, Forbes, 18 March 2022,  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2022/03/18/how-machine-learning-and-edge-computing-power-sustain
ability/?sh=78055e4e5fab.
62. Simpson, Stephen, “Systems on a Chip Comes to the Data Center”, McKinsey Digital, 8 March 2022,  
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/tech-forward/systems-on-a-chip-comes-to-the-data-center .
63. Barroso, Luiz and Urs Hölzle, “The Case for Energy-Proportional Computing”, Computer, vol. 40, no. 12, 2007,  
pp. 33-37, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2962080_The_Case_for_Energy-Proportional_Computing.
64. Malik, Yashpal Singh, Shubhankar Sircar, Sudipta Bhat, Mohd Ikram Ansari et al., “How Artificial Intelligence May Help the 
Covid-19 Pandemic: Pitfalls and Lessons for the Future”, Medical Virology, vol. 31, no. 5, 2021, pp. 1-11.
65. “Preparing for a Future Pandemic with Artificial Intelligence”, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 21 September 2021, 
https://www.pnnl.gov/news-media/preparing-future-pandemic-artificial-intelligence.
66. Mahajan, Abhishek, Tanvi Vaidya, Anurag Gupta, Swapnil Rane and Sudeep Gupta, “Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare i 
n Developing Nations”, Cancer Research, Statistics, and Treatment, vol. 2, no. 2, 2019, pp. 182-189.
67. “Comparing Nations on Timeliness and Coordination of Health Care”, The Commonwealth Fund, 4 October 2021,  
https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/surveys/2021/oct/comparing-nations-timeliness-and-coordination-health-care.
68. Johnson, Angela, “Reducing the wait for care: Case study”, HRR Reporter, 9 December 2019, https://www.hrreporter.
com/focus-areas/compensation-and-benefits/reducing-the-wait-for-care-case-study/323823.
69. Mahajan, Abhishek, Tanvi Vaidya, Anurag Gupta, Swapnil Rane and Sudeep Gupta, “Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare  
in Developing Nations”, Cancer Research, Statistics, and Treatment, vol. 2, no. 2, 2019, pp. 182-189.
70. Federation of European Academies of Medicine, International Sharing of Personal Health Data for Research, 2021,  
https://www.feam.eu/wp-content/uploads/International-Health-Data-Transfer_2021_web.pdf.
Top 10 Emerging Technologies of 2023
34World Economic Forum
91–93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland  
Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum, 
committed to improving  
the state of the world, is the 
International Organization for 
Public-Private Cooperation.
 
The Forum engages the 
foremost political, business  
and other leaders of society  
to shape global, regional 
and industry agendas.