Insight Report
Operating Models 
for the Future  
of Consumption
January 2018A Report by the World Economic Forum’s System Initiative on  
Shaping the Future of Consumption prepared in collaboration with Accenture
Contents
3. Preface 
4. Executive Summary 
6. Why Do Organizations Need to Change? 
8. What Will Operating Models Look Like in the Future? 
19. How Can Society Achieve a Brighter Future? 
24.  Conclusion 
25. Appendices 
27. Research & Acknowledgements
29. Endnotes 
World Economic Forum®
 
© 2018 – All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or
Transmitted in any form or by any means, including 
Photocopying and recording, or by any information Storage 
and retrieval system.
REF 3105173
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionPreface
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is transforming entire systems of production, 
distribution and consumption, providing opportunities for value creation through 
game-changing technologies and challenges to ensure inclusivity. To ensure 
success in the midst of digital disruption, there will be a premium placed on 
innovation, a willingness of organizations to disrupt themselves, a quest for active 
collaboration and a commitment to advance inclusive growth strategies.
In the context of this seismic change, the World Economic Forum System Initiative 
on Shaping the Future of Consumption envisions a future where technology is firmly 
embedded in people’s lives, making their daily experiences simpler, highly personal 
and more enjoyable as well as imbued with trust and harmonious with nature.  
It takes a holistic view by addressing the question, “How can technological 
disruption drive enhanced models of consumption with sustainable benefits for 
business and society?”  
Introduced in June 2016, this System Initiative features a portfolio of projects 
designed to create forward-looking scenarios with corresponding roadmaps as 
the consumption landscape rapidly evolves. Its inaugural project,  Shaping the 
Future of Retail,  deepened the understanding of how the world of retail, the largest 
private employer in the world, will continue to evolve over the next decade, fuelled 
by hyperconnected consumers and a multitude of technology-enabled business 
models. In 2017, the Operating Models of the Future project explored how 
organizations must transform to support innovative business models and integrate 
disruptive technologies and data analytics into the DNA of their businesses to 
realize benefits across the enterprise. 
The Forum is pleased to present this insight report developed in partnership with 
Accenture to global leaders as they manage disruption on multiple fronts. Extensive 
qualitative and quantitative research was conducted to understand the current 
environment and develop a vision of the future. The future-oriented insights along 
with the commensurate challenges in the report can be applied to a broad range 
of businesses that are preparing to navigate the uncharted waters of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution. It is important to highlight that the transformation of operating 
models will impact employees by altering roles, requiring new skills and changing 
how work is done. To mitigate employment risk, the private and public sectors have 
the opportunity to leverage the perspectives in this report and proactively advance 
workforce transition strategies to meet the demands of the digital age while also 
ensuring economic equality.
It is only through collective effort that a pathway to realizing a prosperous future 
with substantial benefits for both business and society can gain momentum. On 
behalf of the Forum’s Future of Consumption System Initiative team, our profound 
appreciation and gratitude are extended to all parties that played a key role in the 
development of this insight report: the Accenture team led by Oliver Wright, the 
project Steering Committee and all participants who contributed via interviews and 
workshops. 
Sarita Nayyar,  
Chief Operating Officer,  
World Economic 
Forum LLC
Zara Ingilizian,  
Head of Future of 
Consumption System 
Initiative, Member 
of the Executive 
Committee, World 
Economic Forum LLC4
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionIntroduction
The Fourth Industrial Revolution will accelerate the 
introduction of game-changing technologies that will 
further empower consumers and enable once-impossible 
business models. The ability to respond to changing 
needs of the marketplace will be key to future success 
and implies material changes to the way companies 
operate. Businesses must re-invent themselves by 
establishing an agile and enduring enterprise in a highly 
disruptive world while also ensuring inclusive societies. 
This insight report presents a perspective on the future 
of consumer-centric enterprises, identifies essential 
characteristics that companies of the digital age must 
embrace and integrate into their operating models, and 
illuminates the significant societal challenges that are 
underway and the commensurate call to action. 
The Imperative: Making the Case for Change
As explored in the 2017 Shaping the Future of Retail  
insight report, over the next decade consumers will have 
more choices and control than ever before. They will be 
presented with a growing array of products and services 
customized for their specific preferences. Over this 
period, new innovative approaches to meet consumer 
expectations will proliferate, particularly with eCommerce 
penetration growing from 10% to more than 40%. As 
these shifts catapult the importance of how data is utilized 
and shared to new heights, consumers’ fears regarding 
privacy, security and transparency will only elevate.  
Despite these consumer and market opportunities, 
evidence suggests that business transformation is 
not occurring at the pace and scale required. 41% of 
Consumer Industry companies in the S&P 500 have 
either been acquired or gone out of business since 
2000. Moreover, half of current S&P 500 companies are 
predicted to face the same fate within the next ten years. 
To survive disruption and thrive in the future, companies 
must move to the modern and find their purpose. This 
unequivocally demands a comprehensive change in each 
component of the operating model including how it is 
governed, how it deploys processes and technologies, 
how it organizes its people to get work done, as well 
as the ecosystems it creates. The reinvention must not 
only deliver efficiencies for the business but also be 
orchestrated with a profound sense of responsibility for all 
stakeholders of the enterprise - consumers, the workforce, 
shareholders, communities and the environment.   The Outlook: Consumer-Centric Enterprises  
of the Future
Consumer landscapes will change more in the next 10 years 
than they have in the past 40. Wholesale disruption will 
redefine every element of business. Industry boundaries will 
fade as technology and consumer-centric industries fuse. 
To deliver optimal consumer experiences, companies will 
be compelled to leverage extensive ecosystems, doing far 
less in-house than ever before. Co-opetition will multiply as 
companies that were previously competitors work together 
to deliver value that they cannot deliver on their own. At 
the extreme, small groups of individuals will create virtual 
organizations to orchestrate full ecosystems that design, 
make, market and distribute products and services.   
At its core, each digitally-enabled company will be 
“consumer-obsessed” with a relentless focus on creating 
growth through holistic consumer value, delivered across the 
lifecycle of consumer engagement. As consumer needs and 
demands shift, so will the company by developing and scaling 
new opportunities that disrupt and ultimately cannibalize 
existing businesses. 
Large organizations will have fewer layers and use contingent 
workers as market needs change. Small management teams 
at the center will use data to direct the activities of front line 
employees more precisely than ever before. Productivity 
improvements will be created through the concurrent arrival 
and scaling of two massive disruptions: the comprehensive 
automation of repetitive tasks across the front and back 
office; and the use of analytics to drive decision-making down 
to the front line. 
The workforce will transform to consist of internal employees, 
freelancers and even consumers. Continuous learning will 
be the norm, with workers seeking ongoing enhancement 
of “soft” skills and “hard” skills. With a focus on self-directed 
project work, workers will take unprecedented accountability 
for their own careers and personal development. Executive Summary
5
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionThe Transformation: Essential Characteristics  
of Future Operating Models
Incremental changes will not suffice. To support the 
aforementioned view of the future, each component of 
the operating model must embrace seven transformative 
characteristics that will establish new mindsets and 
structures, ensuring economic viability in a disrupted world. 
 –Mindset:  A profound shift in culture and ways of working
1. Human:  Purpose is deeply embedded in the 
organization of the future to empower employees 
to deliver consumer outcomes, while also being 
authentically engaging and partnering with employees 
to foster intrapreneurial, life-long learning
2. Living:  Businesses operate in a highly agile 
organization that continually re-shapes and adapts by 
using self-organising teams, prioritizing progress over 
perfection and acting at a vastly accelerated pace 
3. Enhanced:  The use of technology and analytics 
transforms each function and, ultimately each worker’s 
role
 –Structure:  Fundamental changes in the shape and 
execution
4. Ecosystem:  A network of relationships enables each 
participating company to accomplish far more than 
it can alone; ecosystems form to deliver consumer 
solutions, capabilities, or data sharing where each 
company has a clear understanding of its core 
capabilities and relies on others for the rest 
5. Modular:  Businesses within the business monetize 
internal capabilities by establishing a “plug-and-play” 
structure to efficiently accelerate the development 
and integration of new business ideas, start-ups, 
acquisitions and outside capabilities
6. Liquid:  Companies source and manage their 
workforces by accessing the best talent at the right 
time to meet demand through employment models 
that include permanent employees, company affiliates, 
partners, publicly available talent and consumers
 –Economic Viability:  Responsibility to generate lasting 
performance and sustainable impact
7. Enduring: The holistic application of the other six 
characteristics and focus on achieving sustainable, 
profitable growth that is aligned to societal values and 
establishing lasting trust and transparencyThe Implications: Addressing Societal 
Challenges to Achieve a Brighter Future
The reinvention of future operating models will require 
significant effort, impacting all of society. Implications range 
from the ability of workers to engage in digitally-enabled 
organizations, security to protect individuals in fluid labor 
markets and measures to both democratize and protect 
information. Public-private partnerships across these key 
areas are vital to minimize risks and optimize the potential for 
value creation. 
 –Worker Enablement in the Digital Age
The technology-driven reinvention of the operating model 
will create new digital skills requirements for jobs, in 
addition to rapidly impacting existing roles. Today, 54% of 
the activities currently performed by Consumer Packaged 
Goods (CPG) workers and 40% of those performed by 
Retail workers could potentially be automated. Therefore, 
the workforce must be supported to master new 
technological, analytical and interpersonal skills, while 
embracing new ways of working to be effectively prepared 
for jobs in the digital age.
 –Flexicurity
As consumer-centric industries transition to more 
flexible operating models, workers that engage in 
non-traditional career paths deserve access to similar 
safety nets historically afforded them in more traditional 
employment models. New contracts for employment, with 
transparency and transferable benefits, will be needed 
to support worker flexibility. Governments, industry 
and individuals must collaborate to establish these new 
contracts, which will be vital to promote a liquid workforce, 
foster radical reskilling, support job mobility and ultimately 
ensure worker welfare. 
 –Consumer Data Principles
The success of consumer-centric industries will be 
predicated on the exponentially increasing use of consumer 
data. Recent surveys find that 57% of consumers are 
concerned with how businesses use their information, with 
41% of consumers feeling they need greater transparency 
into companies to have confidence in their products/
services. To build long term trust, the industry must carefully 
protect the privacy and security of consumers’ data and be 
transparent about how they are utilizing it. 
In conclusion, the decade ahead will fuel the acceleration 
of technology-driven change which can lead to the creation 
of significant value for consumers, workers and the 
enterprise. As operating models transform to enable these 
new opportunities for growth, there is the potential for both 
positive and negative impacts on society. To ensure an 
inclusive society, key stakeholders must work together in 
focused collaboration to proactively manage this disruption to 
achieve a brighter future. 6
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionFor decades, the largest CPG and retail companies 
dominated by exploiting economies of scale across a 
linear value chain. Big-format shops offered wide ranges 
of products at competitive prices and – as long as those 
products delivered on expectations – consumer loyalty was 
assured.
Owning and selling big, global brands no longer guarantees 
survival. This trend is further challenging the long-standing 
symbiotic relationship between CPG and retail. Manufacturers 
are selling directly to the consumer. Innovation has emerged 
from unexpected sources, with small CPG companies 
generating more than half of industry growth in many 
categories. Extrapolated across the industry, analysis 
indicates that half of future value will come from new sources 
of growth.1 Retailers and e-commerce players alike are 
aggressively pursuing private labels. Five of the largest 
e-commerce players who dominate the global e-retail market 
present the most compelling examples of value creation 
through ecosystems. 
41% Percentage of S&P 500 Consumer Industry 
companies that have gone bankrupt, been 
acquired or ceased to exist since 2000.2
50% Percentage of today’s S&P 500 that are 
expected to face the same fate within the  
next ten years.3
49% Percentage of global e-commerce market 
held by the top five largest retailers.4
53% Percentage of US food and beverage  
industry growth captured by small companies  
in 2016 compared to 2% growth captured  
by incumbents.5
Companies must shift their strategies and make the related 
adjustments in how they operate, or risk obsolescence. 
For incumbents, those existing companies currently at the 
forefront, this reality will compel them to undertake the largest 
changes in operating models since the Second World War. For consumer-centric industries, this Fourth Industrial 
Revolution has three driving forces:
1. Disruptive Technologies 
The impact of technology is exponentially greater because 
individual innovations increasingly work together. These 
“combinatorial technologies” have enabled new entrants 
to offer novel methods of consumer engagement that 
create, deliver and capture value. Barriers to entry have 
fallen as visibility and brand presence no longer depend 
on expensive television advertising. Combinatorial 
technologies are also transforming company operations. 
Last year’s Future of Retail  insight report outlined the 
impact of eight technologies on the value chain of 
consumer industries. In the past 12 months, this impact 
has shifted and deepened at a faster rate than previously 
anticipated. For example, consider how 3D printing 
companies have truncated R&D, scale production 
and distribution. Historically, rapid prototyping was 
the core use-case in 3D printing; today, technological 
advancements have reframed these organizations as 
active scale manufacturers (that is, those that can actively, 
in an agile way, scale operations up or down to meet 
demand). These changes have long-reaching impacts, 
including the potential repatriation of manufacturing as 
companies bring production closer to end consumers. 
(For more on these changes, see Appendix A.)
2. Proliferating New Business Models
Rapid growth in the number of new business models 
makes it much easier for companies to micro-target 
offerings that meet precise consumer needs. Instead of 
employing a discrete business model, industry players will 
operate flexibly across a portfolio of models. No company 
will be able to do everything in-house. Firms that were 
previously standalone will need to become “ecosystem 
enablers”, where success is measured, in part, by 
the overall impacts the system produces. This ability 
will be dynamic, with the most successful companies 
continuously evolving what they do while making 
conscious choices about how they generate economic 
value.
3. Empowered Consumers 
Ever-connected consumers have higher expectations 
than ever before as combinatorial technology and 
new business models provide many ways for them to 
discover, purchase and engage. Not only are consumers 
dictating exactly what they want, but they are embedding 
themselves at all stages of the value chain – acting as 
developers, marketers, salespeople and even employees. 
This is a fundamental change in the consumer value 
equation, amplifying historic drivers – cost, choice and 
convenience – and adding both control and end-to-end 
experience. Why Do Organizations Need to Change?
Disruptive technologies, new business models and the empowered consumer are accelerating industry change.  
Companies must transform to survive.
7
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionIn many cases, a tailored experience outweighs cost 
considerations. Analysis of Google search data6 shows 
that consumers are increasingly seeking the “best” versus 
This means that companies are no longer just selling products 
to consumers, but are instead anticipating and meeting 
consumers’ needs as part of deeper, more enduring, and in 
many cases increasingly interactive, relationships. This implies 
a shift in focus from maximizing market share and revenue to 
creating material consumer value.
Consider, for example, that a food company may move from 
simply selling food items to participating in a healthy-eating 
ecosystem. This network might provide a range of offerings, 
including healthy packaged foods, personalized nutrition 
subscriptions, and physical and emotional coaching. In this 
scenario, rather than maximizing individual profits, participants 
will strive to maximize the value of the entire system, while 
realizing sustainable value for each stakeholder – consumers, 
partners and self. 
Search for
“Best Make-up”
Search for
“Best Paper Towels”Search for
“Cheap Make-up”
Search for
“Cheap Paper Towels”1 Oct 2010
1 Oct 20101 Feb 2007
1 Feb 200725
2550
5075
75100
100Average
Average1Jun 2014
1Jun 2014Figure 1: Consumer Search Analysis
To ensure continued success, firms will need to craft an 
operating model that recognizes these significant changes in 
profit pools —the sources and distribution of profit within the 
industry— across consumer-centric industries, and design 
both organizations and ecosystems to unlock opportunities.
Profit pools of the future will focus on the consumer. 
Companies will need to seek revenue opportunities that 
increase consumer value and balance cost savings with 
consumer outcomes.the “cheapest”; this trend holds true for both high-touch 
products, such as make-up, as well as utilitarian products 
such as paper towels. 
8
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionCharacteristics of Future  
Operating Models
Operating models of the future – tightly focused on 
consumers – will be built on characteristics that define the 
mindset, structure and economic viability of the company. 
Figure 2: The Three Core Tenets of Future Operating Models What Will Operating Models Look Like in  
the Future? 
Operating models of consumer-centric businesses must embody three core principles, enabled by seven essential 
characteristics, to transform for the future and ensure their continued existence in a disruptive world. 
Cultural shift in 
approach and 
ways of workingFundamental 
changes in shape 
and executionHuman,
Living,
EnhancedEcosystem, 
Modular,
Liquid
Responsibility to generate 
lasting performance and 
sustainable impactECONOMIC 
VIABILITY
Enduring
company and direct their own skill development through 
continuous learning. By creating clear decision-making criteria 
and managing outcomes, rather than activities, employees at 
all levels will be “masters of their own fate”. These workers will 
be able to act as “intrapreneurs”, who use an entrepreneurial 
mindset within a larger organization.
We have a saying at Andela – ‘YOYO Learning – 
You Own Your Own Learning’. The people who 
do this are the ones who will succeed.
Jeremy Johnson – Chief Executive Officer of AndelaMindset  outlines the substantial cultural change that needs 
to occur in an organization’s vision, objectives and ways 
of working. Structure  describes the integration within 
ecosystems and the internal platform that facilitates liquid 
talent and capabilities. Economic viability  combines lasting 
and renewable business impact with the licence to operate 
through sustainable practices. 
Mindset: The Cultural Shift in Approach  
and Ways of Working
Human
In the future, companies will be more human – driven by an 
organizational purpose and focused on consumer-centric 
outcomes. In a world where technology is embedded into all 
consumer interactions, this purpose will connect employees 
to consumers and consumers to the company or brand. 
Authenticity and personalization will be woven throughout 
the culture, as well as the consumer experience. Purposeful 
organizations will drive personal accountability, with individual 
employees able to define their unique contribution to the 
company’s purpose, while also maximizing their potential. 
Employees will now be able to chart their own course at a MINDSET
STRUCTURE9
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionCase Study: Picnic – Empowerment Through Purpose
Picnic is a Dutch online grocery organization that uses a 
“milkman” model, where the same “runners” deliver to the 
same homes at regular times. Customers trust and enjoy 
seeing their favourite runners, who are selected for both their 
people skills and their problem-solving abilities. Importantly, 
and unusually, individual runners are able to determine the 
best way to solve customer service issues. If a product is 
missing, the runner can decide to purchase it in a local outlet 
or deliver it at another time. The company also shares its 
data with runners so that runners can proactively address 
situations. Most people who started shopping at Picnic 
two years ago are loyal customers, making an average of 
40 purchases per year. With very low customer acquisition 
costs – 75% of customers join Picnic via word-of-mouth – 
and the efficiency of the last mile (that is, delivering locally, all 
the way to the consumer’s doorstep), every customer adds 
considerably to the contribution margin of the operation. 
Human organizations will, thus, be characterized by a 
fundamental change in how leaders lead. Critical leadership 
skills will include the ability to focus on mobilizing the right 
resources, regardless of tenure, and an understanding of 
how best to act on the opportunities that will truly make a 
difference. This is a shift that P&G Europe President Gary 
Coombe calls “servant leadership”. To support this objective, 
P&G leaders employ “upward” mentorship by looking to junior 
members for insight into areas such as technology and social 
media.  
 
Future leaders in consumer-centric industries will need to 
embrace this mentality and augment their approach into 
“student leadership” – seeking mentors and learning from 
non-traditional disruptors to maintain a high level of external 
awareness. Leaders must adopt a new continuous-learning 
mindset that contrasts with the “command and control” 
behaviours that persist in many organizations today. 
Living
A hallmark of operating models of the future will be their 
agility. Only 15% of today’s industry leaders believe their 
operating models can respond sufficiently quickly to 
changing market conditions, while more than 62% of 
digital disruptors believe their operating models can do so.7 
Living organizations will continually evaluate the external 
environment and nimbly adjust to changing conditions. They 
will be self-organizing, and their work will be project-based, 
with new initiatives forming organically. Teams will act with 
resolve and resiliency, prioritizing progress over perfection – a 
“corporate garage” model enabling rapid experimentation 
and the development of “minimum viable products” that they 
test quickly, learning from successes and failures. Teams will 
also respond to changing market dynamics and innovate 
at a rapid pace, having the will to experiment and the ability 
to do so. The end goal will be value creation across all 
stakeholders.Case Study: Instacart – Rapid Experimentation
Instacart serves a large network of physical locations, carrying 
out millions of shopping occurrences. This allows for rapid, 
statistically significant experimentation in real-life situations. 
The San Francisco-based grocery delivery company runs 
hundreds of experiments at any point in time, ranging from 
two to four weeks in length. Chief Business Officer Nilam 
Ganenthiran describes Instacart’s “culture of experimentation” 
as one where individuals must be comfortable with fast failure 
as only 10–20% of experiments succeed. 
Case Study: Graze – Unleashing Agility
London-based Graze is a natural-food company that delivers 
directly to the consumer, sells to retailers in the UK and US, 
and has a subscription model business with personalized, 
monthly snack boxes. Explicit objectives, well-defined 
guardrail metrics (which help to guard against potential 
negative outcomes by covering additional dimensions on 
which the primary objective is not necessary focused) and 
independent initiatives enable unusual agility through a series 
of sprints.  Just seven weeks after entering Sainsbury’s, Graze 
created an alternate full line of products with simultaneous 
packaging development, manufacturing and marketing. Once 
in market, teams took a test-and-learn approach, making 
immediate adjustments based on signals within days of 
products being placed on shelf. 
Enhanced
Operating models of the future will see the creation of both 
turbocharged capabilities and new ways of working through 
technological innovation, continually enhanced by data that 
improves decisions and resulting activities. Digitalization will 
permeate every functional area; intelligent automation and 
artificial intelligence will be incorporated into operations to 
increase efficiency and accuracy, freeing human workers to 
drive market growth and efficiency.
Recent press articles have focused on a dystopian scenario 
sometimes called the “Terminator” future, one in which robots 
replace humans. Research and in market examples, however, 
suggest an “Iron Man” future, with technology instead 
enhancing human abilities, creating “super workers” capable 
of delivering twice as much as non-augmented peers.8
This will involve a significant shift in mindset and the ongoing 
discovery and use of technology. Technology will no longer 
be defined as the provenance of IT. Instead, it will be the 
responsibility of each business unit and individual employee 
to understand the new opportunities that technology unlocks, 
and integrate those technologies into their day-to-day 
activities – an ability that only 33% of current companies claim 
to have.9 At the same time, the role of IT will expand, with a 
focus on identifying and exercising disruptive technologies, 
to unlock combinatorial technology that opens new strategic 
options. As a result, each worker across the organization 
will embrace technology and every company will become a 
technology-powered company. 10
Operating Models for the Future of Consumption27% Percentage of processes digitalized by 
incumbent consumer industry companies.
50% Percentage of processes digitalized by 
consumer industry disruptors.10
Case Study: Voodoo Manufacturing – The Power of 
Combinatorial Technology
To borrow a software development term, the 
future of manufacturing is agile, not waterfall.
Jonathan Schwartz  – Co-founder of Voodoo Manufacturing
Voodoo Manufacturing, the New York-based 3D printing 
start-up, uses combinatorial technology to continually 
improve production efficiency on a manufacturing floor that 
seamlessly melds human technicians, robots, 3D printers, AI 
and other technology. In-house design software manages 
and coordinates the process from order to shipping. Machine 
learning increasingly streamlines processes. Voodoo is adding 
robotics to automate tasks currently performed by technical 
staff (for instance, robots “harvest” completed printing plates 
and put clean ones in the printer). In the future, they believe 
robots will clean parts, ensure quality and automate packing 
and shipping, while human technical support troubleshoots 
and continually enhances the effectiveness of the line.
Next to technology adoption, a data mindset and 
analytical capabilities will be the most significant factors 
in determining future success: these are the building blocks 
for enabling technology and understanding customers and 
consumers. While few companies dispute the importance of 
data, most have not yet gone through the dramatic change 
necessary to become truly data-driven organizations. Future 
operating models will view and incorporate data as DNA, the 
fundamental ingredients for the entire organization, governed 
by a top-down mandate and actively supported by every 
employee. Serving the core, consumer-obsessed purpose 
of the company will require significant increases in individual 
consumer insight. As the pace of change accelerates, 
dramatically expanded and continually renewed data becomes 
vital to survival. Data will be the vital factor enabling leaders and 
individual employees to make the best decisions at the optimal 
speed. 
Imperatives for the data-driven organization include:
 –Top-down mandate, with leadership themselves actively 
using data, driving its improvement and extending data as 
DNA to every member and structural component of the 
organization
 –Exponential insights aided by data science and a real-time 
data system across every function and role within the company
 –Centrally facilitated and seamless flow of data across 
business models, functions and project teams –Obvious, rapid decisions based on a single version of the 
truth, driven by undisputed facts; time to action is reduced 
by a factor of ten.
Case Study: StitchFix – Enhancing Style with Data 
Science
This San Francisco-based on-demand styling service and 
apparel subscription company marries predictive data science 
with human skills to create a virtuous cycle that achieves and 
sustains consumer relevance by unifying sales, marketing, 
R&D and supply chain. The 80+ data scientists link every 
aspect of operations. Algorithms guide human stylists to 
the clothing choices that clients are most likely to enjoy and 
purchase. Simultaneously, data science informs the supply 
chain, determining the logistical flow that optimizes delivery to 
the client’s door. Finally, live feedback from clients generates 
a vast amount of consumer preference data by clothing 
characteristic, which the company uses to predictively design 
its private label line.11
Case Study: Farmers Business Network – Unlocking 
Agribusiness Value through Data Sharing
Farmers Business Network (FBN) is a US-based analytics and 
commerce platform that crowd-sources data from farmers to 
help farmers make better decisions. Participants contribute 
their individual data, which is consolidated into a significant 
and powerful base of knowledge. This collaboration allows 
all participants to benefit from the shared insights across 
the platform. FBN farmers generate 9% higher corn yields 
and 11% higher soy bean yields than average, illustrating 
how good data and information enable this community to 
make better decisions to increase output. Additionally, FBN 
offers the first national e-commerce buying system for farm 
inputs, premiums for speciality crops, and access to credit 
programmes. While some farmers are at first hesitant to share 
information with competitors, FBN has expanded primarily 
through word-of-mouth as farmers realize the benefits to be 
had in terms of profits of the digital farm economy and gain 
strength in numbers during big agriculture’s era of mega-
consolidation.
Structure: The Fundamental Change in Shape 
and Execution within the Operating Model
Ecosystem
Operating models of the future will be transformed 
structurally, bringing ecosystems to the core of companies’ 
strategies. Extending far beyond the existing supplier/
customer value chain relationships, an ecosystem is the 
network of cross-industry players who work together to 
define, build and execute market-creating customer and 
consumer solutions. An ecosystem is defined by the depth 
and breadth of potential collaboration among a set of 
players: each can deliver a piece of the consumer solution, or 
contribute a necessary capability. 11
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionThe power of the ecosystem lies in the fact that no single 
player need own or operate all components of the solution, 
and the value the ecosystem generates is larger than 
the combined value each of the players could contribute 
individually. Company strategies will assess which capabilities 
and assets are truly “core” and vital to control – either 
because they are vital to the business value proposition 
or because there are winning economies of scale/scope. 
Ecosystems accelerate the development of new markets as 
potential solutions and capabilities can be quickly exploited 
as an idea is born. This requires executive management and 
strategists to collaborate to acquire these capabilities and 
have an agile, innovative mindset.
Companies will need to create ways to engage with start-
up and accelerator communities by hosting competitions, 
setting up collaborative working spaces and creating large 
open-sourced innovation networks, often involving up to a 
thousand different companies. Today, internet players have 
some of the most sophisticated models, a complex web of 
capabilities and relationships representing what ecosystems 
will look like in the coming years. Case Study: Alibaba – Ecosystems Expanding Market 
and Industry Reach
Alibaba, the Chinese internet giant, manages a complex web 
of business models, capabilities and other investments. This 
ecosystem allows them to access capabilities from best-in-
class providers, expand new businesses quickly and extend 
into adjacent industries:12
 –E-commerce Platforms: Alibaba manages many business-
to-consumer and business-to-business marketplaces 
(e.g. Taobao, Tmall and Alibaba.com), online-to-offline 
businesses (e.g. Koubei) and investments in other 
marketplaces (e.g. Lazada)
 –Capabilities: In support of its diverse businesses, 
Alibaba has built and invested in alternative payments 
(e.g. Ant Financial, Paytm), logistics (e.g. Cai Niao, Didi, 
Lyft), marketing analysis (e.g. Alimama) and supporting 
technology (e.g. Alibaba Cloud)
 –Extra-Industry Ventures: The company is building its 
consumer health offerings through AliHealth.Figure 3: Components of the Data-Driven Organization  
Data Engagement
Basic: Sporadic usage of data  
Good:  Standalone  
analytics team
Better: Analytics are 
embedded in each function 
Best: Every individual actively 
and directly uses data, from 
leadership on downData Sources
Basic:  No data
Good:  Internal quantitative data
Better:  Diversity and depth 
of real-time internal/external 
quantitative and qualitative data
Best: Ecosystem of partners 
with two-way data sourcing
Decision-Making
Basic:  Asymmetric decisions 
loop; no “right” answer
Good:  Clear enterprise financial 
targets; tactical targets by team  
Better:  Teams independently 
empowered to drive targets
Best: Individual empowerment – 
clear guardrails allow employees 
to make rapid and independent 
decisionsData Exchange*
Basic:  Individuals hold data
Good: Data shared within 
functions
Better: Cross-functional 
data sharing
Best: Cross-business 
model data sharing
* For example, the corporate centre takes in data from across business models and facilitates the continuous flow of data between them – thus, what 
one business model learns about a consumer is immediately known to and affects the activities of other business models touching that consumer.Best
Better
BasicGood
Representative 
DisruptorRepresentative 
Incumbent12
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionCore Commerce
 Mobile Media & Entertainment
 Local Services
	
Payment & Financial Services
Logistics
Cloud Computing
Marketing Services & Data Management Platform
Data
DrivenData
Refuel
Case Study: Royal Philips – Creating an Ecosystem to 
Deliver Consumer Solutions
As digitalization reshapes healthcare, Philips is adapting 
from a transactional, product-focused technology company 
to a solutions provider with customer needs at its centre. 
Established in 2013 and now 20 people strong, Philips 
HealthWorks runs 90-day programmes that have worked 
with over 50 start-ups this past year to help build, test, de-risk 
and expand new businesses in health technology. For each 
cohort, Philips looks externally to select seven companies out 
of around 400 to provide mentoring, access to the expertise 
in the Philips network, and connections to help grow these 
small businesses. Each cohort is selected based on a singular 
theme (e.g. cardiology or neonatal care) and matched to be 
non-competitive, allowing them to work easily together on 
solutions. Companies are chosen without commitment to 
future ownership.
To extend the ecosystem, Philips started the HealthTech 
Ventures investment organization in 2017 to formalize 
partnerships with select companies in the HealthWorks 
programmes and other early-stage companies. From seed 
funding, indirect investing in fund-to-funds, and minority 
stakes in select companies, Philips exchanges capital and 
expertise for access to products and exposure to companies 
in the direct fund that are agile, flexible and have specific skill 
sets not currently found in the larger Philips organization. 
The four-person team starts by assessing 2,000 companies, 
then vetting 300 of those to identify 12–15 companies 
in which to invest. By investing in innovation, creating an 
ecosystem within the healthcare space, and learning from 
small companies, this global health-technology player is 
strengthening its impact in the hospital and the home.Currently, companies’ reluctance to share data for fear 
of losing competitive advantage is often a key inhibitor to 
ecosystem engagement. This attitude severely constrains the 
value that players can gain from a more open approach. Best 
practices for open data sharing include:
 –Define data-sharing agreements that recognize 
comparative advantage, and optimize total ecosystem 
value, while protecting individual interests
 –Outline data governance for appropriate use, including 
compliance with local regulations
 –Build integrated technology platforms that support data 
interoperability, as well as protect data security.
Ecosystems or Platforms?
Platforms are one type of ecosystem. While every company 
will be part of an ecosystem, some may have only peripheral 
involvement in platforms. Research has identified three types 
of platforms:
1. Marketplace Platforms  hosting buyers and sellers
2. Internal Company Platforms  that support multiple business 
models
3. Business-to-Business Platforms  on which ecosystem 
partners trade capabilities (e.g. borrowing or monetizing 
another’s existing capabilities and assets, such as 
manufacturing or regulatory management)
While conventional definitions focus on the first type of 
platform, all three will play significant roles in the future. What 
differentiates platforms from the types of exchanges seen in 
the past is that platforms are enabled by technology and data, 
and based on network effects that enhance the value of the 
platform as the number of participants increases.Figure 4: The Alibaba Ecosystem13
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionModular
To meet market demands in the future, organizations will 
employ modular capabilities to support various business 
models. “Modular” is a characteristic that is defined as the 
ability to develop and deploy a business capability that can be 
utilized in a flexible, repeatable way across multiple business 
models with minimal re-design. This is a deliberate, “plug-
and-play” approach that is distinctly different from previous 
eras in business that were focused on driving efficiencies 
through linear process design for a single business use case 
(e.g. business process re-engineering). Modular capabilities 
enable the organization to adapt quickly to market changes 
and more easily pivot their strategies and business models. 
Case Study: GLAMSQUAD – Building A Modular Business
GLAMSQUAD is a New York-based multi-business model 
platform supporting beauty services and products. The 
company’s portfolio of business models includes: on-demand 
beauty services, retail partnerships to provide salon services 
in stores, beauty services for fashion designers’ runway 
shows, sales of partners’ products and beauty tools, and 
their own private label products leveraging alliances with 
established manufacturers. GLAMSQUAD leverages a level of 
trust established with the consumer across business models 
to create an end-to-end consumer experience.
A modular design is also a key building block and facilitator 
of ecosystem strategies, tapping into the $1.5T potential 
value from increased collaboration between companies.13 
Modular capabilities can be used to support external partners 
or provide core capabilities to deliver an ecosystem-driven 
consumer solution.Case Study: Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy – Multi-brand 
Luxury Platform
Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy (LVMH), the French luxury goods 
company, has launched 24 Sèvres, an eCommerce luxury 
platform that carries not only LVMH’s in-house brands, but 
also those of other prestigious fashion houses. Brands on 
the platform leverage the platform’s overall features, including 
chatbots, on-demand stylists, stunning graphics, efficient 
checkout and fast delivery. In addition, the company gathers 
and analyses cross-brand consumer insights across the 
platform.14
A lean corporate centre will orchestrate the entire entity, 
managing multiple, autonomous business models. The 
application of a “plug-and-play” approach allows for internal 
usage across business models as well as external usage by 
ecosystem partners, who will seamlessly integrate and utilize 
the organization’s assets and capabilities. Consumer insights, 
new innovations and technologies will flow from each of these 
businesses back into the corporate center to be leveraged for 
new value creation as relevant.
Liquid
Liquid organizations unlock value through ecosystems by 
seamlessly accessing the best talent to meet demand and 
respond to changing market conditions, whether inside or 
outside traditional company boundaries. Through a liquid 
workforce, companies will source and manage talent via 
internal and external employment models.
Figure 5: The Five Employment Models of the Future
Core Workforce 
(Permanent Employees)
Organization’s talent filling adaptive 
roles as incremental gigs beyond 
day-to-day work and meeting 
needs across multiple teams, 
enabling scalability and flexibilityPublicly Available Talent
Specialized expert talent sourced and/or 
managed via service provider
Company Affiliates
External workers who have 
strong associations and 
existing understanding 
and relationships (e.g. 
organization’s alumni with 
known capabilities and 
relationships)
Partners
Talent provided by outsourcing/
managed service providersConsumers
Crowdsourced talent to solve 
problems, get ideas, gather 
information/data, complete 
“on-the-ground” tasksCore Workforce
(Permanent 
Employees) 
Company Affiliates
Partners
Publicly Available  
Talent
Consumers14
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionCase Study: Quri — Using Consumer as Employees
Quri is an American retail intelligence company that employs 
consumers to collect data, which provides real-time 
visibility into products and promotion performance in-store. 
Used by roughly half of the top 25 CPG companies, Quri 
allows companies to convert consumers into employees 
by completing “on-the-ground” tasks. For example, Quri 
collected promotion compliance and execution data for a 
beer and wine manufacturer, which then created an incentive 
programme that increased display execution performance by 
8% and annual revenue by $45 million.15
Case Study: Pluralsight – Expanding with New 
Employment Models
Pluralsight is a Utah-based training platform that creates 
and delivers educational content for software developers, 
IT administrators and creative professionals. All of the 
courses are taught by experts in their respective fields. To 
maximize scalability and “fresh” content, Pluralsight uses new 
employment models with more than 800 core employees, 
5,000 affiliated freelance “mentors” and several thousand 
experts who help author the 6,000-plus courses offered. 
Pluralsight has thoughtfully designed its employment structure 
to keep pace with technology and enable its customers to do 
the same. 
While only 16% of the consumer industries’ workforce is 
currently comprised of freelancers, the CPG industry is the 
most active user of the full range of employment models of 
any industry globally.16 Some 79% of executives believe a 
liquid workforce provides a competitive advantage and 81% 
believe freelancers will be a seamless part of the workforce 
within three years.17 Historically, human resources (HR) has 
owned traditional employment while contractors have typically 
fallen under the purview of procurement. This separation can 
limit an organization’s ability to effectively source and engage 
the best talent. By contrast, Upwork CEO Stephane Kasriel 
advocates “total talent management” – merging procurement 
and HR activities to oversee a fluid base of external workers. 
To exploit the full potential of liquid workforce strategies, the 
industry should take a leadership role in defining how best to 
support the movement to a more fluid way of working that 
supports the best outcomes for society.
Economic Viability: The Responsibility to 
Generate Lasting Performance and Sustainable 
Impact
Enduring
Operating models of the future will be defined by their ability to 
subsist in a disrupted world. Enduring organizations will establish 
the necessary mindsets (human, living, enhanced) and structures 
(ecosystem, modular, liquid) to ensure that the company has 
long-term economic viability. Companies will drive financial 
value through sustainable practices and by enabling trust and 
transparency, as well as by reflecting stakeholder values. Stakeholders will consider the company’s corporate citizenship 
when determining whether to do business with the enterprise – 
as consumers, employees or partners. Enduring companies will 
develop strong relationships with their stakeholders through the 
development of mutual trust and by displaying behaviour that is 
consistent with the expectations of society and stakeholders. 
Succeeding in an increasingly difficult environment takes 
a combination of skill and will: companies must have the 
capabilities for a wholesale transformation, as well as the 
desire and willingness to execute it. The challenges of survival 
are clear. In the 1920s, the average lifespan of an S&P 500 
company was 67 years; today it is 15.18 This underscores 
the need for companies to design their operating models in a 
flexible manner to allow for sustained business performance 
and ensure long-term economic viability. 
The Path Forward
Organizing to Drive Operating Model Transformation
Activating the three core principles, and the seven essential 
characteristics, will require significant changes to enterprises’ 
organization, processes and ways of working. Today, 80% 
of executives believe that company goals will increasingly 
be completed in collaborative teams, with less emphasis on 
functional roles.19 In the future, organizations will move from 
traditional functional groups to end-to-end integration. This will 
lead to a blending of skills across jobs (e.g. supply chain experts 
will also need to understand marketing, as these activities 
directly link to one another, and procurement experts will need to 
collaborate with HR teams to efficiently manage non-traditional 
talent). Instead of being organized by role, cross-functional 
teams will work together to achieve holistic outcomes. 
Case Study: Hepsiburada – Organizing to be a Truly 
Consumer-Centric
Hepsiburada, the Turkish e-commerce leader, is organizing its 
business around defined consumer “personae” (e.g. “Working 
Mothers”, “Techies”, “Sports Man”), bringing them physically 
to life within the working environment. The new persona 
teams focus on providing an end-to-end experience across 
traditional functional roles, tailoring each aspect of consumer 
engagement to the specific persona.
As companies move from single to multiple business models, 
go-to-market functions will need to change accordingly – from 
standardized central functions to flexible functional support 
organized around, and simultaneously managing, each 
business model’s distinct objectives, activities and metrics. 
Functions will become porous, with a rapidly expanding 
ecosystem changing players’ roles, responsibilities and 
activities, and with companies borrowing or lending entire 
capabilities to other partners. “Co-boting”, the collaboration 
between people and machines, will be commonplace in the 
automation of simple tasks and more so as artificial intelligence 
amplifies truly human capabilities. Technology will help create 
the functions of the future by integrating and redesigning 
activities to drive efficiency and create greater consumer value. 15
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionCase Study: Carbon – Technology Blurs Functional Lines
Carbon, the San Francisco-based 3D technology 
manufacturer, enables design-to-manufacturing at 
astonishing speed. With ongoing prototyping and iterative, 
parallel processes, Carbon reduces design, prototyping and 
manufacturing processes that usually take 8–12 months to 
a matter of days. The company sees opportunities to merge 
manufacturing and distribution and is in discussions with 
shipping carriers to house 3D printers in their distribution 
centres, which would enable carriers to receive orders, print 
products and ship directly. As traditional “back-office” functions change focus by linking 
into the extended ecosystem, they will achieve scale and 
flexibility with partnerships providing on-demand capabilities. 
The nature of these functions will need to shift from 
supporting services to actively driving business outcomes. 
HR will manage both a liquid workforce and fluid processes. 
Finance will evolve from a compiler of historic financials to 
a true strategic partner by exploiting predictive analytics. 
Procurement will enable liquid capabilities, working with both 
project teams and central functional areas to identify, secure 
and integrate external capabilities. 
Figure 6: Operating Model Framework of the Future
Governance
refers to the organizational 
accountabilities, the critical 
decisions that need to be taken, 
and the forum in which they will 
be decided
What’s Changed?  
Agile; decentralized;  
accelerated  
decision-making
 
Technology
outlines the underpinning 
technology, digital and analytical 
requirements to support 
business capabilities and 
processes
What’s Changed?  
Continually renewing disruption; 
technology awareness across 
the companyProcess
defines how work will get done 
within the organization and 
between partners, outlining the 
key activity steps, roles and 
responsibilities
What’s Changed?  
Integrated,  
outcome-focused;  
ongoing innovation
 
Culture
reflects the core values  
of the organization and the 
behaviours they drive
What’s Changed?  
Bias towards action; 
incorporation of new 
stakeholders’/society’s values 
Organization  
& Workforce 
includes the structure of  
the organization and its 
approach to accessing  
and managing talent
What’s Changed?  
Flatter, liquid and  
intrapreneurial;  
converging teams
 
Metrics & Incentives 
addresses the KPIs measured 
by the company, their usage, 
and their ability to drive 
behaviours
What’s Changed?  
Forward-focused;  
real-time data  
and analysisIntent 
provides direction on what the company is trying to achieve,  
and what will enable it to be successful in its chosen strategy and business model
What’s Changed?  
Purposeful exploration of ecosystems to unlock the power of intra- and  
cross-industry external networks across new business models, capabilities and data16
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionOperating Model Design
The sheer complexity of operations now requires a more 
refined operating model execution framework. That is, 
as companies look to make changes, a more detailed 
framework is needed to account for the key components in 
the executional complexity of today’s operating models. 
Developing an operating model for the future will involve every 
operating model building block – but not in the same way for 
each company. While these operating model components 
are common to all companies, one thing remains certain in 
consumer-centric industries: incumbents must become more 
like disruptors in their approach to operating models. 
The differentiating features of each component exhibited 
by disruptors can be adopted by incumbents. While 
understandably more difficult, given the significant 
transformation required and sea-change implications to 
governance, culture, and metrics and incentives, it can be 
done, and the impact will be extremely powerful.Learning from Disruptors
Much is made of the “advantages” of disruptors. They benefit 
naturally from different market expectations and performance 
metrics, as well as a lack of legacy (historic) operations. 
This has allowed them to develop a series of “disruptive 
behaviours” from which incumbents can learn:
 –Risk-embracing behaviour
 –Intense focus on chosen core competencies while 
divesting the rest
 –Data as DNA at every level of the organization 
 –Willingness to disrupt market and self
 –Viewing failure as a learning opportunity
 –Persistently seeking the one “yes” (rather than being 
derailed by the one “no”).
Figure 7: Operating Model Design – Incumbents versus Disruptors
Component Traditional Operating Models Disruptive Operating Models
GovernanceTop-down decision-making, guided  
by experienceData-driven decisions, individual empowerment 
with clear decision guardrails all the way to the 
front line
ProcessFunctional groups, managing dependent but 
separate activitiesFunctions merge to deliver outcomes, enabled 
by combinatorial technology
 
Organization  
& WorkforceDefined as an independent, individual company; 
maximizing company financial valuePorous organization with plug-and-play platform 
supporting self-organizing project teams focused 
on driving outcomes; multiple internal/external 
employment models
 
TechnologyEnterprise IT, with focus on standardization; 
shadow IT addresses specific business needsTechnology roadmap developed with 
intentionality continually renews – scan and 
integrate new technologies, creating business 
opportunities; AI and automation simplify 
activities
 
CultureTradition and excellence; valuing experience and 
historical knowledge; focus on preserving and 
building on legacy; value of leaders is determined 
by size of team and book of business managed“Disrupt thyself” and learn by doing; risk tolerant; 
prizes individual intrapreneurship; student 
leadership; value of leaders is determined by 
impact to the business
Metrics & 
IncentivesPremium placed on stability, longevity, 
predictable growth and profitability; 
standardization across businessesConsumer value and forward-looking metrics; 
different metrics for different business models17
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionFuture Jobs and Skills
New Jobs Within Future Operating Models
As the market refocuses on living services and the delivery of 
holistic consumer experiences, individual roles will change. 
In 2016, OECD analysis showed that 65% of children would 
work in jobs that do not yet exist,20 underscoring the need for 
a highly adaptive workforce, career-long continuous learning 
and educational reform. In consumer-centric industries, roles 
such as retail sales associates or manufacturing machine 
operators will be redefined around human activities – for 
instance, providing a creative, personalized in-store consumer 
experience or applying complex problem-solving to optimize 
robotic production. 
Case Study: Amazon – The Evolution of Warehouse Jobs
Seattle-based online retail giant Amazon has been at the 
forefront of automation, with more than 100,000 robots 
working in its facilities around the world. In addition to 
efficiency gains, the company intends to have machines 
perform monotonous or physically strenuous tasks, refocusing 
humans on more engaging roles such as managing a group 
of robots and troubleshooting issues. To aid this transition, the 
company provides courses in robot operation. Making workers 
more efficient through the use of technology ultimately boosts 
employee productivity, generating almost $400,000 in revenue 
per employee in 2016 – nearly twice that of leading traditional 
retailers.21
New Skills for Employment
Future operating models will require a broad range of new 
roles, significantly altering the composition and structure of 
the workforce. The nature of the skills in these new roles 
will be significantly more multidisciplinary. This will open 
up a broad range of career paths for workers. Rather than 
following linear career paths, workers will increasingly move 
fluidly across organizations. 
Historically, companies targeted individuals with specific 
experience and knowledge. In recent years, the balance has 
tipped to demand for “hard skills” such as coding or data 
science. Looking ahead to an era of continuous change and 
flexible careers, human skills will be an increasingly important 
complement. For a company to remain viable, it must enable 
its employees to build both soft and hard skills. 
Case Study: Digital Skills Create Job Opportunities
In 2017, a global study exploring the current and future 
landscape of jobs conducted by Boston-based labour market 
analytics company Burning Glass Technologies found that 
82% of jobs that pay a living wage and do not require a 
bachelor’s degree, currently also known as middle-skill jobs, 
require digital skills. The share of these jobs is increasing 
rapidly, providing improved economic opportunities for 
workers, commanding 17% higher salaries than non-digital 
roles.22Figure 8: ‘Soft’ and ‘Hard’ Skills for the Future 
Growth
• Adaptability
• Resilience
• Global Mindset
• Learning AgilityDigital
• Digital Fluency
• Interaction & 
Connectedness
• Digital DesignInterpersonal & 
Human Intelligence
• Collaboration
• Communication
• Creativity
• Critical Thinking
• Empathy
Data
• Data Literacy
• Data Science
• Insights to ActionSoft Skills Hard Skills
Between now and 2020, the World Economic Forum 
anticipates growth in demand for cognitive abilities (52%), 
systems skills (42%) and complex problem-solving skills 
(40%).23 Looking ahead, organizations will need to seek out 
individuals with strengths in learning agility and adaptability. 
With the half-life of a learned skill at five years24 and the half-
life of a developer’s skillset at two years,25 the accelerating 
pace of change requires constant reskilling, putting a 
premium on individuals who drive their own development 
paths and embrace continual learning, as well as a premium 
on organizations that encourage this type of learning.
Incumbent companies face an additional challenge, with 
workforces designed for a different market. These workers 
frequently lack the critical skills for the digital age – as many as 
20% of adults in developed countries are considered “digitally 
illiterate”.26 For example, in a recent digital skills analysis, New 
York-based education technology company General Assembly 
found that “digital-native marketers” (e.g.-marketers working at 
companies that were founded during the digital age) outscored 
“corporate marketers” (e.g. marketers at traditional companies, 
CPG brand managers) by 72%. The distinctions were even 
more profound when examining the very top performers who 
were clustered in digital-native companies.27 Because of the 
speed with which skill needs will change, organizations must 
continually assess the digital skills of employees and address 
development gaps. This will require HR to fundamentally 
rethink the role of the hiring function within the company. 18
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionFigure 9: Example – Digital Skills Assessment within Marketing Function
In addition to sourcing talent across several internal and 
external workforces, companies need to consider reskilling 
rather than expensive recruitment of in-demand talent. 
General Assembly found that “radical reskilling” is 63% more 
cost-effective than recruiting external software engineers.28 
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and virtual learning 
are tools that scale and flex quickly to enable radical reskilling 
and meet changing market conditions. 
It is neither through ‘cheap labour’ nor through attracting 
a narrow set of the ‘best and the brightest’ and winning 
a ‘war for talent’ that countries can optimize their long-
term human capital potential, but through building 
up deep, diverse and resilient talent pools and skills 
ecosystems in their economies that allow for inclusive 
participation in good-quality, skilled jobs by the largest 
possible number of people. 
World Economic Forum  – Human Capital Report, 201776%
38%Digital-Native Marketers
at younger companies born in the 
digital age (e.g. Email Marketing 
Manager at VC-backed start-up)
44%Corporate Marketers
at long-standing corporations 
that are transforming in the digital 
age (e.g. Brand Manager at CPG) 
Non-Marketers
work in functions outside 
Marketing (e.g. Sales, IT, HR, 
Legal, Creative)
Traditional
HiringRadical  
Reskilling>$20,000
$5,000 – 
$10,000Figure 10: Cost Reduction of Radical Reskilling vs 
Traditional Hiring for Software Engineers over Three 
Years
19
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionIn the future, successful companies will be consumer-
obsessed, and their operating models will reflect this. The 
scale and scope of the transformation required to operate in 
this new way are significant, and will have a commensurate 
impact on workers and consumers. For workers, the 
change implies navigating a more fluid career journey rather 
than following a linear career progression. For consumers, 
the change involves becoming much more proactive in 
understanding how providers are collecting, using and 
protecting their information. 
The implications are widespread and complicated. Public-
private partnerships can help businesses and consumers 
alike by minimizing risks and realizing the potential benefits of 
the changes. Such partnerships must include a diverse array 
of stakeholders beyond industry and government, including 
individuals and academic institutions, and they must enable 
disruptors such as education technology companies and 
freelance platforms. These partnerships need to focus on 
three areas: 
 –Worker Enablement in the Digital Age : Helping 
workers acquire and apply new skills 
 –Flexicurity:  Supporting fluid career flexibility with 
transparency, social safety nets and transferable benefits
 –Consumer Data Principles: Managing and protecting 
consumer data while unlocking valueWorker Enablement in the  
Digital Age
Technology can provide value across every aspect of the 
industry. Artificial intelligence alone has the potential to double 
annual economic growth rates and boost labour productivity 
by up to 40 percent by 2035.29 As this change progresses, 
the need for employees to work alongside technologies will 
grow increasingly urgent as many employees lack the digital 
skills required to undertake this journey. 
This is a massive challenge – consumer industries employ 
19% of the workforce across the OECD.30 As transformations 
of operating models of consumer-centric industries creates 
new opportunities for workers, it may also cause widespread 
displacement for millions of people. 
In this US alone, consumer industries employ 30.5 million 
people.31 Analysis indicates that 54% of the activities currently 
performed by CPG workers and 40% of those performed 
by retail workers can, in fact, be automated (for details 
on methodology, see Appendix B).32 If these tasks were 
automated today and no new roles were found for workers, this 
displacement could effectively double the US unemployment 
rate.33 Workers are feeling this pressure directly as well: 43% 
of individuals believe that their job is likely to be automated in 
the next 10 years.34 Similar patterns are expected to play out in 
other markets.How Can Society Achieve a Brighter Future?
The advances in digital technologies and shifts in consumer behaviour have profound potential impacts on society.  
Public-private cooperation can accelerate positive changes, enable inclusive innovation, and mitigate adverse effects  
– if purposeful efforts begin now.
2050Time
2015 2040 2025 2030 2035 2045 2020Shar e of job s
37% 43% 45% 47% 53% 15% 23% 26% 44% 48% 34% 
43%4%9%
30%
58% 69% 81% 2%
28%2%
39%17%4%
46% 47% 48% 51% 82% 34% 39% 41% 44% 20% 14% 
2015 202513%4%
20304%
10%
2035 2020TimeShar e of job s
Role-Eliminating Automation Partial Automation “Running with the Machine”RETAIL INDUST RY CPG INDUST RYFigure 11: Estimated Impact of Automation on CPG and Retail Industries Workforce in the United States 
Role-Eliminating Automation: More than 75% of activities can be automated
Partial Automation: Between 25% and 75% of activities can be automated
“Running with the Machine” : Less than 25% of activities can be automated; Running with the Machine considers that workers 
will reallocate time to more “human-like tasks” and work in a collaborative, fully integrated manner alongside machines20
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionA closer analysis of those tasks that can be completely or 
partially automated reveals that while low-skill workers are 
often considered the most vulnerable, most of the activities, 
and jobs, at risk actually correspond to middle-skill workers. 
Middle-skill jobs are those occupations that require more 
education and training than a high school diploma but less 
than a four-year college degree, and where repetition is high 
so the need for critical thinking is low once the skill is learned, 
such as health technicians, sales personnel, back office 
administrators, etc.35  By contrast, low-skill jobs require less 
training or education and involve frequent manual tasks, such 
as house cleaners or restaurant waiters. Given the nature of 
tasks in middle-skill jobs, automation has led to a significant 
decline in the availability of work at that level. In fact, the share 
of workers in middle-skill jobs fell by almost 10% from 1995 
to 2015, while share of workers in high-skill jobs increased 
and in low-skill jobs remained relatively stable. As the middle-
skill jobs lost are replaced – 80% by high-skilled work and 
20% by low-skilled work36  -- the potential for occupational 
polarization risks becoming a reality as technological changes 
yield primarily high-skill jobs. 
People [with] low and middle incomes have seen their 
wages stagnate and the share of middle-skilled jobs 
has fallen, contributing to rising inequality and concerns 
that top earners are getting a disproportionate share of 
the gains from economic growth.
– OECD  Employment Outlook 2017
As new jobs form across the industry, stakeholders will 
need to support this growth in an inclusive way. CPG 
manufacturers and Retailers must invest in reskilling their 
workforces through targeted learning and skill development to 
ensure that all employees can succeed in the digital age.
Continuous Learning
The ever-increasing pace of technology will require all workers 
to commit to ongoing learning. Today, the process and 
culture of learning is sequential – from primary and secondary 
education, through vocational training and higher education 
to job-specific training. The underlying assumption is that 
the resulting formal education will serve individuals for their 
entire career. This is no longer the case. Digital inclusion, 
developing an overarching digital and technology literacy to 
support market changes, provides access to digital technology 
for all workers at all stages – not just the few. It must be 
accomplished.
The future of learning involves a continuous cycle in which 
digital inclusion is achieved through: 
 –Skill Building:  Preparing individuals for the workforce with 
new skill training, practical courses that combine academic 
and real-world experience, and active job placement –Continual Evolution:  Reinforcing and advancing 
workers’ capabilities as the business evolves; supporting 
continuous learning as employees increasingly chart highly 
varied courses throughout the organization
 –Radical Reskilling:  Retraining workers for new 
opportunities as existing roles are displaced, offering a 
path to employment in new skill areas.
Figure 12: Continuous Learning Cycle
Future of 
LearningSkill 
Building
Continual 
EvolutionRadical 
Reskilling         Digital Inclusion | Digital Inclusion                              Digital Inclusion | Digital Inclusion                            Digital Inclusion | Digital Inclusion 
Case Study: SkillsFuture Singapore – Offering Incentives 
to Participate in Reskilling Programmes
Through the national Work Trial skill-building programme, 
Singaporean employers offer short-term trials in which 
jobseekers can work between 16 hours and 3 months, with 
30% of wages subsidized by the government. Participants 
learn skills “on the job” while employers test candidates 
for fit and capability. The Ministry of Education has also 
set up SkillsFuture Singapore to strengthen the country’s 
adult training infrastructure and provide access to quality 
programming and educational institutions. Some 126,000 
Singaporeans – 2% of the population – enrolled in the 
programme’s first year in 2016.37
According to the World Economic Forum’s Future of Jobs  
report, 30% of consumer industry core skills will change by 
2020, accelerated by new business models and technology. 
Workers are not ready. Almost one in three individuals 
is concerned they will not be able to develop the skills 
necessary to succeed in the field they wish to pursue in 
ten years.38 The objective of learning needs to shift from 
formal certification to ongoing skill development. Educational 
providers also need to shift their approach from helping 
students earn a static diploma to enabling workers to 
continually evolve their capabilities both within their current 
roles and as they transition to new ones. 21
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionCase Study: Skillful by the Markle Foundation – Creating 
Platforms to Bring Stakeholders Together
Skillful connects people to middle-skill jobs by supporting 
employers to shift from certification-dependent to skills-based 
hiring practices. The organization provides access to local 
talent pools, encourages the teaching of in-demand skills 
and prepares workers for new jobs with the help of their 
career coaches. Skillful has defined and piloted, and is now 
promoting, tools and practices to accelerate the shift to a 
skills-based labour market, working across the network of 
employers, educators, government and non-profit support 
organizations. Launched in 2016 by the State of Colorado, 
Microsoft, LinkedIn and local partners, 375 businesses have 
engaged with Skillful’s network, and 20 companies are now 
working to fully embrace skills-based hiring practices. As of 
June 2017, more than 60,000 people have engaged with 
Skillful, and more than 1,400 people have actively engaged 
with Skillful’s career coaches. 
Workers do not only need to acquire job-specific skills, they 
must also have the ability to navigate career changes through 
transitional education. These programmes help people 
better identify their skills, develop and use networks, and use 
support services effectively. More broadly, such efforts will 
help unlock the potential of underused talent. Global human 
capital is developed to 62% of its potential,39 which indicates 
that the world is wasting or neglecting 38% of its talent. 
Figure 13: Gap in Human Development40
North America 26%
Western Europe 29%
Eastern Europe and Central Asia 33%
East Asia and the Pacific 34%
Latin America and the Caribbean 40%
Middle East and North Africa 44%
South Asia 46%
Sub-Saharan Africa 47%Global Average 38%
All too often, however, human potential is not realized, 
held back either by inequality or an unrealistic and 
outdated faith on the part of policy-makers that 
investment in small subsections of highly skilled 
labour alone can drive sustainable, inclusive growth.
Klaus Schwab  – Executive Chairman of the World Economic Forum41
In this digital age, skill development requires continuous 
learning on a global scale. This creates opportunities to 
develop hard technical skills, provides basic digital literacy 
to populations who lack it and enables individuals through 
infrastructure to achieve digital inclusion. Case Study: Andela – Upskilling Non-traditional 
Candidates
Andela is a technical talent company that trains software 
developers from the African continent and places them as full-
time distributed team members with Fortune 500 companies 
ranging from Viacom and Mastercard to dozens of high-
growth disruptors such as GitHub and Gusto. Currently 
working with 500 developers, Andela has invested in an 
advanced training infrastructure and offers support services to 
help its developers achieve success in their careers. 
Case Study: Chattanooga – Providing Universal Access 
to Stimulate New Growth
The City of Chattanooga built a government-owned, 
fibre-optic cable network to provide a high-speed internet 
service, while simultaneously increasing electricity reliability 
in rural parts of the city. Based on an independent study 
conducted by the University of Tennessee, the Electric Power 
Board (EPB) of Chattanooga’s network has directly created 
2,800–5,200 new jobs for the city and generated $1 billion in 
economic benefit over the past five years.40
Securing employment in the digital age will require 
stakeholder groups to collaborate to support professionals 
mastering new skills, embracing new ways of working and 
building both intrapreneurial and entrepreneurial capabilities.
Flexicurity
Given how important it is to develop agility, along with the 
responsibility to ensure economic inclusivity, the market is 
shifting to a more “liquid” workforce. In a recent Accenture 
survey, 52% of individuals say they are likely to work in the 
gig economy and 53% would prefer to work as a freelancer 
rather than as a formal, full-time employee. However, 72% 
expressed worry about a freelancer’s lack of employee 
benefits.43 Legacy support structures for labour markets 
have not kept pace with the development of new workforce 
models. As such, these legacy structures threaten the welfare 
of workers, who stand to lose the benefits of permanent 
employment, and will restrict the willingness of many workers 
to find new roles that could be more lucrative and fulfilling. 
A new contract for employment is vital not only for worker 
welfare but to promote a liquid workforce and support job 
mobility. Flexicurity ties benefits (e.g. pensions and healthcare) 
to the individual and enables talent mobility with portable 
skills transcripts, helping workers maximize their long-term 
economic opportunity. This support structure reduces friction 
in the labour market, enabling optimal matching of supply and 
demand of talent. 22
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionOur policy-makers need social innovations to 
fully embrace the idea of flexibility and social 
protection – ‘flexicurity’ – by giving all workers 
the same rights and benefits, regardless of 
what contract they have.
Alain Dehaze – CEO, Adecco Group44
While public discourse has focused on minimum guaranteed 
wages, other benefits to consider include health insurance, 
unemployment insurance and pensions. In addition to 
traditional benefits, stakeholders will need to consider 
alternatives for filling skills gaps, with easily accessible training 
and learning opportunities. A small number of governments 
have introduced individual learning accounts, which give 
employees the financial assistance to invest in their own 
continuous training, independent of employers.45
Case Study: The Portable Benefits for Independent 
Workers Pilot Program Act (Proposed)
In 2017, US Senator Mark Warner and US Representative 
Suzan DelBene proposed legislation to pilot, test and evaluate 
portable benefit programmes. Eligible models include a variety 
of benefits such as healthcare, training and educational 
assistance, workers compensation and retirement savings. 
Senator Warner is the co-chairperson of the Aspen Institute’s 
Future of Work Initiative, whose 2016 paper highlighted 
existing programmes that could serve as models: multi-
employer benefit plans in construction and entertainment, 
pooled workers’ compensation in New York livery, and health 
insurance in San Francisco.46
Finally, there are some less obvious enablers of a fluid career. 
As employment velocity increases, networks become more 
important. Deviating from a formal career path impedes 
workers’ ability to communicate skills and accomplishments 
to new employers. Workers will increasingly be in situations 
where they are an unknown quantity; as learning increasingly 
shifts beyond traditional credentials such as the four-year 
university degree, a traditional curriculum vitae will no longer 
communicate the majority of an individual’s capabilities – nor 
will there be a universal taxonomy and language to describe 
competencies.47 Fortunately, both industry disruptors and 
emerging technologies are targeting these challenges.
Case Study: Portfolium – Enabling Digital Portfolios
As employers increasingly value competencies that extend 
beyond the standard skills and experience reported on a 
traditional curriculum vitae, Portfolium provides individuals 
with the opportunity to build their own digital portfolio, 
capturing and curating examples of their academic and 
extracurricular work. Portfolium also serves as a social 
network, linking potential workers with academic institutions 
and employers.48Case Study: Learning Machine – Blockchain-verified 
Transcripts
Chris Jagers, CEO of Learning Machine, has been working 
with the MIT Media Lab to use blockchain technology to 
enable individual students to hold and share their verified 
official records with others in a safe, tamper-proof manner. 
This approach allows students to “act as their own lifelong 
registrar”, holding records not only for traditional education, 
but also for corporate training and alternative schools.49
Flexicurity is vital for workers and employers alike, enabling 
agility and access to vastly expanded pools of talent. 
Companies have their own part to play in helping employees 
navigate a non-linear career path. To do this, businesses 
need to shift their focus towards radical reskilling – especially 
when it comes to helping steer workers through periods of 
digital disruption. Some business leaders have even raised 
the idea of a “carbon tax” model whereby companies that are 
more effective at skilling workers would lower their required 
contribution to state-administered unemployment benefits. 
Flexicurity provides highly skilled workers with the portability 
to meet professional needs, a safety net for those low-skilled 
workers most vulnerable to market disruption, and freedom 
for employers to use the best available talent. 
Consumer Data Principles
Lastly, there is a significant opportunity – and risk – 
associated with consumer data. Recent reports have framed 
data as the “new oil” – the most valuable resource in the 
world. This idea should be expanded to include data as the 
“new soil” – the basis on which consumer and market value 
can grow. 
Given that the fundamental driver towards future operating 
models is a reorganization to address consumer needs, 
copious amounts of personal data are required to establish 
consumer intimacy. This ongoing data collection gives rise 
to concerns about the privacy and security of personal 
information and how companies are using it. Recent surveys 
find that 57% of consumers are concerned with how 
businesses use their information,50 with 41% of consumers 
stating they need companies to have greater transparency if 
they are to have confidence in their products/services.51
Consumer data is critical for technology to function. It serves 
as the primary input and building block for technologies such 
as artificial intelligence and connected devices. Industry and 
society need to collaborate to establish and protect consumer 
trust, while increasing the value created for consumers. To do 
so requires alignment on the following principles:
 –Communicating consumer data collection and usage 
procedures in a simple, understandable way
 –Outlining consumer data ownership and acceptable 
sharing practices 
 –Agreeing on data monetization protocols
 –Understanding the necessary infrastructure and activities 
required to support consumer data security.23
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionFigure 14: Calls to Action – Stakeholder Involvement to Achieve a Better Future
 
THEME CALL TO ACTIONSTAKEHOLDERS
Individual 
WorkersIndustry GovernmentAcademic 
InstitutionsEnabling 
Disruptors
Worker  
Enablement in  
the Digital AgeTransform academic curricula 
and culture from focus on 
knowledge and four-year degree 
to lifelong learningX X X X X
Use data to drive right-skilling 
that recurrently identifies and 
builds newly required skills; 
measure the ROI of programmesX X
Address the affordability hurdle 
of alternative learningX X X
Couple education/skills 
programmes with career 
opportunitiesX X
Enable the “digitally 
underprivileged” with digital 
literacy and infrastructureX
FlexicurityReform to tie benefits to the 
employee rather than company; 
broad-based benefits, including 
learning accountsX X
Invest in platforms and 
technology that enable workers 
to provide a transparent 
and verified record of their 
competenciesX X X
Consumer  
Data PrinciplesCreate comprehensible overview 
of consumer data collection and 
usage  X X X
Deploy control mechanisms,  
(e.g. consumer data passport)X X X X
Define data security requirements 
and infrastructureX X XIf Not Now, When?
As technology-driven change continues to accelerate, 
the long-term viability of the economic system depends 
on thoughtful, collaborative, purposeful and immediate 
stakeholder action. These specific societal implications are 
intrinsically linked by a common purpose to drive societies 
towards digital inclusivity. Stakeholder groups can, and 
should, actively explore ways to mitigate these societal 
impacts through both individual and collaborative actions. Realization of these principles will require both protocols 
and potential constructs or platforms – (for example, a “data 
passport”) in which consumers can securely store the data 
that they explicitly agreed to share with companies across 
multiple marketplaces.24
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionConclusion
Disruptive technologies will continue to accelerate the pace of 
change. In light of this, this report paints a vision of the future 
for consumer-centric industries, provides a rich perspective 
on why organizations need to transform rapidly, and explains 
the seven essential characteristics of operating models that 
businesses should adopt. Furthermore, it provides a holistic 
view of the potential implications for business and society. 
In summary, the goal of this report is to inspire responsive 
and responsible action – for industry leaders to change how 
they lead and transform their enterprises, while ensuring 
inclusive growth for the workforces they employ and the 
consumers they serve. Enabling this journey will require 
the full range of stakeholders – individual workers, industry, 
government, academic institutions and enabling disruptors – 
to collaborate in support of a prosperous future for all. 
The time to act is now.
25
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionAppendices
Appendix A: Eight Disruptive Technologies – Value Chain Applications
The use of disruptive technologies across the entire value chain is driving high-impact benefits through a range of applications 
and has become a key source of value creation. 
Consumer Industries Value Chain – Technology and Use-Cases
Disruptive  
TechnologyRecent  
Development
Internet of  
Things (IoT)IOT is enabling data 
sharing within the 
ecosystem across the 
entire value chain• Foundational use-cases:  quality management; storage conditions control; fleet 
management; digital stores; real-time omnichannel marketing; electronic shelf 
labels; beacons & geolocation; wearables
• Emerging use-cases:  automated replenishment; remote diagnostics;predictive 
maintenance
• Pioneering use-cases:  living services; real-time engagement feedback
Autonomous 
Vehicles/DronesAdvancing technology 
continues to open 
possibilities in 
distribution efficiency• Foundational use-cases:  Self-driving commercial trucks; Last mile delivery;  
Self-driving drones
• Emerging use-cases:  Self-driving personal automobiles; Self-driving public 
transportation (buses, etc..)
• Pioneering use-cases:  Drone consumer intelligence; Dronevertising
 
Artificial 
Intelligence/ 
Machine LearningNew models for  
‘Human+Machine’  
augmentation are 
emerging, extending 
from supply chain  
operations to customer-  
facing applications• Foundational use-cases:  Trend and volume forecasting; Descriptive analytics; 
Chatbots; After-sales service; Robotics Process Automation; Development 
Operations Automation
• Emerging use-cases:  Predictive recommendations; Smart Search 
Assistance; Intelligent S&OP planning; Stock allocation forecasting; AI-assisted 
merchandising; Dynamic pricing
• Pioneering use-cases:  Scenario-driven prescriptive analytics; Brain-simulation 
ideation; DNA workforce profiling
 
RoboticsRobotic-enabled  
manufacturing lowers  
operational costs, 
enabling repatriation of 
manufacturing to bring 
production closer to the 
end-consumer• Foundational use-cases:  Robotics-enabled prototyping; Robotic manufacturing; 
Robotic picking
• Emerging use-cases:  Automated warehouse; Automated sales assistants; 
Automated customer support
• Pioneering use-cases:  Co-bots; Cognitive robotics; Dark manufacturing; 
Robotic shopping carts
 
Digital TraceabilityConsumer demand for 
trust and transparency 
continue to increase• Foundational use-cases:  Product source tracking; inventory replenishment; 
Supply chain product traceability; Merchandise tracking; Product authenticity 
mapping; Product warranty
3D PrintingThe convergence of 
R&D with prototyping 
and manufacturing is 
effectively shrinking the 
supply chain• Foundational use-cases:  Prototyping; In-store product printing;  
Real-time manufacturing
• Emerging use-cases:  In-store ‘point-of-sale marketing’ printing;  
In-store customization
• Pioneering use-cases:  Real-time inventory production; 3D printed fashion; 
Custom promotional material; Custom workplace solutions
 
Augmented Reality/
Virtual RealityApplication of AR/
VR growing to include 
training the workforce 
and facilitating  
Human+Machine  
collaboration in  
manufacturing• Foundational use-cases:  Virtual planogramming; Product design;  
Virtual retail locations; AR/VR engagement
• Emerging use-cases:  Virtual changing rooms; Immersive campaigns;  
Virtual training environments
• Pioneering use-cases:  Virtual market research, Virtual sourcing;  
Virtual customer service; Virtual hiring
BlockchainNew applications 
emphasize trusted 
verification of  
individually held 
information• Foundational use-cases:  Authenticity verification; Supply-chain verification; 
Online wallet; Transaction verification
• Emerging use-cases:  Employee data verification; Education transcript 
verification; Professional credentials (e.g. legal) verification
• Pioneering use-cases : Smart contracts; Warranty tracking; Shared ledgersDesign &  
InnovationManufacture, 
Plan & BuyDistribute
& MoveSell After Sales26
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionAppendix B: Future Workforce of Consumer 
Packaged Goods and Retail Industries in the 
US: Econometric Model, 2017
The model is used to identify the portion of employment 
subject to automation under different assumptions of the 
“state of skills” in the workforce. It employs an estimated 
inverse relationship between the importance of skills that run 
with the machine and time allocation to “human-like” tasks 
within occupations, on the one hand, and the probability of 
automation, on the other. The analysis takes a task-based 
approach that accounts for human versus machine-like skills 
and tasks in occupations, in a similar way to the OECD’s 
research by Arntz, Gregory and Zierahn (2016),52 to address 
an important gap in occupation-based estimations (e.g. Frey 
and Osborne, 2013),53 which assumes that occupations 
as a whole, rather than single tasks, can be automated by 
technology. This leads to an overestimation of automation – in 
reality, most occupations contain a substantial share of tasks 
that are hard to automate. 
This analysis is based on the state of technologies today 
and accounts for future technological improvement 
(advancement/adoption) in a constant (linear) fashion. It 
considers the fact that the adoption of new technologies 
is often a slow process and workers are able to adjust by 
learning skills and switching tasks, preventing unemployment. 
The share of workforce subject to automation must not be 
equated to its current “as of today” possibilities. 
Assumptions were made about the pace of reskilling the 
workforce in the future in terms of “run with the machine” 
skills, the reallocation of working time to human-like tasks and 
the reduction in learning years needed by the workforce in the 
United States to be ready to “run with the machine”. 
Methodology:
 –Country-specific analysis for CPG and retail industries in 
the United States
 –Data basis: O*NET database, OECD PIACC survey, the 
work of C.B. Frey and M.A. Osborne (Oxford University), 
combined with the work supply demographics of the 
individual countries derived from the respective national 
account statistics on employmentModelling Approach:
1. Constructed consistent data that links automation 
probabilities, skills, job activities, job descriptions and 
employment data
2. Defined those job activities that require strong human-
like skills (that are not automatable) through regression 
analysis
3. Computed the share of employment in each country 
that is subject to total automation (= more than 75% 
probability), based on econometrics to estimate how the 
automation probability depends on PIACC activities of 
employees
4. Computed the average automation probability of each 
task grouping to calculate the total amount of tasks that 
can be automated across all jobs 27
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionThis insight report leveraged extensive quantitative and 
qualitative primary research to arrive at key findings, 
contributing to the perspective presented. From a 
qualitative perspective, over 75 individuals across the 
globe, including industry leaders, disruptors, educators, 
and policymakers, were interviewed to understand 
their views on future operating models. Quantitative 
research included the use of five global surveys -- four 
executive surveys and one consumer survey -- and a 
comprehensive econometric model to assess the impact 
of automation (See appendix B). Secondary research 
was also performed to gather additional data and analyse 
perspectives written in other reports issued by academic 
institutions, governments, private businesses, and other 
global organizations. Research & Acknowledgements
The World Economic Forum would like to acknowledge 
and extend its sincere gratitude to, first and foremost, the 
project steering committee. We also wish to thank the 
broad community of contributors across partner companies, 
technology start-ups, academicians and experts. 
Project Steering Committee
 –Wouter Kolk, Chief Executive Officer of Albert Heijn, Ahold 
Delhaize, Netherlands
 –Henk Mahieu, Head of International Relations and 
Economic Policy, Office of the Deputy Prime Minister of 
Belgium, Belgium
 –Brian Kean, Chief International Officer, CJSC Ulmart, 
Russia
 –Jamie Murray Wells, Industry Head of Retail, Google, 
United Kingdom
 –Blanca Juti, Chief Corporate Relations Officer, Heineken 
NV, Netherlands
 –Mutlu Erturan, Chief Business Officer, Hepsiburada, Turkey
 –Carrie Ask, Global Head of Retail, Levi Strauss & 
Company, United States
 –Joe Abi Akl, Head of Strategy and Business Development, 
Majid Al Futtaim, United Arab Emirates
 –Mara Swan, Executive Vice-President of Global Strategy 
and Talent, Manpower, United States
 –Chris Johnson, Executive Vice-President- Head of 
Business Excellence, Nestle SA, Switzerland
 –Arun Sundararajan, Head of Social Cities Initiative, New 
York University Stern School of Business, United States
 –Lars Olav Olaussen, Senior Vice-President of Global 
Strategy and Talent, Orkla ASA, Norway
 –Gary Coombe, President of Europe, Procter & Gamble, 
Switzerland
 –Stefan Pryor, Secretary of Commerce, State of Rhode 
Island, United States
 –Philippe Gillet, Chief Innovation Officer, SICPA SA, 
Switzerland
 –Vincent Ambrosino, Chief Operating Officer, Global 
Business Development, Suntory Holdings Limited, Japan
 –Sean Flaherty, Senior Director of Global Retail Strategy, 
UPS, United States
 –Jack Forestell, Global Head of Product, Visa, United 
States
 –Lori Flees, Senior Vice-President of Corporate Strategy, 
Walmart Stores Inc., United States28
Operating Models for the Future of ConsumptionResearch Contributors
 –Andela
 –Boston University
 –Carbon
 –Carlsberg
 –Carnegie Mellon University
 –Catalant
 –Colgate-Palmolive
 –Columbia University
 –Da Vinci Institute
 –DoorDash
 –Farmers Business Network
 –FEMSA
 –Future Workplace
 –General Assembly
 –GLAMSQUAD
 –Godrej
 –Graze.com
 –Grupo Bimbo
 –Instacart
 –Koc Holdings
 –LinkedIn
 –London Business School
 –MakeTime
 –Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 –Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD)
 –Patanjali Ayurved
 –Peerspace
 –Picnic
 –Pluralsight
 –Progressive Policy Institute
 –REMA 1000
 –Royal Philips
 –Sainsbury’s Argos
 –Skillful at the Markle Foundation
 –Swedish Trade Union Federation 
 –TaskRabbit
 –Tophatter
 –Tsinghua University
 –United Kingdom Office of Digital Government Services
 –University of Washington
 –Upskill
 –Upwork
 –Vivint Smart Home
 –Voodoo Manufacturing
 –WayUp
 –Wesfarmers Coles
 –The Wharton School
 –W.R. Berkely Innovation Labs
 –Xiaoi Robot Technology
 –Yoox Net-A-PorterProject Team
World Economic Forum
 –Zara Ingilizian, Head of Future of Consumption System 
Initiative
 –Andrew Moose, Head of Retail, Consumer Goods and 
Lifestyle Industries
 –Mayuri Ghosh, Project Lead, Future of Consumption 
System Initiative
 –Sarah Shellaby, Community Lead of Retail, Consumer and 
Lifestyle Industries
 –Julien Lederman, Community Lead of Future of 
Consumption System Initiative
Accenture
 –Oliver Wright, Managing Director, Global Lead for 
Consumer Goods & Services, Accenture Strategy
 –Christopher Donnelly, Senior Managing Director, 
Accenture Consulting
 –Jim Scully, Managing Director, Accenture Strategy
 –Karen Fang Grant, Senior Principal, Global Lead for 
Products and Consumer Goods, Accenture Research
 –Delmary Salcedo, Manager, Accenture Strategy and World 
Economic Forum Secondee
 –Sydney Lapeyrolerie, Senior Consultant, Accenture 
Strategy and World Economic Forum Secondee29
Operating Models for the Future of Consumption1. Accenture Analysis of Nielsen, 2017.
2. Accenture Analysis of Bloomberg Market Data, 2017.
3. Anthony, Scott D., S. Patrick Viguerie and Andrew Waldeck, Corporate 
Longevity: Turbulence Ahead for Large Organizations, Innosight, 2016, 
https://www.innosight.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Corporate-
Longevity-2016-Final.pdf.
4. Top 500 Database, Global 1000 Spotlight: The Top 10 e-Retail Players 
Dominate, 5 August 2016, http://www.top500guide.com/global-1000-
spotlight-top-10-e-retail-players-dominate/. 
5. Nielsen Retail Measurement Services, “Amid the FMCG Downturn Small 
Manufacturers Are Tapping Big Growth”, 2017, http://www.nielsen.com/us/
en/insights/news/2017/amid-the-fmcg-downturn-small-manufacturers-are-
tapping-big-growth.html.
6. Google, World Economic Forum: The FMCG Consumer – Utilitarian or 
Experiential?, 2017. 
7. Accenture Strategy, Global Operating Model Research, 2016.
8. Sandeep, Raut, “Terminator or Iron Man – What Will AI Bring in the 
Future”, The Innovation Enterprise, 9 May 2017, https://channels.
theinnovationenterprise.com/articles/terminator-or-iron-man-what-will-ai-
bring-in-future. 
9. Accenture Digital Operating Model Survey, 2016.
10. Ibid.
11. Larsen, Kim, “Data Science at StitchFix”, Multithreaded by StitchFix, 31 
March 2016, http://multithreaded.stitchfix.com/blog/2016/03/31/data-
science-at-stitch-fix/. 
12. Accenture Analysis of Alibaba Group Financials, 2017.
13. Accenture: Harnessing the Power of Entrepreneurs to Open Innovation, 
2015.
14. “Launch of 24 Sèvres, the New Online Shopping Experience”, Louis Vuitton 
Moet Hennessy, 6 June 2017, https://www.lvmh.com/news-documents/
news/launch-of-24-sevres-the-new-online-shopping-experience/. 
15. Perez, Sarah, “Quri, a Retail Intelligence Platform Using Mobile 
Crowdworkers, Scores $10 Million from Matrix & Others”, Techcrunch, 2 
October 2013, https://techcrunch.com/2013/10/02/quri-a-retail-intelligence-
platform-using-mobile-crowdworkers-scores-10-million-from-matrix-
others/; “A Refreshing Approach to Improving Retail Field Execution”, Quri, 
http://quri.com/field-labor-optimization-beer-wine/. 
16. Information provided by Stephane Kasriel, CEO of Upwork.
17. Accenture, Technology Vision 2017.
18. Anthony, Scott D., S. Patrick Viguerie and Andrew Waldeck, Corporate 
Longevity: Turbulence Ahead for Large Organizations, Innosight, 2016, 
https://www.innosight.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Corporate-
Longevity-2016-Final.pdf.
19. Accenture, Humanizing Work through Digital, 2016.
20. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Forum 2016 
Issues: The Future of Education, 2016, http://www.oecd.org/forum/issues/
forum-2016-issues-the-future-of-education.htm. 
21. Wingfield, Nick, “As Amazon Pushes Forward with Robots, Workers Find 
New Roles”, The New York Times, 10 September 2017; Amazon 10-K 
report issued 10 February 2017, https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1018724/000101872417000011/amzn-20161231x10k.htm. 
22. Bradley, Ben, and Dan Restuccia with Chris Rudnicki and Scott Biddle, The 
Digital Edge: Middle-Skill Workers and Careers, 2017, http://burning-glass.
com/wp-content/uploads/Digital_Edge_report_2017_final.pdf.
23. World Economic Forum, The Future of Jobs Report, 2016. 
24. Brown, John Seely, and Douglas Thomas, “A New Culture of Learning”, 
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2011.
25. Bloom, Eric, “Your Technology Skills have a Two Year Half-Life and Six 
Ways to Stay Current”, Manager Mechanics, 24 October 2011, https://www.
itworld.com/article/2735945/careers/your-technology-skills-have-a-two-
year-half-life-and-6-ways-to-stay-current.html.
26. Wingfield, “As Amazon Pushes Forward with Robots, Workers Find New 
Roles”.27. General Assembly, 2017 Digital Marketing Skills Report, 2017.
28. General Assembly, Benefits and ROI of Talent Pipeline-as-a-Service, 2017.
29. Accenture, Why Artificial Intelligence Is the Future of Growth, 2016.
30. United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment by Major Industry 
Sector 2006–2016, 2017. https://www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_201.htm; 
Euromonitor, Global Employment Data, Total Value RSP, Constant 2016 
Prices and Fixed 2016 Exchange Rates, June 2017.
31. US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Industry Employment, 2016.
32. Accenture, Econometric Analysis on Impact of Automation on Consumer 
Industries in the US, 2017.
33. Ibid.
34. Accenture, Global Consumer Pulse Research Survey, 2017. 
35. Accenture, Burning Glass Technologies, Harvard Business School, Bridge 
the Gap: Rebuilding America’s Middle Skills, 2016.
36. OECD Employment Outlook 2017.
37. Singapore Ministry of Manpower, SkillsFuture, SkillsFuture Singapore, 
2017, http://www.mom.gov.sg/employment-practices/skills-training-and-
development/skillsfuture. 
38. Accenture, Global Consumer Pulse Research Survey, 2017.
39. World Economic Forum, The Global Human Capital Report, 2017, https://
www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-human-capital-report-2017. 
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Koebler, Jason, “The City that Was Saved by the Internet”, Motherboard, 
27 October 2016, https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/ezpk77/
chattanooga-gigabit-fiber-network; Lobo, Bento J., The Realized Value 
of Fiber Infrastructure in Hamilton County, Tennessee, The University of 
Tennessee at Chattanooga, 18 June 2015, http://ftpcontent2.worldnow.
com/wrcb/pdf/091515EPBFiberStudy.pdf. 
43. Accenture, Global Consumer Pulse Research, 2017.
44. Dehaze, Alain, Chief Executive Officer of the Adecco Group, 2017. https://
www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/10/future-of-work-can-be-fair-and-flexible/.
45. Information provided by Stefano Scarpetta, Director of Employment, Labour 
and Social Affairs of the OECD.
46. Office of Senator Mark Warner, “Legislation to Test-Drive Portable Benefits 
Model Introduced in the House and Senate”, 25 May 2017, https://www.
warner.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/pressreleases?ContentRecord_
id=73DA2EF1-FD4E-4397-9B7C-D24B1843A29A; Foster, Natalie, Greg 
Nelson and Libby Reder, Portable Benefits Resource Guide. The Aspen 
Institute Future of Work Initiative, 2016, http://src.bna.com/hbo.
47. Interview with Michelle Weise, SVP of Workforce Strategies and Chief 
Innovation Officer at Strada Education Network, 22 August 2017. 
48. What Is Portfolium?, Portfolium, 2017, https://portfolium.com/. 
49. Jagers, Chris, Why the Blockchain Will Revolutionize Academic 
Credentialing, 28 October 2016, Educause at the Anaheim Convention 
Center, California, https://medium.com/learning-machine-blog/why-the-
blockchain-will-revolutionize-academic-credentialing-9950c9c4928d. 
50. Chartered Institute of Marketing, “Whose Data is it Anyway?”, 2016, https://
www.cim.co.uk/newsroom/whose-data-is-it-anyway/. 
51. Accenture, Global Consumer Pulse Research, 2017.
52. Arntz, Melanie, Terry Gregory and Ulrich Zierahn  (2016), “The Risk of 
Automation for Jobs in OECD Countries: A Comparative Analysis”, OECD 
Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 189, OECD 
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jlz9h56dvq7-en.
53. Carl Frey and Michael Osborne, “The Future of Employment: How 
Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?”, 17 September 2013, https://
www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_
Employment.pdf.EndnotesWorld Economic Forum
91–93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland  
Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum, 
committed to improving  
the state of the world, is the 
International Organization for 
Public-Private Cooperation.
 
The Forum engages the 
foremost political, business  
and other leaders of society  
to shape global, regional 
and industry agendas.