Demystifying the 
Consumer Metaverse
JANUARY 2023In collaboration 
with AccentureContents
© 2023 World Economic Forum. All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, including 
photocopying and recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system.Disclaimer 
This document is published by the World Economic 
Forum as a contribution to a project, insight area 
or interaction. The findings, interpretations and 
conclusions expressed herein are a result of a 
collaborative process facilitated and endorsed by 
the World Economic Forum but whose results do 
not necessarily represent the views of the World 
Economic Forum, nor the entirety of its Members, 
Partners or other stakeholders.
Foreword 3
Executive summary 4
Initiative overview 51   Decoding the metaverse,  
web3 and Web 3.0 6
2  Value creation in the consumer metaverse 15
3   Metaverse economic models  21
4  Future value horizons in the metaverse 24
Conclusion 29Appendix: Economic models  
in the consumer metaverse 30
Glossary 48
Contributors 49
Endnotes 52Images: Getty Images, Unsplash
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
2ForewordDefining and building 
the metaverse
The next era of the internet is taking shape, 
with the convergence of technologies forging 
the metaverse, an immersive, interoperable, 
and synchronous virtual world. Though a 
single standard definition for the metaverse 
has yet to emerge, experts agree that this 
new age of the internet will disrupt and 
transform current social and economic 
structures. From more immersive, empathetic 
social experiences to more universal access 
to services and education, the metaverse 
presents momentous opportunity, but 
also brings about new challenges. 
It is within this context that in May 2022, 
the World Economic Forum launched the 
initiative Defining and Building the Metaverse. 
The initiative has brought together a global, 
multistakeholder group of more than 100 
experts in academia, civil society, government, 
technology and business to help shape a 
future metaverse that is equitable, safe and 
economically viable. The initiative does so via 
two tracks: governance, and economic and 
social value creation, as the interdependent 
topics that the public and private sectors 
must work together on in order to responsibly 
activate the metaverse.Kevin Collins
Managing Director and 
Global Software and 
Platforms Lead, AccentureCathy Li
Head, Media, Entertainment 
and Sport and Member of 
the Executive Committee, 
World Economic Forum
The governance track focuses on frameworks 
that prevent potential harms and mitigate 
emerging risks while ensuring equity, 
privacy, security, safety and interoperability. 
The first output of the track is focused on 
interoperability, which is founded on the ability 
for users to participate across environments 
and technologies, for data to circulate freely 
and securely, and for systems to exchange 
information seamlessly.
Meanwhile, the value creation track looks 
at the opportunities in consumer, industrial 
and enterprise metaverses and researches 
the considerations for access, inclusion, 
sustainability and well-being that will come 
with its development. 
This insight report, written by the World 
Economic Forum in collaboration with 
Accenture, is focused on consumer 
applications, exploring the key components, 
foundation technologies, roles and paths 
to economic value and growth. Due to their 
experimentation, incubation and creation of 
new behaviours and business models, the work 
of consumer organizations can serve to inspire 
and illuminate more changes to come. While some economic models will simply 
be replicated from the existing internet to 
metaverse environments, complemented by a 
certain level of immersion or interaction, others 
will disrupt entire industries and generate brand 
new revenue streams. It is our hope that this 
paper will educate and guide organizations to 
stable and informed decision-making so that 
value creation is equitable and sustainable for all. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
3Executive 
summaryThe metaverse is expected to have a wide-
ranging impact on consumers’ attitudes and 
behaviours, impacting how, where and when 
they will want to play, learn, earn and socialize 
in their existing reality or newly established 
augmented and virtual realities. Consequently, 
organizations will need to redefine their 
brand image, shift their relationship model 
with consumers and change the way they 
monetize products and services in order to 
create true consumer value. They will likely 
move from offering products and services to 
being metaverse participants and providers, 
introducing engaging experiences and 
building communities in order to create 
meaning and fulfilment for their customers.
The World Economic Forum has launched 
the Defining and Building the Metaverse 
initiative to help explore and qualify the 
metaverse’s social and economic opportunities 
and challenges while aiming to explore and 
create a holistic governance framework. 
The initiative does so within two tracks, the 
value creation and governance track. 
While the broader initiative explores the 
metaverse from multiple angles and dives 
into areas from interoperability and identity 
to social value, this report aims to give a 
holistic introduction to the consumer-facing 
metaverse and its economic opportunities. The consumer metaverse 
offers a myriad of economic 
opportunities and challenges The key question of this report is: What makes 
up the metaverse and how can organizations 
and individuals create equitable economic 
value through it in a consumer context? 
Drawing on expertise in retail, media and 
entertainment, consumer packaged goods, 
real estate, banking and communications, 
as well as technology innovation, web3, 
environmental, social and governance 
(ESG), and economics experts, this insight 
report presents an interdisciplinary view 
of the end-user experience layer of the 
metaverse, capturing the present technology 
landscape and related economic models 
that may pave the way for future growth. 
A selection of this paper’s key insights 
is outlined in the following:
 –While it currently is difficult to define 
the metaverse, its main distinguishing 
components are highlighted to be social 
interaction, identity, multilateral value 
exchange and distribution, and a degree 
of immersion.
 –Impacted by wider society – organizations 
and individuals can take on one or 
multiple roles in the metaverse, from being 
participants to creators or providers.  –The role of individual creators will be 
amplified in the metaverse. Technologies 
such as AI and blockchain, will support 
this amplification. An evolving creator 
economy will influence value distribution in 
the metaverse greatly and offer far-reaching 
opportunities for businesses and individuals, 
but it will also pose challenges when 
approached incorrectly.
 –Eight economic models were identified 
to drive value in the metaverse, including 
digital products and assets, access and 
influence, immersive commerce, payments 
and currency, asset monetization, advertising 
and marketing, the creator economy, and 
metaverse-native services. 
 –A selection of six drivers of metaverse 
growth and adoption were identified, 
including metaverse-ready networks, 
realistic avatars, infrastructure, governance, 
standards and regulation, ownership and 
artificial intelligence. 
Given the breadth of the metaverse topic, 
this report confines itself to the consumer 
metaverse and its economic challenges and 
opportunities. Further work within this value 
creation track will explore the enterprise and 
industrial metaverse, as well as the metaverse 
in the context of education, healthcare, 
life sciences, infrastructure and cities. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
4Defining and Building the Metaverse
Initiative overview
Value creation
Governance2023 2022 2024The consumer metaverse
Exploration of the key components, 
foundational technologies, roles and 
paths to economic value creation and 
growth in the consumer metaverse.
Interoperability
Exploration of target states, 
capability gaps , potential risks , 
solutions and opportunities related 
to metaverse technical, usage, and 
jurisdictional interoperability.  The industrial metaverse
Exploration of early-stage use 
cases, foundational technologies 
and future potential related to 
the industrial metaverse.
Coming up:  
Explore the frontier 
technologies in healthcare, 
education and cities 
Privacy, security and safety
Exploration of target states , capability 
gaps , potential risks , solutions and 
opportunities related to privacy, security 
and safety. These will be explored in 
conjunction with notice and consent 
structures, anonymity, and the right to 
be forgotten, among other topics.Social value in the metaverse
Exploration of social opportunities 
and challenges in the context of the 
metaverse as it relates to diversity, 
equity and inclusion, as well as 
access and well-being.
Identity
Exploration of target states , capability 
gaps , potential risks , solutions 
and opportunities of technical 
and functional identity. Additional 
topics to explore include physical, 
emotional and mental well-being.The future of consumer, industrial  
and enterprise metaverses
Expanding on research and analysis 
from 2022, the initiative will look at 
how to activate the economic fly 
wheel of the metaverse, through the 
identification of new value chains and 
future growth scenarios
Governance white paper
Analysis of the material shared 
across the exploratory series on 
interoperability, privacy, security, safety 
and identity bolstered by a supporting 
governance white paper, which can 
be used by metaverse stakeholders to 
create a human-first metaverse. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
5Decoding the metaverse, 
web3 and Web 3.01
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
61   Decoding the metaverse, web3 and Web 3.0
Introduction
The introduction of innovative 
technologies regularly changes 
and shapes the world’s social and 
economic structures, presenting 
momentous opportunities 
and pivotal challenges.FIGURE 1
Evolution of the internetThe prime example of groundbreaking 
technological change is the internet. While 
the first versions of the internet (internet of 
data) solely served the purpose of exchanging 
information, later iterations introduced the 
concepts of social interaction, entertainment, 
commerce (internet of people) and direct 
interconnection of physical objects, creating 
connected worlds (internet of things). 
The current iteration of the internet, Web 
3.0 (internet of place and ownership), 
evolves its predecessors towards a more 
intuitive interaction with technology. 
It reimagines the connection between 
the virtual and the physical world while 
emphasizing ownership of identity and 
assets, enhancing the way humans conduct 
their private, public and professional lives.
While exact definitions are widely discussed, 
Web 3.0, web3 and the metaverse are 
expected to create the next wave of significant 
technological, and hence economic and 
societal change. 1990s
Internet of data
Made vast amounts of 
information available for 
people to access anywhere, 
anytime and search with ease
Connected people to people 
across vast distances and 
brought virtual social life to 
the forefront
Connected phones, 
devices and machines 
together, extending the 
digital world for people2000s
Internet of people
2010s
Internet of things
Web 3.0
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
7FIGURE 2
Web 3.0 as defined by Accenture
The internet of place 
This new evolution of the internet 
introduces a shift to 3D as a method  
for navigation, social interaction, 
engagement and insights.
Web 3.0Public places
Places that belong to communities 
circled around certain norms.Consumer and community places
Hybrid places
Enterprise and industrial places
Digital wallets
Tokens
Data
Virtual representation
Digital identityPrivate places
Places with exclusive access for 
selected users and groups.
Digital assets
Value distribution of virtual/physical 
goods through tokens in an economy.
Identity
Self-expression and authentication 
in the shape of individual assets.The internet of ownership 
Ownership reimagines how individuals and 
organizations handle data, create, learn, 
shop, have fun, interact and collaborate. 
It enables an internet built on the ability 
to own one’s identity and assets. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
8Decoding the metaverse 
In a quest to quantify the metaverse’s future 
impact, the metaverse is predicted to be worth 
$6-13 trillion by 2030,1 with global revenues 
expected to reach $800 billion by 2024.2
Today’s metaverse is an expanding and 
evolving proposition that will be re-defined 
perpetually. A “true” metaverse does not 
exist yet, and mass adoption will most likely 
be driven by advances in hardware, software 
and processing power, enabling density of 
population and high levels of interaction in 
virtual worlds. Hence, formulating an all-
encompassing definition for the metaverse is 
rather difficult at this point in time. However, it 
is acknowledged that there is a need to define 
the metaverse’s components to help identify 
its fabric and inform investment decisions. 
Guided through conversations with metaverse 
thought leaders and analysis of existing 
publications, the World Economic Forum 
highlights social interaction, identity, multilateral 
value exchange and distribution, and a degree 
of immersion as the main components of 
metaverse worlds, which combined with a set 
of foundational technologies, immersive content 
and experiences make the metaverse a new 
iteration of digital change, that will disrupt value 
chains, businesses and entire industries. It is 
noted that the metaverse won’t be comprised 
of one single entity but many different 
worlds in either centralized or decentralized environments that offer a certain degree of 
interoperability and create meaning and user 
fulfilment through value exchange between 
realities across virtual and physical worlds.
web3 and the metaverse
The terms web3 and the metaverse are often 
used interchangeably, though they refer to two 
different, albeit related, concepts.
While this report does not aim to give an 
exhaustive definition of the two terms or define 
their overlap, it will give a brief summary of the 
public’s understanding of these concepts and 
their delineation. 
Web 3.0, referenced earlier, describes the third 
stage of the internet. It is an evolution focused 
on distributing systems to create a more secure, 
transparent and open internet experience 
that enables direct interactions between 
users and their peers without intermediaries. 
Decentralization in this frame is achieved through 
web3, an emerging portfolio of decentralized 
technologies (such as blockchain and its 
applications), protocols and standards, which 
establish provenance, veracity and value of data.
Even though the metaverse and web3 are not 
interchangeable, use cases often employ both 
concepts. Hence, in the frame of the Defining 
and Building the Metaverse initiative, both 
concepts will be taken into consideration when 
discussing economic and social implications. 
A massively scaled and interoperable 
network of real-time rendered 3D 
virtual worlds that can be experienced 
synchronously [...] with an individual sense 
of presence, and with continuity of data, 
such as identity, history, entitlements, 
objects, communications, and payments. 
Matthew Ball, The Metaverse  
 
… virtual worlds are generally ‘composed 
of a few distinct elements: a society or 
grouping of humans; another world or reality 
involving events, identity, rules and things 
that are deemed to be in some way real; 
and an ongoing transfer of value between 
the two, which grows individual and group 
fulfilment, wealth and meaning.
Herman Narula, Virtual Society
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
91   Decoding the metaverse, web3 and Web 3.0
The metaverse 
stackFIGURE 3
Layers of value creation in the metaverse
Identity, value distribution, social interaction 
and immersion are key components of the 
metaverse and are enabled by an interplay 
of technologies, capabilities and human 
behaviour. Figure 3 aims to outline this 
interplay as the “metaverse stack”, layers 
of the metaverse in which value can be 
realized. Policy, security and governance 
should ensure the equitable realization of 
the entirety of the stack.Select the layers 
to discover more
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
101   Decoding the metaverse, web3 and Web 3.0
Foundational 
technologies 
and capabilities 
driving the 
expansion of 
the metaverseFIGURE 4
Foundational technologies and capabilities
The previously outlined metaverse stack 
is enabled through a set of foundational 
technologies and capabilities. The metaverse 
market is expected to denote a compound 
annual growth rate of 39.8% from 2022 to 
2030,3 which may signal a promising market 
unfolding the possibilities of new innovations 
and business models. Understanding 
the metaverse’s technologies and their 
implications on future developments, from 
experiences to operations and adoption, is 
vital to foresee value creation in a consumer 
context. Figure 4 outlines and describes a 
selection of these metaverse technologies.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
111   Decoding the metaverse, web3 and Web 3.0
Roles in the 
metaverse
In the metaverse, individuals and organizations 
take on the roles of society, participants, 
creators and providers, bringing the metaverse 
stack to life. Within these roles they constantly 
exchange value. Even though this value 
exchange is use-case dependent, each role 
is integral to the fabric of the metaverse.
Select the tabs 
to discover more
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
121   Decoding the metaverse, web3 and Web 3.0
The gaming 
industry as 
the pioneer 
in virtualized 
world-building After a pandemic bump, interest in gaming has 
continued to skyrocket. Video game revenue 
is projected to show an annual growth rate of 
7.7%, resulting in a projected market volume of 
$285 billion by 2027.10 
The gaming industry and the metaverse share 
an inherent experiential, social, transactional 
and sometimes virtual nature, with gameplay 
at the heart of its consumer value. Players 
in the gaming industry, such as Epic Games 
and Roblox, are pioneering ideas of what the 
metaverse could be, both in terms of engaging 
content and attracting audiences. Seen in the 
widely publicized virtual concerts and brand 
collaborations, these platforms engage users to 
develop their digital identities and enable them 
to express these identities through collectables 
and skins while offering them a virtual home in 
their communities.
The gaming industry has essentially moulded 
users for the metaverse and will continue to lead 
and help support development in perpetuity.
Just as gaming shapes our idea of the 
metaverse, the metaverse also impacts the 
gaming industry. Collaboration is key to growth
Fuelled through the introduction of 
XR and web3 technologies such as 
blockchain, traditional business models of 
gaming companies are being challenged. 
Cryptocurrencies, non-fungible tokens (NFTs), 
and GameFi models are only some of the 
metaverse concepts that will impact gaming.
Conversely, consumer brands operating in 
the metaverse can draw inspiration from 
gaming company experiences in how to 
create unique and engaging touchpoints.Creators as the primary 
source of content
User-generated content (UGC) has been a 
vital building block of the gaming industry for 
years. It provides virtual environments with 
personality, authenticity and scale, acting as a 
steady stream of new, engaging characters and 
content to fill the gaps between official content 
releases or even replace them altogether.
An expanding creator economy, in which 
tools for creation are widely available and 
easy to use, is essential to ensuring a steady 
flow of creativity into virtual worlds with new, 
engaging and personalized content that will 
inspire and retain users and ensure diverse 
and inclusive experiences. The metaverse 
brings this model a step further by enabling 
creator economies in which creators can 
monetize their IP in perpetuity, such as 
through royalties.
Organizations inside and outside of the gaming 
industry are expected to empower and uplift 
creators in the form of content generation but 
also in building long-lasting communities that 
bring creators to the forefront.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
131   Decoding the metaverse, web3 and Web 3.0
Implications 
of gamified 
experiences
With an aim to create responsible gaming and 
metaverse worlds, certain considerations need 
to be taken into account when designing both 
virtual worlds and experiences.
A growing data economy will elevate the 
need for privacy and security, while an influx 
of virtual assets will lead to the growing need 
for asset management. Furthermore, studies 
reveal a correlation between microtransactions, 
gaming and gambling disorders.
What valuable lessons from gaming light the path ahead?
Engage through play
VR gaming is expected to grow at a compound 
annual growth rate (CAGR) of 32.7% over the 
forecast period 2021-202711 and gamified 
commerce is booming. “Play” has led the first 
wave of metaverse adoption, with companies 
shifting from selling products and services to 
offering experiences.
Next generation of users are 
innate gamers
Gamers will inherit the metaverse: 54% of 
Roblox participants as of 2020 are younger 
than 1312 and this demographic highlights 
gaming’s future potential, with the users 
of tomorrow being intrinsically gamers. As 
the metaverse of tomorrow is designed, 
users will expect frictionless, non-intrusive 
and socially engaging experiences to play, 
share, learn and socialize.Creators and IP rights
Content in the metaverse will be increasingly 
built by individual creators, requiring the 
development of new ways of managing 
content, IP rights and ownership as 
important value drivers of leading metaverse 
experiences. Seen by many as a “prototype” 
of the metaverse, the platform Second Life 
has reportedly paid creators $80 million 
in 2021 while reporting 64.7 million active 
users on their platform in the same year.  
Social pays
Engagement is higher for metaverse players 
who play to socialize (over two extra hours 
played/month), and players who socialize 
spend more (over 4-5% spent every six 
months).13 While platforms like Roblox and 
Fortnite are becoming the most sought-after 
virtual destinations for socializing, branded 
virtual spaces and experiences on these 
platforms are gaining traction for advertisers. 
Roblox recently stated that it would soon 
allow brands to directly purchase in-game 
advertising and launch advertisement 
experiences, providing an opportunity for 
brands and businesses eager to target a 
tech-savvy young audience.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
14Value creation in the 
consumer metaverse2
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
152   Value creation in the consumer metaverse
IntroductionThe metaverse isn’t conducive to a linear 
consumer journey. The days of step-by-step 
journey models are over. Humans don’t follow 
linear paths to purchase, predictable patterns 
of behaviour, or set attitudes. They are driven 
by their in-the-moment intent. The next step 
from awareness is not always engagement. 
Brand loyalty doesn’t require purchase. This 
could not be truer in the metaverse, where 
immersive experiences and fluid interactions 
allow brands to develop a deeper sense of 
relevance in their consumers’ day-to-day. 
Brands will find new ways to authentically play 
a role in their consumers’ specific missions, 
key occasions and magic moments.
A recent report, Gen Z and the Metaverse, 
by Nokia and Ipsos, implies that “consumer 
value” in the metaverse will look different for 
different personality profiles. As highlighted 
in the report, solidarity searchers, which 
are described as rather introverted, will find 
the most value in the metaverse, offering 
them heightened convenience, allowing 
them to complete mundane “social chores”, 
such as clothes shopping, from home. 
In contrast, citizens, which the research 
describes as less tech-forward, will find 
the most value in the socialization and 
entertainment aspects of the metaverse.14Further research in Roblox’s recent 2022 
Metaverse Fashion Trends report highlights 
that one attitude that most Gen Z shares is an 
ambition to embrace their digital identities and 
the liking of brands that support this identity 
creation.15 These findings highlight that just as 
in the current version of the internet, consumer 
value will not be generated universally but will 
have to be strongly aligned with the target 
group’s wants and needs, using consumer 
data in a responsible manner that puts the 
human right for privacy at its centre. 
Source: Accenture, Accenture 
Consumer Metaverse Study (Insights 
from ~9,000 global consumers), 2023.61%
of consumers look forward to interacting 
with family and friends in the metaverse
52%
of consumers believe that the metaverse will 
strengthen the connection to their favourite brand
51%
of consumers look forward to creating 
and monetizing content in the metaverse
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
16Virtual reality (VR)/augmented reality (AR) 
reaching mass market potential: This will 
open up the devices to millions of consumers 
and developers, ensuring a price point and 
feature set that meets consumer expectations.
A workforce in the metaverse: When 
enterprises accelerate metaverse adoption 
and introduce immersive technologies into 
the workforce, adoption will transition from 
employee to consumer use.
Network effects: The development of net-
new offerings, achieved as big tech brands and 
creators create new experiences, products and 
services that are more compelling, unique and 
convenient. Today there are only a few must-
play games and experiences – for example, 
location-based AR games and AR commerce.Everyone born today is an innate gamer:  
iPad natives and gamers native to platforms 
such as Roblox and Fortnite will enter the 
working population in 5-10 years. This 
audience has grown up expecting the world 
to be interactive. 
Technological progress: As the underlying 
technologies required for the metaverse 
continue to evolve (such as game engines, 
small and power-efficient XR-processors and 
XR optics), integrated virtual world platforms 
will become easier to use, more capable and 
easier to build on. 
Other factors include the maturation of digital 
wallets and tokens, the evolution of payment 
rails through regulatory action, advancements 
in network edge computing, low-latency cloud 
computing, the establishment of a culture 
of ownership and market-wide adoption of 
interoperability standards. These factors and 
more can be explored further in chapter 4.
2   Value creation in the consumer metaverse
Drivers of 
consumer 
adoption
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
172   Value creation in the consumer metaverse
Successful 
players will 
choose the future 
they build for 
tomorrow, today
Select the tabs 
to discover more
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
182   Value creation in the consumer metaverse
The metaverse 
economy
Far beyond opening the door to virtual 
gameplay, the metaverse expands societies’ 
reality and introduces environments in which 
every consumer can take an active role in 
creating, shaping and distributing value. The 
application of the metaverse and web3 is set to 
herald a new era in content and world creation 
and drive immense economic opportunity, 
thus making the creator economy a vital part 
of the overall metaverse economy. Moreover, 
this shift presents an opportunity to address 
flaws of a current Web 2.0 centralized system 
that sees the majority of value created fall into 
the hands of a few centralized entities. Web 
3.0 provides an opportunity to reinvent the 
way value is generated and shared among a 
diverse set of creators, brands and businesses. 
To achieve this goal, it is important that 
the metaverse is designed with a value-
led economic mindset that learns from past 
mistakes and encourages a sustainable 
and fair economic climate for creators in 
this new era of authenticated ownership. Changing the paradigm of artistic creation, 
creators now have a way to ensure visibility, 
voice and economic share. Blockchain 
applications allow creators to monetize 
talent independently of centralized hosting 
platforms. While they do not provide proof 
that a particular creation, was in fact 
generated by the original creator, they provide 
mechanisms for transferring ownership of 
particular assets. Advancements in AI are 
also likely to play a significant role in the 
creation of the metaverse, such as putting 
design tools into the hands of consumers – 
turning metaverse participants into creators.
Businesses (participants and providers) play a 
vocal role in uplifting a diverse set of creators 
while ensuring creator tools and features 
are available and accessible to everyone.
Creators, participants and providers 
introduce a symbiotic value exchange, 
which opens up new possibilities for 
equitable and fair digital economies. 
Brands and platform providers benefit 
from enabling and amplifying creators, 
as they are at the pulse of consumer 
sentiment. The creator economy goes far 
beyond amplifying content creation and 
will be transformative for the metaverse, as 
creators are in a position to reinvent and 
challenge the status quo and inherently 
accelerate metaverse adoption speed. While benefiting from the threefold value 
distribution, it is both participant’s and 
provider’s obligation to ensure equitable 
treatment of creators while keeping transaction 
fees reasonable and at a minimum. 
The creator economy plays a significant role 
in the broader metaverse economy, and it is 
acknowledged that a wide range of factors – 
from tokenomics to stable currencies and 
fair voting rights – contribute to a stable and 
equitable metaverse economy. The sheer 
number of voices to be considered makes for 
a strenuous balancing process and a need for 
a set of tools and rules to be established. 
Roblox’s immersive marketplaces are 
scaling towards becoming fully user-
generated, with 90% of avatar items 
currently from the community. 
Roblox is introducing new mechanisms 
for the community to build sustainable 
businesses, including giving creators full 
control over the scarcity of their items and 
allowing all users to resell or trade items.16
Future papers in the frame of this initiative aim to 
investigate how to activate the economic flywheel of the 
metaverse and build on the idea of value distribution.USE CASE
Roblox
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
192   Value creation in the consumer metaverse
Ensuring fair 
value distribution 
in the metaverse
Mechanics for transparent and fair value 
distribution in the metaverse will be essential 
to ensure a sustainable economy. While 
in Web 2.0, IP attribution to creators was 
limited by individual platform mechanisms, 
web3 technologies offer the unique 
opportunity to ensure trust, credibility and 
fair value distribution by design. Establishing 
a new set of standards and processes is 
required to allow creators and participants 
(businesses) in the metaverse to create, build 
and share ideas in a way that cultivates a 
circular economy in which everyone wins.Value distribution by design
Assumption: An equitable and fair system tracks each 
individual and new creation. This requires:
 –Platforms or systems that allow users to easily find and  
re-use existing creations
 –Transparency on the re-use of existing ideas and 
mechanisms to credit the initial creator
 –Fair value distribution across the entire value chain 
(credit to all parties) 
 –AI-driven transparent and automated decision-making with 
sufficient control mechanisms, including an appeal process
 –Attributing value to intermediaries, such as legal, 
marketing and influencers, who create value 
through rights, promotion, distribution and more
 –All parties (creators and organizations) to share a 
percentage of credit and/or monetary value
What must we get right?
 –Address the culture of ownership in relation to IP rights 
management and treatment
 –Address how to properly measure “added-value”
 –Address how to flow micro-credits fairly and efficiently
 –Design for growth, not to inflate, such that the majority 
of creators can make a sustainable livingFIGURE 5
The value-add economy
1
2
3 5
46Initial
creation
Money 
and credit is
ﬂowed back
proportionally
dividedOther creators
build onto
initial creationIncentive to create
as tangible outcomes
are ensured
Creation is
launched onto
marketplaceCreators,
intermediaries and
end sales get a
ﬁnancial cut
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
20Metaverse 
economic models3
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
213  Metaverse economic models
Introduction
The metaverse is expanding 
traditional monetization channels 
and opening the door for net 
new consumer opportunities. 
Economic models will form 
an interdependent ecosystem 
across all roles that is driven 
by compelling experiences, 
seamless commerce options and 
the fabric that will underpin both.FIGURE 6
Metaverse economic modelsIt is evident that the metaverse offers a 
myriad of opportunities for new circular 
business models. Users continue to develop 
their digital identities, and they do so by 
making use of economic mechanisms, such 
as avatar skins, NFTs or immersive games. 
Gen Z especially exhibits a liking for brands 
and platforms that help them embrace their 
unique identities.17 However, consumer 
value will not be generated universally.18 
Leaders must understand consumer wants 
and needs and decide which role to play in 
the metaverse, informed by consumer data, 
designed in a human-centric manner.
Organizations need to align their metaverse 
strategies with industry-specific needs, target 
group metaverse adoption and maturity, 
and the technological and regulatory 
landscape. New economic plays will be 
based on successfully delivering compelling 
experiences, seamless commerce options, 
social interaction and transactions, the 
underlying fabric that will support the 
surrounding ecosystem and tools that enable 
circular experiences and economies.
Aware of the fast-evolving nature of this 
space, this chapter explores the potential 
value capture of nine economic models. 
These models are projected using market 
research and analysing value captured from 
existing Web2.0 business models.Metaverse goods 
and experiences
The user moments that 
delight, surprise and engageMetaverse payments 
and commerce
The marketplace and 
platforms that consumers 
transact onMetaverse fabric
The surrounding ecosystem 
and tools that enable 
experience and economy
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
223  Metaverse economic models
Paths to 
economic value 
and growth in 
the metaverse
The metaverse opens a spectrum of new 
revenue opportunities – from traditional 
to entirely unprecedented. The following 
eight economic models represent notable 
shifts from today’s ways of doing business. 
Businesses may pursue one or more of 
these simultaneously.
Note on the metaverse and personal data:   
the metaverse will introduce new models that enable 
users to share, manage and operate their own 
data. Although personal data is not called out as an 
economic model in its own right, this report aims to 
emphasize the responsible use of personal data while 
outlining its potential.
Select the tabs 
to discover more
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
23Future value horizons 
in the metaverse4
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
244  Future value horizons in the metaverse
Introduction
Mass scale will depend on 
the ability to deliver engaging 
experiences – however, 
maturity across key enablers 
will be the defining driver.
Forecasting beyond this first wave of use cases 
and their corresponding economic mechanisms 
will continue to be an open and evolving 
dialogue. However, as technologies continue 
to be adopted, purposeful experimentation 
acts as an opportunity for brands, businesses 
and creators to design, build and refine 
experiences and supporting models. The 
thinking today will act as core foundational 
learnings for stakeholders to position 
themselves and to evolve and expand offerings 
into longer-term, sustainable opportunities.
It’s important to understand that this is a 
rapidly evolving space of technologies, and 
albeit an evolving ecosystem, development 
requirements can be attached to the time 
constraints of when fundamental technologies 
will be mass-produced and adopted and the 
impact this will have on select value plays.FIGURE 7
Projected horizons of metaverse growth and adoption
Economic models selected today must consider the varying stages of maturity across 
technology, policy and wider enablers that these choices may use, as these choices will act 
as the foundations for how experiences of product and service offerings will evolve over time.
Now
Early adoption and traction
Today-2 years~
Initial enablement 
and experiences2-5 years~
Mainstream products 
and technologies5-10+ years
Proliferation of worlds, 
products and servicesNear
Ecosystem maturityNext
Mass adoption
Early development and adoption of 
worlds and spaces powered by major 
investment in content production, 
new tools and features, foundational 
technologies, hardware, software 
and identity solutions. Development of standards for enabling 
interoperability, mass adoption 
of immersive technologies, new 
business models based on content 
distribution, new financial products 
and services and the proliferation 
of 5G and edge computing.Maturity and adoption will set 
future scenarios, with economic 
models to be validated further in 
future reports supported by the 
identification of new value chains 
and future growth scenarios. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
254  Future value horizons in the metaverse
Drivers of growth 
and adoption of 
the metaverse
Six non-exhaustive areas were identified 
as leading prerequisites for impactful 
metaverse mass adoption.
Select the tabs 
to discover more
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
264  Future value horizons in the metaverse
Projected 
horizons of 
metaverse growth 
and adoption
This list does not aim to provide an exhaustive 
overview but brings to life the types of enablers 
required to accelerate the development and 
adoption of the metaverse, with a particular 
focus on the metaverse stack layers of 
software and platforms, infrastructure and 
network. Experience, economy and identity 
are addressed in greater detail in other 
sections of the report.
Select the now, near and 
next to discover moreSources: “What’s New in the 2022 Gartner Hype Cycle 
for Emerging Technologies”, Gartner, 10 August 2022.
Gartner, Gartner Identifies Key Emerging Technologies 
Expanding Immersive Experiences, Accelerating AI 
Automation and Optimizing Technologist Delivery  
[Press release], 10 August 2022.
Rimol, Meghan, “Metaverse, Web3 and Crypto: 
Separating Blockchain Hype from Reality: Q&A with 
Avivah Litan”, Gartner Newsroom, 30 August 2022. 
Baier-Lentz, Moritz, Faye Maidment, Benedikt Hübenthal, 
“Reality Check” Perspectives on Extended Reality  
(AR, MR, VR)”, Bitkraft, 2021.
Biondi, Matteo, Anna Heid, Ivan Ostojic, Nicolaus Henke, 
Lorenzo Pautasso, Niko Mohr, Linde Wester, Rodney 
Zemmel, Quantum computing: An emerging ecosystem 
and industry use cases, McKinsey & Company, 2021.
Mello-Klein, Cody, ”The Future of 6G Wireless Could  
be Closer Than You Think”, Northeastern University, 
26 May 2022. 
“6G: preparing today the mobile networks of the future”, 
Orange, 11 July 2022.
“Digital identity trends – 5 forces that are shaping 2022”, 
Thales, 29 December 2021.
Cordon, Stephanie, “2023 will be a pivotal year for VR: 
Which headset will you buy?”, ZDNET, 5 July 2022.
Makarov, Andrew, “12 Augmented Reality Trends of 2023: 
New Milestones in Immersive Technology”, MobiDev, 
2 August 2022.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
274  Future value horizons in the metaverse
Projections 
of when the 
value of these 
economic 
opportunities 
may be realized 
across the 
same horizonDigital products 
and assetsDigital assets External platform utilityPotential future scenario: As ownership of digital assets becomes mainstream, new economic models 
making use of those assets will arise. Models will include the development of specific assets for target 
communities as a reward for their engagement. Other models, such as the tokenisation of the brand-
to-consumer relationship, will enable greater participation, collaboration and innovation, where users’ 
creative input is recognized and rewarded – creating a sense of togetherness, inspiration and loyalty.
Access and 
influencePlay-to-earn Access as an assetPotential future scenario: Premium experiences, which allow users to access and acquire products, 
services and experiences by paying a fee, will mature. Mechanisms such as governance and voting 
rights will go mainstream. Brands will grant users’ rights by means of utility tokens or virtual assets. 
It is important to note that sufficient governance, regulation and standards will need to be in place 
to make this metaverse experience truly democratized and not a one-share-one-vote process.
Immersive 
commerceTokenized gated 
marketplaceImmersive shoppingPotential future scenario: Growth of token-based business models and aspects of the commerce 
value chain becoming decentralized may lead to the potential transition to a decentralized future of 
commerce (commerce 3.0) where decentralized commerce (DeCo) platforms go mainstream.
Payments and 
currencyDigital wallet custodyCentral bank digital 
currencies (CBDCs) 
and stablecoinsPotential future scenario: The inclusion of digital wallets within the financial services sector and 
the adoption of CBDCs and Stablecoins will improve cross-border payments, making remittances 
cheaper and faster. This will create new kinds of financial instruments, such as fractional lending.
Asset 
monetizationStaking Credit/loansPotential future scenario: Mass adoption of worlds and spaces will result in the potential for net-
new sources of revenue generation, as end-users, creators, brands and businesses will be able to 
lease items such as virtual spaces or renting digital products and spaces for passive income.
Advertising 
and marketingVirtual brand worlds“Buy off your 
back” affiliatesPotential future scenario: Moving from traditional content to more natural, immersive, and intuitive 
experiences, new concepts will come to the fore, from programmatic advertising at scale, to hyper-
personalized brand experiences where users live the Nike commercial, to integrated advertising across 
omni with virtual/AR as the new channels, built on a trusted identity foundation where users control 
their data, potentially opening the door for consumers to reap some of the monetization benefits.
Creator 
economyCreator tools 
and featuresProduct co-creationPotential future scenario: By 2030, it is projected that immersive technologies, content and experiences 
will accelerate this sector, blurring the lines between creator and consumer on an unprecedented 
scale. Leading to a proliferation in creator-led content and resulting in next-gen creator tools and 
features and new brand/creator partnership models as the metaverse matures and evolves.
Metaverse-
native servicesSmart contracts Premium connectivityPotential future scenario: A proliferation of interoperable worlds and spaces will result in a need for 
net-new virtual services, from access to network and computing power to digital-twin-as-a-service 
and metaverse-as-a-service offering specialized services, simulations and entire world builds.Now
Early adoption 
and tractionPaths to economic 
value and growth 
in the metaverseNear
Ecosystem 
maturityNext
Mass  
adoption
Disclaimer: The displayed projections are based 
on market research and forecasts. Various 
variables, such as investment, regulation or 
economic climate, impact metaverse evolution. 
In consequence, the displayed mechanisms may 
mature and evolve earlier or later than projected. (Not exhaustive)
Select each path to read 
more in the Appendix
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
28ConclusionWhile the metaverse’s full potential will likely 
unfold in the coming decade, its current 
nascent stage offers great opportunity to 
individuals and organizations to position 
themselves clearly in a newly emerging 
world. As education and understanding drive 
equitable adoption and value distribution, it is 
essential that the public and private sectors 
create a deep understanding of the metaverse, 
its components, implications and economic 
models today. 
Today’s imagination drives tomorrow’s 
innovation. Thus, growth drivers and emerging 
technologies require further development and 
innovation to enable meaningful metaverse 
engagement and interaction. Based on 
forecasts and statistics, this report can only 
speculate that, next to others, these drivers 
include metaverse-ready networks, software, 
hardware infrastructure and AI.
Individuals and businesses must find their 
role within the metaverse economy and 
clearly define their metaverse strategy, goals 
and target group to ensure meaningful value 
exchange and distribution in augmented or 
immersive worlds. They must evaluate their 
current offerings, appropriately translate 
them into metaverse environments, or allow 
disruption of their business models.A comprehensive understanding 
of the metaverse builds the 
foundation for equitable 
adoption and economic 
success across industries.This report gives a comprehensive but non-
exhaustive overview of possible economic 
opportunities and their potential for companies 
across various consumer-facing industries. In 
recognition of the evolving creator economy, 
the report aims to show the positive impact 
that comes with a metaverse that potentially 
strengthens the role of creators. Organizations 
in the public and private sectors should 
continue to amplify creators in order to fuel an 
equitable digital economy. 
While this report marks an important step 
on the journey towards an equitable and 
meaningful metaverse, it will be followed by 
further research, analysing potential social 
implications of the metaverse, implications to 
metaverse governance, as well as quantitative 
data-based forecasting of potential economic 
scenarios and value chains in the metaverse. 
This current nascent stage of the metaverse 
offers an unprecedented opportunity to build 
better, more equitable and just worlds that may 
greatly impact current physical reality. This 
report sets a steppingstone for companies and 
individuals to start their educational journey 
and to translate it into economically and 
socially viable action. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
29Appendix
Economic models in the 
consumer metaverse
The metaverse will expand traditional economic models 
by replicating them in metaverse environments and by 
complementing them with a certain level of interaction and 
immersion. At the same time, the metaverse will open the 
door for new, unexplored economic models, which will disrupt 
entire industries and generate brand-new revenue streams. 
This appendix aims to highlight a selection of relevant 
economic models the metaverse offers today or will offer in 
the near to long-term future, outlining possible commercial 
opportunities for companies and creators to explore.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
30Appendix
Digital products 
and assets
The metaverse unlocks a new frontier with 
digital products and assets. New product 
opportunities will range from independent 
revenue streams driven by entirely virtual goods, 
over NFTs, avatar skins, accessories and 
features, tokens enabling fractional ownership 
and perpetual royalties that generate passive 
income, to phygital products that provide utility 
within and across virtual experiences and 
extend to the physical simultaneously.
The metaverse introduces new user 
experiences and relationship models, such  
as micro-interactions or micro-experiences,  
that deepen the connection between the  
brand, creator and consumer, offering new 
ways to express, create, share content and 
drive community behaviours introducing new 
forms of growth.Economic mechanisms:  
product sales and royalties
1Digital assets
Digital products, such as in-game assets (skins, wearables) or art (NFTs), 
can drive meaningful revenue through direct end-user sales while also 
enabling royalties (passive income from secondary sales in perpetuity) to 
creators and platforms.
2Phygital products
End-users can redeem digital products or NFTs/tokens for physical, 
and vice versa, increasing utility and brand exposure across channels. 
Products can be directly mirrored or conceptually related, expanding 
experience and storytelling opportunities for brands.
3Consumables
Single or multiple use tokens, with the potential for expiry, open the door 
for applications like coupons, tickets, and more (loyalty programs). These 
items can be sold or rewarded by brands to end-users where they can 
choose to trade or consume the item. 
4External platform utility
Brands can develop goods for end-user utility within existing external 
platforms, such as creating a wearable for use in Decentraland, an in-
game asset, or a 3D model to be imported into a virtual environment. 
They can be bought or earned and then resold by the user. The platform 
may take a cut of the sale.Economic mechanisms:  
equity and entitlement sales
5Pre-production sales
Fund/refine product development through digital, pre-production 
representation of a product. End-users can collect/sell/trade, and the 
brand can benefit from the market insight and cash flow.
6(Hyper) fractional ownership
Enable fractional ownership of more expensive assets to end-users by 
broadening the pool of potential buyers and increasing engagement.
7Community exclusivity
Brands can develop products specifically for target communities of end-
users as a reward/incentive for their engagement. Products can be sold 
or gifted, physical or virtual, and can be personalized or tiered based on 
membership level or owned assets.
8Physical asset tokenization
Physical assets can be tokenized as NFTs and exchanged, traded, 
transferred and held like any other NFT; or redeemed for the physical asset. 
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
31Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –Digital and physical experiences will need 
to transition seamlessly.
 –Community-led approaches will support 
product development, funding and more.
 –Digital scarcity elevates value, and 
embedded royalties foster connection in 
the creator economy.
Additional considerations
 –Interoperability of assets will play an 
important role in value creation.
 –Virtual to physical commerce models have 
not yet been scaled.
 –Potential impact on supply chains to 
deliver virtual to physical offerings.The almost century-old publisher TIME has 
been facing a changing media environment, 
shifting consumer behaviours and the challenge 
to stay competitive in a market strongly 
impacted by free online content. Widening 
its existing business model, the company 
introduced TIMEpieces, connecting culture and 
technology. Within the project, TIME partners 
with artists and creators to create NFTs, which 
can be purchased through platforms such as 
Opensea. Through this, TIME has showcased 
a fluid ability to develop web3 offerings and 
business model alternatives. The company 
has gathered more than 50,000 artists and 
sold over 22,000 NFTs generating more than 
$10 million in profit and over $600,000 for 
charities to date.19EXAMPLE USE CASE
Digital assets – strategic evolution
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
32Appendix
Access and 
influence
The potential to monetize the “live-able” 
virtual experiences of tomorrow presents a 
tremendous opportunity for the platform and 
experienced players. Many early metaverse 
gaming experiences are free to play today. 
Yet, pay-for-access offers an opportunity 
for metaverse players to monetize exclusive 
and premium offerings for participants or 
creators – such as exclusive worlds, games, 
in-game tiers, individual events, voting 
rights or items. The pricing structure for 
these experiences can be designed to take 
advantage of scarcity while enhancing – 
or at least not inhibiting – engagement.Economic mechanisms: payment-based access
1Paywalled access
End-users pay to become a paywall subscriber, acquiring access to 
exclusive content.
2Premium tier access
End-users pay a subscription fee to access immersive games 
and experiences. 
3Usage-based toll
End-users pay for the amount of content they consume (i.e. how  
much time they spend playing a game or how many times they  
access the service).
4Single-instance fee access
End-users pay brands for access to one-time events (exclusive fan 
experiences, virtual concerts, sporting events).Economic mechanisms: ownership-based access
5Access as an asset
NFTs as tools for verification. End-users pay for tokenized access to 
exclusive virtual communities, goods, offerings and services through 
ownership of specific assets. 
6Governance and voting rights
End-users are granted governance and voting rights by purchasing/
gaining utility tokens and/or virtual assets from brands.
7Play-to-earn
Whether in NFTs, cryptocurrencies or fiat, the metaverse allows for new 
revenue models where users can be rewarded for playing games and 
exchange such rewards for (crypto) currencies beyond the platform.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
33Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –A trend towards non-paywalled but tiered  
or premium models based on exclusivity 
and engagement is evident.
 –Virtual network effects will be key to scaling. 
Companies will need to create ways to build 
community and gather around content.
 –NFTs can act as tools for verification.
Additional considerations
 –Higher customer acquisition costs 
associated with subscription models need 
to be considered.
 –Mechanisms, such as premium tier access, 
must not be a barrier to adoption.
 –Technology and capabilities still need 
to evolve to provide engaging real-time, 
immersive experiences for large crowds.Ranging from concerts to fashion or sporting 
events, access to an engaging and interactive 
experience has been limited to those situated 
in specific geographic locations with specific 
financial means. In order to access a wider 
and more diverse audience, Justin Bieber, 
Ariana Grande and Travis Scott are just some 
artists who have entered the sphere of virtual 
concerts in Fortnite. Virtual concerts offer 
artists the opportunity to monetize through 
ticket sales, virtual merchandise and premium 
tier access, while platform providers attract 
new users into their virtual worlds. According 
to Forbes, Travis Scott’s 2020 concert on 
Fortnite has attracted over 12 million viewers, 
grossing “roughly $20 million (…) including 
merchandise sales”,20 which highlights the 
future potential of virtual events. EXAMPLE USE CASE
Virtual events
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
34Appendix
Immersive 
commerce
The metaverse powers the next evolution 
of commerce, which progressed from 
shopping in store to shopping online, and 
now to blended and immersive virtual and 
physical experiences. It is positioned to both 
evolve and revolutionize online and physical 
commerce. As end-users shift from browsers 
to participants, their shopping will become 
increasingly experiential along multiple 
layers of immersion. Not only will consumers 
encounter products within their experiences 
(like encountering a wearable during a digital 
fashion event), but they’ll also be able to buy 
it on the spot without having to link to a site, 
decentralizing the shopping experience.Economic mechanisms:  
point of sale (POS) transactions
1Marketplace
Brands can design marketplaces to attract and feature curated products, 
offer a unique shopping experience, or be exclusive to a community 
(tokenized gated marketplace) of end-users. Curation, personalization and 
filtering capabilities will drive differentiation.
2Interactive contextual PoS
Brands can link products on display or in-use to a site or seamlessly 
facilitate the transaction with the click of a button to end-users, taking a 
fee in the referral process. Economic mechanisms: enhanced/embedded 
shopping
3Social shopping/commerce
Brands can benefit from social interaction and end-user contribution 
within virtual communities in order to drive brand interaction and 
sales. Wallet and end-user data can be used for personalization, 
recommendation and insight. 
4Immersive shopping
End-users can use augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) to 
virtually try on or visualize products before purchase, driving confidence 
(conversion) in digital/virtual purchases for brands. Virtual capabilities 
enable manipulation of size, perspective, environment, etc. for the good.
5Virtual context
Brands can offer digital products in the environment/experiences they’re 
most useful in, such as allowing end-users to purchase an NFT profile 
picture while setting up an avatar.
6Cross-channel shopping
Brands can make use of virtual interactions to trigger IRL behaviours. 
Products can be bought virtually to be redeemed physically, using 
digital wallets to deliver a seamless transition for end-users.
7In-game commerce
Opportunities to buy digital or physical goods while playing or consuming 
an experience. Goods may be placed in the game and fit the context of 
the experience.
8Decentralized commerce (DeCo)/marketplaces
Physical and digital (phygital) goods will be tokenized as NFTs and 
listed and traded on an open market eliminating high transaction fees 
through the support of blockchain technology and smart contracts.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
35Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –Brands’ shopping experiences will 
connect various channels seamlessly 
while transitioning between 2D and 3D, 
AR and VR.
 –Product placement is expected to gain 
traction, and minimal time between product 
discovery and purchase will be expected.
 –The opportunity to experience and explore 
products in virtual or augmented contexts 
drives buyer confidence in online commerce.
Additional considerations
 –The virtual commerce consumer base is 
small but growing. Consumers currently 
lack the hardware, software, payment 
means or understanding to shop in 
virtual environments.
 –Physical commerce experiences cannot 
simply be replicated in virtual environments 
but need to be aligned with platform, 
interface and consumer needs.
 –Virtual worlds and protocols are still 
immature, and products and interactions 
may not be compatible across platforms.Young, digitally native consumers are a key 
audience for Forever21 and many metaverse-
like online games. With an aim to cultivate a 
following among young consumers, Forever 
21 introduced their interactive experience, 
“Forever 21 Shop City”, on Roblox in December 
2021. The experience encourages individuals 
to express themselves by means of digital 
fashion and cosmetics. The brand allows 
users to design, own and manage their own 
virtual store of digital assets, which have been 
inspired by physical products and created 
by known digital creators. Beyond opening 
up new revenue streams, the experience 
elevates Forever 21’s relationship with its 
customers, as it actively involves them in a 
rather unusual part of the retail value chain. 
To date (November 2022), the experience has 
registered over 256,900+ visitors highlighting 
the potential of gamified commerce.21EXAMPLE USE CASE
Gamified commerce
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
36Appendix
Payments and 
currency
Powering a digitally native economy, the 
metaverse will necessitate robust payment 
infrastructures, encompassing digital assets 
as a store of value or cryptocurrencies as 
means for payment. 
While cryptocurrencies have occupied the 
metaverse spotlight for a while, metaverse 
transactions are expected to be conducted 
in fiat currency, in-platform tokens as well 
as cryptocurrencies. The interplay of various 
payment means and currencies is expected 
to establish a need for services such as 
on and offramps for currency conversion, 
wallets to store digital assets and provide 
access, and custody to protect assets from 
potential threats.Economic mechanisms: digital wallet payment, 
exchange and custody fees
1In-platform tokens (utility)
End-users can buy, earn and exchange tokens, which brands can provide, 
that can be used to get products/rewards or cashed out for money.
2Digital wallet payments
End-users pay fees to brands – or generate B2B fees, depending on  
the solution – for payment transactions for digital products, services, 
access, etc.
3Currency exchange
End-users pay fees to companies – or generate B2B fees, depending on the 
solution – for using a crypto-to-fiat offramp or executing token exchanges.
4Digital wallet custody
End-users pay fees to brands– or generate B2B fees or interest, 
depending on the solution – for storing digital assets in third-party wallets.5CBDCs and stablecoins
New means of payment may result in new transaction models where 
fees may apply.
6Cross-border payments
Improvements in the cross-border payments space may result in a 
competitive landscape to offer faster and cheaper payments/remittances 
(fees may apply).
7Fractional lending
Tokenized ownership of NFTs is split into forms of repayment methods 
with an applied interest. The act of dividing the ownership of an NFT 
between the owner and the lender into fractions allows the owner of the 
NFT to take out a loan on the asset and the lender to apply a see in the 
form of an interest return.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
37Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –Virtual payments should be an extension of 
existing digital and crypto payments.
 –Private key storage and custody services will 
enable new opportunities for trusted third 
parties and a broader spectrum of options 
for the end-user (including self-custody).
 –Interoperability of digital wallets benefits 
from network effects and standards 
proposed by both the crypto communities 
and public initiatives, such as the European 
Blockchain Services Infrastructure (EBSI).
Additional considerations
 –Access and payment experience in the 
metaverse requires simplification of the  
user experience.
 –Unfavourable token cash-out rates could 
result in fewer users and creators on 
metaverse platforms.
 –A current lack of clear risk and regulatory 
framework is evident.With a growing want of end-consumers for 
crypto-related services provided by trusted 
financial institutions, Mastercard recently 
introduced Crypto SourceTM. In partnership 
with regulated and licensed crypto custody 
providers, the company provides banks 
and fintech companies with technology and 
partnership support that enables buying, 
holding, and selling of selected crypto assets, 
security management, crypto spending and 
cash-out capabilities, as well as crypto program 
management. Mastercard has been working 
alongside customers and partners to bring 
additional security to the crypto ecosystem and 
offer seamless crypto experiences that meet 
consumer needs.22EXAMPLE USE CASE
Payments, trading and custody
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
38Appendix
Asset 
monetization
While digital assets are mostly associated with 
the storing of value, they offer organizations 
and individuals monetization options that 
enable passive income. Similar to fiat products, 
asset owners can extract value from these 
assets beyond their original intended value-
exchange, using different monetization 
mechanisms while keeping ownership. Economic mechanisms: renting/leasing 
virtual assets
1Renting digital products and spaces
Brands can rent out digital/virtual products like virtual clothing or 
accessories, and virtual spaces for hosting events to end-users for a 
defined period of time (NFT-based).
2Leasing virtual space
Owners of digital/virtual space can lease it to brands for ad purposes  
for a defined period of time.Economic mechanisms: savings and investments
3Staking
Brands can offer end-users the option to stake their crypto, allowing them 
to earn a return from assets instead of idling them in their virtual wallets. 
Brands can generate value by keeping end-users assets in their native 
ecosystems and encouraging the growth of their platform through fees 
and network effects. 
4Earn
Yield farming or liquidity pooling are some of the earning strategies, similar 
to fixed income, that brands can offer to asset owners to attract liquidity 
to their ecosystems while allowing them to earn a return from assets 
instead of idling them in their virtual wallets. 
5Airdrops
Airdrops are produced when a company issues tokens that go directly to 
the community, earned through features such as staking. This enables 
users to become early adopters and build community, while acting as a 
foundation to start creating value from the token or asset for trading, in-
game currency, exchange and more.
6Credit/loans
Asset owners can use their digital assets as collateral to ask for a loan, 
so they get liquidity to purchase goods and services while keeping 
assets ownership.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
39Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –Virtual assets offer new opportunities to 
link with physical assets.
 –Extension of enterprise assets into the 
virtual realm, such as virtual land and 
space, art and more.
 –Blockchain-based contracts can help 
build trust and provide authenticity.
 –Staking is currently the most trusted form 
of asset monetization, albeit a new and 
somewhat complex concept which comes 
with its own risks.
Additional considerations
 –Renting/leasing would only gain traction 
when there is enough demand for assets 
like land and spaces.
 –Decentralized finance (DeFi) is currently 
not extensively user-friendly and lacks 
regulation for protecting end-users against 
fraud and cyber risk.
 –Staking is not risk-free, as users staking 
their crypto could incur losses as a result 
of the value of a currency decreasing.With virtual land prices ranging up to $1 million 
and monthly rent sometimes exceeding 
$60,000, more and more businesses venture 
into the space of buying and renting virtual 
land. Admix, a monetization platform for AR, 
VR and games, has leased virtual spaces to 
brands like Pepsi and Formula One. According 
to Admix CEO Sam Huber, “Admix has pulled 
profits upwards of 70%”. With an uncertain 
future of the metaverse, according to Huber, 
many brands are still wary about buying 
virtual real estate. This in return offers unique 
opportunities for individuals and companies to 
monetize on renting virtual land and spaces.23EXAMPLE USE CASE
Renting virtual land
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
40Appendix
Advertising and 
marketing
Consumers’ virtual lives will entirely or at least 
partly shift into the metaverse, creating new 
digital channels for companies to make use of 
for marketing purposes. This shift will trigger 
a transformation of traditional marketing and 
advertising models. Metaverse advertising 
models will use immersion, storytelling and 
user expression through authentic content 
and experiences. Brands will play the role of 
extending users’ identities and will be most 
successful if they provide authentic and 
transparent value.
Beyond passively consuming ads, consumers 
will “live” targeted experiences that match their 
wants and needs (identities) throughout various 
channels, leading to richer, more intimate 
marketing that yields higher margins for key ad 
products. With an expanding data economy, 
the metaverse will offer new types of consumer 
data, delivering consumer insights with 
unprecedented depth. While using this data to 
provide personalized and targeted experiences 
that match consumer needs, organizations 
are expected to implement transparent and 
responsible data practices to ensure digital trust. Economic mechanisms: ad sales on 
owned or third-party properties
1Non-intrusive display ads
End-users generate B2B revenue through targeted, programmatic and 
AI-driven models (tracking facial expressions to adapt ad content) that 
serve ads on virtual banners, billboards and during gameplay, possibly 
complemented by the sponsorship of virtual venues.
2Marketplace ads
End-users generate ad revenue through targeted, programmatic and 
possibly AI-driven retail media placements in metaverse marketplaces.
3Phygital experiences
End-users generate B2B revenue through extended reality (XR) ads that 
bridge the virtual and physical worlds to drive foot traffic in both realms.
4Immersive ads
End-users generate B2B revenue through engaging in 3D advertising 
experiences that are clearly labelled as ads and seamlessly transport 
between virtual worlds and ad experiences.Economic mechanisms: experience-driven brand 
and product promotion
5“Buy off your back” affiliates
End-users, creators or AI avatars can become brand affiliates with the 
potential for others to purchase products directly from their avatars, 
spaces, profiles, or streaming/community events, increasing product sales.
6Brand gamification
Brands create free games and events that end users can engage with, 
creating a deeper connection with the brand by learning about the 
company, its products and driving sales.
7Virtual brand worlds
Brands create virtual worlds to connect with end-users in a way that is 
more authentic to the brand and serves as an additional PoS.
8Loyalty and token-based loyalty
Brands generate value through brand loyalty by providing meaningful 
experiences with end-users which can drive future sales of digital and 
physical products. It also unlocks the opportunity for blockchain-based 
tokenization in loyalty programmes.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
41Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –Advertisements will span from 2D to 3D, 
between AR and VR.
 –Advertising will shift towards content 
creation, enabling businesses to engage 
with more authenticity.
 –Ad spend growth will be coupled with 
metaverse user growth rates.
 –The metaverse/web3 may trigger increased 
user control of personal data.
Additional considerations
 –The adoption of new touchpoints will define 
new parameters for audience segmentation 
and a need for new marketing metrics.
 –Data privacy needs to be front and centre in 
metaverse marketing and advertisement.
 –Current marketing approaches will need 
to be adapted to new opportunities and 
consumer expectations of the metaverse.A recent consumer survey showcases that 
41% of respondents are often annoyed 
by online advertising, while 35% state that 
they don’t mind advertisements if they 
get content in return.24 Survey results like 
these highlight consumers’ needs for more 
engaging advertising and might be some of 
the reasons Roblox will introduce immersive 
ads its platform in 2023. The immersive 3D 
advertising experience will be labelled as such 
and will seamlessly transport users back and 
forth between experiences while operating in 
a walled garden.25  Roblox’s introduction of 
immersive ads is expected to open up new 
revenue streams to the platform and offer new 
opportunities to advertisers to raise brand 
awareness and drive sales.EXAMPLE USE CASE
Immersive ads
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
42Appendix
Creator economy
As an evolution of our traditional economy, the 
creator economy represents a paradigm shift 
of new business models and content creation.  
Web3 marks a decisive shift in data ownership 
from platforms to individuals, and the metaverse 
enables creators of all ages to have autonomy 
over how, where and when they monetize the 
content they make (e.g. through royalties). 
Reimagining the future of content design in the 
metaverse opens our eyes to additional avenues 
of virtual asset and world creation, as well as 
collaboration. Brands will be able to originate 
diverse creations by empowering diverse creators. 
While social media has introduced a fluidity 
between consumers and creators, the metaverse 
will exhibit a unique dynamic between brands, 
creators and consumers.
1. Brand to creator: Beyond offering creator tools, 
brands can license their IP to creators to empower 
their creativity to create branded assets, which 
end-users can purchase and use in the metaverse.
2. Creator to creator: Creators can sell their content 
to other creators to customize and build on top of. 
Original creators will continue to receive royalties 
every time the content is sold.
3. Creator to consumer: Creators can sell their 
content directly to the end-user or brand, providing 
new ways to enhance virtual experiences.Economic mechanisms: creation enablement
1Creator tools and features
Brands can provide creators with tools and features to create content or 
to facilitate collaboration with other creators and end-users. This can help 
financial inclusion by generating end-user assets, and originating new 
content and revenue from platform royalties and fees. 
2Creator consulting
Brands can serve as the connective tissue between brands and/or 
end-users to contract out and fulfil metaverse-related design requests. 
Revenue can be generated through contracting fees and commission 
from service. 
3Product co-creation
Brands directly collaborate with creators to design new products and 
services in virtual, physical and phygital environments. Generation and sale 
of products drive awareness and revenue for both the brand and creator.
4Create-to-earn 
As part of GameFi, end-users can be part of the in-game asset build. 
Introducing a new model and royalty stream, end-users can provide their 
input to create digital in-game assets, granting the creator unique merits 
and brands/businesses a new source of creative content. Economic mechanisms: creation monetization
5License brand IP
Brands can license their IP to creators to create branded worlds, digital 
products, and other experience consumables for end-users. Revenue 
generated from sale of assets and perpetual royalties from resale and 
licensing fees.
6Transactional fees
Environment/platform owners can charge creators a transactional fee to 
create and maintain a space in the environment. Additionally, the platform 
can charge fees every time the creator sells a good to an end-user.
7Usage fees
Metaverse environment owners can charge end-users fees based on their 
usage of assets in the environment. Royalties of usage could also be paid 
out to the original creator of the asset.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
43Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –User roles will shift further to being creators 
themselves, and their digital identities will be 
amalgamations of creators they like.
 –Creator economies will evolve into multi-
dimensional IP , triggering multi-surface 
delivery throughout the physical and XR 
at every level, as well as across platforms, 
ensuring continued revenue generation and 
value distribution.
Additional considerations
 –Applying current IP approaches and not 
adapting them to the needs of the creator 
will trigger potential loss of content and IP 
generation for brands.
 –Current creator payout models don’t leave 
enough margin for creators; platforms need to 
ensure creators have the incentive to create.
 –Creators can track the impact of their 
brand-related communication and value 
delivered, leading to greater transparency 
in how they charge for their influence and 
creativity. Brands will need to include 
the resulting insights in their negotiations 
with creators for enhanced visibility on 
engagement key performance indicators 
(KPIs) and return on investment (ROI).While ways to turn perfume into an engaging 
experience may not be obvious, the British 
company Rook has excelled in turning perfume 
sales into a metaverse experience that delivers 
ownership. In the frame of their “Scent of the 
Metaverse” project, Rook has sold 30 NFTs, 
which served as an invite to an exclusive 
decentralized autonomous organization (DAO). 
The NFT enabled holders to join exclusive 
learning sessions, interactive games and 
metaverse trips. It furthermore allowed NFT 
holders to work with perfumer Nadeem Crowe 
to create the “Scent of the Metaverse”. NFT 
holders then received a bottle of the perfume 
(with a collaboratively designed NFT of the 
label) and co-creation rights to the fragrance, 
which still earns them royalties on fragrance 
sales.26 While the exact results of the campaign 
are not public, the use case highlights the 
metaverse’s potential for user co-creation, as 
well as the inclusion of consumers into rather 
unusual stages of businesses’ value chains 
while strengthening brand awareness and 
consumer relationships.EXAMPLE USE CASE
User co-creation and license brand IP
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
44Appendix
Metaverse-
native services
Just like the need for virtual goods, the 
metaverse amplifies the growing need for virtual 
services in the metaverse. Some metaverse-
native services have an enabling function. 
Services like smart contracts, premium 
connectivity or network and computing 
power will fuel metaverse experiences and 
drive an equitable creator economy. Other 
services directly serve an end consumer or 
business. Through offerings such as digital 
twin or rendering as a service, brands, users 
and creators will be able to outsource select 
metaverse-related tasks while focusing on key 
capabilities in the space. Economic mechanisms: metaverse-native 
services enablement
1Smart contracts
As brands create new metaverse experiences and digital products, a 
need for smart contract creation services will be required to stake and 
transfer ownership to end-users seamlessly.
2Network and computing power
Brands, and even users, can rent their network access and computing 
power to other users for a fee.
3Premium connectivity
End-users pay brands for premium network connectivity, improving the 
end-user metaverse experience by reducing buffer time.Economic mechanisms: metaverse-native 
services
4Net-new services/brokers
Brands can offer select services/foundational capabilities to enhance end-
user metaverse experiences, from entire builds of virtual branded worlds 
to specialized service offerings (identity services, delegated custody, etc.),  
to experience consulting, user reviews and more (also known as 
metaverse-as-a-service).
5Digital-twin-as-a-service
Service offering enabling a virtual duplicate of a physical object, 
process or system.
6Rendering-as-a-service
An extension of net-new services, brands can offer to pay per amount of 
computing resources needed for certain rendering.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
45Selected insights
Mindset shifts
 –The metaverse will require brand-new 
service offerings while advancing existing 
offerings by translating them into new 
technological realms.
 –Interaction of large sums of individuals in 
virtual environments will require sufficient 
computing and network infrastructure.
 –Brands will increasingly rely on metaverse 
native service providers to outsource work 
that does not lie in their core capability.
Additional considerations
 –Additional technological developments, 
such as 5G (6G), will be required to provide 
certain services.
 –Value add of moving services into 
metaverse environments needs to be 
assessed and communicated.The recent COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted 
the human need for face-to-face interaction 
and communication. With an aim to elevate 
the way we communicate, Deutsche Telekom, 
Orange, Telefónica and Vodafone have 
partnered with MATSUKO to develop an easy-
to-use platform, that combines the physical 
and virtual world through a mobile connection. 
Using a smartphone camera, the platform 
creates a 2D video, which “is then rendered 
into 3D holograms in the cloud to be streamed 
by viewers” in an AR, VR or MR environment.27 
While detailed results are yet to be published, 
this metaverse service promises great potential 
to enhance communication in both consumer 
and business settings. EXAMPLE USE CASE
Net new services
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
46Appendix
Implications to 
personal data in 
the metaverseThe metaverse will allow organizations 
to capture increasingly large amounts of 
personal data. Through input channels 
such as haptics, camera vision, audio or 
Electroencephalography (EEG) sensors, 
this data will take entirely new forms, as it 
will capture biometric insights and precise 
information about people’s surroundings. 
New data analytics will be possible, including 
insights into consumers’ emotions, cognitive 
load or attention span. A 2020 study suggests 
that  five minutes of VR tracking data can 
produce “information that can identify a user 
out of a pool of 511 people with an accuracy of 
95.3%”, indicating the increasing privacy risks 
of the metaverse’s growing data ecosystem.28
New data types, combined with 
technology enablers such as AI and digital 
twins, will unlock an unprecedented degree 
of consumer understanding, as well as 
new capabilities for brands to connect with 
audiences, for example, through hyper-
personalized marketing and engaging 
experiences in XR. Enhanced privacy, 
security and safety protections will be 
critical to encourage people to participate in 
these experiences and unlock the value the 
metaverse can deliver. 
Companies will need to prioritize safe virtual 
environments, enhanced data protection 
measures, and proactive security to achieve 
robust adoption of metaverse offerings.The metaverse will give end users more 
mechanisms to exercise personal ownership 
and control over their data and will offer new 
ways to let people manage their own identities 
online. Both in centralized and decentralized 
environments, the metaverse will enable 
users to share, manage and operate their 
own data. Users will exert their rights to profit 
from their data, or to be forgotten; they will 
embrace privacy and anonymity. Platforms, 
device makers and other organizations have 
an opportunity to support consumers in their 
data ownership journey by incorporating 
decentralized identity protocols and data 
portability into their business models, where 
possible. Users may additionally outsource 
their data stewardship, e.g. by hiring external 
privacy services providers (such as the Solid 
project29), opening the door for new personal 
data products and services.
Future papers in the governance initiative 
track will analyse privacy and security in the 
metaverse. This appendix aims to outline 
economic models in the metaverse and 
emphasizes the responsible use of personal 
data while outlining its potential.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
47Glossary
Metaverse: The metaverse describes 
persistent, interconnected virtual worlds 
and spaces that are characterized by the 
enablement of social interaction and value 
distribution and a certain degree of immersion. 
Human-first: A metaverse that prioritizes the 
human needs of an individual and consequently 
integrates supportive design choices, tools 
and interactions to respect the persons behind 
the data; this transcends decisions – from 
architecture and security to privacy, identity and 
safety choices.
web3: web3 describes an emerging portfolio 
of decentralized technologies, protocols and 
standards that help to establish provenance, 
veracity and value of data.
Web3.0: Web3.0 describes the third stage 
of the World Wide Web’s development. It is 
an evolution focused on distributing systems 
to create a more secure, transparent and 
open internet experience that enables direct 
interactions between users and their peers 
without intermediaries.Interoperability: The ability to interact, 
exchange and make use of data and resulting 
information to enable movement, transactions 
and participation across systems, platforms, 
environments and technologies. 
Phygital: Combines the words physical and 
digital to describe blending digital/virtual 
experiences with physical ones. Extending 
into the metaverse, phygital now portends 
to describe opportunities for experiences 
to exist dually in physical and digital spaces 
simultaneously – as well as real goods and 
services as they become interoperable.
XR: XR or extended reality is an umbrella term 
that includes immersive technologies such as 
augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and 
mixed reality (MR).
Decentralized finance (DeFi): Used to refer 
to a financial ecosystem built on blockchain 
technology where users exchange assets 
without intermediaries. 
Digital token: A unit on a digital ledger that is 
used to represent value, such as an asset or 
a basket of assets, including real-world assets 
such as commodities, stock or real estate 
property. The token can be used to facilitate 
transactions and transfers of title to such 
underlying value or asset.Non-fungible tokens (NFTs): A solution 
created to allow us to represent objects with 
unique, unrepeatable and indivisible qualities 
within a blockchain.
Tokenization: The digitization and 
representation of a physical or digital asset 
within a blockchain, including all its information. 
This process brings a more commercialized 
vision, where people can value and exchange 
any element based on its supply and demand.
Digital wallet: In the context of this paper, a 
digital wallet is considered a crypto wallet, a 
piece of software or hardware with which users 
perform the send/receive operations of digital 
assets through a blockchain network.
Digital identity: A collection of individual 
attributes (e.g. name, date of birth, occupation, 
health status) associated with a uniquely 
identifiable individual, stored and authenticated 
in the digital sphere. Digital identity may 
be used for transactions, interactions, 
representations and authentication online.
Decentralized identity: Decentralized identity, 
also referred to as self-sovereign identity, is an 
open-standards-based identity framework that 
uses digital identifiers and verifiable credentials 
that are self-owned, independent and enable 
trusted data exchange.Decentralized autonomous organization 
(DAO): An organization that is managed 
by making use of smart contracts and 
blockchain technology to provide transparency, 
immutability, autonomy and security. All 
decisions are taken based on programmatic 
algorithms, where participants can execute 
their voting rights if applicable.
Permissionless: Refers to (blockchain) 
networks without restrictions neither to 
read nor validate transactions, which 
means all participants have the same rights. 
Permissionless networks are also known as 
public networks.
Centralized: Refers to environments, platforms 
and ecosystems in which governance resides 
in a small group of participants with great 
power of action and control over the rest of the 
participants.
Decentralized: Opposite to centralized. 
Refers to those environments, platforms and 
ecosystems in which governance resides with 
the whole community.
3D worlds: Digital environments and objects 
occupying 3D worlds in an immersive sensory 
setting displayed on flat screens.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
48Contributors
This paper is a combined effort based on 
numerous interviews, discussions, workshops 
and research. The opinions expressed herein do 
not necessarily reflect the views of the individuals 
or organizations involved in the project or listed 
below. Sincere thanks are extended to those 
who contributed their insights via interviews and 
workshops, as well as those not captured below.
World Economic Forum 
Connie Kuang 
Project Lead, Media, Entertainment and Sport
Cathy Li 
Head, Shaping the Future of Media, Entertainment 
and Sport; Member of the Executive Committee
Metaverse Initiative 
Project Fellows
Thomas Beckley 
Project Fellow, Accenture 
Jennifer Bettinger 
Project Fellow, Accenture
Kevin Collins
Managing Director and Global Software 
and Platforms Lead, Accenture 
Daniel Diez 
Project Fellow, AccentureAcknowledgements
Sincere appreciation is extended to the 
following working group members, who spent 
numerous hours providing critical input and 
feedback to the drafts. Their diverse insights 
are fundamental to the success of this work.
Brian Afande 
Co-Founder and Managing Director, BlackRhino VR 
Joe Abi Akl 
Chief Corporate Development Officer and Managing 
Director, Xsight Future Solutions, Majid al Futtaim
Ahmed Alghamdi 
Chief Executive Officer, Artificial 
Intelligence Global, Algihaz Holding
Abdulla Aljaziri 
Senior Manager, Digital Disruption, 
Dubai Electricity and Water Authority
Peter Allwood
Vice-President, Cyber & Intelligence, Mastercard
Daniel Asmar 
Associate Professor, Mechanical Engineering, 
American University of Beirut
Moritz Baier-Lentz
Partner, Lightspeed Gaming 
Paul Bances  
Vice-President, Market Development & 
New Legal Entity, PayPal
Justin Banon 
Co-Founder, Boson ProtocolAvi Bar-Zeev 
Chief Technology Officer and Founder, Reality Prime
Jonathan Batty 
Director, Public Relations, DXC Technology
Itamar Benedy 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Anzu
Mike Blank 
Chief Operating Officer, Polygon Technologies
Doreen Bogdan-Martin 
Director, International Telecommunications Union
Edward Bowles
Global Director, Public Policy for Meta 
Financial Technologies, Meta Platforms
Jehangir Byramji 
Emerging Technology and Innovation, 
Lloyds Banking Group
Ciara Byrne
Vice-President, New Business Innovation, 
Conde Nast
Xochitl Cadena 
Project Manager, Metaverse, NEOM
Adam Caplan 
Senior Vice-President, Emerging 
Technologies, Salesforce
Isaac Castro García
Co-Founder and Co-Chief Executive Officer, Emerge 
Pearly Chen 
Vice-President, HTC-VIA Eugene Chung  
Chief Executive Officer, Penrose Studios
Nighat Dad 
Executive Director, Digital Rights Foundation
Daniel Diez 
Chief Marketing Officer, Magic Leap
Scott Eckert 
Senior Vice-President, Next Generation 
Retail and Store No. 8, Walmart
Maureen Fan 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Baobab Studios
Tom Ffiske 
Editor, ImmersiveWire
Ryan Fitzpatrick 
Senior Vice-President, Strategy, Vindex
Fabio La Franca 
Chief Executive Officer, Blueverse Ventures
Clementina Giraldo
Project Specialist, Blockchain, Centre for the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution, Colombia
Arturo Gonzalez 
Director and Global Head, Policy Advocacy  
& Research, Meta Platforms 
Keith Grossman 
President, TIME Magazine
Walter Grüner 
Chief Information Officer, Covestro
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
49Cathy Hackl 
Chief Metaverse Officer, Journey
Ylva Hansdotter 
Founder and Executive Director, XR Impact
Cortney Harding
Chief Executive Officer, Friends with Holograms
HE Huda Al Hashimi
Deputy Minister of Cabinet Affairs for Strategic 
Affairs, Prime Minister’s Office in the Ministry of 
Cabinet Affaires and Future, United Arab Emirates
Mohamed Heikal
Head, Business Development, Majid al Futtaim
Roberto Hernandez
Global Metaverse Leader, PwC Americas
Heidi Holman 
Assistant General Counsel, Microsoft
Abdulrazzak Hussain
Vice-President, Information and Communication 
Technology, Olayan Financing Company
Tatsuya Ichikawa
Chief Executive Officer, Avers
Stephanie Ifayemi
Head, Digital Standards Policy, London Hub
Rolf Illenberger 
Chief Executive Officer, VR Direct
Dale Imerman 
Director, Metaverse Partnerships, WPPKyle Jackson 
Chief Executive Officer, Talespin Reality Labs
Masa Kawashima 
Executive Producer, Director of Asia Pacific  
Operations, Niantic 
Hoda Al Khzaimi 
Assistant Research Professor, Engineering, 
New York University, Abu Dhabi
Marja Konttinen 
Marketing Director, Decentraland
Ingrid Kopp 
Co-Founder, Electric South
Basak Koralturk  
Head, Corporate Strategy, JP Morgan
Kyle Kretschman
Chief Economist, Spotify
Abhinmanyu Kumar
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Naavik
Natalie Lacey 
Executive Vice-President,  
Ipsos Media and Entertainment
Joseph Lin  
Head, HTC Content and Platforms, HTC-VIA
George Liu 
Vice-President, AlixPartners
Kuniyoshi Mabuchi
Managing Director, PwC JapanCalvo Mawela 
Group Chief Executive Officer, Multichoice
Dinusha Mendis
Professor of Intellectual Property and 
Innovation Law, Bournemouth University
Nelly Mensah 
Vice-President of Digital Innovation, LVMH
Tibor Merey 
Managing Director and Partner, Boston 
Consulting Group, (BCG)
Alan Miles 
Chief Executive Officer, NCSolutions
Jonathan Miranda 
Vice-President and Head, Corporate 
Strategy, Sony Interactive Entertainment
Peter Miscovich
Managing Director, Strategy and 
Innovation, Consulting, JLL
Hiroaki Miyata 
Professor and Chair, Department of Health Policy 
Management, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University
Hamdullah Mohib 
Managing Director, Khas Fund, Chimera Investment
Karabo Morule 
Founder, Capital Art
Angelica Munson 
Executive Officer, Chief Digital Officer, ShiseidoRucha Nanavati
Chief Information Officer, Mahindra Group
Rajan Navani 
Vice-Chairman and Managing Director, Jetline Group
Genki Oda 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Remixpoint
Judith Okonkwo 
Founder, Imìsí 3D Creation Lab
Helen Papagiannis 
Founder, XR Goes Pop
Nimesh Patel 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Kabuni
Gerald Podobnik
Chief Financial Officer, Investment Bank and  
Corporate Bank, Deutsche Bank
Anna Rafferty 
Vice-President, Digital Consumer 
Engagement, The LEGO Group
Gabriela Ramos 
Assistant Director-General for Social and 
Human Sciences, UNESCO Digital 
Yonatan Raz-Fridman 
Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Supersocial
Michael Reffay 
Advisor for Digital, Telecommunications and Postal 
Services, Permanent Representation of France  
to the European Union
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
50Philip Rosedale 
Co-Founder, High Fidelity
Ali Sajwani 
Chief Operation Officer, DAMAC International Limited
Nadim Salha 
Investment Director, Amanat Holdings
Nagwa El Shenawy 
Undersecretary, Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology of Egypt
Jeongho Shin 
Chief Technology Officer, CJ Olivenetworks, CJ
Lewis Smithingham 
Director, Creative Solutions, Media.Monks, S4 Capital
Tracy Stallard 
Global Vice-President, Consumer Experiences 
& In House Agency, Anheuser-Busch InBev
Artur Sychov 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Somnium Space
Timmu Toke 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, Wolfprint 3D
Sara Lisa Vogl 
Co-Founder, R00ts Club
Amy Webb 
Chief Executive Officer and Founder, 
Future Today Institute
Silvia Wiesner
General Manager, Belgium and Luxembourg, UnileverCollette Winn 
Vice-President, Creative Partnerships, 
NBC Universal Media
Alexander Winterling 
Managing Director, Europe, Huma
Jonathan Wong 
President, Group One Holdings
World Economic Forum
Kimmy Bettinger 
Project Specialist, Data Policy, C4IR Platforms
Jaci Eisenberg
Head, Content Curation,  
Global Collaboration Village
Jeremy Jurgens 
Managing Director, Managing Board, 
World Economic Forum 
Stephanie Llamas
Project Lead, XR Ecosystem Governance
Erin Parsons
Project Specialist, XR Ecosystem Governance
Sandra Waliczek
Platform Curator, Blockchain and Digital CurrencyAccenture
Kathleen O’Reilly 
Senior Managing Director, Global 
Communications, Media and Technology 
Industry Practices Chair, Accenture 
David Treat 
Senior Managing Director, Metaverse Continuum 
Business Group Lead, Accenture 
Kathryn White 
Associate Director, Metaverse Continuum Business 
Group (MCBG), North America, Accenture 
Denise Zheng 
Managing Director, Metaverse Continuum Business 
Group, Responsible Metaverse, AccentureProject team 
Phoebe Barker
Designer, Studio Miko 
Laurence Denmark
Creative Director, Studio Miko
Martha Howlett
Editor, Studio Miko
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
51Endnotes
1. Citi GPS: Global Perspectives & Solutions,  
Metaverse and Money – Decrypting the  
Future, 2022.
2. “Metaverse may be $800 billion market, 
next tech platform”, Bloomberg Intelligence, 
1 December 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/
professional/blog/metaverse-may-be-800-billion-
market-next-tech-platform/. 
3. Global Data, Metaverse Market Size, Share, 
Trends, Analysis and Forecasts By Vertical (BFSI, 
Retail, Media and Entertainment, Education, 
Aerospace and Defense, Manufacturing, Others), 
Component Stack (Hardware, Software, Services), 
Region and Segment 2022-2030, 2022. 
4. “XR/AR/VR/MR market size 2021-2028”, 
Statista, 2022, https://www.statista.com/
statistics/591181/global-augmented-virtual-
reality-market-size/. 
5. Grand View Research, Blockchain Technology 
Market Size, Share & Trends Analysis Report 
By Type (Private Cloud, Public Cloud), By 
Application (Digital Identity, Payments), By 
Enterprise Size, By Component, By End Use, 
And Segment Forecasts, 2022 – 2030, n.d.
6. “Worldwide Spending on AI-Centric Systems Will 
Pass $300 Billion by 2026, According to IDC”, 
IDC, 12 September 2022, https://www.idc.com/
getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS49670322#  
:~:text=NEEDHAM%2C%20Mass.%2C  
%20September%2012,%24118%20billion%20
in%202022%20and.  7. Zaveria, K., “Big data is the future of metaverse, 
in a sustainable way”, Analytics Insight, 02 October 
2022, https://www.analyticsinsight.net/big-data-is-
the-future-of-metaverse-in-a-sustainable-way/.
8. Kranz, Garry and Christensen, Gerry,  
“What is 6G? Overview of 6G networks & 
technology”, Tech Target, April 2022,  
https://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/
definition/6G.
9. Pankaj, J., M. Neha, and V. Vitika, Digital Twin 
Market Report, Allied Market Research, 2022. 
10. “Video Games – Worldwide”, Statista, 2022, 
https://www.statista.com/outlook/dmo/digital-
media/video-games/worldwide.
11. Mordor Intelligence, Global Virtual Reality In 
Gaming Market - Growth, Trends, COVID-19 
Impact, and Forecasts (2022-2027), 2022.
12. “Distribution of Roblox games users 
worldwide as of September 2020, by age”, 
Statista, 2021, https://www.statista.com/
statistics/1190869/roblox-games-users-global-
distribution-age/.
13. Melcher, Niklas, “Deep Dive: Early Metaverse 
Players – Data on Demographics, Socializing, 
Playing, & Spending”, NewZoo, 19 January 2022
14. Roblox, Metaverse Fashion Trends, 2022.
15. Nokia, Ipsos, Gen Z and the Metaverse, 2022.
16. “RDC 2022: Our Vision for the Future of  
Roblox”, Roblox, 9 September 2022,  
https://blog.roblox.com/2022/09/rdc-2022-
vision-future-roblox/.17. Roblox, Metaverse Fashion Trends, 2022.
18. Nokia, Ipsos, Gen Z and the Metaverse, 2022.
19. De León, Riley, “How 99-year-olf publisher Time 
is leading legacy media into the NFT future”, 
CNBC, 17 July 2022, https://www.cnbc.com/  
2022/07/17/99-year-old-publisher-time-is-
leading-legacy-media-into-the-nft-future.html.
20. Brown, Arbram, “How Hip-Hop superstar Travis 
Scott has become corporate America’s brand 
whisperer”, Forbes, 30 November 2020,  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/
abrambrown/2020/11/30/how-hip-hop-
superstar-travis-scott-has-become-corporate-
americas-brand-whisperer/?sh=7f826f9b74e7.
21. “Forever 21 Shop City”, Roblox, n.d.,  
https://www.roblox.com/games/8254336243/
Forever-21-Shop-City.
22. Mastercard, Mastercard makes it easier, safer to 
buy crypto [Press release], 4 October 2022.
23. Berg, Nate, “Inside the lucrative business  
of a metaverse landlord, where monthly  
rent can hit $60,000 per property”,  
Fast Company, 5 September 2022,  
https://www.fastcompany.com/90749937/inside-
the-lucrative-business-of-a-metaverse-landlord-
where-monthly-rent-can-hit-60000-per-property.
24. Kunst, Alexander, “Attitudes towards online 
advertising in the U.S. in 2022”, Statista, 
28 November 2022, https://www.statista.com/
forecasts/997054/attitudes-towards-online-
advertising-in-the-us.25. “RDC 2022: Our Vision for the Future of  
Roblox”, Roblox, 9 September 2022,  
https://blog.roblox.com/2022/09/rdc-2022-
vision-future-roblox/.
26. ”RSX | The Scent of the Metaverse: Verse 1 
Extrait de Parfum”, Rook Perfumes London, n.d., 
https://rookperfumes.co.uk/products/sotm.
27. Orange, Deutsche Telekom, Orange, Telefónica 
and Vodafone together with MATSUKO 
implement a proof of concept of holographic 
presence as a simple phone call [Press release], 
21 September 2022.
28. Miller, M. R., F. Herrera, H. Jun, J.A. Landay and 
J.N. Bailenson, “Personal identifiability of user 
tracking data during observation of 360-degree 
VR video”, Scientific Reports, vol. 10 no. 1, 2020.
29. "About Solid", solid project, n.d.,   
https://solidproject.org/about.
Demystifying the Consumer Metaverse
52